
S-4 1 d186489ds4.htm FORM S-4 Form S-4
Table of Contents
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 1, 2016
No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC.
Additional Registrants Listed on Schedule A Hereto (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nevada
1311
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
94-1667468
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500
Frisco, Texas 75034
(972) 668-8800
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
M. Jay Allison
Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer
Comstock Resources, Inc.
5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500
Frisco, Texas 75034
(972) 668-8800
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Jack E. Jacobsen
Locke Lord LLP
2200 Ross Avenue, Suite 2800
Dallas, Texas 75201
(214) 740-8000
Copies to:
Doug Rayburn
Baker Botts L.L.P.
2001 Ross Avenue, Suite 600
Dallas, Texas 75201
(214) 953-6500
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale of the securities to the public: The exchange will occur as soon as
practicable after the effective date of this Registration Statement.
If the securities being registered on this form are being offered in connection with the formation of a holding company and there is
compliance with General Instruction G, check the following box:  ¨
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please check the
following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same
offering.  ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list
the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
Table of Contents
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller
reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer
Non-Accelerated filer
¨
  ¨  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Smaller reporting Company
Accelerated filer  x
  ¨
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of
Securities to be Registered
Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020
Guarantees of Senior Secured Toggle Notes
due 2020
Warrants to purchase shares of Common
Stock
Common Stock issuable upon exercise of the
Warrants
7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due
2019
Guarantees of 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK
Notes due 2019
Common Stock issuable upon conversion of
the 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due
2019
9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due
Amount
to be
Registered
$775,000,000(2)
—
1,050,000(4)
1,050,000(5)
Proposal
Maximum
Offering Price
Per Security
100%
—
—
$3.60(6)
$352,122,329(7)
100%
—
(8)
—
(8)
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Offering Price  
$775,000,000
Amount of
Registration Fee(1)
$78,042.50
—
—
$3,780,000(6)
$352,122,329
—
(8)
(3)
(4)
$380.65
$35,458.72
(3)
(8)
9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due
2020
Guarantees of 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK
Notes due 2020
Common Stock issuable upon conversion of
the 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due
2020
$249,511,142(9)
100%
—
(8)
—
(8)
$249,511,142
—
(8)
$25,125.77
(3)
(8)
(1) The registration fee has been calculated pursuant to Rule 457 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
(2) Represents the maximum principal amount at maturity of Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020 that may be issued pursuant
to the exchange offer described in this Registration Statement, including the amount of such notes, and guarantees thereon,
that  may  be  issued  upon  an  election  by  Comstock  Resources,  Inc.  to  make  payments  of  interest  in  kind  by  increasing  the
principal amount of such notes or issuing additional notes.
(3) Pursuant to Rule 457(n), no additional registration fee is payable with respect to the guarantees.
(4) Represents the maximum number of Warrants to purchase common stock that may be issued pursuant to the exchange offer
described in this Registration Statement. Pursuant to Rule 457(g), no separate registration fee is required for the Warrants.
(5) Represents the maximum number of shares of common stock that may be issued upon exercise of the Warrants to be registered
hereunder. Pursuant to Rule 416 under the Securities Act, such number of shares of common stock registered hereby shall
include an indeterminate number of shares of common stock that may be issued in connection with the anti-dilution provisions
or stock splits, stock dividends, recapitalizations or similar events.
(6) Estimated pursuant to Rule 457(c) solely for the purpose of calculating the registration fee. This amount is adjusted to reflect the
one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock split of the common stock which became effective on July 29, 2016.
(7) Represents the maximum principal amount at maturity of 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019 that may be issued
pursuant  to  the  exchange  offer  described  in  this  Registration  Statement,  including  the  registrants’  reasonable  good  faith
estimate of the amount of such notes, and guarantees thereon, that may be issued upon the payment of interest in kind thereon
by increasing the principal amount of such notes or issuing additional notes.
(8) The shares of common stock that are being registered include such indeterminate number of shares of common stock, if any,
that may be issued upon conversion of the 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019 and the 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured
PIK Notes due 2020 registered hereunder, which shares are not subject to an additional fee pursuant to Rule 457(i) of the
Securities Act. Pursuant to Rule 416 under the Securities Act, such number of shares of common stock registered hereby shall
include an indeterminate number of shares of common stock that may be issued in connection with the anti-dilution provisions
or stock splits, stock dividends, recapitalizations or similar events.
(9) Represents the maximum principal amount at maturity of 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020 that may be issued
pursuant  to  the  exchange  offer  described  in  this  Registration  Statement,  including  the  registrants’  reasonable  good  faith
estimate of such notes, and guarantees thereon, that may be issued upon the payment of interest in kind thereon by increasing
the principal amount of such notes or issuing additional notes.
The registrants hereby amend this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective
date  until  the  registrant  shall  file  a  further  amendment  which  specifically  states  that  this  Registration  Statement  shall
thereafter  become  effective  in  accordance  with  Section  8(a)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933  or  until  this  Registration
Statement shall become effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Table of Contents
Exact Name of Additional
Registrants
Comstock Oil & Gas, LP
Comstock Oil & Gas-
Louisiana, LLC
Comstock Oil & Gas GP,
LLC
Comstock Oil & Gas
Investments, LLC
Comstock Oil & Gas
Holdings, Inc.
Table of Contents
Schedule A
Principal Executive
Offices
5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500
Frisco, Texas 75034
5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500
Frisco, Texas 75034
5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500
Frisco, Texas 75034
5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500
Frisco, Texas 75034
5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500
Frisco, Texas 75034
Primary
Standard
Industrial
Classification
Code Number    
 
1311  
  
1311  
  
1311  
  
1311  
  
1311
I.R.S.
Employer
Identification
No.
75-2272352
26-0012430
(not applicable)
90-0155903
75-2968982
Jurisdiction of
Incorporation
or Formation     
NV  
  
NV  
  
NV  
  
NV  
  
NV
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not complete the exchange offer and
issue these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. The
prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities nor a solicitation of an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction
where the offer and sale is not permitted.
Prospectus
Subject to Completion, Dated August 1, 2016
Comstock Resources, Inc.
OFFER TO EXCHANGE AND CONSENT SOLICITATION
Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020 and
Warrants For Shares of Common Stock
for
Any and All 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020
(CUSIP Nos. 205768 AK0 and U2038J AC1)
and
7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019
for
Any and All 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019
(CUSIP No. 205768 AH7)
and
9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020
for
Any and All 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020
(CUSIP No. 205768 AJ3)
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this prospectus and related letter of transmittal, as each may
be amended from time to time, Comstock Resources, Inc. is offering to exchange (collectively, the “Exchange Offer”) (a) its Senior
Secured Toggle Notes due 2020 (the “New Senior Secured Notes”) and warrants exercisable for shares of common stock for any
and all outstanding 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020 (the “Old Senior Secured Notes”), (b) its 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK
Notes due 2019 (the “New 2019 Convertible Notes”) for any and all outstanding 7  3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019 (the “Old 2019
Notes”) and (c) its 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020 (the “New 2020 Convertible Notes” and together with the New
Senior Secured Notes and the New 2019 Convertible Notes, the “new notes”) for any and all outstanding 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due
2020 (the “Old 2020 Notes” and together with the Old Senior Secured Notes and the Old 2019 Notes, the “old notes”). See the
“Summary  Offering  Table.”  The  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  are  collectively  referred  to
herein as the “New Convertible Notes.”
THE EXCHANGE OFFER AND THE CONSENT SOLICITATION (AS DEFINED BELOW) WILL EXPIRE AT 11:59 P.M., NEW
YORK CITY TIME, ON AUGUST 26, 2016, UNLESS EXTENDED OR EARLIER TERMINATED BY US WITH RESPECT TO ANY
OR ALL SERIES (SUCH DATE AND TIME, AS THE SAME MAY BE EXTENDED, THE “EXPIRATION DATE”). TO BE ELIGIBLE
TO RECEIVE THE APPLICABLE EARLY EXCHANGE CONSIDERATION (AS DEFINED HEREIN), ELIGIBLE HOLDERS MUST
TENDER THEIR OLD NOTES (AS DEFINED HEREIN) AT OR PRIOR TO 5:00 P.M., NEW YORK CITY TIME, ON AUGUST 12,
2016  UNLESS  EXTENDED  (SUCH  TIME  AND  DATE  WITH  RESPECT  TO  AN  EXCHANGE  OFFER  AND  CONSENT
SOLICITATION, AS IT MAY BE EXTENDED FOR SUCH EXCHANGE OFFER, THE “EARLY TENDER DATE”). TENDERS MAY
BE WITHDRAWN AT ANY TIME BEFORE 11:59 P.M., NEW YORK CITY TIME, ON AUGUST 26, 2016 (SUCH DATE AND TIME,
AS THE SAME MAY BE EXTENDED, THE “WITHDRAWAL DEADLINE”).
IF  YOU  ELECT  NOT  TO  PARTICIPATE  IN  THE  EXCHANGE  OFFER  AND  COMSTOCK  SUBSEQUENTLY  FILES  FOR
BANKRUPTCY, YOUR NOTES MAY BE WORTHLESS BECAUSE THEY WILL RANK JUNIOR TO ALL OF THE NEW NOTES.
Table of Contents
Subject to the tender acceptance procedures described herein: (i) for each $1,000 principal amount of old notes tendered at or prior
to the Early Tender Date, accepted for exchange and not validly withdrawn, holders of old notes will be eligible to receive the
applicable early exchange consideration set forth in the table on page ii of this prospectus (the “Early Exchange Consideration”);
and (ii) for each $1,000 principal amount of old notes tendered after the Early Tender Date and prior to the Expiration Date and
accepted for exchange, holders of old notes will be eligible to receive the applicable late exchange consideration set forth in such
table (the “Late Exchange Consideration”).
Payment  of  accrued  and  unpaid  interest  on  the  old  notes  will  be  made  in  cash  on  the  date  on  which  the  Exchange  Offer  is
completed (the “Closing Date”).
The New Senior Secured Notes will bear interest at a rate of 10.0% per annum, if we elect to pay interest in cash, or 11.0% per
annum, if we elect to pay interest in kind, in each case payable semi-annually, but no more than $75.0 million of interest may be
paid in kind on the New Senior Secured Notes. The New Senior Secured Notes will mature on March 15, 2020. See “Description of
New Senior Secured Notes.”
The New 2019 Convertible Notes will bear interest at a rate of 7 3⁄4% per annum, payable semi-annually. Interest will be paid only
by the issuance of additional New 2019 Convertible Notes. The New 2019 Convertible Notes will mature on April 1, 2019 and will
be convertible at the option of the holders, and in certain instances mandatorily convertible, in each case into shares of our common
stock, subject to certain circumstances. See “Description of New Convertible Notes.”
The New 2020 Convertible Notes will bear interest at a rate of 9 1⁄2% per annum, payable semi-annually. Interest will be paid only
by the issuance of additional New 2020 Convertible Notes. The New 2020 Convertible Notes will mature on June 15, 2020 and will
be convertible at the option of the holders, and in certain instances mandatorily convertible, in each case into shares of our common
stock, subject to certain circumstances. See “Description of New Convertible Notes.”
The new notes will be guaranteed on a senior basis by all of our current and certain of our future subsidiaries (the “Guarantors”).
Other than with respect to the payment of interest on the New 2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible Notes in kind, the
provisions relating to the second priority liens on the collateral and the provisions regarding the conversion of such notes into our
common stock, the restrictive covenants in the respective indentures governing the New 2019 Convertible Notes and the New 2020
Convertible Notes will be substantially similar to the covenants in the indenture governing the Old 2020 Notes. Other than with
respect to our ability to pay up to $75.0 million of interest on the New Senior Secured Notes in kind, the restrictive covenants in the
indenture governing the New Senior Secured Notes will be substantially similar to the covenants in the indenture governing the Old
Senior Secured Notes. For a more detailed description of the new notes, see “Description of New Senior Secured Notes” and
“Description of New Convertible Notes.”
Concurrently  with  this  Exchange  Offer,  we  are  also  soliciting  consents  (the  “Consent  Solicitation”)  from  holders  for  certain
amendments  to  the  indentures  governing  the  old  notes  to  eliminate  or  amend  certain  of  the  restrictive  covenants,  release  the
collateral  securing  the  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  modify  various  other  provisions  contained  in  the  existing  indentures
(collectively,  the  “Proposed  Amendments”).  We  refer  to  the  Exchange  Offer  and  the  Consent  Solicitation  collectively  in  this
prospectus as the Exchange Offer. See “Proposed Amendments to Existing Indentures and Old Notes.”
It  is  a  condition  to  the  consummation  of  this  Exchange  Offer,  among  other  things,  that  (i)  (x)  holders  of  not  less  than  95%  in
aggregate principal amount of the Old Senior Secured Notes having validly tendered (and not validly withdrawn) their old notes in
the Exchange Offer and (y) holders of not less than 95% in total aggregate principal amount of the Old 2019 Notes and Old 2020
Notes (on a combined basis) having validly tendered (and not validly withdrawn) their old notes in the Exchange Offer (collectively,
the “Minimum Condition”), (ii) consents with respect to more than 50% of the aggregate principal amount of each series of the old
notes approving the Proposed Amendments (other than the consent regarding a release of the collateral with respect to the Old
Senior Secured Notes, which requires the consent of at least 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate principal amount of the Old Senior Secured
Notes) are delivered and not revoked prior to the Expiration Date in connection with the consent solicitation described below and
(iii) the Exchange Offer is completed by September 15, 2016. With respect to the condition described in clause (ii) of the preceding
sentence, since not less than 95% in aggregate principal amount of the old notes must be tendered to consummate the Exchange
Offer and because consents to the Proposed Amendments are required if holders tender their old notes, the minimum threshold for
the consents will automatically be achieved if the Minimum Condition is satisfied.
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol “CRK.” There is no market for the new
notes  or  warrants  and  we  do  not  intend  to  list  the  new  notes  or  warrants  on  the  NYSE  or  any  national  or  regional  securities
exchange.
Table of Contents
If we are unable to complete the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation and address our near term liquidity needs, we
will  consider  other  restructuring  alternatives  available  to  us  at  that  time.  Those  alternatives  include  seeking  asset
dispositions, joint ventures, additional debt and relief under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, all of which involve uncertainties,
potential delays and other risks.
You should carefully consider the risks set forth under “Risk Factors” beginning on page 21 of this prospectus before
you decide whether to participate in the Exchange Offer.
NEITHER  THE  SECURITIES  AND  EXCHANGE  COMMISSION  NOR  ANY  STATE  SECURITIES  COMMISSION  HAS
APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED OF THE SECURITIES BEING OFFERED IN EXCHANGE FOR OUR OLD NOTES OR THIS
TRANSACTION,  PASSED  UPON  THE  MERITS  OR  FAIRNESS  OF  THIS  TRANSACTION  OR  PASSED  UPON  THE
ADEQUACY  OR  ACCURACY  OF  THIS  PROSPECTUS.  ANY  REPRESENTATION  TO  THE  CONTRARY  IS  A  CRIMINAL
OFFENSE.
Dealer Manager
BofA Merrill Lynch
The date of this prospectus is                     , 2016.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY OFFERING TABLE
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
IMPORTANT DATES
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THE EXCHANGE OFFER
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
THE NEW SENIOR SECURED NOTES
THE NEW CONVERTIBLE NOTES
RISK FACTORS
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK, OLD NOTES AND DIVIDEND POLICY
CAPITALIZATION
SELECTED HISTORICAL CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA
SELECTED QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA
SUMMARY OIL AND NATURAL GAS RESERVES
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
BUSINESS AND PROPERTIES
MANAGEMENT
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
DESCRIPTION OF OTHER INDEBTEDNESS
GENERAL TERMS OF THE EXCHANGE OFFER AND CONSENT SOLICITATION
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF NEW SENIOR SECURED NOTES
DESCRIPTION OF NEW CONVERTIBLE NOTES
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING INDENTURES AND OLD NOTES
CERTAIN UNITED STATES FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
APPENDIX 1: COMPARISON OF TERMS OF THE NEW SENIOR SECURED NOTES TO OLD SENIOR SECURED
NOTES
APPENDIX 2: COMPARISON OF TERMS OF THE NEW CONVERTIBLE NOTES TO OLD CONVERTIBLE NOTES
APPENDIX 3: TERMS OF EXISTING INDENTURES TO BE MODIFIED BY THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS
ii  
   iv  
   vi  
    vii  
   viii  
  1
  11
  15
  21
  47
  47
  47
  49
  50
  52
  53
  54
  68
  78
  83
  97
  99
101
111
116
118
199
281
287
303
304
304
308
A-1-1
  A-2-1
  A-3-1
Table of Contents
i
SUMMARY OFFERING TABLE
This summary offering table indicates the new notes and warrants, as the case may be, to be offered in the Exchange Offer. For the
purposes of this prospectus, the term “exchange consideration” refers to the new notes and in certain cases warrants being offered
to holders of the old notes.
Early Exchange Consideration
Early Exchange Consideration
per $1,000 Principal Amount of
Old Notes
Late Exchange Consideration
if Tendered and Not
Withdrawn
per $1,000 Principal Amount of Old Notes
if Tendered After the Early Tender Date
Prior to Early Tender Date(2)(3)
and Not Withdrawn Prior to the
Expiration Date(2)(3)(4)
$950 principal amount of Senior Secured
Toggle Notes due 2020 and warrants
exercisable for 1.50 shares of common
stock of the Company
$950 principal amount of 7 3⁄4%
 
Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019
$950 principal amount of 9 1⁄2%
 
Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020
Aggregate Principal
Title of Old Notes to be Tendered
Amount
Outstanding(1)
10% Senior Secured Notes due
$    700,000,000
2020
7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019
9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020
$    288,516,000
$    174,607,000
(4)
$1,000 principal amount
of Senior Secured Toggle
Notes due 2020 and warrants
exercisable for 1.50 shares of
 
common stock of the Company 
$1,000 principal amount
of 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured
 
PIK Notes due 2019
$1,000 principal amount
of 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured
 
PIK Notes due 2020
(1) The outstanding principal amount reflects the aggregate principal amount outstanding as of July 29, 2016.
(2) Any accrued and unpaid interest on the old notes through the closing date of the Exchange Offer will be paid in cash.
(3) Subject to certain conditions, the New 2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible Notes will be convertible into shares
of common stock. The warrants issued in connection with the New Senior Secured Notes will be exercisable for shares of
common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. See “Description of New Senior Secured Notes,” “Description of New
Convertible Notes” and “Description of Warrants.”
(4) The share and per share data reflects the one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock split that became effective on July 29, 2016.
Table of Contents
ii
NONE  OF  THE  COMPANY,  ITS  SUBSIDIARIES,  THE  COMPANY’S  BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS,  THE  TRUSTEE  NOR  THE
INFORMATION AND EXCHANGE AGENT HAS MADE ANY RECOMMENDATION AS TO WHETHER OR NOT HOLDERS
SHOULD  TENDER  THEIR  OLD  NOTES  FOR  EXCHANGE  PURSUANT  TO  THE  EXCHANGE  OFFER.  YOU  MUST  MAKE
YOUR OWN DECISION WHETHER TO EXCHANGE ANY OLD NOTES PURSUANT TO THE EXCHANGE OFFER, AND, IF
YOU WISH TO EXCHANGE OLD NOTES, THE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT OF OLD NOTES TO TENDER.
This  prospectus  does  not  constitute  an  offer  to  participate  in  the  Exchange  Offer  to  any  person  in  any  jurisdiction  where  it  is
unlawful to make such an offer or solicitations. The Exchange Offer is being made on the basis of this prospectus and is subject to
the terms described herein and those that may be set forth in any amendment or supplement thereto or incorporated by reference
herein. Any decision to participate in the Exchange Offer should be based on the information contained in this prospectus or any
amendment or supplement thereto or specifically incorporated by reference herein. In making an investment decision or decisions,
prospective investors must rely on their own examination of us and the terms of the Exchange Offer and the securities being offered
and the terms of the amendments being sought, including the merits and risks involved. Prospective investors should not construe
anything in this prospectus as legal, business or tax advice. Each prospective investor should consult its advisors as needed to
make its investment decision and to determine whether it is legally permitted to participate in the Exchange Offer under applicable
legal investment or similar laws or regulations.
Each prospective investor must comply with all applicable laws and regulations in force in any jurisdiction in which it participates in
the Exchange Offer or possesses or distributes this prospectus and must obtain any consent, approval or permission required by it
for participation in the Exchange Offer under the laws and regulations in force in any jurisdiction to which it is subject, and neither
we nor any of our respective representatives shall have any responsibility therefor.
No action with respect to the offer of exchange consideration has been or will be taken in any jurisdiction (except the United States)
that would permit a public offering of the offered securities, or the possession, circulation or distribution of this prospectus or any
material  relating  to  the  Company  or  the  offered  securities  where  action  for  that  purpose  is  required.  Accordingly,  the  offered
securities may not be offered, sold or exchanged, directly or indirectly, and neither this prospectus nor any other offering material or
advertisement in connection with the Exchange Offer may be distributed or published, in or from any such jurisdiction, except in
compliance with any applicable rules or regulations of any such jurisdiction.
This prospectus contains summaries believed to be accurate with respect to certain documents, but reference is made to the actual
documents for complete information. All of those summaries are qualified in their entirety by this reference. Copies of documents
referred to herein will be made available to prospective investors upon request to us at the address and telephone number set forth
in “Prospectus Summary—Corporate Information.”
This prospectus, including the documents incorporated by reference herein, and the related letters of transmittal contain
important information that should be read before any decision is made with respect to participating in the Exchange Offer.
The delivery of this prospectus shall not under any circumstances create any implication that the information contained
herein is correct as of any time subsequent to the date hereof or that there has been no change in the information set forth
herein or in any attachments hereto or in the affairs of the Company or affiliates since the date hereof.
We are responsible only for the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus. No one has
been  authorized  to  give  any  information  or  to  make  any  representations  with  respect  to  the  matters  described  in  this
prospectus and the related letter(s) of transmittal, other than those contained in this prospectus and the related letter(s) of
transmittal. If given or made, such information or representation may not be relied upon as having been authorized by us.
This prospectus incorporates important business and financial information about the Company that is not included in or
delivered with this document. This information is available without charge to security
Table of Contents
iii
holders upon written or oral request to the Company, which may be made in writing or by phone to the following address
or  telephone  number:  5300  Town  and  Country  Blvd.,  Suite  500,  Frisco,  Texas  75034,  Tel.  (972)  668-8800,  Attention:
Corporate Secretary. To obtain timely delivery of such information, security holders must request such information no
later than                     , 2016.
In making a decision in connection with the Exchange Offer, you must rely on your own examination of our business and the terms
of the Exchange Offer, including the merits and risks involved. You should not construe the contents of this prospectus as providing
any  legal,  business,  financial  or  tax  advice.  You  should  consult  with  your  own  legal,  business,  financial  and  tax  advisors  with
respect to any such matters concerning this prospectus and the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation contemplated hereby.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The information contained in this prospectus, including the documents incorporated by reference herein and our public releases,
include “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities
Act, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. These forward-looking statements
are identified by their use of terms such as “expect,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “project,” “plan,” “intend,” “believe” and similar terms. All
statements,  other  than  statements  of  historical  facts,  included  in  this  prospectus,  are  forward-looking  statements,  including
statements regarding:
•
•
•
amount and timing of future production of oil and natural gas;
the availability of exploration and development opportunities;
amount, nature and timing of capital expenditures;
the number of anticipated wells to be drilled after the date hereof;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the number of anticipated wells to be drilled after the date hereof;
our financial or operating results;
our cash flow and anticipated liquidity;
operating costs, including lease operating expenses, administrative costs and other expenses;
finding and development costs;
our business strategy; and
other plans and objectives for future operations.
Any or all of our forward-looking statements in this prospectus may turn out to be incorrect. They can be affected by a number of
factors, including, among others:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the risks described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this prospectus;
the volatility of prices and supply of, and demand for, oil and natural gas;
the timing and success of our drilling activities;
the numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of oil and natural gas reserves and actual future production
rates and associated costs;
our ability to successfully identify, execute, or integrate future acquisitions effectively;
the  usual  hazards  associated  with  the  oil  and  natural  gas  industry,  including  fires,  well  blowouts,  pipe  failure,  spills,
explosions and other unforeseen hazards;
our ability to effectively market our oil and natural gas;
the availability of rigs, equipment, supplies and personnel;
our ability to discover or acquire additional reserves;
our ability to satisfy future capital requirements;
Table of Contents
iv
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
changes in regulatory requirements, including those relating to environmental matters, permitting or other aspects of our
operations;
general economic conditions, status of the financial markets and competitive conditions;
the adequacy and availability of capital resources, credit and liquidity, including, but not limited to, access to additional
borrowing capacity and our inability to generate sufficient cash flow from operations to fund our capital expenditures and
meet working capital needs;
the willingness and ability of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) to set and maintain oil price and
production controls;
counterparty credit risks;
competition in the oil and gas industry in general, and specifically in our areas of operations;
the success of our business and financial strategies, and hedging strategies;
our ability to retain key members of our senior management and other key employees; and
hostilities in the Middle East and other sustained military campaigns and acts of terrorism or sabotage that impact the
supply of crude oil and natural gas.
Other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated are discussed in “Risk Factors” included in
this  prospectus.  Should  one  or  more  of  the  risks  or  uncertainties  described  above  or  elsewhere  in  this  prospectus  or  in  the
documents incorporated by reference herein occur, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results and plans
could differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements. We specifically disclaim all responsibility to publicly
update  any  information  contained  in  a  forward-looking  statement  or  any  forward-looking  statement  in  its  entirety  and  therefore
disclaim any resulting liability for potentially related damages.
Table of Contents
v
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
Old  notes  tendered  and  not  validly  withdrawn  prior  to  the  Withdrawal  Deadline  may  not  be  withdrawn  at  any  time  after  the
Withdrawal Deadline, which is 11:59 P.M., New York City time, on August 26, 2016.
Old notes tendered for exchange, along with letters of transmittal and any other required documents, should be directed to the
Information and Exchange Agent. Any requests for assistance in connection with the Exchange Offer or for additional copies of this
prospectus or related materials should be directed to the Information and Exchange Agent. Contact information for the Information
and  Exchange  Agent  is  set  forth  on  the  back  cover  of  this  prospectus.  None  of  the  Company,  its  subsidiaries,  their  respective
boards of directors and the Information and Exchange Agent has made any recommendation as to whether or not holders should
tender their old notes for exchange pursuant to the Exchange Offer.
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated is acting as Dealer Manager for the Exchange Offer. D.F. King & Co., Inc. is
acting as the Information and Exchange Agent for the Exchange Offer.
Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Exchange Offer, the exchange consideration to which an exchanging holder is
entitled  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Offer  will  be  paid  on  the  Closing  Date,  which  is  the  date  promptly  following  the  applicable
expiration date of the Exchange Offer, subject to satisfaction or waiver (to the extent permitted) of all conditions precedent to the
Exchange Offer. Under no circumstances will any interest be payable because of any delay in the transmission of the exchange
consideration to holders by the Information and Exchange Agent.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Exchange Offer, our obligation to pay the exchange consideration for old notes validly
tendered  for  exchange  and  not  validly  withdrawn  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Offer  is  subject  to,  and  conditioned  upon,  the
satisfaction  or  waiver  of  the  conditions  described  under  “General  Terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation—
Conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
Subject to applicable securities laws and the terms of the Exchange Offer, we reserve the right:
•
•
•
•
to waive any and all conditions to the Exchange Offer that may be waived by us;
to extend the Exchange Offer;
to terminate the Exchange Offer; or
otherwise to amend the Exchange Offer in any respect in compliance with applicable securities laws.
If the Exchange Offer is withdrawn or otherwise not completed, the exchange consideration will not be paid or become payable to
holders of the old notes who have validly tendered their old notes for exchange in connection with the Exchange Offer, and the old
notes tendered for exchange pursuant to the Exchange Offer will be promptly returned to the tendering holders.
Only registered holders of old notes are entitled to tender old notes for exchange and give consents. Beneficial owners of old notes
that are held of record by a broker, bank or other nominee or custodian must instruct such nominee or custodian to tender the old
notes for exchange on the beneficial owner’s behalf. A letter of instructions is included in the materials provided along with this
prospectus, which may be used by a beneficial owner in this process to affect the tender of old notes for exchange. See “General
Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Procedures for Tendering Old Notes—General.”
Exchanging holders will not be obligated to pay brokerage fees or commissions to the Information and Exchange Agent or us. If a
broker, bank or other nominee or custodian tenders old notes on behalf of a tendering holder, such broker, bank or other nominee or
custodian  may  charge  a  fee  for  doing  so.  Exchanging  holders  who  own  old  notes  through  a  broker,  bank  or  other  nominee  or
custodian should consult their broker, bank or other nominee or custodian to determine whether any charges will apply.
Table of Contents
vi
IMPORTANT DATES
Holders of old notes should note the following dates and times relating to the Exchange Offer, unless extended:
Event
Launch Date
Early Tender Date
Date and Time
Event Description
August 1, 2016
Commencement of the Exchange Offer.
The  last  time  for  you  to  validly  tender  old  notes  to
5:00 P.M., New York City time, on August
12, 2016
qualify for payment of the applicable Early Exchange
11:59 P.M., New York City time, on August
26, 2016
11:59  P.M.,  New  York  City  Time,  on
August 26, 2016
Promptly after the Expiration Date
Expected to be August 31, 2016
Consideration.
The last time for you to validly withdraw tenders of old
notes. If your tenders are validly withdrawn, you will
no longer receive the applicable consideration on the
Closing  Date  (unless  you  validly  retender  such  old
notes at or before the Expiration Date).
The  last  time  for  you  to  validly  tender  old  notes  to
qualify  for  the  payment  of  the  applicable  Late
Exchange  Consideration  payable  in  respect  of  old
notes tendered after the Early Tender Date.
to
the
Subject 
tender  acceptance  procedures
described  herein,  payment  of  the  Early  Exchange
Consideration and the Late Exchange Consideration,
plus  the  payment  in  cash  of  accrued  and  unpaid
interest on old notes accepted for exchange from the
applicable  last  interest  payment  date  to,  but  not
including,  the  Closing  Date  (subject  to  the  right  of
holders on the relevant record date to receive interest
due on the relevant interest payment date).
vii
Withdrawal Deadline
Expiration Date
Closing Date
Table of Contents
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THE EXCHANGE OFFER
The  following  are  some  questions  and  answers  regarding  the  Exchange  Offer,  including  the  Consent  Solicitation.  It  does  not
contain all of the information that may be important to you. You should carefully read this prospectus to fully understand the terms of
the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation,  as  well  as  the  other  considerations  that  are  important  to  you  in  making  your
investment decision. You should pay special attention to the information provided under the captions entitled “Risk Factors” and
“Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Who is making the Exchange Offer?
Comstock  Resources,  Inc.,  a  Nevada  corporation  and  the  issuer  of  the  old  notes,  is  making  the  Exchange  Offer.  The  mailing
address of our principal executive offices is 5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500, Frisco, Texas 75034. Our telephone number
is (972) 668-8800. Our common stock is currently listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CRK.” See “General
Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
Why are we making the Exchange Offer?
We  are  making  the  Exchange  Offer  in  order  to  restructure  the  terms  of  our  consolidated  outstanding  indebtedness  to  enhance
liquidity, add equity and pay-in-kind (PIK) interest components, to provide collateral security to certain unsecured debt obligations,
to  modify  the  restrictive  covenants  and  to  make  other  changes  in  such  terms.  We  believe  that  restructuring  our  outstanding
indebtedness will promote our long-term financial viability. See “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—
Exchange Offer.”
The  Company  continues  to  assess  strategic  alternatives  to  address  our  liquidity  needs  and  capital  structure  and  if  we  are  not
successful in our efforts to restructure our debt obligations, including because the response to the Exchange Offer is too limited, or if
we are otherwise unable to extend the maturities of our debt obligations, we may consider seeking relief under the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code. Even if we are successful with the Exchange Offer, avoidance of an in-court restructuring under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in
the future is not guaranteed and we expect to continue to restructure our remaining obligations and will likely attempt to undertake
other financing and refinancing alternatives, the success of which cannot be predicted at this time.
What will happen to the Company if the Exchange Offer is not completed?
If we are unable to complete the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation and improve our near-term liquidity, we will consider
other restructuring alternatives available to us at that time. Those alternatives include seeking asset dispositions, joint ventures,
additional debt and relief under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, all of which involve uncertainties, potential delays and other risks. If we
seek bankruptcy relief, there is a substantial risk that some holders of old notes would receive little or no consideration for their old
notes  and  the  ability  of  such  holders  to  recover  all  or  a  portion  of  their  investment  would  be  substantially  delayed  and  more
impaired than under the Exchange Offer restructuring. For a more complete description of potential bankruptcy relief and the risks
relating  to  our  failure  to  complete  the  Exchange  Offer,  see  “Risk  Factors—Risks  Relating  to  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation.”
What will happen to the old notes if the Company files for bankruptcy?
Any old notes that remain outstanding after the Exchange Offer is completed may be worthless in the event of our bankruptcy. That
is because all of the new notes will rank ahead of any remaining old notes in a bankruptcy.
Why are we pursuing an out-of-court restructuring rather than an in-court restructuring?
An out-of-court restructuring through the Exchange Offer or an in-court restructuring pursuant to the U.S. Bankruptcy Code provide
alternative means of restructuring our liabilities and seeking to achieve the survival and long-term viability of our business. We
believe  that  there  are  advantages  to  restructuring  the  Company’s  indebtedness  out-of-court.  We  believe  that  the  successful
consummation of the Exchange Offer out-of-court would, among other things:
•
enable  us  to  continue  operating  our  business  without  the  negative  impact  that  a  bankruptcy  could  have  on  our
relationships with our customers, suppliers, employees and others;
Table of Contents
viii
•
•
reduce the risk of a potentially precipitous decline in our revenues in a bankruptcy; and
allow us to complete our restructuring in less time, with less cash and with less risk than any bankruptcy alternatives.
If we have to resort to bankruptcy relief, among other things, we expect that the ability of holders of old notes to recover all or a
portion of their investment would likely be impaired to a greater degree than if the Exchange Offer is completed.
When does the Exchange Offer expire?
The Exchange Offer will expire at 11:59 P.M., New York City time, on August 26, 2016 (unless extended). See “General Terms of
the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Early Tender Date, Expiration Date, Extensions, Amendments or Termination.”
Can the Exchange Offer be extended?
Yes, we can extend the Exchange Offer. See “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Early Tender Date,
Expiration Date, Extensions, Amendments or Termination.”
What securities are being sought in the Exchange Offer?
We are offering to exchange, for new notes and in certain cases warrants, upon the terms and subject to the conditions described in
this prospectus, any and all of the $1.2 billion in aggregate principal amount of outstanding old notes that are validly tendered and
not validly withdrawn, as permitted under the terms of the Exchange Offer, on or prior to the Expiration Date. Our acceptance of
validly tendered old notes and the closing of the Exchange Offer are subject to the conditions described under “General Terms of
the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
The old notes were issued pursuant to three existing indentures and have the following payment terms:
(i)                Old  Senior  Secured  Notes:  10%  Senior  Secured  Notes  due  March  15,  2020;  interest  payable  semi-annually  on  each
March 15 and September 15.
(ii)        Old 2019 Notes: 7 3⁄4% Notes due April 1, 2019; interest payable semi-annually on each April 1 and October 1.
(iii)        Old 2020 Notes: 9 1⁄2% Notes due June 15, 2020; interest payable semi-annually on each June 15 and December 15.
The Old Senior Secured Notes are secured on a first-priority basis equally and ratably with our revolving credit facility described
under “Description of Other Indebtedness,” subject to certain payment priorities in favor of the revolving credit facility.
The old notes are guaranteed by all of our subsidiaries. Upon a change of control of the Company, we are obligated to offer to
repurchase  the  old  notes  for  cash  at  101%  of  the  aggregate  principal  amount  tendered  plus  accrued  and  unpaid  interest.  The
Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation,  if  completed,  will  not  trigger  this  change  of  control  repurchase  obligation.  For  a
description of the terms governing the old notes, see “Description of Other Indebtedness.”
What will I receive in the Exchange Offer?
Holders of old notes that are validly tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer will, subject to the terms and conditions of the
Exchange Offer, receive for each $1,000 in principal amount of old notes exchanged, the following:
(i)        Holders of Old Senior Secured Notes will receive exchange consideration consisting of (a) new Senior Secured Toggle
Notes due 2020 (the “New Senior Secured Notes”) and (b) warrants exercisable for 1.50 shares of our common stock at an exercise
price of $0.01 per share;
(ii)        Holders of Old 2019 Notes will receive exchange consideration consisting of new 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes
due 2019 (the “New 2019 Convertible Notes”); and
Table of Contents
ix
(iii)        Holders of Old 2020 Notes will receive exchange consideration consisting of new 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes
due 2020 (the “New 2020 Convertible Notes”).
In each instance, if the tender is made by the Early Tender Date, you will receive $1,000 principal amount of the applicable new
notes. If the tender is made after the Early Tender Date and prior to the Expiration Date, you will receive $950 principal amount of
the applicable new notes.
Payment of accrued and unpaid interest on the old notes tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer will be made in cash on the
Closing Date. The Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation are each subject to the conditions described under “General Terms of
the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
The exchange consideration will be in full satisfaction of the principal amount of the old notes that are tendered and accepted in the
Exchange Offer, and any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the Closing Date of the Exchange Offer on the old notes
that are tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer will be paid in cash on the date on which the Exchange Offer is completed.
When are the new notes convertible into shares of common stock of the Company?
The New Senior Secured Notes will not be convertible into shares of our common stock but holders of the New Senior Secured
Notes will receive for each $1,000 principal amount of old notes tendered warrants exercisable for 1.50 shares of our common stock
at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. The share and per share data reflects the one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock split that became
effective on July 29, 2016.
The  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  convertible,  subject  to  and  following  receipt  of
required stockholder approval, at the option of the holder, into shares of our common stock at a conversion rate of 81.2 shares of
common stock per $1,000 principal amount of such new notes (equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $12.32 per share
of common stock), subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments.
In  addition,  subject  to  and  following  receipt  of  required  stockholder  approval,  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  New  2020
Convertible Notes will be mandatorily convertible into shares of our common stock at the conversion rate of 81.2 shares of common
stock per $1,000 principal amount of such notes (equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $12.32 per share of common
stock) on or before the third business day following required notice of the 10 consecutive trading day period during which the daily
volume  weighted  average  price  on  the  NYSE  for  our  common  stock  is  equal  to  or  greater  than  $9.24  per  share,  subject  to
customary anti-dilution adjustments.
If  the  required  stockholder  approval  is  not  obtained  by  December  31,  2016,  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  New  2020
Convertible Notes will not be convertible into common stock, and such failure to obtain stockholder approval will result in a default
under such notes. If such default continues for 90 days, it will become an Event of Default. Such default may in turn result in a
default under the New Senior Secured Notes.
Interest shall cease to accrue on any new notes on the date such new notes have been converted (the “Conversion Date”). All
accrued and unpaid interest on new notes that are being converted will be paid in cash on any Conversion Date. See “Description
of New Senior Secured Notes” and “Description of New Convertible Notes.”
What  percentage  of  the  ownership  of  the  Company  will  holders  receive  or  be  entitled  to  if  the  Exchange  Offer  is
completed?
Assuming all $1.2 billion in outstanding old notes are validly tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer, we will reserve for
issuance, (i) subject to stockholder approval, up to 48.8 million shares of common stock to be issuable upon conversion of the New
2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible Notes and (ii) up to 1.05 million shares of common stock to be issuable upon
exercise  of  the  warrants.  If  the  conversion  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  was  to  occur  immediately  after  receipt  of  stockholder
approval,  approximately  37.6  million  shares  of  common  stock  would  be  issued,  which  would  represent  in  the  aggregate
approximately 73.5% of our outstanding common stock. If the conversion of the New Convertible Notes was to occur immediately
prior to
Table of Contents
x
their respective maturity date, approximately 48.8 million shares of common stock would be issued, which would represent in the
aggregate  approximately  78.3%  of  our  outstanding  common  stock.  Exercise  of  the  warrants  would  represent  in  the  aggregate
approximately  2.1%  of  our  outstanding  common  stock.  If  the  maximum  number  of  shares  of  common  stock  were  issued  upon
conversion of the New Convertible Notes and exercise of the warrants, it would represent approximately 80% of our outstanding
shares. The foregoing assumes (i) all $1.2 billion in outstanding old notes are validly tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer,
(ii) all of the New Convertible Notes are converted into and all warrants are exercised for common stock and (iii) the number of
outstanding shares of our common stock prior to such conversion or exercise is equal to 12,504,562, which is the approximate
number of outstanding shares on July 29, 2016.
Who may participate in the Exchange Offer?
All holders of the old notes may participate in the Exchange Offer.
Is there a minimum tender condition to the Exchange Offer?
Yes. The Exchange Offer is conditioned upon holders of not less than (i) 95% in aggregate principal amount of the Old Senior
Secured Notes and (ii) 95% in total aggregate principal amount of the Old 2019 Notes and Old 2020 Notes (on a combined basis)
having validly tendered (and not validly withdrawn) their old notes in the Exchange Offer.
Are there any other conditions to the Exchange Offer?
Yes. The Exchange Offer is conditioned on the closing conditions described under “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and
Consent Solicitation—Conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.” We will not be required, but we reserve the right,
to the extent legally permitted, to accept for exchange any old notes tendered (or, alternatively, we may terminate the Exchange
Offer)  if  any  of  the  conditions  of  the  Exchange  Offer  as  described  under  “General  Terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation—Conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation” remain unsatisfied.
What rights will I lose if I exchange my old notes in the Exchange Offer?
If you validly tender your old notes and we accept them for exchange, you will have rights as a holder of new notes and/or a holder
of warrants, as the case may be, and will lose the rights of a holder of old notes. For example, as a holder of warrants to purchase
common  stock,  your  claims  would  rank  below  those  of  a  holder  of  old  notes  and/or  new  notes  in  any  bankruptcy  proceeding
involving the Company.
How can I determine the market value of the old notes?
The old notes are not listed on any securities exchange. To the extent that old notes have traded, prices of the old notes have
fluctuated depending, among other things, upon trading volume, the balance between buy and sell orders, prevailing interest rates,
our operating results and financial condition, our business prospects and the market for similar securities.
Will the new securities be freely tradable?
The new notes and the warrants received in the Exchange Offer, and the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the
warrants or conversion of the New Convertible Notes will be freely tradable in the United States, unless you are an affiliate of the
Company, as that term is defined in the Securities Act. The Company’s common stock is currently listed on the NYSE under the
symbol “CRK.” However, our common stock may be delisted if it does not maintain an average closing price of $1.00 per share or
our average market capitalization is less than $50.0 million, in each case over a consecutive 30-day trading period. As of July 29,
2016, our average market capitalization was $52.5 million and the average closing price of our common stock was $0.84 (prior to
the reverse stock split), in each case over the preceding 30-day trading period. The Company has submitted, and the NYSE has
accepted, a plan to address the market capitalization and minimum trading price issues. The plan is closely tied to the successful
completion  of  the  restructuring,  along  with  other  operating  initiatives,  which  the  Company  also  believes  will  address  the  $1.00
minimum  price  and  market  capitalization  deficiency.  To  address  the  minimum  stock  price  requirement,  on  July  20,  2016,  we
announced a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of our
Table of Contents
xi
common stock which became effective on July 29, 2016. We do not intend to list the new notes or the warrants on the NYSE or any
national or regional securities exchange, and therefore no trading market for the new notes will exist upon consummation of the
Exchange Offer, and none is likely to develop.
What risks should I consider in deciding whether or not to exchange the old notes?
In deciding whether to participate in the Exchange Offer, you should carefully consider the discussion of the risks and uncertainties
relating to the Exchange Offer, our Company and our industry described in the section entitled “Risk Factors,” beginning on page
20 of this prospectus.
How do I participate in the Exchange Offer?
To tender your old notes, you must deliver the required documents to D.F. King & Co., Inc. as Information and Exchange Agent, on
or prior to the Expiration Date, which is 11:59 P.M., New York City time, on August 26, 2016, unless extended as described in this
prospectus. See “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Early Tender Date, Expiration Date, Extensions,
Amendments or Termination.”
A  holder  who  is  a  DTC  participant  should  tender  its  old  notes  electronically  through  DTC’s  Automatic  Tender  Offer  Program
(“ATOP”), subject to the terms and procedures of that system. See “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation
—Procedures for Tendering Old Notes—Tender of Notes Through ATOP.”
What happens if I do not participate in the Exchange Offer?
If you currently hold old notes and do not tender them, then, following completion of the Exchange Offer, your old notes will continue
to  be  outstanding  according  to  their  terms  (as  amended  pursuant  to  any  amendments  resulting  from  the  Consent  Solicitation).
Because the new notes will be secured by substantially all assets of the Company and the old notes are (or as a result of the
Proposed  Amendments  will  be)  unsecured,  any  old  notes  remaining  outstanding  after  the  Exchange  Offer  will  effectively  be
subordinated to the new notes to the extent of the assets securing the new notes. The Proposed Amendments will also remove
certain of the covenants from the indentures governing the old notes. Moreover, if we complete the Exchange Offer, the liquidity and
value of, and any trading market for, any old notes that remain outstanding after completion of the Exchange Offer may be adversely
affected.
HOLDERS  THAT  TENDER  THROUGH  DTC  NEED  NOT  SUBMIT  A  PHYSICAL  LETTER  OF  TRANSMITTAL  TO  THE
INFORMATION  AND  EXCHANGE  AGENT  IF  SUCH  HOLDERS  COMPLY  WITH  THE  TRANSMITTAL  PROCEDURES  OF
DTC.
A  holder  whose  old  notes  are  held  by  a  broker,  dealer,  commercial  bank,  trust  company  or  other  nominee  must  contact  that
nominee if that holder desires to tender its old notes and instruct that nominee to tender the old notes on the holder’s behalf.
A holder whose old notes are held in certificated form must properly complete and execute the applicable Letter of Transmittal, and
deliver  such  Letter(s)  of  Transmittal  and  old  notes  in  certificated  form  to  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent,  with  any  other
required documents and the certificates representing the old notes to be tendered in the Exchange Offer.
May I withdraw my tender of old notes?
Yes. You can withdraw old notes previously tendered for exchange at any time before the Withdrawal Deadline. The Withdrawal
Deadline is 11:59 P.M., New York City time, on August 26, 2016, unless extended as described in this prospectus. See “General
Terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation—Early  Tender  Date,  Expiration  Date,  Extensions,  Amendments  or
Termination.”
HOLDERS  THAT  WITHDRAW  THROUGH  DTC  NEED  NOT  SUBMIT  A  PHYSICAL  NOTICE  OF  WITHDRAWAL  TO  THE
INFORMATION AND EXCHANGE AGENT IF SUCH HOLDERS COMPLY WITH THE WITHDRAWAL PROCEDURES OF DTC.
xii
Table of Contents
What happens if my old notes are not accepted in the Exchange Offer?
If we decide for any reason not to accept your old notes for exchange, the old notes will be returned to you promptly after the
expiration or termination of the Exchange Offer. In the case of old notes tendered by book entry transfer into the Information and
Exchange Agent’s account at DTC, any unaccepted old notes will be credited to your account at DTC. See “General Terms of the
Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
Do I need to do anything if I do not wish to tender my old notes?
No. If you do not deliver a properly completed and duly executed Letter of Transmittal to the Information and Exchange Agent or
tender your old notes electronically through DTC’s ATOP before the Expiration Date, your old notes will remain outstanding subject
to their terms (as amended pursuant to any amendments resulting from the Consent Solicitation).
If I choose to tender my old notes for exchange, do I have to tender all of my old notes?
No. You may tender a portion of your old notes, all of your old notes or none of your old notes for exchange. See “General Terms of
the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
How will I be taxed under United States federal income tax laws on the exchange of the old notes if I am a United States
holder of old notes?
Though it is not free from doubt, we intend to take the position that, the exchange of the old notes for exchange consideration
should be treated as part of a recapitalization for United States federal income tax purposes. In such case, you generally should not
recognize  loss  or  gain  for  United  States  federal  income  tax  purposes  as  a  result  of  exchanging  your  old  notes  for  exchange
consideration, even if you have otherwise recognized an economic loss or gain with respect to such exchange. You should consult
with  your  own  tax  advisor  regarding  the  tax  consequences  of  exchanging  your  old  notes.  See  “Certain  United  States  Federal
Income Tax Consequences.”
Has the Board of Directors adopted a position on the Exchange Offer?
Our board of directors, which we refer to in this prospectus as the “Board of Directors” or the “Board,” has approved the making of
the Exchange Offer. However, our directors do not make any recommendation as to whether you should tender your old notes
pursuant to the Exchange Offer. You should consult your own financial, tax, legal and other advisors and must make your own
decision as to whether to tender your old notes.
Who will pay the fees and expenses associated with the Exchange Offer?
We  will  bear  all  of  our  fees  and  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with  consummating  the  Exchange  Offer.  No  brokerage
commissions are payable by the holders to the Information and Exchange Agent or us. If your old notes are held through a broker or
other nominee who tenders old notes on your behalf, your broker or other nominee may charge you a commission or fee for doing
so. You should consult with your broker or other nominee to determine whether any charges will apply. See “General Terms of the
Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
How do I vote for the Proposed Amendments?
If a holder validly tenders old notes prior to 11:59 P.M., New York City time, on the Expiration Date, such tender will be deemed to
constitute the delivery of consent to the Proposed Amendments as a holder of old notes with respect to the tendered old notes. See
“Proposed Amendments to Existing Indentures and Old Notes.”
Who can answer questions concerning the Exchange Offer?
Requests for assistance in connection with the tender of your old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer may be directed to the
Information and Exchange Agent, D.F. King & Co., Inc., 48 Wall Street, 22nd Floor, New York, New York 10005, Attention: Peter
Aymar; phone: (877) 732-3619 or to the Dealer Manager, BofA Merrill Lynch, Attention: Debt Advisory; The Hearst Building, 214
North Tryon Street, 14th Floor, Charlotte, North Carolina 28255, toll-free: (888) 292-0070; collect: (980) 388-4813 and (646) 855-
2464.
Table of Contents
xiii
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
For the definitions of certain terms and abbreviations used in the oil and natural gas industry, see “Definitions.”
Our Company
We are engaged in the acquisition, development, production and exploration of oil and natural gas. Our common stock is listed and
traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CRK.”
Our oil and gas operations are concentrated in Texas and Louisiana. Our oil and natural gas properties are estimated to have
proved reserves of 625 Bcfe with a standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows of $372.1 million as of December 31,
2015. Our proved oil and natural gas reserve base is 91% natural gas and 9% oil and was 59% developed as of December 31,
2015.
Our proved reserves at December 31, 2015 and our 2015 average daily production are summarized below:
East Texas / North
Louisiana
South Texas
Other Regions
Total
Recent Developments
Proved Reserves at December 31,
2015
Natural
Oil
(MMBbls)
Gas
(Bcf)
Total
(Bcfe)
% of
Total
2015 Average Daily Production
Oil
Natural
Gas
Total
% of
(MBbls/d)
(MMcf/d)
(MMcfe/d)
Total
0.3   
8.8   
0.1   
   
9.2
493.6   
67.3   
 
 
8.7   
  
   
  569.6
495.4   
 119.9   
 
9.7   
  
   
 625.0
79.3%  
  19.2%  
  1.5%  
  
 
 100.0%
0.2   
8.1   
0.2   
   
8.5
106.9   
20.3   
3.4   
   
130.6
107.9   
68.9   
4.6   
   
181.4
59.5% 
38.0% 
2.5%
100.0%
With  the  substantial  decline  in  oil  and  natural  gas  prices  we  experienced  in  2015,  which  continued  into  2016,  we  continue  to
experience declining cash flows and reductions in our overall liquidity. Given current oil and natural gas prices, our operating cash
flow is not sufficient to cover our fixed debt service costs and as a result, we have had to fund capital expenditures with asset sale
proceeds or from cash on hand. In late 2014 and into 2015, we reduced our drilling activity and released three operated drilling
rigs.  We  substantially  reduced  our  capital  spending  in  2015  and  directed  our  drilling  program  to  natural  gas.  We  drilled  ten
horizontal wells on our Haynesville and Bossier shale properties in North Louisiana, employing an enhanced completion design
using longer laterals and larger well stimulations. The well results were successful but natural gas prices substantially declined in
response to a very warm winter. In order to preserve liquidity, we recently released our last operated rig after drilling and completing
three additional successful Haynesville shale wells in 2016. While the reduction in drilling activity will allow us to preserve more of
our  cash  on  our  balance  sheet,  it  will  result  in  future  reductions  to  our  natural  gas  production  and  proved  oil  and  natural  gas
reserves. Without additional drilling in 2016, we expect our natural gas production to decline by 25-30% in 2017.
A successful completion of the Exchange Offer combined with our previous repurchases of $236.9 million of our senior notes in
2015 and 2016 will free up our cash flow from operations to allow us to restart our Haynesville shale drilling program which will
allow us to increase our natural gas production and proved oil and gas reserves into 2017 and benefit from improving natural gas
prices. To the extent that the Exchange Offer is not completed, we intend to pursue other initiatives to enhance our liquidity. Such
initiatives could include entering into a drilling joint venture on our Haynesville shale properties or additional asset divestitures. We
may also seek to issue additional secured debt to the extent permitted by the indentures governing the old notes. Such initiatives
may help to meet our short-term liquidity needs but may come with terms that diminish our longer-term value and ability to benefit
from improving oil and natural gas prices.
We have received a notice of non-compliance with continued listing standards from the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) for
our common stock in that our common stock did not meet the minimum trading
Table of Contents
1
price of $1.00 per share and our market capitalization was less than the minimum requirement of $50 million. We have submitted a
business plan to the NYSE demonstrating our intent to regain compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing standards which has
been accepted by the NYSE. As part of the plan to regain compliance, we have effected a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of our
common stock that became effective on July 29, 2016. All share and per share information in this prospectus has been adjusted to
reflect the reverse stock split, unless the context otherwise requires.
Strengths
High Quality Properties.     Our operations are focused in two operating areas: East Texas/North Louisiana and South Texas. Our
properties have an average reserve life of approximately 9.4 years and have extensive development and exploration potential. Our
properties in the East Texas/North Louisiana region, which are primarily prospective for natural gas, include 78,759 acres (66,864
net  to  us)  in  the  Haynesville  or  Bossier  shale  formations.  Advances  in  drilling  and  completion  technology  have  allowed  us  to
increase the reserves recovered through longer horizontal lateral length and substantially larger well stimulation. As a result of the
improved economic returns that we achieved with our Haynesville shale natural gas wells, and the continuing decline of oil prices,
our 2015 drilling activity primarily targeted natural gas in the Haynesville shale. In our South Texas region, our Eagleville field
includes 26,416 acres (19,293 net to us) located in the oil window of the Eagle Ford shale. Our oil development program in the
Eagleville field in 2015 was limited to the completion of wells that were drilled in 2014. In addition to our acreage in the Eagle Ford
shale,  we  have  81,421  acres  (75,669  net  to  us)  in  Mississippi  and  Louisiana  that  are  prospective  for  oil  development  in  the
Tuscaloosa Marine shale. We did not drill on these properties in 2015 due to the low oil prices throughout the year, and we have
extended lease terms on key acreage in this area to hold this oil acreage until prices support further development.
Successful Exploration and Development Program.     In 2015, we spent $227.7 million on exploration and development activities,
of which $196.4 million was for drilling and completing wells. We drilled 15 wells (13.6 net to us) and completed 23 wells (19.6 net
to us). We also spent $13.7 million in 2015 on leasehold costs and $31.3 million for other development costs. Of our 2015 capital
expenditures,  48%  was  directed  towards  natural  gas  projects.  In  2015,  our  natural  gas  drilling  program  grew  our  natural  gas
production by 20% over 2014 and increased our proved natural gas reserves by 167 Bcf.
Efficient Operator.     We operated 98% of our proved reserve base as of December 31, 2015. As the operator, we are better able to
control  operating  costs,  the  timing  and  plans  for  future  development,  the  level  of  drilling  and  lifting  costs  and  the  marketing  of
production.  As  an  operator,  we  receive  reimbursements  for  overhead  from  other  working  interest  owners,  which  reduces  our
general and administrative expenses.
Successful Acquisitions.    We have had significant growth over the years as a result of our acquisition activity. In recent years, we
have focused primarily on acquiring undrilled acreage rather than producing properties. We apply strict economic and reserve risk
criteria in evaluating acquisitions. Over the past 25 years, we have added 1.1 Tcfe of proved oil and natural gas reserves from 38
acquisitions  of  producing  oil  and  gas  properties  at  an  average  cost  of  $1.17  per  Mcfe.  Our  applications  of  strict  economic  and
reserve risk criteria have enabled us to successfully evaluate and integrate acquisitions.
Business Strategy
Pursue Exploration Opportunities.        Each  year,  we  conduct  exploration  activities  to  grow  our  reserve  base  and  to  replace  our
production. In 2015, we focused on natural gas development as our natural gas projects in the Haynesville and Bossier shales
provide us the highest returns within our opportunity set. We deferred further development of our oil properties under the low oil
price environment.
Table of Contents
2
In 2015, our Haynesville shale properties were the primary focus of our drilling activity. We have 80,657 acres (68,331 net to us) in
East  Texas  and  North  Louisiana  with  Haynesville  or  Bossier  shale  natural  gas  potential.  In  January  2016,  we  completed  an
acreage  swap  with  another  operator  which  increased  our  Haynesville  shale  properties  by  3,637  net  acres  in  DeSoto  Parish,
Louisiana. Our 2015 drilling program focused on natural gas development based on a new well design that significantly enhanced
the  economics  of  these  wells.  We  spent  $109.9  million  to  drill  10  wells  (9.6  net  to  us)  on  our  Haynesville  and  Bossier  shale
properties and to recomplete two wells using the new enhanced completion design.
From 2010 through 2015, we spent approximately $169.5 million leasing acreage in South Texas, in the oil window of the Eagle
Ford shale formation. We have in place a joint venture which allows us to accelerate the development of this field. Our joint venture
partner participates for a one-third interest in the wells that we drill in exchange for paying $25,000 per net acre that is earned by its
participation. Through December 31, 2015, we have drilled 196 wells (138.2 net to us) in our Eagleville field. Our joint venture
partner participated in 144 of these wells and contributed $86.0 million through 2015 for acreage and an additional $9.1 million to
reimburse us for a portion of common production facilities. During 2015, we completed four oil wells that were drilled on these
properties during 2014, but we did not drill any new wells in 2015 and we are not currently anticipating any drilling activity on our oil
properties until oil prices improve. In January 2016, we exchanged 2,547 net acres in Atascosa County, Texas for Haynesville
shale acreage.
We divested all of our acreage in or near Burleson County, Texas in 2015 which were prospective for oil in the Eagle Ford shale
formation. Cash proceeds realized from this sale were $102.5 million. We spent $69.1 million to drill four wells (4.0 net to us) and to
complete eight wells (7.8 net to us) on this acreage in 2015 prior to their sale.
Through the end of 2015 we spent $94.2 million to acquire 87,746 acres (81,537 net to us) in Louisiana and Mississippi which are
prospective for oil in the Tuscaloosa Marine shale. During 2014 we drilled our first well on this acreage but did not drill any wells in
2015 due to the decline in oil prices. We are not currently anticipating any drilling activity on this acreage during 2016 until oil
prices improve. The lease terms on our key acreage in this area were modified during 2015 to allow us to defer drilling activity until
2018.
Enhance Liquidity and Reduce Leverage. With the substantial decline in oil and natural gas prices we experienced in 2015, which
continued into 2016, we have taken several steps to enhance liquidity, reduce corporate commitments and ultimately reduce our
leverage. In late 2014 and into 2015, we reduced our drilling activity and released three operated drilling rigs. We substantially
reduced our capital spending in 2015 and have further reduced activity in 2016. In March 2015, we refinanced our bank revolving
credit facility with $700 million of senior secured notes which mature in 2020. The bank revolving credit facility was subject to a
semi-annual  borrowing  base  which  was  based  on  current  oil  and  gas  prices.  During  2015  and  2016,  we  repurchased  $236.9
million in principal amount of our senior unsecured notes for $46.1 million in cash and the issuance of 2.7 million shares of our
common stock. The repurchases reduced our annual interest expense by $20.6 million.
Exploit Existing Reserves.    We seek to maximize the value of our oil and gas properties by increasing production and recoverable
reserves  through  development  drilling  and  workover,  recompletion  and  exploitation  activities.  We  utilize  advanced  industry
technology, including 3-D seismic data, horizontal drilling, enhanced logging tools, and formation stimulation techniques. We spent
$4.6 million in 2015 to refrac two of our producing horizontal wells in the Haynesville shale. This pilot program was successful in
enhancing production from these wells by 577%. The success of this program supports a future program to re-stimulate many of our
186 producing natural gas shale wells and may also have applicability to our 196 horizontal oil shale wells when well economics
support these investments.
Table of Contents
3
Maintain Flexible Capital Expenditure Budget.    The timing of most of our capital expenditures is discretionary because we have
not  made  any  significant  long-term  capital  expenditure  commitments.  We  operate  most  of  the  drilling  projects  in  which  we
participate. Consequently, we have a significant degree of flexibility to adjust the level of such expenditures according to market
conditions. In 2016, we drilled three horizontal Haynesville shale wells and in June 2016 suspended our drilling program. We may
restart our drilling program later in 2016 conditioned on our liquidity and industry conditions.
Acquire High Quality Properties at Attractive Costs.    Historically, we have had a successful track record of increasing our oil and
natural gas reserves through opportunistic acquisitions. Over the past 25 years, we have added 1.1 Tcfe of proved oil and natural
gas reserves from 38 acquisitions of producing oil and gas properties at a total cost of $1.3 billion, or $1.17 per Mcfe. In evaluating
acquisitions, we apply strict economic and reserve risk criteria. We target properties in our core operating areas with established
production and low operating costs that also have potential opportunities to increase production and reserves through exploration
and exploitation activities.
Markets and Customers
The  market  for  our  production  of  oil  and  natural  gas  depends  on  factors  beyond  our  control,  including  the  extent  of  domestic
production and imports of oil and natural gas, the proximity and capacity of natural gas pipelines and other transportation facilities,
demand for oil and natural gas, the marketing of competitive fuels and the effects of state and federal regulation. The oil and gas
industry also competes with other industries in supplying the energy and fuel requirements of industrial, commercial and individual
consumers.
Our  oil  production  is  currently  sold  under  short-term  contracts  with  a  duration  of  six  months  or  less.  The  contracts  require  the
purchasers  to  purchase  the  amount  of  oil  production  that  is  available  at  prices  tied  to  the  spot  oil  markets.  Our  natural  gas
production is primarily sold under contracts with various terms and priced on first of the month index prices or on daily spot market
prices. Approximately 50% of our 2015 natural gas sales were priced utilizing first of the month index prices and approximately 50%
were  priced  utilizing  daily  spot  prices.  BP  Energy  Company  and  its  subsidiaries  and  Shell  Oil  Company  and  its  subsidiaries
accounted for 52% and 25%, respectively, of our total 2015 sales. The loss of either of these customers would not have a material
adverse effect on us as there is an available market for our crude oil and natural gas production from other purchasers.
We have entered into longer term marketing arrangements to ensure that we have adequate transportation to get our natural gas
production in North Louisiana to the markets. As an alternative to constructing our own gathering and treating facilities, we have
entered into a variety of gathering and treating agreements with midstream companies to transport our natural gas to the long-haul
natural gas pipelines. We have entered into certain agreements with a major natural gas marketing company to provide us with firm
transportation  for  15,000  MMBtu  per  day  for  our  North  Louisiana  natural  gas  production  on  the  long-haul  pipelines.  These
agreements expire from 2016 to 2019. To the extent we are not able to deliver the contracted natural gas volumes, we may be
responsible for the transportation costs. Our production available to deliver under these agreements in North Louisiana is expected
to  exceed  the  firm  transportation  arrangements  we  have  in  place.  In  addition,  the  marketing  company  managing  the  firm
transportation is required to use reasonable efforts to supplement our deliveries should we have a shortfall during the term of the
agreements.
Competition
The oil and gas industry is highly competitive. Competitors include major oil companies, other independent energy companies and
individual producers and operators, many of which have financial resources, personnel and facilities substantially greater than we
do. We face intense competition for the acquisition of oil and natural gas properties and leases for oil and gas exploration.
Table of Contents
4
Summary of the Terms of the Exchange Offer
We refer to the notes to be registered under the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part as new notes. You may
exchange your old notes for new notes and warrants, as the case may be and as further described herein, in this Exchange Offer.
You should read the discussion under the headings “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation,” “Description
of New Senior Secured Notes” and “Description of New Convertible Notes” for further information regarding the new notes.
Securities Subject to the Exchange Offer
The Exchange Offer
Early Tender Date
Any and all of $700.0 million aggregate principal amount of 10% Senior Secured
Notes  due  2020,  any  and  all  of  $288.5  million  aggregate  principal  amount  of
7  3⁄4%  Senior  Notes  due  2019  and  any  and  all  of  $174.6  million  aggregate
principal amount of 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
We are offering to exchange any and all of our outstanding old notes tendered
prior  to  the  Expiration  Date  for  new  notes  and,  in  the  case  of  the  Old  Senior
Secured Notes, warrants, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in
this prospectus and the accompanying Letter(s) of Transmittal (collectively, as the
same  may  be  amended  or  supplemented  from  time  to  time,  the  “Offer
Documents”). Payment of accrued and unpaid interest on each of the old notes
will be made in cash on the date on which the Exchange Offer is completed.
To be eligible to receive the Early Exchange Consideration, holders must tender
the old notes at or prior to 5:00 P.M., New York City time, on August 12, 2016,
unless extended by us.
Withdrawal Deadline; Expiration Date and
Time
A holder’s right to withdraw any old notes tendered will expire at 11:59 P.M., New
York City time on August 26, 2016 unless extended by us. See “General Terms of
the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation—Withdrawal  of  Tenders;
Revocation of Consents.”
The Exchange Offer will expire at 11:59 P.M., New York City time, on August 26,
2016,  unless  extended  by  us.  See  “General  Terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and
Consent  Solicitation—Early  Tender  Date,  Expiration  Date,  Extensions,
Amendments or Termination.”
Exchange Consideration
Eligible holders whose old notes are tendered prior to the Early Tender Date, not
validly  withdrawn  and  accepted  for  exchange  will  receive  the  following  Early
Exchange Consideration:
•
•
For  each  $1,000  principal  amount  of  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes  so
tendered,  $1,000  principal  amount  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  and
warrants exercisable for 1.50 shares of common stock of the Company;
For  each  $1,000  principal  amount  of  Old  2019  Notes  so  tendered,
$1,000 principal amount of New 2019 Convertible Notes; and
Table of Contents
5
•
For  each  $1,000  principal  amount  of  Old  2020  Notes  so  tendered,
$1,000 principal amount of New 2020 Convertible Notes.
Eligible holders whose old notes are tendered after the Early Tender Date and
prior to the Expiration Date, not validly withdrawn and accepted for exchange will
receive the following Late Exchange Consideration:
•
•
•
For  each  $1,000  principal  amount  of  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes  so
tendered,  $950  principal  amount  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  and
warrants exercisable for 1.50 shares of common stock of the Company;
For  each  $1,000  principal  amount  of  Old  2019  Notes  so  tendered,
$950 principal amount of New 2019 Convertible Notes; and
For  each  $1,000  principal  amount  of  Old  2020  Notes  so  tendered,
$950 principal amount of New 2020 Convertible Notes.
For additional information regarding the terms of the new notes, see “Description
of New Senior Secured Notes” and “Description of New Convertible Notes.”
Accrued Interest
Payment of accrued and unpaid interest on the old notes will be made in cash on
Accrued Interest
Proposed Amendments
Table of Contents
Conditions to the Exchange Offer
Payment of accrued and unpaid interest on the old notes will be made in cash on
the Closing Date.
Holders  that  tender  old  notes  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Offer  prior  to  the
Expiration Date will be deemed automatically to have delivered a consent to the
Proposed  Amendments  with  respect  to  all  such  old  notes.  If  consents
representing a majority of the outstanding principal amount of the respective old
notes are delivered (and not revoked) prior to the Expiration Date, we will, subject
to consummation of the Exchange Offer, execute supplemental indentures with
respect to each series of the old notes with The Bank of New York Mellon Trust
Company, N.A., as Trustee. Each such supplemental indenture will eliminate or
amend certain of the restrictive covenants contained in the respective indenture
governing  the  applicable  series  of  old  notes.  If  consents  from  holders
representing at least 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the
Old Senior Secured Notes are delivered (and not revoked) prior to the Expiration
Date, the supplemental indenture with respect to the Old Senior Secured Notes
will,  subject  to  the  consummation  of  the  Exchange  Offer,  also  release  all  liens
securing the Old Senior Secured Notes. See “Proposed Amendments to Existing
Indentures  and  Old  Notes.”  Since  not  less  than  95%  in  aggregate  principal
amount  of  the  old  notes  must  be  tendered  to  consummate  the  Exchange  Offer
and  because  consents  to  the  Proposed  Amendments  are  required  if  holders
tender their old notes, the minimum threshold for the consents will automatically
be achieved if the Minimum Condition is satisfied.
6
Our obligation to accept, and exchange, any old notes validly tendered (and not
validly withdrawn) pursuant to the Exchange Offer is conditioned, among other
things, upon: (i) the Minimum Condition; (ii) consents with respect to more than
50% of the aggregate principal amount of the old notes approving the Proposed
Amendments  are  delivered  and  not  revoked  prior  to  the  Expiration  Date  in
connection  with  the  Consent  Solicitation,  provided  that  the  requested  consent
regarding a release of the collateral with respect to the Old Senior Secured Notes
requires the consent of at least 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate principal amount of the
Old  Senior  Secured  Notes;  and  (iii)  the  Exchange  Offer  is  completed  by
September 15, 2016.
In  addition,  pursuant  to  NYSE  rules,  we  may  not  issue  shares  of  our  common
stock  representing  in  excess  of  19.9%  of  our  outstanding  shares  without  the
approval of our stockholders. If the Exchange Offer is completed, we intend to call
a  special  meeting  of  stockholders  as  soon  as  reasonably  practicable  for
stockholders of record as of the Closing Date to consider the following matters:
(1)  a  proposal  to  amend  our  restated  articles  of  incorporation  to  increase  the
number  of  shares  of  our  common  stock  authorized  for  issuance,  in  order  to
provide  a  sufficient  number  of  authorized  shares  of  common  stock  for  the
issuance of shares upon conversion of the New Convertible Notes; (2) a proposal
to issue shares of common stock in excess of 19.9% of the currently outstanding
shares that would be issued upon conversion of the New Convertible Notes and
exercise of the warrants; and (3) any other matters properly brought before the
meeting. If stockholder approval is not obtained by December 31, 2016, the New
2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible Notes will not be convertible
into common stock and such failure to obtain stockholder approval will result in a
default under such notes. If such default continues for 90 days, it will become an
Closing Date
Acceptance of Tenders
Procedure for Tenders
Table of Contents
Withdrawal of Tenders
Further Information
Fees and Expenses
Event  of  Default.  Such  default  may  in  turn  result  in  a  default  under  the  New
Senior Secured Notes. See “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent
Solicitation—Conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
The Closing Date will be promptly after the Expiration Date and is expected to be
the first business day after the Expiration Date. Assuming the Exchange Offer is
not extended, we expect the Closing Date will be August 31, 2016.
All  properly  completed,  executed  and  delivered  Letters  of  Transmittal  and
properly  tendered  old  notes  received  by  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent
prior to the Expiration Date may be accepted.
If you wish to participate in the Exchange Offer and your old notes are held by a
custodial entity such as a bank, broker, dealer, trust company or other nominee,
you  must  instruct  that  custodial  entity  to  tender  your  old  notes  on  your  behalf
pursuant to the procedures of the custodial entity.
7
Custodial entities that are participants in The Depository Trust Company, or DTC,
may tender old notes through DTC’s Automated Tender Offer Program, known as
ATOP, by which the custodial entity and the beneficial owner on whose behalf
the  custodial  entity  is  acting  agree  to  be  bound  by  the  Letter  of  Transmittal.
Holders  may  also  tender  old  notes  at  their  option  through  the  completion  and
delivery to the Information and Exchange Agent of a Letter of Transmittal. See
“General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Procedures for
Tendering  Old  Notes.”  A  Letter  of  Transmittal  need  not  accompany  tenders
effected through ATOP.
You may withdraw the tender of your old notes at any time prior to 11:59 P.M.,
New  York  Time,  on  August  26,  2016  unless  extended  by  us,  by  submitting  a
notice of withdrawal to the Information and Exchange Agent using the procedures
described in “General Terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—
Withdrawal  of  Tenders;  Revocation  of  Consents.”  Any  old  note  withdrawn
pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer  shall  not  thereafter  be  considered
tendered  for  any  purpose  unless  and  until  such  old  note  is  again  tendered
pursuant to the Exchange Offer. Any old notes tendered prior to the Withdrawal
Deadline that are not validly withdrawn prior to such Withdrawal Deadline may
not be withdrawn thereafter, except as otherwise provided by law.
Requests for additional copies of this prospectus and the Letter(s) of Transmittal
and questions about the terms of the Exchange Offer should be directed to the
Information and Exchange Agent at the address and telephone numbers set forth
on the back cover of this prospectus.
We  will  bear  all  of  our  fees  and  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with
consummating the Exchange Offer. No brokerage commissions are payable by
the holders to the Information and Exchange Agent or us. If your old notes are
held through a broker or other nominee who tenders old notes on your behalf,
your broker or other nominee may charge you a commission or fee for doing so.
You should consult with your broker or other nominee to determine whether any
charges  will  apply.  See  “General  Terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation.”
We  will  agree  to  pay  a  soliciting  dealer  fee  equal  to  $5.00  for  each  $1,000
principal  amount  of  old  notes  that  are  validly  tendered  for  exchange  and  not
validly  withdrawn  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Offer  to  retail  brokers  that  are
appropriately  designated  by  their  clients  to  receive  this  fee,  but  only  if  the  old
notes of each applicable series that are tendered by or for that beneficial owner
have  an  aggregate  equivalent  principal  amount  of  $250,000  or  less.  Soliciting
dealer  fees  will  only  be  paid  to  retail  brokers  upon  consummation  of  the
Exchange Offer. No soliciting dealer fees will be paid if the Exchange Offer is not
consummated, and the fees will be payable thereafter
8
upon  request  by  the  soliciting  dealers  and  presentation  of  such  supporting
documentation as we may reasonably request.
We  may  extend,  in  our  sole  discretion,  the  Early  Tender  Date,  the  Withdrawal
Deadline  or  the  Expiration  Date.  We  may  terminate  the  Exchange  Offer  if  the
conditions to the Exchange Offer are not met on or prior to the Expiration Date.
We  reserve  the  right,  subject  to  applicable  law,  to  (i)  waive  any  and  all  of  the
conditions of the Exchange Offer prior to the Expiration Date, (ii) extend the Early
Tender Date without extending the Withdrawal Deadline and vice versa, or (iii)
amend the terms of the Exchange Offer. In the event that the Exchange Offer is
terminated, withdrawn or otherwise not consummated prior to the Expiration Date,
no new notes will be issued or become payable to holders who have tendered
their old notes. In any such event, the old notes previously tendered pursuant to
the  Exchange  Offer  will  be  promptly  returned  to  the  tendering  holders  and  the
Proposed Amendments will not become effective.
We will not receive any cash proceeds in the Exchange Offer.
Soliciting Dealer Fee
Table of Contents
Extensions, Amendments or Termination
Use of Proceeds
Delivery of Letters of Transmittal and Consent Properly completed and executed Letters of Transmittal and Consent should be
sent by mail, first class postage prepaid, overnight courier or hand delivery to the
Information and Exchange Agent at the address, or faxed to the Information and
Exchange  Agent  at  the  facsimile  number,  set  forth  on  the  back  cover  of  this
prospectus.
In  lieu  of  physically  completing  and  signing  the  Letter  of  Transmittal  and
delivering  it  to  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent,  DTC  participants  may
electronically transmit their acceptance of the Exchange Offer through the ATOP
procedures described above.
Letters  of  Transmittal  and  Consent  should  not  be  delivered  directly  to  the
Company.
Certain United States Federal Income Tax
Consequences
For  a  discussion  of  the  United  States  federal  income  tax  consequences  of  the
Exchange Offer, see “Certain United States Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
Consequences of Failure To Exchange
Old notes not exchanged will continue to be outstanding according to their terms
(as  amended  pursuant  to  any  amendments  resulting  from  the  Consent
Solicitation).  Because  the  new  notes  will  be  secured  by  certain  assets  of  the
Company and the guarantors and the old notes are (or by result of the Proposed
Amendments  will  be)  unsecured,  any  old  notes  left  outstanding  after  the
Exchange Offer will effectively be subordinated to the new notes to the extent of
the assets securing the new notes. The Proposed Amendments will also remove
certain  of  the  covenants  from  the  indentures  governing  the  old  notes.  See
“Consequences of Not Exchanging Old Notes.”
Table of Contents
Additional Information
9
Questions or requests for assistance in completing and delivering the Letter(s) of
Transmittal or tendering old notes and requests for additional copies of any Offer
Document or other related documents should be directed to the Information and
Exchange Agent, at the addresses and telephone numbers set forth on the back
cover of this prospectus.
Information and Exchange Agent
D.F. King & Co., Inc.
Dealer Manager
Trustee
Table of Contents
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated.
The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A.
10
THE NEW SENIOR SECURED NOTES
The summary below describes the principal terms of the New Senior Secured Notes. Certain of the terms and conditions described
below  are  subject  to  important  limitations  and  exceptions.  The  “Description  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes”  section  of  this
prospectus contains more detailed descriptions of the terms and conditions of the New Senior Secured Notes.
Issuer
Comstock Resources, Inc.
Issuer
Notes Offered
Maturity
Interest Rate
Interest Payment Dates
Payment-In-Kind Election
Use of Proceeds
Collateral
Guarantees
Table of Contents
Ranking
Comstock Resources, Inc.
$700.0 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Secured Toggle Notes due
2020.
The New Senior Secured Notes will mature on March 15, 2020.
The New Senior Secured Notes will bear interest at a rate of 10.0% per annum, if
the Company elects to pay interest in cash, or 11.0% per annum, if the Company
elects to pay interest in kind, in each case accruing from the issue date of the
New Senior Secured Notes; provided, that not more than $75.0 million of interest
may be paid in kind on the New Senior Secured Notes.
Interest  on  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  will  be  payable  on  March  15  and
September 15, commencing on March 15, 2017.
Up to an aggregate of $75.0 million of interest will be payable, at the election of
the  Company  (made  by  delivering  a  notice  to  the  trustee  for  the  New  Senior
Secured  Notes  (the  “Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee”)  prior  to  the  end  of  each
interest period), by issuing additional New Senior Secured Notes in lieu of all or
part of the cash interest that would otherwise be payable.
We will not receive any proceeds in connection with the Exchange Offer.
The New Senior Secured Notes will be secured by liens on the Collateral, on an
equal  and  ratable,  first  priority  basis  with  the  obligations  under  our  existing
revolving  credit  facility  (the  “Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations”  and,
together  with  the  obligations  under  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  the  “Pari
Passu Obligations”), subject to payment priorities in favor of lenders under our
existing  revolving  credit  facility  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  pari  passu
intercreditor  agreement  (as  described  more  fully  below).  The  Collateral  will
consist  of  substantially  all  of  the  assets  of  the  Company  and  the  subsidiary
guarantors.
All  of  our  subsidiaries  that  guarantee  our  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes,  which
consist  of  all  of  our  subsidiaries  in  existence  on  the  issue  date,  will  initially
guarantee the New Senior Secured Notes. In the future, the New Senior Secured
Notes will be guaranteed by all of our future wholly-owned restricted subsidiaries
and  any  of  our  other  subsidiaries  that  guarantee  our  existing  revolving  credit
facility. See “Description of New Senior Secured Notes—Subsidiary Guarantees
of New Senior Secured Notes” and “Description of New Senior Secured Notes—
Certain Covenants—Future Subsidiary Guarantees.”
11
The New Senior Secured Notes:
Ranking
The New Senior Secured Notes:
•
•
•
•
•
•
will be our senior obligations;
will rank pari passu in right of payment with all of our existing and future
senior  indebtedness,  subject  to  the  terms  of  the  pari  passu  intercreditor
agreement;
will  be  secured,  on  an  equal  and  ratable  first  priority  basis  with  the
Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations (subject to payment priorities in
favor of our existing revolving credit facility pursuant to the terms of the pari
passu intercreditor agreement and subject to permitted collateral liens) by
liens on the same collateral that secure the Revolving Credit Agreement
Obligations;
will  rank  senior  in  right  of  payment  to  any  of  our  existing  and  future
subordinated indebtedness;
will  effectively  rank  senior  to  all  existing  and  future  unsecured  senior
indebtedness, including the Old Senior Secured Notes (which will become
unsecured upon completion of the Exchange Offer), our Old 2019 Notes
and our Old 2020 Notes, to the extent of the value of the Collateral; and
will  effectively  rank  senior  to  our  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  our
New 2020 Convertible Notes, to the extent of the value of the Collateral.
The subsidiary guarantees:
•
•
•
•
•
will be senior obligations of each subsidiary guarantor;
will rank pari passu in right of payment with all existing and future senior
indebtedness of each such subsidiary guarantor, subject to the terms of the
pari passu intercreditor agreement;
will  be  secured,  on  an  equal  and  ratable  first  priority  basis  with  the
Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations (subject to payment priorities in
favor of our existing revolving credit facility pursuant to the terms of the pari
passu intercreditor agreement and subject to permitted collateral liens), by
liens on the same collateral that secure the Revolving Credit Agreement
Obligations;
will rank senior in right of payment to any existing and future subordinated
indebtedness of each such guarantor;
will  effectively  rank  senior  to  all  existing  and  future  unsecured  senior
indebtedness  of  such  subsidiary  guarantor,  including  the  Old  Senior
Secured Notes, the Old 2019 Notes and the Old 2020 Notes, to the extent
Table of Contents
Intercreditor Agreements
of the value of the Collateral; and
•
will effectively rank senior to each subsidiary guarantor’s guarantee of the
New 2019 Convertible Notes and the New 2020 Convertible Notes to the
extent of the value of the Collateral.
12
The allocation of the proceeds of the Collateral among the New Senior Secured
Notes and our existing revolving credit facility will be governed by a pari passu
intercreditor agreement. The pari passu intercreditor agreement will provide that
(i)  our  existing  revolving  credit  facility  will  have  priority  of  payment  as  to  the
proceeds of the Collateral securing obligations up to an amount of $50.0 million
plus  accrued  and  unpaid  interest,  fees,  costs  and  expenses,  any  swap
obligations we or our subsidiaries enter into with our revolving credit lenders or
their affiliates and letters of credit outstanding (the “priority obligations”) and (ii)
subsequent to the satisfaction in full, in cash, of the priority obligations, the New
Senior Secured Notes will be entitled to the proceeds of the Collateral.
The  Controlling  Agent  will  control  (i)  the  exercise  of  remedies  relating  to  the
Collateral  and  (ii)  certain  amendments  to  the  Collateral  Agreements  governing
the Collateral, including releases of liens thereunder. “Controlling Agent” means
the administrative agent under our existing revolving credit facility until the earlier
of (x) the satisfaction in full, in cash, of the priority obligations or (y) the passage
of 180 days after an event of default under the indenture with respect to the New
Senior  Secured  Notes  has  occurred,  such  obligations  have  been  accelerated,
and  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  has  provided  notice  thereof  to  the
Controlling Agent, and provided that the Controlling Agent has not taken action to
exercise remedies within such 180 day time period.
In addition, the allocation of the proceeds of the Collateral among the Pari Passu
Obligations and the obligations under the New 2019 Convertible Notes and the
New 2020 Convertible Notes (the “Junior Lien Obligations”) will be governed by a
junior  lien  intercreditor  agreement.  The  junior  lien  intercreditor  agreement  will
provide  that  the  Pari  Passu  Obligations  will  have  priority  of  payment  as  to  the
proceeds  of  the  Collateral  securing  both  the  Pari  Passu  Obligations  and  the
Junior Lien Obligations.
Optional Redemption
We  may  redeem  some  or  all  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  at  redemption
prices that decrease over time, plus accrued and unpaid interest and additional
amounts, if any, to the redemption date.
See  “Description  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes—Redemption—Optional
Redemption.”
Change of Control Offer
Upon the occurrence of a change of control (as defined in “Description of New
Senior  Secured  Notes—Certain  Definitions”),  each  holder  of  New  Senior
Table of Contents
Asset Sale Offer
Certain Covenants
Secured  Notes  may  require  us  to  repurchase  some  or  all  of  its  New  Senior
Secured  Notes  at  a  price  equal  to  101%  of  the  principal  amount  thereof,  plus
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the repurchase date. See “Description of
New Senior Secured Notes—Certain Covenants—Change of Control.”
13
We may be required to offer to use all or a portion of the net proceeds of certain
asset sales to purchase New Senior Secured Notes at a price equal to 100% of
the  principal  amount  thereof,  plus  accrued  and  unpaid  interest,  if  any,  to  the
repurchase  date.  See  “Description  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes—Certain
Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
We will issue the New Senior Secured Notes under an indenture. The indenture
governing  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  will  contain  covenants  that,  among
other things, will limit our and our restricted subsidiaries’ ability to:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
pay  dividends,  purchase  or  redeem  our  capital  stock  or  our  or  our
subsidiary  guarantor’s 
lien,  unsecured  and  subordinated
indebtedness or make other restricted payments;
junior
incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock;
create or incur liens;
create unrestricted subsidiaries;
enter into transactions with affiliates;
enter into new lines of business; and
transfer or sell assets or enter into mergers.
The covenants in the New Senior Secured Notes are substantially the same as
the covenants in the Old Senior Secured Notes.
The  indenture  governing  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  will  also  contain
covenants that limit our and our subsidiaries’ ability to consummate a merger or
consolidation and that limit our ability to consummate a sale of all or substantially
all of their assets.
Risk Factors
Table of Contents
These  covenants  are  subject  to  important  exceptions  and  qualifications.  See
“Description of New Senior Secured Notes—Certain Covenants.”
Many of these covenants will cease to apply to the New Senior Secured Notes
during  any  period  that  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  have  investment  grade
ratings  from  both  Moody’s  Investors  Service,  Inc.  (“Moody’s”)  and  S&P  Global
Ratings  (“S&P”)  and  no  default  has  occurred  and  is  continuing  under  the
indenture  governing  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes.  See  “Description  of  New
Senior Secured Notes—Covenant Suspension.”
You should consider carefully all of the information set forth or incorporated by
reference in this prospectus and, in particular, the information under the heading
“Risk Factors” beginning on page 20 of this prospectus.
14
THE NEW CONVERTIBLE NOTES
The summary below describes the principal terms of the New Convertible Notes. Certain of the terms and conditions described
below are subject to important limitations and exceptions. The “Description of New Convertible Notes” section of this prospectus
contains more detailed descriptions of the terms and conditions of the New Convertible Notes.
Issuer
Notes Offered
Comstock Resources, Inc.
Up to $288,516,000 aggregate principal amount of 7  3⁄4%  Convertible  Secured
PIK Notes due 2019 (the “New 2019 Convertible Notes”)
Up to $174,607,000 aggregate principal amount of 9  1⁄2%  Convertible  Secured
PIK Notes due 2020 (the “New 2020 Convertible Notes” and, together with the
New 2019 Convertible Notes, the “New Convertible Notes”)
Maturity
The New 2019 Convertible Notes will mature on April 1, 2019.
Interest Rate
The New 2020 Convertible Notes will mature on June 15, 2020.
The New 2019 Convertible Notes will bear interest at a rate of 7 3⁄4% per annum,
accruing from the issue date of the New 2019 Convertible Notes.
The New 2020 Convertible Notes will bear interest at a rate of 9 1⁄2% per annum,
accruing from the issue date of the New 2020 Convertible Notes.
Interest Payment Dates
Payment-In-Kind
Use of Proceeds
Collateral
Table of Contents
Guarantees
Ranking
Interest  on  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  will  be  payable  on  April  1  and
October 1, commencing on April 1, 2017.
Interest  on  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  payable  on  June  15  and
December 15, commencing on December 15, 2016.
For  each  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes,  interest  will  be  payable  by  issuing
additional notes in an amount equal to the applicable amount of interest for the
interest period (rounded down to the nearest whole dollar).
We will not receive any proceeds in connection with the Exchange Offer.
revolving  credit
Each series of New Convertible Notes will be secured by liens on the Collateral,
on a second priority basis, subject to (i) the liens securing the obligations under
our  existing 
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement
Obligations”)  and  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  (together  with  the  Revolving
Credit  Agreement  Obligations,  the  “Priority  Lien  Obligations”)  and  (ii)  permitted
collateral liens. The Collateral for the New Convertible Notes is the same as the
collateral  for  the  Revolving  Credit  Obligations  and  the  New  Senior  Secured
Notes.
facility
(the
15
All of our subsidiaries that guarantee our Old 2019 Notes and Old 2020 Notes,
which  consist  of  all  of  our  subsidiaries  in  existence  on  the  issue  date  of  each
series  of  New  Convertible  Notes,  will  initially  guarantee  the  New  Convertible
Notes. In the future, the New Convertible Notes will be guaranteed by any future
wholly-owned restricted subsidiary that has outstanding or guarantees any other
indebtedness  of  ours  or  our  subsidiary  guarantors.  See  “Description  of  New
Convertible  Notes—Junior  Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantees  of  New  Convertible
Notes” and “Description of New Convertible Notes—Certain Covenants—Future
Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees.”
The New Convertible Notes:
•  will be our senior obligations;
•  will  rank  pari  passu  in  right  of  payment  with  all  of  our  existing  and  future
senior indebtedness;
•  will  be  secured,  on  a  second  priority  basis,  subject  to  the  Priority  Lien
Obligations  and  permitted  collateral  liens,  by  junior  liens  on  the  same
collateral that secures such Priority Lien Obligations;
•  will  rank  senior  in  right  of  payment  to  any  of  our  existing  and  future
subordinated indebtedness;
•  will  effectively  rank  senior  to  all  existing  and  future  unsecured  senior
indebtedness, including the Old Senior Secured Notes (which will become
unsecured upon completion of the Exchange Offer), our Old 2019 Notes and
our Old 2020 Notes, to the extent of the value of the Collateral; and
•  will  effectively  be  subordinated,  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement (as defined below), to all Priority Lien Obligations,
to the extent of the value of the Collateral.
The subsidiary guarantees:
•  will be senior obligations of each subsidiary guarantor;
•  will rank pari passu in right of payment with all existing and future senior
indebtedness of each such subsidiary guarantor;
•  will  be  secured,  on  a  second  priority  basis,  subject  to  the  Priority  Lien
Obligations  and  permitted  collateral  liens,  by  junior  liens  on  the  same
collateral that secures such Priority Lien Obligations;
•  will rank senior in right of payment to any existing and future subordinated
indebtedness of each such guarantor;
•  will  effectively  rank  senior  to  all  existing  and  future  unsecured  senior
indebtedness  of  such  subsidiary  guarantor,  including  the  Old  Senior
Secured Notes, the Old 2019 Notes and the Old 2020 Notes, to the extent of
the value of the Collateral; and
Table of Contents
16
•  will  effectively  be  subordinated,  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement, to all Priority Lien Obligations, to the extent of the
value of the Collateral.
Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement
The  allocation  of  the  proceeds  of  the  Collateral  among  the  Priority  Lien
Obligations  and  the  New  Convertible  Notes  will  be  governed  by  a  junior  lien
Collateral Trust Agreement
Optional Redemption
Conversion Rights
Mandatory Conversion
Table of Contents
intercreditor  agreement  (the  “Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement”).  The  Junior
Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  will  provide  that  the  Priority  Lien  Obligations  will
have priority of payment as to the proceeds of the Collateral securing both the
Priority Lien Obligations and the New Convertible Notes.
The New Convertible Notes will be subject to a collateral trust agreement that will
set  forth  the  terms  on  which  the  junior  lien  collateral  agent  will  receive,  hold,
administer,  maintain,  enforce  and  distribute  the  proceeds  of  all  liens  upon  the
Collateral held by it, in trust for the benefit of the holders of the New Convertible
Notes. The junior lien collateral agent will hold (directly or through co-trustees or
agents), and, subject to the terms of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, will
be entitled to enforce, all liens on the Collateral securing the New Convertible
Notes.
We  may  redeem  some  or  all  of  each  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  at
redemption  prices  payable  in  cash  that  decrease  over  time,  plus  accrued  and
unpaid interest and additional amounts, if any, to the redemption date.
See 
“Description  of  New  Convertible  Notes—Redemption—Optional
Redemption  of  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes”  and  “Description  of  New
Convertible  Notes—Redemption—Optional  Redemption  of 
the  New  2020
Convertible Notes.”
At any time following issuance, the New 2019 Convertible Notes and the New
2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  convertible,  subject  to  and  following  receipt  of
required  stockholder  approval  and  the  effectiveness  of  an  amendment  to  our
restated articles of incorporation, at the option of the holder, into shares of our
common stock at a conversion rate of 81.2 shares of common stock per $1,000
principal  amount  of  such  new  notes  (equivalent  to  a  conversion  price  of
approximately  $12.32  per  share  of  common  stock),  which  will  be  subject  to
customary  adjustments  with  respect  to,  among  other  things,  dividends  and
distributions, mergers and reclassifications.
Subject  to  and  following  receipt  of  required  stockholder  approval  and  the
effectiveness of an amendment to our restated articles of incorporation, the New
2019  Convertible  Notes  and  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  mandatorily
convertible into shares of our common stock at the conversion rate then in effect
per $1,000 principal amount of such notes on or before the third business day
17
following required notice of the 10 consecutive trading day period during which
the daily volume weighted average price on the relevant stock exchange for our
common stock is equal to or greater than $9.24 per share.
See “Description of New Convertible Notes—Conversion Rights.”
Change of Control Offer
Asset Sale Offer
Certain Covenants
Upon the occurrence of a change of control (as defined in “Description of New
Convertible  Notes—Certain  Definitions”),  each  holder  of  each  series  of  New
Convertible  Notes  may  require  us  to  repurchase  some  or  all  of  its  New
Convertible  Notes  at  a  price  in  cash  equal  to  101%  of  the  principal  amount
thereof,  plus  accrued  and  unpaid  interest,  if  any,  to  the  repurchase  date.  See
“Description  of  New  Convertible  Notes—Certain  Covenants—Change  of
Control.”
We may be required to offer to use all or a portion of the net proceeds of certain
asset sales to purchase New Convertible Notes in each series at a price in cash
equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest,
if  any,  to  the  repurchase  date.  See  “Description  of  New  Convertible  Notes—
Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
We  will  issue  each  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  under  an  indenture.  The
indentures  governing  the  New  Convertible  Notes  will  contain  covenants  that,
among other things, will limit our and our restricted subsidiaries’ ability to:
•  pay dividends, purchase or redeem our capital stock or our or our subsidiary
guarantor’s subordinated indebtedness or make other restricted payments;
•  incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock;
•  create or incur liens;
•  create unrestricted subsidiaries;
•  enter into transactions with affiliates;
•  enter into new lines of business; and
•  transfer or sell assets or enter into mergers.
The covenants for each series of the New Convertible Notes are substantially the
same as the covenants in the Old 2019 Notes and the Old 2020 Notes.
The indentures governing the New Convertible Notes will also contain covenants
that  limit  our  and  our  subsidiaries’  ability  to  consummate  a  merger  or
consolidation and that limit our ability to consummate a sale of all or substantially
all of their assets.
18
Many of these covenants will cease to apply to a series of New Convertible Notes
during  any  period  that  such  New  Convertible  Notes  have  investment  grade
ratings  from  both  Moody’s  Investors  Service,  Inc.  (“Moody’s”)  and  S&P  Global
Ratings  (“S&P”)  and  no  default  has  occurred  and  is  continuing  under  the
applicable indenture governing the New Convertible Notes. See “Description of
New Convertible Notes—Covenant Suspension.”
These  covenants  are  subject  to  important  exceptions  and  qualifications.  See
“Description of New Convertible Notes—Certain Covenants.”
You should consider carefully all of the information set forth or incorporated by
reference in this prospectus and, in particular, the information under the heading
“Risk Factors” beginning on page 20 of this prospectus.
19
Table of Contents
Risk Factors
Table of Contents
Consequences of Not Exchanging Old Notes
If you currently hold old notes and do not tender them, then, following completion of the Exchange Offer, your old notes will continue
to  be  outstanding  according  to  their  terms  (as  amended  pursuant  to  any  amendments  resulting  from  the  Consent  Solicitation).
Because the new notes will be secured by certain assets of the Company and the guarantors and the old notes are (or by result of
the  Proposed  Amendments  will  be)  unsecured,  any  old  notes  left  outstanding  after  the  Exchange  Offer  will  effectively  be
subordinated to the new notes to the extent of the assets securing the new notes. The Proposed Amendments will also remove
certain of the covenants from the indentures governing the old notes. Moreover, if we complete the Exchange Offer, the liquidity of
any old notes that remain outstanding after completion of the Exchange Offer may be adversely affected and the value of the old
notes may otherwise be affected by the completion of the Exchange Offer.
Corporate Information
Our principal executive offices are located at 5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500, Frisco, Texas 75034 and our telephone
number  is  (972)  668-8800.  Our  website  can  be  found  on  the  Internet  at  http://www.comstockresources.com.  Information  on  our
website is not deemed to be a part of this prospectus. Our common stock is currently listed on the New York Stock Exchange under
the symbol “CRK.”
Table of Contents
20
RISK FACTORS
You should carefully consider the risk factors set forth below as well as the other information contained in this prospectus before
investing  in  the  new  notes.  The  risks  described  below  are  not  the  only  risks  facing  us.  Additional  risks  and  uncertainties  not
currently known to us or those we currently view to be immaterial may also materially and adversely affect our business, financial
condition or results of operations. Any of the following risks could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition
or results of operations. In such a case, you may lose all or part of your investment.
Risks Related to the Exchange Offer and Holding the New Notes
Risks Relating to the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation
We may not complete the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.
Our ability to make required payments under our indebtedness would be adversely affected if we were to be unable to complete the
Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation. The purpose of the Exchange Offer is to restructure the terms of our outstanding notes to
promote our long-term financial viability through the issuance of the exchange consideration.
The completion of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation is subject to the satisfaction, or in certain cases, waiver of specified
conditions. It is a condition to the completion of the Exchange Offer that, among other things, (i) holders of not less than 95% in
aggregate principal amount of the Old Senior Secured Notes having validly tendered (and not validly withdrawn) their old notes in
the Exchange Offer; (ii) holders of not less than 95% in total aggregate principal amount of the Old 2019 Notes and Old 2020 Notes
(on a combined basis) having validly tendered (and not validly withdrawn) their old notes in the Exchange Offer (collectively, the
“Minimum Condition”); (iii) consents approving the Proposed Amendments with respect to more than 50% of the aggregate principal
amount of each series of the old notes (except regarding the release of the collateral with respect to the Old Senior Secured Notes
which requires not less than 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate principal amount) are delivered and not revoked prior to the Expiration Date;
and (iv) the Exchange Offer is completed by September 15, 2016. If the conditions to the completion of the Exchange Offer and
Consent Solicitation are not satisfied or, if permitted, waived, the Exchange Offer may not be completed.
If  we  are  unable  to  consummate  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation,  we  will  consider  other  restructuring
alternatives available to us at that time. Any alternative restructuring could be on terms less favorable to the holders of old
notes than the terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.
If  we  are  unable  to  consummate  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation,  we  will  consider  other  restructuring  alternatives
available to us at that time. Those alternatives may include asset dispositions, joint ventures, additional debt or the commencement
of a Chapter 11 proceeding with or without a pre–arranged plan of reorganization. Moreover, there can be no assurance that any
alternative out–of–court restructuring arrangement or plan will be pursued or accomplished. Any alternative restructuring could be
on terms less favorable to the holders of old notes than the terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation. If a protracted and
non–orderly  reorganization  were  to  occur,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  ability  of  the  holders  to  recover  their  investments  would  be
substantially delayed and more impaired than under the proposed Exchange Offer restructuring.
A long and protracted restructuring could cause us to lose key management employees and otherwise adversely affect
our business.
If we fail to consummate the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation, any alternative we pursue, whether in or out of court, may
take  substantially  longer  to  consummate  than  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation.  A  protracted  financial  restructuring
could disrupt our business and would divert the attention of our management
Table of Contents
21
from  the  operation  of  our  business  and  implementation  of  our  business  plan.  It  is  possible  that  such  a  prolonged  financial
restructuring  or  bankruptcy  proceeding  would  cause  us  to  lose  many  of  our  key  management  employees.  Such  losses  of  key
management employees would likely make it difficult for us to complete a financial restructuring and may make it less likely that we
will be able to continue as a viable business.
The uncertainty surrounding a prolonged financial restructuring could also have other adverse effects on us. For example, it could
also adversely affect:
•
•
•
•
our ability to raise additional capital;
our ability to capitalize on business opportunities and react to competitive pressures;
our ability to attract and retain employees;
our liquidity;
•
•
how our business is viewed by investors, lenders, strategic partners or customers; and
our enterprise value.
Our ability to use our NOLs to offset our future income may be limited.
For United States federal income tax purposes, it is possible that a “Section 382 ownership change” could occur as a result of the
transactions contemplated by the Exchange Offer (in particular, as a result of the conversion of all of the New Convertible Notes). In
the event such a Section 382 ownership change occurs, our ability to use our tax loss carryforwards and other tax attributes would
be restricted. See “Certain United States Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
We will incur significant costs in conducting the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.
The Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation have resulted, and will continue to result, in significant costs to us, including advisory
and professional fees paid in connection with evaluating our alternatives under the old notes and pursuing the Exchange Offer and
Consent Solicitation.
We have not obtained a third–party determination that the Exchange Offer is fair to holders of the old notes.
We are not making a recommendation as to whether holders of the old notes should exchange their old notes or consent to the
Proposed Amendments. We have not retained and do not intend to retain any unaffiliated representative to act solely on behalf of
the holders of the old notes for purposes of negotiating the Exchange Offer or preparing a report concerning the fairness of the
Exchange Offer. We cannot assure holders of the old notes that the value of the exchange consideration received in the Exchange
Offer will in the future equal or exceed the value of the old notes tendered, and we do not take a position as to whether you ought to
participate in the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.
If the Exchange Offer is consummated, holders of old notes that do not exchange their old notes in the Exchange Offer will
be subject to certain risks.
If the Exchange Offer is consummated, holders that do not validly tender their old notes in the Exchange Offer will not be entitled to
receive  exchange  consideration.  The  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the  related  guarantees  will  become  secured  second  lien
obligations and, assuming adoption of the Proposed Amendments, will effectively rank senior in right of payment to the old notes to
the extent of the value of the collateral securing such new obligations.
If the Exchange Offer is consummated, the Proposed Amendments to the Existing Indentures and old notes will become effective,
and will substantially reduce, and in some cases eliminate entirely, the covenant protection, collateral security, certain event of
default protection, and other provisions of the old notes. See “Proposed Amendments to Existing Indentures and Old Notes.”
Table of Contents
22
In  addition,  consummation  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation  would  substantially  reduce  the  aggregate  principal
amount of old notes outstanding, which could adversely affect the trading market, if any, for the untendered old notes. This could
adversely affect the liquidity, market price, and price volatility of any untendered old notes. If a market for untendered old notes
exists, such old notes may trade at a discount to the price at which the old notes would trade if the amount outstanding had not
been reduced, depending on prevailing interest rates, the market for similar securities, and other factors.
You may find it difficult to sell your new notes.
The new notes are a new issue of securities and, although the new notes will be registered under the Securities Act, the new notes
will not be listed on any securities exchange. Because there is no public market for the new notes, you may not be able to resell
them.
We cannot assure you that an active market will develop for the new notes or that any trading market that does develop will be
liquid. If an active market does not develop or is not maintained, the market price and liquidity of the new notes may be adversely
affected. If a market for the new notes develops, they may trade at a discount from their historic trading prices. Any trading market for
the new notes may be adversely affected by:
•
changes in the overall market for non-investment grade securities;
•
•
•
•
•
changes in our financial performance or prospects;
the financial performance or prospects for companies in our industry generally;
the number of holders of the new notes;
the interest of securities dealers in making a market for the new notes; and
prevailing interest rates and general economic conditions.
Historically, the market for non-investment grade debt has been subject to substantial volatility in prices. The market for the new
notes, if any, may be subject to similar volatility. Prospective investors in the new notes should be aware that they may be required
to bear the financial risks of such investment for an indefinite period of time.
Consideration paid to holders in the Exchange Offer could be subject to avoidance as a preferential transfer.
If we were to become a debtor in a case under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code within 90 days after the consummation of the Exchange
Offer (or, with respect to any insiders, as defined in the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, within one year after consummation of the Exchange
Offer) and certain other conditions were met, it is possible that the consideration paid to holders of old notes in the Exchange Offer,
absent  any  of  the  U.S.  Bankruptcy  Code’s  defenses  to  avoidance,  could  be  subject  to  avoidance,  in  whole  or  in  part,  as  a
preferential transfer and, to the extent avoided, the value of such consideration could be recovered from such holders and possibly
from subsequent transferees.
Risks Related to Holding the New Notes
To service our indebtedness, including the new notes, we will require a significant amount of cash. Our ability to generate
cash depends on many factors beyond our control.
Our ability to pay our expenses and make payments due on our indebtedness, including the new notes, depends on our future
performance, which will be affected by financial, business, economic, legislative and other factors, many of which are beyond our
control. The new notes contain pay-in-kind (PIK) interest provisions which reduce the cash needed to pay interest while increasing
the principal amount of notes that ultimately must be retired with a cash payment. Our business may not generate sufficient cash
flow from operations in the future, which could
Table of Contents
23
result in our being unable to pay interest in cash or repay indebtedness, including the new notes, or to fund other liquidity needs. A
range of economic, competitive, business and industry factors will affect our future financial performance, and many of these factors,
such as oil, NGL and natural gas prices, economic and financial conditions in our industry and the global economy and initiatives of
our competitors, are beyond our control. If we do not generate enough cash flow from operations to satisfy our debt obligations, we
may have to undertake alternative financing plans, such as:
•
•
•
selling assets;
pursuing joint ventures;
reducing or delaying capital investments;
seeking to raise additional capital; or
•
•
seeking to raise additional capital; or
restructuring or refinancing all or a portion of our indebtedness, including the new notes, at or before maturity.
We cannot assure you that we will be able to accomplish any of these alternatives on terms acceptable to us, or at all. In addition,
the terms of existing or future debt agreements may  restrict  us  from  adopting  any  of  these  alternatives.  The  failure  to  generate
sufficient cash flow or to achieve any of these alternatives could materially adversely affect the value of the new notes and our
ability to pay the amounts due under such notes.
Rights of holders of new notes in the collateral may be adversely affected by the failure to have, obtain and/or perfect liens
on certain assets.
Subject to certain exceptions, the liens securing the new notes will cover substantially all of our and the subsidiary guarantors’
assets, whether now owned or acquired in the future. Applicable law requires that certain property and rights acquired after the
grant of a general security interest or lien can only be perfected at the time such property and rights are acquired and identified.
There can be no assurance that the Trustee or the collateral agent will monitor, or that we will inform the Trustee or the collateral
agent of, the future acquisition of property and rights that constitute collateral, and that the necessary action will be taken to properly
perfect the lien on such after acquired collateral. The collateral agent for the new notes has no obligation to monitor the acquisition
of additional property or rights that constitute collateral or the perfection of any security interests therein. Such failure may result in
the loss of the liens thereon or of the priority of the liens securing the new notes.
Our substantial level of indebtedness could materially adversely affect our financial condition and prevent us from fulfilling
our obligations under the new notes and any other indebtedness.
We have a substantial amount of debt. As of July 29, 2016, we had $1.2 billion principal amount of total funded indebtedness,
including old notes in the aggregate principal amount of $1.2 billion. The respective indentures governing the new notes will allow
us to continue to maintain a senior secured revolving credit facility and incur certain other additional indebtedness, including pari
passu senior secured indebtedness in certain circumstances. Our substantial indebtedness could have important consequences to
you and significant effects on our business, including the following:
•
•
it may make it difficult for us to satisfy our obligations under the new notes and our other indebtedness and contractual and
commercial commitments and, if we fail to comply with these requirements, an event of default could result;
we will be required to use a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to make payments on the new notes and
any other indebtedness, which will reduce the funds available to us for other purposes, such as funding operations or other
business activities;
•
we will be more vulnerable to economic downturns and adverse developments in our business;
Table of Contents
24
•
•
•
our ability to obtain additional debt financing in the future for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or general
corporate purposes may be limited;
our flexibility in reacting to changes in our industry may be limited and we could be more vulnerable to adverse changes in
our business or economic conditions in general; and
we may be at a competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors that are not as highly leveraged.
The occurrence of any one of these events could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of
operations, prospects and ability to satisfy our obligations under the new notes.
We are a holding company, and therefore our ability to make any required payments on our indebtedness depends upon
the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends or to advance funds.
We have no direct operations and no significant assets other than the equity interests of our subsidiaries. Because we conduct our
operations through our operating subsidiaries, we depend on those entities for dividends and other payments to generate the funds
necessary  to  meet  our  financial  obligations,  including  our  required  obligations  under  the  new  notes.  However,  each  of  our
subsidiaries is a legally distinct entity, and while our subsidiaries will guarantee the new notes, such guarantees are subject to
risks. See “—Risks Relating to the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation—Consideration paid to holders in the Exchange Offer
could be subject to avoidance as a preferential transfer”; “—Risks Related to Holding the New Notes—A court could cancel the
new notes or the related guarantees of our existing and future restricted subsidiaries under fraudulent conveyance laws or certain
other circumstances” and “—Rights of holders of new notes in the collateral may be adversely affected by the failure to have, obtain
and/or perfect liens on certain assets.” The ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends and make distributions to us will be subject
to, among other things, the terms of any debt instruments of our subsidiaries then in effect and applicable law. If distributions from
our subsidiaries to us were eliminated, delayed, reduced or otherwise impaired, our ability to make payments on the new notes
would be substantially impaired.
Despite our substantial level of indebtedness, we may still incur significantly more debt, which could exacerbate any or all
of the risks described above.
The PIK interest feature of the new notes will increase the aggregate amount of debt that must be repaid at maturity or otherwise. In
addition, we may be able to incur other substantial indebtedness in the future. Although the indentures governing the new notes will
limit our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to incur additional indebtedness, these restrictions are subject to a number of
qualifications  and  exceptions  and,  under  certain  circumstances,  debt  incurred  in  compliance  with  these  restrictions  could  be
substantial. In addition, the indentures governing the new notes may not prevent us from incurring obligations that do not constitute
indebtedness. See “Description of New Senior Secured Notes” and “Description of New Convertible Notes.” To the extent that we
incur  additional  indebtedness  or  such  other  obligations,  the  risks  associated  with  our  substantial  leverage  described  above,
including our possible inability to service our debt, would increase.
The new notes will contain restrictive covenants that limit our operational flexibility.
The new notes will contain covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to take specific actions, even if we believe them to
be in our best interest. These covenants will include restrictions on our ability to:
•
•
•
•
•
•
incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain preferred stock;
pay dividends or make other distributions;
issue capital stock of our restricted subsidiaries;
transfer or sell assets, including the capital stock of our restricted subsidiaries;
make certain investments or acquisitions;
grant liens on our assets;
Table of Contents
25
•
•
incur dividend or other payment restrictions affecting our restricted subsidiaries;
enter into certain transactions with affiliates; and
merge, consolidate or transfer all or substantially all of our assets.
•
merge, consolidate or transfer all or substantially all of our assets.
Our failure to comply with these restrictions could lead to a default under the new notes. The actual covenants will be contained in
the indentures governing the new notes. See “Description of New Senior Secured Notes—Certain Covenants” and “Description of
New Convertible Notes—Certain Covenants.”
The restrictive covenants in the new notes may permit us to enter into and contribute assets to joint ventures and to effect
asset sales or other dispositions that may not benefit holders of the new notes.
The indentures governing the new notes will permit us, in certain circumstances, to contribute assets to joint ventures that may not
guarantee the new notes. In addition, we will have 365 days to apply the proceeds of asset sales before we are required to make an
offer to repurchase the new notes. During such period, we can use such proceeds in any manner not prohibited by the indentures
governing  the  new  notes.  See  “Description  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes—Certain  Covenants”  and  “Description  of  New
Convertible Notes—Certain Covenants.”
The indebtedness under our revolving credit facility and New Senior Secured Notes will be effectively senior to the New
2019  Convertible  Notes  and  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  to  the  extent  of  the  value  of  the  collateral  securing  those
obligations.
Assuming completion of the Exchange Offer as contemplated hereby, we do not expect to have any amounts outstanding under our
revolving  credit  facility  at  the  completion  of  the  Exchange  Offer,  with  $50.0  million  available  for  borrowing.  Assuming  100%
participation in the Exchange Offer, we expect to have $700.0 million of New Senior Secured Notes, $288.5 million of New 2019
Convertible Notes and $174.6 million of New 2020 Convertible Notes outstanding at the completion of the Exchange Offer.
The New Senior Secured Notes will be secured on an equal and ratable first priority basis with our revolving credit facility but
subject to payment priority in favor of the credit facility. The New Convertible Notes will be secured on a second priority basis,
subject  to  the  obligations  under  the  revolving  credit  facility  and  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  by  junior  liens  on  the  same
collateral that secures the revolving credit facility and the New Senior Secured Notes. To the extent the value of the collateral is not
sufficient to satisfy the obligations under the revolving credit facility and the New Senior Secured Notes, the New Convertible Notes
would effectively be unsecured obligations.
We may be unable to maintain compliance with certain financial ratio covenants of our outstanding indebtedness which
could  result  in  an  event  of  default  that,  if  not  cured  or  waived,  would  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our  business,
financial condition and results of operations.
We  are  in  compliance  with  our  financial  ratio  covenants  in  our  debt  agreements  as  of  June  30,  2016.  However,  we  cannot
guarantee that we will be able to comply with such terms at all times in the future. Any failure to comply with the conditions and
covenants that is not waived by our lenders or otherwise cured could lead to an event of default that would have a material adverse
effect  on  our  business,  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.  These  restrictions  may  limit  our  ability  to  obtain  future
financings to withstand a future downturn in our business or the economy in general, or to otherwise conduct necessary corporate
activities. We may also be prevented from taking advantage of business opportunities that arise because of the limitations that the
restrictive covenants under our indebtedness impose on us.
The new notes will be structurally subordinated to all liabilities of any of our non–guarantor subsidiaries.
Not all of our future subsidiaries will guarantee the new notes. If any of our future non-guarantor subsidiaries becomes insolvent,
liquidates, reorganizes, dissolves or otherwise winds up, holders of its indebtedness and its
Table of Contents
26
trade creditors generally will be entitled to payment on their claims from the assets of such subsidiary before any of those assets
would be made available to us. Consequently, your claims in respect of the new notes effectively would be subordinated to all of
the existing and future liabilities of our future non-guarantor subsidiaries, if any.
There are circumstances other than repayment or discharge of the new notes under which the collateral securing the new
notes and guarantees would be released automatically, without your consent or the consent of the indenture trustee and
the collateral agent.
Pursuant to the indentures governing the new notes, under various circumstances all or a portion of the collateral securing the new
notes  and  guarantees  would  be  released  automatically  without  your  consent  or  the  consent  of  the  indenture  trustee  and  the
collateral agent, including:
in  the  absence  of  an  event  of  default  under  the  indentures  governing  the  new  notes  at  such  time,  with  respect  to  the
•
•
•
•
•
in  the  absence  of  an  event  of  default  under  the  indentures  governing  the  new  notes  at  such  time,  with  respect  to  the
collateral, upon the release of liens securing our revolving credit facility and the New Senior Secured Notes in accordance
with the terms of such agreements;
upon the sale, transfer or other disposition of such collateral in a transaction not prohibited under the indentures governing
the new notes;
with respect to collateral held by a guarantor, upon the release of such guarantor from its guarantee in accordance with the
indentures governing the new notes;
with the consent of the holders of the requisite percentage of notes in accordance with the provisions described under
“Description of New Senior Secured Notes—Amendments and Waivers” and “Description of New Convertible Notes—
Amendments and Waivers;” and
in other circumstances specified in the intercreditor agreements, including in connection with the exercise of remedies by
the collateral agent.
See “Description of New Senior Secured Notes—The Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement” and “Description of New Convertible
Notes—The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.”
The  indentures  governing  the  new  notes  will  also  permit  us  to  designate  one  or  more  of  our  subsidiaries  as  unrestricted
subsidiaries,  subject  to  certain  conditions.  If  we  designate  a  subsidiary  as  an  unrestricted  subsidiary,  all  of  the  liens  on  any
collateral owned by such unrestricted subsidiary or any of its subsidiaries and any guarantees of the notes by such unrestricted
subsidiary  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries  will  be  automatically  released  under  the  indentures.  Designation  of  one  or  more  of  our
subsidiaries as an unrestricted subsidiary will therefore reduce the aggregate value of the collateral securing the notes.
The imposition of certain permitted liens may cause the assets on which such liens are imposed to be excluded from the
collateral securing the new notes and the guarantees. There are also certain other categories of property that are excluded
from the collateral.
The indentures governing the new notes will permit us and the guarantors to grant certain permitted liens in favor of third parties
and, in certain cases, any assets subject to such liens will be automatically excluded from the collateral securing the new notes and
the guarantees to the extent inclusion in such collateral would be prohibited by the documents relating to such permitted liens.
In the event of our bankruptcy or the bankruptcy of any of the guarantors, the ability of the holders of the new notes to
realize upon the collateral will be subject to certain bankruptcy law limitations.
The ability of holders of the new notes to realize upon the collateral will be subject to certain bankruptcy law limitations in the event
of our bankruptcy or the bankruptcy of our guarantor subsidiaries. Under applicable U.S. federal bankruptcy laws, secured creditors
are prohibited from, among other things, repossessing their security from a debtor in a bankruptcy case without bankruptcy court
approval and may be prohibited from retaining security repossessed by such creditor without bankruptcy court approval. Moreover,
applicable federal
Table of Contents
27
bankruptcy laws generally permit the debtor to continue to retain collateral, including cash collateral, even though the debtor is in
default under the applicable debt instruments, provided that the secured creditor is given “adequate protection.”
The secured creditor is entitled to “adequate protection” to protect the value of the secured creditor’s interest in the collateral as of
the commencement of the bankruptcy case but the adequate protection actually provided to a secured creditor may vary according
to the circumstances. Adequate protection may include cash payments or the granting of additional security if and at such times as
the  court,  in  its  discretion  and  at  the  request  of  such  creditor,  determines  after  notice  and  a  hearing  that  the  collateral  has
diminished in value as a result of the imposition of the automatic stay or the debtor’s use, sale or lease of such collateral during the
pendency  of  the  bankruptcy  case.  In  view  of  the  lack  of  a  precise  definition  of  the  term  “adequate  protection”  and  the  broad
discretionary powers of a U.S. bankruptcy court, we cannot predict whether or when the Trustee and collateral agent under the
indentures governing the new notes could foreclose upon or sell the collateral or whether or to what extent holders of notes would
be compensated for any delay in payment or loss of value of the collateral through the requirement of “adequate protection.”
Moreover, the Trustee and collateral agent under the indentures governing the new notes may need to evaluate the impact of the
potential liabilities before determining to foreclose on collateral consisting of real property, if any, because secured creditors that
hold a security interest in real property may be held liable under environmental laws for the costs of remediating or preventing the
release or threatened releases of hazardous substances at such real property. Consequently, the collateral agent may decline to
foreclose on such collateral or exercise remedies available in respect thereof if it does not receive indemnification to its satisfaction
from the holders of the new notes.
In the event of a bankruptcy of us or any of the guarantors, holders of the New Senior Secured Notes and/or the New
Convertible Notes may be deemed to have an unsecured claim to the extent that our obligations in respect of the New
Senior Secured Notes and/or the New Convertible Notes exceed the fair market value of the collateral securing the New
Senior Secured Notes and/or the New Convertible Notes, respectively.
In any bankruptcy proceeding with respect to us or any of the guarantors, it is possible that the bankruptcy trustee, the debtor-in-
possession or competing creditors will assert that the fair market value of the collateral (taking into account the relative priority of the
liens securing the New Senior Secured Notes and the New Convertible Notes) available to satisfy the New Senior Secured Notes
and/or the New Convertible Notes on the date of the bankruptcy filing was less than the then-current principal amount of the New
Senior Secured Notes and/or the New Convertible Notes, respectively. Upon a finding by the bankruptcy court that any of the new
notes are under-collateralized, the claims in the bankruptcy proceeding with respect to that series of notes would be bifurcated
between a secured claim in an amount equal to the value of such collateral and an unsecured claim with respect to the remainder
of  its  claim  which  would  not  be  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  security  in  the  collateral.  Other  consequences  of  a  finding  of  under-
collateralization would be, among other things, a lack of entitlement on the part of the new notes that are under-collateralized to
receive post-petition interest and a lack of entitlement on the part of the unsecured portion of such new notes to receive “adequate
protection” under federal bankruptcy laws. In addition, if any payments of post-petition interest had been made at any time prior to
such a finding of under-collateralization, those payments would be recharacterized by the bankruptcy court as a reduction of the
principal  amount  of  the  secured  claim  with  respect  to  the  new  notes  that  are  under-collateralized.  Further,  in  any  bankruptcy
proceeding with respect to us or any of the guarantors, the holders of the New Senior Secured Notes will have priority of payment
over the holders of the New 2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible Notes, to the extent of the value of the collateral for
the new notes.
The value of the collateral securing the New Senior Secured Notes and/or the New Convertible Notes may not be sufficient
to secure post-petition interest.
In the event of a bankruptcy proceeding with respect to us or any of the guarantors, holders of the new notes will only be entitled to
post-petition interest under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code to the extent that the value of their
Table of Contents
28
security  interest  in  the  collateral  is  greater  than  their  pre-bankruptcy  claim  (taking  into  account  the  relative  priority  of  the  liens
securing the New Senior Secured Notes and the New Convertible Notes). Holders of any series of new notes that have a security
interest in collateral with a value equal or less than their pre-bankruptcy claim will not be entitled to post-petition interest under the
U.S. Bankruptcy Code. The value of the new note holders’ interest in the collateral may change over time, and may not equal or
exceed the principal amount of the new notes. Further, in any bankruptcy proceeding with respect to us or any of the guarantors, the
holders of the New Senior Secured Notes will have priority of payment over the holders of the New 2019 Convertible Notes and
New 2020 Convertible Notes, to the extent of the value of the collateral for the new notes.
In the event of our bankruptcy or the bankruptcy of any of the guarantors, the present grant, and any future grant, of a lien
on collateral might be challenged as preferences under certain circumstances and, if successful, avoided.
The present grant, and any future grant of a lien on the collateral in favor of the Trustee and the collateral agent might be avoidable
under  the  preference  laws  by  the  person  granting  such  lien  (as  debtor-in-possession)  or  by  its  trustee  or  other  creditor
representative in bankruptcy if certain events or circumstances exist or occur, including if the person granting such lien is insolvent
at the time the lien is granted, the lien permits the holders of the notes to receive a greater recovery in the bankruptcy than if the lien
had  not  been  given  and  a  bankruptcy  proceeding  in  respect  of  the  person  granting  such  lien  is  commenced  within  90  days
following the date the lien was granted. If such claims are filed, the allowance of your claim under the new notes and subsidiary
guarantees, as applicable (including your right to a distribution in the bankruptcy case on account of such debt obligations) may be
suspended or disallowed pending the outcome of such claims in court. To the extent a challenge to a lien succeeded in court, you
would lose the benefit of the security or recourse that the collateral was intended to provide.
Security over certain collateral, including all mortgages on oil and gas properties, on which a lien in favor of the collateral
agent is required, may not be perfected on the Closing Date.
Security interests over certain collateral, including all mortgages on oil and gas properties, which are required under the indentures
governing the new notes, may not be perfected on the Closing Date. To the extent such security interests are not perfected on such
date, we will be required to have such security interests thereafter perfected promptly, but in no event later than the date that is 60
days after the Closing Date, but there can be no assurance that such security interest will be perfected on a timely basis. In the
event that more than a reasonable time passes between the issuance of the notes and the perfection of the security interests on the
oil  and  gas  properties,  such  security  interests  may  be  set  aside  or  avoided  as  a  preferential  transfer  if  the  collateral  grantor
becomes  a  debtor  that  is  the  subject  of  a  voluntary  or  involuntary  bankruptcy  case  under  the  U.S.  Bankruptcy  Code  (or  under
certain similar state law insolvency proceedings) on or before 90 days from the perfection of the security interests. In the event of
such a determination in such bankruptcy case or insolvency proceeding, the collateral agent will not have a security interest in that
collateral.
The value of the collateral securing the new notes may not be sufficient to satisfy our and the guarantors’ obligations
under the new notes and the guarantees.
No appraisal of the value of the collateral has been made in connection with this Exchange Offer, and the fair market value of the
collateral is subject to fluctuations based on factors that include general economic conditions and similar factors. The amount to be
received  upon  a  sale  of  the  collateral  would  be  dependent  on  numerous  factors,  including  the  actual  fair  market  value  of  the
collateral at such time, the timing and the manner of the sale and the availability of buyers. By its nature, portions of the collateral
may  be  illiquid  and  may  have  no  readily  ascertainable  market  value.  Accordingly,  in  the  event  of  a  foreclosure,  liquidation,
bankruptcy or similar proceeding, the collateral may not be sold in a timely or orderly manner, and the proceeds from any sale or
liquidation  of  the  collateral  may  not  be  sufficient  to  satisfy  our  and  the  guarantors’  obligations  under  the  new  notes  and  the
guarantees.
Table of Contents
29
To the extent that pre-existing liens, liens permitted under the indentures governing the new notes and other rights, including liens
on  excluded  property  (in  addition  to  the  holders  of  obligations  secured  by  higher-priority  liens),  encumber  any  of  the  collateral
securing the new notes and the guarantees, those parties have or may exercise rights and remedies with respect to the collateral
that could adversely affect the value of the collateral and the ability of the collateral agent, the indenture Trustee or the holders of
the new notes to realize or foreclose on the collateral.
Your security interest in certain items of present and future collateral may not be perfected. Even if your security interests
in certain items of collateral are perfected, it may not be practicable for you to enforce or economically benefit from your
rights with respect to such security interests.
The security interests are not perfected with respect to certain items of collateral that cannot be perfected by the filing of financing
statements in each debtor’s jurisdiction of organization, the filing of mortgages, the delivery of possession of certificated securities,
the filing of a notice of security interest with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office or the U.S. Copyright Office or certain other
conventional methods to perfect security interests in the U.S. Security interests in collateral such as deposit accounts and securities
accounts, which require or benefit from additional special filings or other actions or the obtaining of additional consents, may not be
perfected or may not have priority with respect to the security interests of other creditors. We and the guarantors will have limited
obligations to perfect the security interest of the holders of the new notes in specified collateral. To the extent that your security
interests in any items of collateral are unperfected, your rights with respect to such collateral are equal to the rights of our general
unsecured creditors in the event of any bankruptcy filed by or against us under applicable United States federal bankruptcy laws.
In addition, applicable law requires that certain property and rights acquired after the grant of a general security interest can only be
perfected at the time such property and rights are acquired and identified. Necessary action may not be taken to properly perfect the
security interest in such after-acquired collateral. Failure to perfect security interests may invalidate such security interests, limit the
assets included in the collateral and block the exercise of remedies with respect to such assets. Moreover, the collateral agent may
need  to  obtain  the  consent  of  a  governmental  agency  to  obtain  or  enforce  a  security  interest  in  certain  of  the  collateral  or  to
otherwise operate our business. We cannot assure you that the collateral agent will be able to obtain any such consent or that any
such consent will not be delayed, the event of which may adversely affect your rights as holders. Moreover, the collateral agent in
exercising  its  rights  to  foreclose  on  certain  assets  may  need  to  commence  governmental  proceedings  in  order  to  obtain  any
necessary governmental approvals. As a result, there may be prolonged delays in receiving such approval, or such approval may
not be granted to the collateral agent, the result of which may adversely affect your rights as holders.
A  court  could  cancel  the  new  notes  or  the  related  guarantees  of  our  existing  and  future  restricted  subsidiaries  under
fraudulent conveyance laws or certain other circumstances.
Our issuance of the new notes and the issuance of the related guarantees by our existing and future restricted subsidiaries (as well
as the respective liens on collateral securing such obligations) may be subject to review under federal or state fraudulent transfer or
similar laws.
All of our existing and certain of our future restricted subsidiaries will guarantee the new notes. If we or such a subsidiary becomes
a  debtor  in  a  case  under  the  Bankruptcy  Code  or  encounters  other  financial  difficulty,  under  federal  or  state  laws  governing
fraudulent conveyance, renewable transactions or preferential payments, a court in the relevant jurisdiction might avoid or cancel
the  guarantee  and/or  the  respective  liens  securing  such  guarantee.  The  court  might  do  so  if  it  found  that,  when  the  subsidiary
entered  into  its  guarantee  or,  in  some  states,  when  payments  become  due  thereunder,  (a)  it  received  less  than  reasonably
equivalent  value  or  fair  consideration  for  such  guarantee  and  (b)  either  (i)  was  or  was  rendered  insolvent,  (ii)  was  left  with
inadequate capital to conduct its business, or (iii) believed or should have believed that it would incur debts beyond its ability to
pay. The court might also avoid such guarantee or lien, without regard to the above factors, if it found that the subsidiary entered
into its guarantee or granted liens with actual or deemed intent to hinder, delay, or defraud its creditors.
Table of Contents
30
A court would likely find that a subsidiary did not receive reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for its guarantee unless it
benefited directly or indirectly from the issuance of the related notes. If a court avoided such guarantee, you would no longer have a
claim against such subsidiary or the collateral granted by such subsidiary to secure its guarantee. In addition, the court might direct
you to repay any amounts already received from such subsidiary. If the court were to avoid any guarantee, we cannot assure you
that funds would be available to pay the related notes from another subsidiary or from any other source.
The indentures governing the new notes will state that the liability of each guarantor on its guarantee is limited to the maximum
amount that the subsidiary can incur without risk that the guarantee will be subject to avoidance as a fraudulent conveyance. This
limitation  may  not  protect  the  guarantees  from  a  fraudulent  conveyance  attack  or,  if  it  does,  we  cannot  assure  you  that  the
guarantees and the collateral granted by such subsidiary to secure its guarantee will be in amounts sufficient, if necessary, to pay
obligations under the new notes when due.
Similarly, if we become a debtor in a case under the Bankruptcy Code or encounter other financial difficulty, a court might cancel
our obligations under the new notes and related liens, if it found that when we issued the such notes (or in some jurisdictions, when
payments become due under such notes or granted liens), factors (a) and (b) above applied to us, or if it found that we issued such
notes with actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud our creditors.
Even  though  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  are  convertible  into  shares  of  our
common stock, the terms of such new notes will not provide protection against some types of important corporate events.
The New 2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible Notes are, subject to certain conditions, convertible into shares of our
common stock. Upon the occurrence of certain change of control events, we may be required to offer to repurchase all of the new
notes then outstanding. However, certain important corporate events, such as leveraged recapitalizations, that would increase the
level of our indebtedness, would not constitute a “change of control” under the new notes. See “Description of New Convertible
Notes.”
The  convertibility  of  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  delayed  until  required
stockholder approval is obtained and will result in a default if such approval is not obtained.
If the required stockholder approval of the issuance of additional shares of common stock and other related actions in connection
with the Exchange Offer is not obtained promptly or at all, the convertibility of the New 2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020
Convertible Notes will be delayed until such approval is obtained. If such stockholder approval is not received by December 31,
2016, the inability to obtain such approval will result in a default under the New 2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible
Notes. If such default continues for 90 days, it will become an Event of Default. Such default may in turn result in a default under the
New Senior Secured Notes.
The market price of the New 2019 Convertible Notes and the New 2020 Convertible Notes could be significantly affected by
the market price of our common stock, which may fluctuate significantly.
We expect that the market price of the New 2019 Convertible Notes and the New 2020 Convertible Notes will be significantly
affected  by  the  market  price  of  our  common  stock.  This  may  result  in  greater  volatility  in  the  trading  value  for  the  New  2019
Convertible Notes and the New 2020 Convertible Notes than would be expected for nonconvertible debt securities. Factors that
could affect our common stock price include the following:
•
•
fluctuations in our quarterly results of operations and cash flows or those of other companies in our industry;
the public’s reaction to our press releases, announcements and filings with the SEC;
additions or departures of key personnel;
additions or departures of key personnel;
•
31
Table of Contents
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
changes in financial estimates or recommendations by research analysts;
changes in the amount of indebtedness we have outstanding;
changes in the ratings of the new notes or our other securities;
changes in general conditions in the United States and international economy, financial markets or the industry in which
we operate, including changes in regulatory requirements;
significant  contracts,  acquisitions,  dispositions,  financings,  joint  marketing  relationships,  joint  ventures  or  capital
commitments by us or our competitors;
developments related to significant claims or proceedings against us;
our dividend policy; and
future sales of our equity or equity–linked securities.
In recent years, stock markets, including the NYSE, have experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations. This volatility has
had  a  significant  effect  on  the  market  price  of  securities  issued  by  many  companies  for  reasons  unrelated  to  the  operating
performance of these companies. These broad market fluctuations may adversely affect the market prices of our common stock and
the new notes.
The issuances of our common stock in connection with the conversion of the New Convertible Notes and the exercise of
the warrants would cause substantial dilution, which could materially affect the trading price of our common stock and
earnings per share.
The New Convertible Notes are, subject to certain conditions, convertible into shares of our common stock. In addition, the warrants
issued pursuant to the Exchange Offer are exercisable for shares of our common stock. As a result, substantial amounts of our
common stock may be issued subsequent to the Exchange Offer. If the maximum number of shares of common stock issuable in
connection  with  the  conversion  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the  exercise  of  the  warrants  are  issued,  such  shares  would
represent approximately 80% of our outstanding shares. Such issuances could result in substantial decreases to our stock price
and earnings per share.
The conversion rate of the New Convertible Notes may not be adjusted for all dilutive events that may occur.
The  conversion  rate  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  is  subject  to  adjustment  for  certain  events  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the
issuance of stock dividends on our common stock, the issuance of certain rights or warrants, subdivisions or combinations of our
common stock, certain distributions of assets, debt securities, capital stock or cash to holders of our common stock and certain
tender or exchange offers as described under “Description of New Convertible Notes—Conversion Rights.” The conversion rate
will not be adjusted for other events, such as certain stock issuances for cash, that may adversely affect the trading price of the new
notes.
You  may  be  required  to  pay  taxes  on  ordinary  interest  income  over  the  term  of  the  new  notes  without  receiving  cash
payments to pay such taxes.
The  new  notes  will  be  considered  to  be  issued  with  original  issue  discount  (“OID”).  A  United  States  Holder  generally  will  be
required to accrue and recognize its share of OID as ordinary interest income over the term of the new notes, possibly in advance of
the receipt of any cash payments attributable to such income. See “Certain United States Federal Income Tax Consequences—
Consequences to United States Holders—Consequences of Holding New Notes—Stated Interest; Original Issue Discount.”
As a holder of the new notes and/or warrants, you will not be entitled to any rights with respect to our common stock, but
you will be subject to all changes made with respect to our common stock.
If you hold any of our new notes or warrants, you will not be entitled to any rights with respect to our common stock (including,
without limitation, voting rights and rights to receive any dividends or other distributions, if
Table of Contents
32
any, on our common stock), but you will be subject to all changes affecting our common stock. You will have rights with respect to
our common stock only when we deliver shares of common stock to you upon conversion of your New Convertible Notes and, in
limited  cases,  under  the  conversion  rate  adjustments  applicable  to  the  new  notes,  or  upon  exercise  of  warrants  granted  in
connection with the issuance of the New Senior Secured Notes. For example, if an amendment is proposed to our restated articles
of  incorporation  or  amended  and  restated  bylaws  requiring  stockholder  approval  and  the  record  date  for  determining  the
stockholders of record entitled to vote on the amendment occurs prior to the delivery of common stock, if any, to you, you will not be
entitled to vote on the amendment, although you will nevertheless be subject to any changes in the powers, preferences or special
rights of our common stock.
The repurchase rights in the new notes triggered by a change of control could discourage a potential acquiror.
The repurchase rights in the new notes triggered by a change of control, as described under the headings “Description of New
Senior Secured Notes—Certain Covenants—Change of Control” and “Description of New Convertible Notes—Certain Covenants
—Change of Control,” could discourage a potential acquiror from engaging in a transaction that may be beneficial to the holders of
our common stock and might impact the value of the new notes.
We  may  not  have  the  ability  to  purchase  the  new  notes  upon  a  change  of  control  or  upon  certain  sales  or  other
dispositions of assets, or to make the cash payment due upon conversion or at maturity.
If a change of control, as described under the headings “Description of New Senior Secured Notes—Certain Covenants—Change
of Control” and “Description of New Convertible Notes—Certain Covenants—Change of Control,” occurs, holders of the new notes
may require us to repurchase, for cash, all or a portion of their new notes. In addition, upon certain sales or other dispositions of
assets, we may be obligated to make offers to purchase the new notes with a portion of the net available cash of such sales or other
dispositions. We may not have sufficient funds to pay the repurchase price when due. In addition, our current and future debt or
other agreements may restrict our ability to make cash payments in connection with the repurchase of the new notes upon a change
of control or upon certain asset sales or other dispositions. For example, the existing revolving credit facility does not permit cash
payments in connection with the repurchase of the notes upon a change of control if an event of default under the revolving credit
facility then exists or would result from such payment. If we fail to repurchase the new notes when required, we will be in default
under the indentures governing the new notes. See “Description of New Senior Secured Notes—Certain Covenants—Change of
Control”; and “—Limitation on Asset Sales” and “Description of New Convertible Notes—Certain Covenants—Change of Control”;
and “—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
While the issuance of the New Convertible Notes to holders who tender their old notes will not be subject to Nevada’s
“Combination with Interested Stockholders” statute, a transferee of such New Convertible Notes could be subject to such
statute.
Under Nevada’s Combination With Interested Stockholders statute, an “interested stockholder” may not enter into a “combination”
with a Nevada corporation for a period of two years after becoming an interested stockholder. While each initial holder of the New
Convertible Notes (those parties that tender old notes) could be considered an “interested stockholder” upon conversion of the New
Convertible Notes, the statute contains an exception which would prevent application of the statute to the initial holders because
the Exchange Offer received prior approval of our board of directors. However, this exception would not apply to any transferee of
such notes, and each transferee could be considered an “interested stockholder” if the transferee otherwise meets the definition of
“interested  stockholder”  and  thus  would  be  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  statute.  The  application  of  the  statute  could  have  a
negative  effect  on  your  ability  to  transfer  the  New  Convertible  Notes.  See  “Description  of  Common  Stock—Anti-Takeover
Provisions—Combination with Interested Stockholders Statute.”
Table of Contents
33
Risks Related to Our Business
An extended period of depressed oil and natural gas prices will adversely affect our business, financial condition, cash
flow, liquidity, results of operations and our ability to meet our capital expenditure obligations and financial commitments.
Our business is heavily dependent upon the prices of, and demand for, oil and natural gas. Historically, the prices for oil and natural
gas have been volatile and are likely to remain volatile in the future. Oil and natural gas prices have declined substantially since
mid 2014 and have continued to decline into 2016. For example, during the year ended December 31, 2015, commodity prices
changed significantly, with the settlement price for West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”) crude oil ranging from a high of approximately
$61.43 per barrel to a low of approximately $34.73 per barrel and settlement prices for Henry Hub natural gas ranging from a high of
approximately $3.23 per Mcf to a low of approximately $1.76 per Mcf. Oil and natural gas price weakness continued into 2016 and,
through June 30, 2016, the WTI settlement price of crude oil had a low of approximately $26.21 per barrel, and the Henry Hub
settlement price of natural gas had a low of approximately $1.78 per Mcf.
The prices we receive for our oil and natural gas production are subject to wide fluctuations and depend on numerous factors
beyond our control, including the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the domestic and foreign supply of oil, NGLs and natural gas;
weather conditions;
the price and quantity of imports of oil and natural gas;
political conditions and events in other oil-producing and natural gas-producing countries, including embargoes, hostilities
in the Middle East and other sustained military campaigns, and acts of terrorism or sabotage;
the actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC;
domestic government regulation, legislation and policies;
the level of global oil and natural gas inventories;
technological advances affecting energy consumption;
the price and availability of alternative fuels; and
overall economic conditions.
Lower oil and natural gas prices will adversely affect:
•
•
•
our revenues, profitability and cash flow from operations;
the value of our proved oil and natural gas reserves;
the economic viability of certain of our drilling prospects;
•
•
our borrowing capacity; and
our ability to obtain additional capital.
Our debt service requirements could adversely affect our operations and limit our growth.
We had $1.2 billion principal amount of debt as of July 29, 2016.
Table of Contents
34
Our outstanding debt has important consequences, including, without limitation:
•
•
•
a portion of our cash flow from operations is required to make debt service payments;
our ability to borrow additional amounts for capital expenditures (including acquisitions) or other purposes is limited; and
our debt limits our ability to capitalize on significant business opportunities, our flexibility in planning for or reacting to
changes in market conditions and our ability to withstand competitive pressures and economic downturns.
In addition, future acquisition or development activities may require us to alter our capitalization significantly. These changes in
capitalization may significantly increase our debt. Moreover, our ability to meet our debt service obligations and to reduce our total
debt will be dependent upon our future performance, which will be subject to general economic conditions and financial, business
and other factors affecting our operations, many of which are beyond our control. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow
from operations in the future to service our indebtedness and to meet other commitments, we will be required to adopt one or more
alternatives, such as refinancing or restructuring our indebtedness, selling material assets or seeking to raise additional debt or
equity capital. We cannot assure you that any of these actions could be effected on a timely basis or on satisfactory terms or that
these actions would enable us to continue to satisfy our capital requirements.
Our debt agreements contain a number of significant covenants. These covenants limit our ability to, among other things:
•
•
•
•
•
borrow additional money;
merge, consolidate or dispose of assets;
make certain types of investments;
enter into transactions with our affiliates; and
pay dividends.
Our  failure  to  comply  with  any  of  these  covenants  could  cause  a  default  under  our  revolving  credit  facility  and  the  respective
indentures governing the old notes and new notes. A default, if not waived, could result in acceleration of our indebtedness, in
which case the debt would become immediately due and payable. If this occurs, we may not be able to repay our debt or borrow
sufficient funds to refinance it given the current status of the credit markets. Even if new financing is available, it may not be on
terms that are acceptable to us. Complying with these covenants may cause us to take actions that we otherwise would not take or
not take actions that we otherwise would take.
Our access to capital markets may be limited in the future.
Adverse changes in the financial and credit markets could negatively impact our ability to grow production and reserves and meet
our future obligations. In addition, the continuation of the current low oil and natural gas price environment, or further declines of oil
and natural gas prices, will affect our ability to obtain financing for acquisitions and drilling activities and could result in a reduction
in drilling activity which results in the loss of acreage through lease expirations, both of which could negatively affect our ability to
replace reserves.
Our future production and revenues depend on our ability to replace our reserves.
Our future production and revenues depend upon our ability to find, develop or acquire additional oil and natural gas reserves that
are economically recoverable. Our proved reserves will generally decline as reserves are depleted, except to the extent that we
conduct successful exploration or development activities or acquire
Table of Contents
35
properties containing proved reserves, or both. To increase reserves and production, we must continue our acquisition and drilling
activities. We cannot assure you that we will have adequate capital resources to conduct acquisition and drilling activities or that
our acquisition and drilling activities will result in significant additional reserves or that we will have continuing success drilling
productive wells at low finding and development costs. Furthermore, while our revenues may increase if prevailing oil and natural
gas prices increase significantly, our finding costs for additional reserves could also increase.
Prospects that we decide to drill may not yield oil or natural gas in commercially viable quantities or quantities sufficient to
meet our targeted rate of return.
A prospect is a property in which we own an interest or have operating rights and that has what our geoscientists believe, based on
available seismic and geological information, to be an indication of potential oil or natural gas. Our prospects are in various stages
of evaluation, ranging from a prospect that is ready to be drilled to a prospect that will require substantial additional evaluation and
interpretation. There is no way to predict in advance of drilling and testing whether any particular prospect will yield oil or natural
gas in sufficient quantities to recover drilling or completion costs or to be economically viable. The use of seismic data and other
technologies and the study of producing fields in the same area will not enable us to know conclusively prior to drilling whether oil
or natural gas will be present or, if present, whether oil or natural gas will be present in commercial quantities. The analysis that we
perform  using  data  from  other  wells,  more  fully  explored  prospects  and/or  producing  fields  may  not  be  useful  in  predicting  the
characteristics and potential reserves associated with our drilling prospects. If we drill additional unsuccessful wells, our drilling
success rate may decline and we may not achieve our targeted rate of return.
Our business involves many uncertainties and operating risks that can prevent us from realizing profits and can cause
substantial losses.
Our success depends on the success of our exploration and development activities. Exploration activities involve numerous risks,
including the risk that no commercially productive natural gas or oil reserves will be discovered. In addition, these activities may be
unsuccessful for many reasons, including weather, cost overruns, equipment shortages and mechanical difficulties. Moreover, the
successful drilling of a natural gas or oil well does not ensure we will realize a profit on our investment. A variety of factors, both
geological and market-related, can cause a well to become uneconomical or only marginally economical. In addition to their costs,
unsuccessful wells can hurt our efforts to replace production and reserves.
Our business involves a variety of operating risks, including:
•
•
•
•
unusual or unexpected geological formations;
fires;
explosions;
blow-outs and surface cratering;
uncontrollable flows of natural gas, oil and formation water;
natural disasters, such as hurricanes, tropical storms and other adverse weather conditions;
pipe, cement, or pipeline failures;
casing collapses;
mechanical difficulties, such as lost or stuck oil field drilling and service tools;
abnormally pressured formations; and
environmental hazards, such as natural gas leaks, oil spills, pipeline ruptures and discharges of toxic gases.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
36
Table of Contents
If we experience any of these problems, well bores, gathering systems and processing facilities could be affected, which could
adversely affect our ability to conduct operations.
We could also incur substantial losses as a result of:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
injury or loss of life;
severe damage to and destruction of property, natural resources and equipment;
pollution and other environmental damage;
clean-up responsibilities;
regulatory investigation and penalties;
suspension of our operations; and
repairs to resume operations.
We maintain insurance against “sudden and accidental” occurrences, which may cover some, but not all, of the risks described
above. Most significantly, the insurance we maintain will not cover the risks described above which occur over a sustained period
of time. Further, there can be no assurance that such insurance will continue to be available to cover all such cost or that such
insurance  will  be  available  at  a  cost  that  would  justify  its  purchase.  The  occurrence  of  a  significant  event  not  fully  insured  or
indemnified against could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
We operate in a highly competitive industry, and our failure to remain competitive with our competitors, many of which
have greater resources than we do, could adversely affect our results of operations.
The  oil  and  natural  gas  industry  is  highly  competitive  in  the  search  for  and  development  and  acquisition  of  reserves.  Our
competitors often include companies that have greater financial and personnel resources than we do. These resources could allow
those competitors to price their products and services more aggressively than we can, which could hurt our profitability. Moreover,
our ability to acquire additional properties and to discover reserves in the future will be dependent upon our ability to evaluate and
select suitable properties and to close transactions in a highly competitive environment.
If oil and natural gas prices decline further or remain depressed for an extended period of time, we may be required to
further write-down the carrying values and/or the estimates of total reserves of our oil and natural gas properties, which
would constitute a non-cash charge to earnings and adversely affect our results of operations.
Accounting rules applicable to us require that we review periodically the carrying value of our oil and natural gas properties for
possible impairment. Based on specific market factors and circumstances at the time of prospective impairment reviews and the
continuing evaluation of development plans, production data, economics and other factors, we may be required to write down the
carrying  value  of  our  oil  and  natural  gas  properties.  A  write-down  constitutes  a  non-cash  charge  to  earnings.  During  2015,  we
recognized impairments of $801.3 million which reduced the carrying value of our oil and natural gas properties. We may incur
additional non-cash charges in the future, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations in the period
taken.  We  may  also  reduce  our  estimates  of  the  reserves  that  may  be  economically  recovered,  which  could  have  the  effect  of
reducing the total value of our reserves.
Table of Contents
37
Our reserve estimates depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate. Any material inaccuracies in our
reserve estimates or underlying assumptions will materially affect the quantities and present value of our reserves.
Reserve engineering is a subjective process of estimating the recovery from underground accumulations of oil and natural gas that
cannot be precisely measured. The accuracy of any reserve estimate depends on the quality of available data, production history
and engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. Because all reserve estimates are to some degree imprecise, the
quantities  of  oil  and  natural  gas  that  are  ultimately  recovered,  production  and  operating  costs,  the  amount  and  timing  of  future
development expenditures and future oil and natural gas prices may all differ materially from those assumed in these estimates.
The information regarding present value of the future net cash flows attributable to our proved oil and natural gas reserves is only
estimated and should not be construed as the current market value of the oil and natural gas reserves attributable to our properties.
Thus, such information includes revisions of certain reserve estimates attributable to proved properties included in the preceding
year’s  estimates.  Such  revisions  reflect  additional  information  from  subsequent  activities,  production  history  of  the  properties
involved and any adjustments in the projected economic life of such properties resulting from changes in product prices. Any future
downward revisions could adversely affect our financial condition, our borrowing ability, our future prospects and the value of our
common stock.
As of December 31, 2015, 41% of our total proved reserves were undeveloped and 10% were developed non-producing. These
reserves  may  not  ultimately  be  developed  or  produced.  Furthermore,  not  all  of  our  undeveloped  or  developed  non-producing
reserves may be ultimately produced at the time periods we have planned, at the costs we have budgeted, or at all. As a result, we
may not find commercially viable quantities of oil and natural gas, which in turn may result in a material adverse effect on our results
of operations.
Some of our undeveloped leasehold acreage is subject to leases that will expire unless production is established on units
containing the acreage.
Leases on oil and gas properties normally have a term of three to five years and will expire unless, prior to expiration of the lease
term, production in paying quantities is established. If the leases expire and we are unable to renew them, we will lose the right to
develop the related properties. Our drilling plans for these areas are subject to change based upon various factors, including drilling
results,  commodity  prices,  the  availability  and  cost  of  capital,  drilling  and  production  costs,  availability  of  drilling  services  and
equipment, gathering system and pipeline transportation constraints and regulatory approvals.
We pursue acquisitions as part of our growth strategy and there are risks in connection with acquisitions.
Our  growth  has  been  attributable  in  part  to  acquisitions  of  producing  properties  and  companies.  More  recently  we  have  been
focused  on  acquiring  acreage  for  our  drilling  program.  We  expect  to  continue  to  evaluate  and,  where  appropriate,  pursue
acquisition opportunities on terms we consider favorable. However, we cannot assure you that suitable acquisition candidates will
be identified in the future, or that we will be able to finance such acquisitions on favorable terms. In addition, we compete against
other  companies  for  acquisitions,  and  we  cannot  assure  you  that  we  will  successfully  acquire  any  material  property  interests.
Further, we cannot assure you that future acquisitions by us will be integrated successfully into our operations or will increase our
profits.
The  successful  acquisition  of  producing  properties  requires  an  assessment  of  numerous  factors  beyond  our  control,  including,
without limitation:
•
•
•
recoverable reserves;
exploration potential;
future oil and natural gas prices;
38
Table of Contents
•
•
operating costs; and
potential environmental and other liabilities.
In connection with such an assessment, we perform a review of the subject properties that we believe to be generally consistent
with industry practices. The resulting assessments are inexact and their accuracy uncertain, and such a review may not reveal all
existing or potential problems, nor will it necessarily permit us to become sufficiently familiar with the properties to fully assess their
merits and deficiencies. Inspections may not always be performed on every well, and structural and environmental problems are not
necessarily observable even when an inspection is made.
Additionally, significant acquisitions can change the nature of our operations and business depending upon the character of the
acquired properties, which may be substantially different in operating and geologic characteristics or geographic location than our
existing properties. While our current operations are focused in Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi, we may pursue acquisitions or
properties located in other geographic areas.
If we are unsuccessful at marketing our oil and natural gas at commercially acceptable prices, our profitability will decline.
Our ability to market oil and natural gas at commercially acceptable prices depends on, among other factors, the following:
•
•
•
•
the availability and capacity of gathering systems and pipelines;
federal and state regulation of production and transportation;
changes in supply and demand; and
general economic conditions.
Our inability to respond appropriately to changes in these factors could negatively affect our profitability.
Market  conditions  or  operational  impediments  may  hinder  our  access  to  oil  and  natural  gas  markets  or  delay  our
production.
Market conditions or the unavailability of satisfactory oil and natural gas transportation arrangements may hinder our access to oil
and natural gas markets or delay our production. The availability of a ready market for our oil and natural gas production depends
on a number of factors, including the demand for and supply of oil and natural gas and the proximity of reserves to pipelines and
processing facilities. Our ability to market our production depends in a substantial part on the availability and capacity of gathering
systems, pipelines and processing facilities, in some cases owned and operated by third parties. Our failure to obtain such services
on acceptable terms could materially harm our business. We may be required to shut in wells for a lack of a market or because of
the inadequacy or unavailability of pipelines or gathering system capacity. If that were to occur, then we would be unable to realize
revenue from those wells until arrangements were made to deliver our production to market.
We are subject to extensive governmental laws and regulations that may adversely affect the cost, manner or feasibility of
doing business.
Our operations and facilities are subject to extensive federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to the exploration for, and
the  development,  production  and  transportation  of,  oil  and  natural  gas,  and  operating  safety.  Future  laws  or  regulations,  any
adverse changes in the interpretation of existing laws and regulations or our failure to comply with existing legal requirements may
harm  our  business,  results  of  operations  and  financial  condition.  We  may  be  required  to  make  large  and  unanticipated  capital
expenditures to comply with governmental laws and regulations, such as:
•
lease permit restrictions;
Table of Contents
39
•
•
•
•
•
•
drilling bonds and other financial responsibility requirements, such as plug and abandonment bonds;
spacing of wells;
unitization and pooling of properties;
safety precautions;
regulatory requirements; and
taxation.
Under these laws and regulations, we could be liable for:
•
•
•
•
personal injuries;
property and natural resource damages;
well reclamation costs; and
governmental sanctions, such as fines and penalties.
Our  operations  could  be  significantly  delayed  or  curtailed  and  our  cost  of  operations  could  significantly  increase  as  a  result  of
regulatory requirements or restrictions. We are unable to predict the ultimate cost of compliance with these requirements or their
effect on our operations.
Our operations are substantially dependent on the availability of water. Restrictions on our ability to obtain water may have
an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Water is an essential component of both the drilling and hydraulic fracturing processes. Historically, we have been able to purchase
water from various sources for use in our operations. In recent years South Texas has experienced the lowest inflows of water in
recent history. As a result of this severe drought, some local water districts may begin restricting the use of water subject to their
jurisdiction for drilling and hydraulic fracturing in order to protect the local water supply. If we are unable to obtain water to use in
our operations from local sources, we may be unable to economically produce oil and natural gas, which could have an adverse
effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Our operations may incur substantial liabilities to comply with environmental laws and regulations.
Our oil and natural gas operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to the release or
disposal of materials into the environment and otherwise relating to environmental protection. These laws and regulations:
•
•
•
•
•
•
require the acquisition of one or more permits before drilling commences;
impose limitations on where drilling can occur and/or requires mitigation before authorizing drilling in certain locations;
restrict the types, quantities and concentration of substances that can be released into the environment in connection with
drilling and production activities;
require  reporting  of  significant  releases,  and  annual  reporting  of  the  nature  and  quantity  of  emissions,  discharges  and
other releases into the environment;
limit or prohibit drilling activities on certain lands lying within wilderness, wetlands and other protected areas; and
impose substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from our operations.
40
Table of Contents
Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in:
•
•
•
the assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties;
the incurrence of investigatory and/or remedial obligations; and
the imposition of injunctive relief.
Changes in environmental laws and regulations occur frequently, and any changes that result in more stringent or costly restrictions
on emissions, and/or waste handling, storage, transport, disposal or cleanup requirements could require us to make significant
expenditures to reach and maintain compliance and may otherwise have a material adverse effect on our industry in general and
on our own results of operations, competitive position or financial condition. Under these environmental laws and regulations, we
could be held strictly liable for the removal or remediation of previously released materials or property contamination regardless of
whether we were responsible for the release or contamination or if our operations met previous standards in the industry at the time
they were performed. Future environmental laws and regulations, including proposed legislation regulating climate change, may
negatively impact our industry. The costs of compliance with these requirements may have an adverse impact on our financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Our hedging transactions could result in financial losses or could reduce our income. To the extent we have hedged a
significant portion of our expected production and actual production is lower than we expected or the costs of goods and
services increase, our profitability would be adversely affected.
To achieve more predictable cash flows and to reduce our exposure to adverse fluctuations in the prices of oil and gas, we have
entered into and may in the future enter into hedging transactions for certain of our expected oil and natural gas production. These
transactions could result in both realized and unrealized hedging losses. Further, these hedges may be inadequate to protect us
from continuing and prolonged decline in the price of oil and natural gas. To the extent that the price of oil and natural gas remain at
current levels or declines further, we will not be able to hedge future production at the same level as our current hedges, and our
results of operations and financial condition would be negatively impacted.
The  extent  of  our  commodity  price  exposure  is  related  largely  to  the  effectiveness  and  scope  of  our  derivative  activities.  For
example, the derivative instruments we utilize are primarily based on NYMEX futures prices, which may differ significantly from the
actual crude oil and gas prices we realize in our operations. Furthermore, we have adopted a policy that requires, and our revolving
credit facility also requires, that we enter into derivative transactions related to only a portion of our expected production volumes
and, as a result, we will continue to have direct commodity price exposure on the portion of our production volumes not covered by
these derivative financial instruments.
Our actual future production may be significantly higher or lower than we estimate at the time we enter into derivative transactions. If
our actual future production is higher than we estimated, we will have greater commodity price exposure than we intended. If our
actual future production is lower than the nominal amount that is subject to our derivative financial instruments, we might be forced
to  satisfy  all  or  a  portion  of  our  derivative  transactions  without  the  benefit  of  the  cash  flow  from  our  sale  or  purchase  of  the
underlying physical commodity, resulting in a substantial diminution in our profitability and liquidity. As a result of these factors, our
derivative activities may not be as effective as we intend in reducing the volatility of our cash flows, and in certain circumstances
may actually increase the volatility of our cash flows.
In addition, our hedging transactions are subject to the following risks:
•
•
we may be limited in receiving the full benefit of increases in oil and gas prices as a result of these transactions;
a counterparty may not perform its obligation under the applicable derivative financial instrument or may seek bankruptcy
protection;
Table of Contents
41
•
•
there may be a change in the expected differential between the underlying commodity price in the derivative instrument
and the actual price received; and
the  steps  we  take  to  monitor  our  derivative  financial  instruments  may  not  detect  and  prevent  violations  of  our  risk
management policies and procedures, particularly if deception or other intentional misconduct is involved.
The  enactment  of  derivatives  legislation  and  regulation  could  have  an  adverse  effect  on  our  ability  to  use  derivative
instruments to reduce the effect of commodity price, interest rate and other risks associated with our business.
In 2010, new comprehensive financial reform legislation, known as the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act (“Dodd-Frank”), was enacted that established federal oversight regulation of over-the-counter derivatives market and entities,
such as us, that participate in that market. Dodd-Frank requires the Commodities Futures Trading Commission, or CFTC, the SEC
and other regulators to promulgate rules and regulations implementing the new legislation. The final rules adopted under Dodd-
Frank identify the types of products and the classes of market participants subject to regulation and will require us in connection
with certain derivatives activities to comply with clearing and trade-execution requirements (or take steps to qualify for an exemption
from such requirements). While most of the regulations have been finalized, it is not possible at this time to predict with certainty the
full  effects  of  Dodd-Frank  and  CFTC  rules  on  us  or  the  timing  of  such  effects.  We  believe  that  Dodd-Frank  and  associated
regulations could significantly increase the cost of derivative contracts from additional recordkeeping and reporting requirements
and through requirements to post collateral which could adversely affect our available liquidity. If we reduce our use of derivatives
as a result of Dodd-Frank and associated regulations, our results of operations may become more volatile and our cash flows may
be less predictable, which could adversely affect our ability to plan for and fund capital expenditures. These consequences could
have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Federal and state legislation and regulatory initiatives relating to hydraulic fracturing could result in increased costs and
additional operating restrictions or delays as well as restrict our access to our oil and gas reserves.
Hydraulic fracturing is an essential and common practice that is used to stimulate production of oil and natural gas from dense
subsurface rock formations such as shale and tight sands. We routinely apply hydraulic fracturing techniques in completing our
wells. The process involves the injection of water, sand and additives under pressure into a targeted subsurface formation. The
water and pressure create fractures in the rock formations, which are held open by the grains of sand, enabling the oil or natural gas
to flow to the wellbore. The use of hydraulic fracturing is necessary to produce commercial quantities of oil and natural gas from
many reservoirs including the Haynesville shale, Bossier shale, Eagle Ford shale, Tuscaloosa Marine shale, Cotton Valley and
other tight natural gas and oil reservoirs. Substantially all of our proved oil and gas reserves that are currently not producing and our
undeveloped acreage require hydraulic fracturing to be productive. All of the wells currently being drilled by us utilize hydraulic
fracturing in their completion.
The use of hydraulic fracturing in our well completion activities could expose us to liability for negative environmental effects that
might occur. Although we have not had any incidents related to hydraulic fracturing operations that we believe have caused any
negative environmental effects, we have established operating procedures to respond and report any unexpected fluid discharge
which might occur during our operations, including plans to remediate any spills that might occur. In the event that we were to suffer
a loss related to hydraulic fracturing operations, our insurance coverage will be net of a deductible per occurrence and our ability to
recover costs will be limited to a total aggregate policy limit of $26.0 million, which may or may not be sufficient to pay the full
amount of our losses incurred.
Drilling  and  completion  activities  are  typically  regulated  by  state  oil  and  natural  gas  commissions.  Our  drilling  and  completion
activities are conducted primarily in Louisiana and Texas. Texas adopted a law in June 2012
Table of Contents
42
requiring disclosure to the Railroad Commission of Texas and the public of certain information regarding the components used in
the hydraulic-fracturing process. Several proposals are before the United States Congress that, if implemented, would subject the
process of hydraulic fracturing to regulation under the Safe Drinking Water Act. In June 2015, the EPA released a draft report on the
potential impacts of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources, which concluded that hydraulic fracturing activities have not
led to widespread, systemic impacts on drinking water resources in the United States, although there may be above and below
ground mechanisms by which hydraulic fracturing activities have the potential to impact drinking water resources. The draft report is
expected  to  be  finalized  after  a  public  comment  period  and  a  formal  review  by  the  EPA’s  Science  Advisory  Board.  Other
governmental  agencies,  including  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  have  evaluated  or  are  evaluating  various  other  aspects  of
hydraulic fracturing. These ongoing or proposed studies have the potential to impact the likelihood or scope of future legislation or
regulation.
State and federal regulatory agencies recently have focused on a possible connection between the hydraulic fracturing related
activities  and  the  increased  occurrence  of  seismic  activity.  When  caused  by  human  activity,  such  events  are  called  induced
seismicity. In a few instances, operators of injection wells in the vicinity of seismic events have been ordered to reduce injection
volumes or suspend operations. Some state regulatory agencies, including those in Colorado, Ohio, Oklahoma, and Texas, have
modified their regulations to account for induced seismicity. Regulatory agencies at all levels are continuing to study the possible
linkage  between  oil  and  gas  activity  and  induced  seismicity.  A  2012  report  published  by  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences
concluded that only a very small fraction of the tens of thousands of injection wells have been suspected to be, or have been, the
likely cause of induced seismicity; and a 2015 report by researchers at the University of Texas has suggested that the link between
seismic activity and wastewater disposal may vary by region. In 2015, the United States Geological Survey identified eight states,
including  Texas,  with  areas  of  increased  rates  of  induced  seismicity  that  could  be  attributed  to  fluid  injection  or  oil  and  gas
extraction. More recently, in March 2016, the United States Geological Survey identified six states with the most significant hazards
from  induced  seismicity,  including  Texas,  Colorado,  Oklahoma,  Kansas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arkansas.  In  addition,  a  number  of
lawsuits have been filed, most recently in Oklahoma, alleging that disposal well operations have caused damage to neighboring
properties or otherwise violated state and federal rules regulating waste disposal. These developments could result in additional
regulation and restrictions on the use of injection wells and hydraulic fracturing.
Potential changes to US federal tax regulations, if passed, could have an adverse effect on us.
The United States Congress continues to consider imposing new taxes and repealing many tax incentives and deductions that are
currently used by independent oil and gas producers. Such changes include, but are not limited to:
•
•
the elimination of current deductions for intangible drilling and development costs;
the repeal of the percentage depletion allowance for oil and gas properties;
an elimination of the deduction for U.S. oil and gas production activities;
•
•
•
an elimination of the deduction for U.S. oil and gas production activities;
an extension of the amortization period for certain geological and geophysical expenditures; and
implementation of a fee on non-producing leases located on federal lands.
It is unclear, however, whether any such changes will be enacted or how soon such changes could be effective. The passage of
any legislation containing these or similar changes in U.S. federal income tax law could eliminate or defer certain tax deductions
that are currently available with respect to oil and gas exploration and development, and any such changes could negatively affect
our  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.  A  reduction  in  operating  cash  flow  could  require  us  to  reduce  our  drilling
activities. Since none of these proposals have yet been included in new legislation, we do not know the ultimate impact they may
have on our business.
Table of Contents
43
Loss of our information and computer systems could adversely affect our business.
We are heavily dependent on our information systems and computer-based programs, including our well operations information,
seismic data, electronic data processing and accounting data. If any of such programs or systems were to fail or create erroneous
information  in  our  hardware  or  software  network  infrastructure  or  we  were  subject  to  cyberspace  breaches  or  attacks,  possible
consequences include our loss of communication links, inability to find, produce, process and sell oil and natural gas and inability
to automatically process commercial transactions or engage in similar automated or computerized business activities. Any such
consequence could have a material effect on our business.
Our business could be negatively impacted by security threats, including cyber-security threats and other disruptions.
As an oil and natural gas producer, we face various security threats, including cyber-security threats to gain unauthorized access to
sensitive information or to render data or systems unusable, threats to the safety of our employees, threats to the security of our
facilities  and  infrastructure  or  third  party  facilities  and  infrastructure,  such  as  processing  plants  and  pipelines,  and  threats  from
terrorist acts. Cyber-security attacks in particular are evolving and include, but are not limited to, malicious software, attempts to
gain  unauthorized  access  to  data,  and  other  electronic  security  breaches  that  could  lead  to  disruptions  in  critical  systems,
unauthorized  release  of  confidential  or  otherwise  protected  information  and  corruption  of  data.  Although  we  utilize  various
procedures and controls to monitor and protect against these threats and to mitigate our exposure to such threats, there can be no
assurance that these procedures and controls will be sufficient in preventing security threats from materializing. If any of these
events  were  to  materialize,  they  could  lead  to  losses  of  sensitive  information,  critical  infrastructure,  personnel  or  capabilities,
essential to our operations and could have a material adverse effect on our reputation, financial position, results of operations, or
cash flows.
We  are  exposed  to  the  credit  risk  of  our  customers  and  counterparties,  and  our  credit  risk  management  may  not  be
adequate to protect against such risk.
We are subject to the risk of loss resulting from nonpayment and/or nonperformance by our customers and counterparties in the
ordinary  course  of  our  business.  Our  credit  procedures  and  policies  may  not  be  adequate  to  fully  eliminate  customer  and
counterparty credit risk particularly in light of the sustained declines in oil and natural gas prices since mid 2014. We cannot predict
to what extent our business would be impacted by deteriorating conditions in the economy, including declines in our customers’
and  counterparties’  creditworthiness.  If  we  fail  to  adequately  assess  the  creditworthiness  of  existing  or  future  customers  and
counterparties,  unanticipated  deterioration  in  their  creditworthiness  and  any  resulting  increase  in  nonpayment  and/or
nonperformance  by  them  could  cause  us  to  write-down  or  write-off  doubtful  accounts.  Such  write-downs  or  write-offs  could
negatively affect our operating results in the periods in which they occur and, if significant, could have a material adverse effect on
our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition.
Substantial exploration and development activities could require significant outside capital, which could dilute the value of
our  common  shares  and  restrict  our  activities.  Also,  we  may  not  be  able  to  obtain  needed  capital  or  financing  on
satisfactory terms, which could lead to a limitation of our future business opportunities and a decline in our oil and natural
gas reserves.
We expect to expend substantial capital in the acquisition of, exploration for and development of oil and natural gas reserves. In
order to finance these activities, we may need to alter or increase our capitalization substantially through the issuance of debt or
equity securities, the sale of non-strategic assets or other means. The issuance of additional equity securities could have a dilutive
effect on the value of our common shares, and may not be possible on terms acceptable to us given the current volatility in the
financial markets. The issuance of additional debt would require that a portion of our cash flow from operations be used for the
payment of interest on our debt, thereby reducing our ability to use our cash flow to fund working capital, capital expenditures,
acquisitions,
Table of Contents
44
dividends and general corporate requirements, which could place us at a competitive disadvantage relative to other competitors.
Our cash flow from operations and access to capital is subject to a number of variables, including:
•
•
•
•
•
our estimated proved reserves;
the level of oil and natural gas we are able to produce from existing wells;
our ability to extract NGLs from the natural gas we produce;
the prices at which oil, NGLs and natural gas are sold; and
our ability to acquire, locate and produce new reserves.
If our revenues decrease as a result of lower oil or natural gas prices, operating difficulties or declines in reserves, our ability to
obtain  the  capital  necessary  to  undertake  or  complete  future  exploration  and  development  programs  and  to  pursue  other
opportunities may be limited, which could result in a curtailment of our operations relating to exploration and development of our
prospects, which in turn could result in a decline in our oil and natural gas reserves.
We depend on our key personnel and the loss of any of these individuals could have a material adverse effect on our
operations.
We believe that the success of our business strategy and our ability to operate profitably depend on the continued employment of
M. Jay Allison, our Chief Executive Officer, and Roland O. Burns, our President and Chief Financial Officer, and a limited number of
other senior management personnel. Loss of the services of Mr. Allison, Mr. Burns or any of those other individuals could have a
material adverse effect on our operations.
Our insurance coverage may not be sufficient or may not be available to cover some liabilities or losses that we may incur.
If we suffer a significant accident or other loss, our insurance coverage will be net of our deductibles and may not be sufficient to
pay the full current market value or current replacement value of our lost investment, which could result in a material adverse impact
on our operations and financial condition. Our insurance does not protect us against all operational risks. We do not carry business
interruption insurance. For some risks, we may not obtain insurance if we believe the cost of available insurance is excessive
relative to the risks presented. Because third party drilling contractors are used to drill our wells, we may not realize the full benefit
of workers’ compensation laws in dealing with their employees. In addition, some risks, including pollution and environmental risks,
generally are not fully insurable.
Provisions of our restated articles of incorporation, amended and restated bylaws, Nevada law and our rights plan will
make it more difficult to effect a change in control of us, which could adversely affect the price of our common stock.
Nevada corporate law and our restated articles of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws contain provisions that could
delay, defer or prevent a change in control of us. These provisions include:
•
•
allowing for authorized but unissued shares of common and preferred stock;
requiring  special  stockholder  meetings  to  be  called  only  by  our  chairman  of  the  board,  our  chief  executive  officer,  a
requiring  special  stockholder  meetings  to  be  called  only  by  our  chairman  of  the  board,  our  chief  executive  officer,  a
majority of the board, a majority of our executive committee or the holders of at a majority of our outstanding stock;
•
requiring removal of directors by a supermajority stockholder vote;
Table of Contents
45
•
•
prohibiting cumulative voting in the election of directors; and
Nevada control share laws that may limit voting rights in shares representing a controlling interest in us.
These provisions could make an acquisition of us by means of a tender offer or proxy contest or removal of our incumbent directors
more difficult. As a result, these provisions could make it more difficult for a third party to acquire us, even if doing so would benefit
our stockholders, which may limit the price that investors are willing to pay in the future for shares of our common stock.
We adopted a rights plan in October 2015 to preserve our accumulated net operating losses. While this rights plan is intended to
preserve our tax net operating losses, it effectively deters current and potential future purchases of our common stock above 4.9%
of the total outstanding shares. This rights plan could make it more difficult for a third party to acquire us, even if doing so would
benefit our stockholders, which may limit the price that investors are willing to pay in the future for shares of our common stock.
We have received a notice of non-compliance with continued listing standards from the New York Stock Exchange (the
“NYSE”) for our common stock. If we are unable to avoid the delisting of our common stock from the NYSE, it could have
a substantial effect on the trading price and liquidity of our common stock.
On March 24, 2016, we received a notification from the NYSE informing us that we were no longer in compliance with the NYSE’s
continued listing standards for our common stock because the average closing price of our common stock and our average market
capitalization have fallen below the NYSE’s requirements. The NYSE’s continued listing standards require that (i) the average
closing  price  of  a  listed  company’s  common  stock  be  at  least  $1.00  per  share  and  (ii)  a  listed  company’s  equity  market
capitalization be at least $50 million, in each case over a consecutive 30 trading-day period. As of July 29, 2016, the average
closing price of our common stock over the preceding 30 trading-day period was $0.84 per share (prior to the reverse stock split)
and our average equity market capitalization over the same period was $52.5 million.
We  have  submitted  and  the  NYSE  has  accepted  a  business  plan  to  regain  compliance  with  the  NYSE’s  continued  listing
standards.  We  may  regain  compliance  with  the  NYSE’s  stock  price  standard  at  any  time  during  a  six-month  cure  period
commencing on receipt of the NYSE notification if our common stock has a closing stock price of at least $1.00 and an average
closing stock price of at least $1.00 over the 30 trading-day period ending on the last trading day of that month or the last trading
day of the cure period. We must regain compliance with respect to our market capitalization within eighteen months of receipt of the
NYSE notification. Failure to regain compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing standards within the applicable time periods will
result in the commencement of suspension and delisting procedures. To address the minimum stock price requirement, on July 20,
2016, we announced a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of our common stock, which became effective on July 29, 2016.
The NYSE notification did not affect our business operations or our SEC reporting requirements and did not conflict with or cause
an event of default under any of our material debt or other agreements. However, if our common stock ultimately were to be delisted
for any reason, it could negatively impact us by (i) reducing the liquidity and market price of our common stock; (ii) reducing the
number of investors willing to hold or acquire our common stock, which could negatively impact our ability to raise equity financing;
(iii)  limiting  our  ability  to  use  a  registration  statement  to  offer  and  sell  freely  tradable  securities,  thereby  preventing  us  from
accessing the public capital markets; and (iv) impairing our ability to provide equity incentives to our employees.
Table of Contents
46
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will not receive any cash proceeds from the Exchange Offer. In consideration for the exchange consideration, we will receive
the old notes. Old notes acquired by us pursuant to the Exchange Offer will be cancelled upon receipt thereof.
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
The following table sets forth our ratios of earnings to fixed charges on a consolidated basis for the periods shown. You should read
these ratios in connection with our consolidated financial statements, including the notes to those statements.
Ratio of earnings to fixed
charges
Coverage deficiency (in
millions)
2011
Year Ended December 31,
2012
2013     2014
2015
Six Months Ended June 30,
2016
2015
—          —          —          —
—
—
—
$  (61.2)   $  (165.1)   $  (165.6)   $  (92.0)   $  (1,202.4)   $
(328.8)    $
(47.2)
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK, OLD NOTES AND DIVIDEND POLICY
Our common stock is listed for trading on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CRK”. The following table sets forth, on
a per share basis for the periods indicated, the high and low sales prices by calendar quarter for the periods indicated as reported
by the New York Stock Exchange. All amounts below have been adjusted to give effect to the one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock split
which became effective on July 29, 2016.
2014 –
2015 –
2016 –
First Quarter
  Second Quarter
  Third Quarter
  Fourth Quarter
First Quarter
  Second Quarter
  Third Quarter
  Fourth Quarter
First Quarter
  Second Quarter
  Third Quarter (through July 29, 2016)
Low
High
$            115.75     $
   $
   $
   $
81.10  
145.75     $          112.10  
91.50  
147.45     $
94.00     $
25.05
$
   $
   $
   $
$
   $
   $
36.10     $
27.20     $
20.35     $
16.90     $
9.40     $
5.45     $
4.60     $
16.15  
16.45  
4.95  
8.00
3.20  
2.75  
3.45
As of July 29, 2016, we had approximately 12,504,562 shares of common stock outstanding after giving effect to the one-for-five
(1:5)  reverse  stock  split  which  became  effective  on  July  29,  2016  (subject  to  minor  variations  resulting  from  the  treatment  of
fractional shares). Such shares were held by 194 holders of record and approximately 11,600 beneficial owners who maintain their
shares in “street name” accounts.
We paid a quarterly cash dividend on our common stock in 2014, resulting in total dividends paid of $23.8 million. On February 13,
2015, we announced that the dividend was being suspended until oil and natural gas prices improve. Any future determination as
to the payment of dividends will depend upon the results of our operations, capital requirements, our financial condition and such
other factors as our board of directors may deem relevant.
The old notes are not listed on any national or regional securities exchange or authorized to be quoted in any inter-dealer quotation
system  of  any  national  securities  association.  Reliable  pricing  information  for  the  old  notes  may  not  always  be  available.  The
Company believes trading in the old notes has been limited and sporadic. Quotations for securities that are not widely traded, such
as the old notes, may differ from actual trading prices
Table of Contents
47
and should be viewed as approximations. To the extent such information is available, holders of old notes are urged to contact their
brokers  or  financial  advisors  or  call  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent  at  the  number  set  forth  on  the  back  cover  of  this
prospectus with respect to current information regarding the trading price of the old notes.
To the extent that the old notes are tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer, such old notes will cease to be outstanding. A
debt security with a smaller outstanding principal amount available for trading (a smaller “float”) may command a lower price and
trade  with  greater  volatility  than  would  a  comparable  debt  security  with  a  greater  float.  Consequently,  any  old  notes  that  the
Company  acquires  in  the  Exchange  Offer  will  reduce  the  float  and  may  negatively  impact  the  liquidity,  market  value  and  price
volatility of the old notes that remain outstanding following the Exchange Offer.
We cannot assure you that a trading market will exist for the old notes following the Exchange Offer. The extent of the market for the
old notes following the consummation of the Exchange Offer will depend upon, among other things, the remaining outstanding
principal  amount  of  the  old  notes  at  such  time,  the  number  of  holders  of  old  notes  remaining  at  such  time  and  the  interest  in
maintaining a market in such old notes on the part of securities firms.
Table of Contents
48
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our cash and cash equivalents and our capitalization as of June 30, 2016 on:
•
•
an a historical basis; and
on  a  pro  forma  basis  to  give  effect  to  the  exchange  by  us  of  exchange  consideration  for  our  outstanding  old  notes,
assuming the tender and acceptance of all of the outstanding old notes and other transactions related to the Exchange
Offer.
This  information  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  sections  entitled  “Selected  Historical  Consolidated  Financial  Data,”
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” elsewhere in this prospectus and our
historical consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in this prospectus.
Cash and Cash equivalents
Long-term debt:
Principal:
Revolving credit facility(1)
10% senior secured notes due 2020
7 3⁄4% senior notes due 2019
9 1⁄2% senior notes due 2020
Senior secured toggle notes due 2020
7 3⁄4% convertible secured PIK notes due 2019
9 1⁄2% convertible secured PIK notes due 2020
Premiums (discounts) on notes:
7 3⁄4% senior notes due 2019
9 1⁄2% senior notes due 2020
Senior secured toggle notes due 2020(2)
7 3⁄4% convertible secured PIK notes due 2019(2)
9 1⁄2% convertible secured PIK notes due 2020(2)
Deferred financing costs
Total long-term debt
Stockholders’ Deficit:
Common stock(3)
Additional paid in capital(3)
Stock warrants(2)
Accumulated deficit
Total stockholders’ deficit
Total capitalization
As of June 30, 2016
(In thousands)
67,412          $
-      
-      
-      
-      
        700,000      
288,516      
174,607
Historical             As Adjusted     
  
 
58,212      
   $
     
 
  
  
   $
            700,000        
288,516        
   
174,607        
   
-        
   
   
-        
-        
   
 
  
   
2,325        
(4,008)       
   
-        
   
   
-        
   
-        
(16,250)       
   
     
    
1,145,190        
   
     
    
 
  
   
6,253        
518,905
-      
-      
(4,313)     
7,825      
(408)     
(16,250)     
 
1,149,977
6,253      
518,905
-          $
-        
(732,425)       
    
(207,267)
4,313      
(732,425)     
 
(202,954)
Total capitalization
$
937,923          $
947,023
As of June 30, 2016, there was no outstanding balance under our revolving credit facility.
Reflects the impact of the Exchange Offer with amounts of the new notes being adjusted for the estimated value of the stock
warrants issued in connection with the senior secured toggle notes due 2020 and the estimated value of the mandatory
conversion feature in connection with the 7 3⁄4% convertible secured PIK notes due 2019 and 9 1⁄2% convertible secured PIK
notes due 2020, assuming the approval of our stockholders of the authorized share proposal at a special meeting of the
stockholders.
Common stock and additional paid-in capital has been adjusted to reflect the one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock split of our
common stock which became effective on July 29, 2016.
(1)
(2)
(3)
49
Table of Contents
SELECTED HISTORICAL CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA
The  following  tables  present  selected  historical  financial  data  as  of  and  for  the  periods  indicated.  The  financial  results  are  not
necessarily indicative of our future operations or future financial results. In the opinion of management, such information contains all
adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring accruals, necessary for a fair presentation of the results of such periods. The data
presented below should be read in conjunction with “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” contained elsewhere in this prospectus and our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained in
the exhibits to the registration statement to which this prospectus relates. All share and per share data presented below has been
adjusted to give effect to the Company’s one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock split which became effective on July 29, 2016, unless the
context otherwise requires.
Statement of Operations Data:
Revenues:
Natural gas sales
Oil sales
Total oil and gas sales
Gain on sales and exchanges of
oil and gas properties
Total revenues
Operating expenses:
Production taxes
Gathering and transportation
Lease operating(1)
Exploration
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
General and administrative, net
Impairment of oil and gas
properties
Loss on sales of oil and gas
properties
Total operating expenses
Operating loss
Other income (expenses):
Gain on sale of marketable
2013
2014
2015
2011
2012
Year Ended December 31,
$    354,123    $    203,651    $    188,453    $    165,461    $     109,753    $      46,757    $      50,874  
26,004  
   
     
 
76,878
(In thousands, except per share data)
97,077     
       
143,834
181,163     
       
384,814
80,244     
       
434,367
231,837     
       
420,290
389,770     
       
555,231
142,669     
       
252,422
June 30,
2015
2016
Six Months Ended
—     
       
434,367     
 
3,670     
28,491     
46,552     
10,148
24,271     
       
409,085     
 
11,727     
26,265     
51,248     
61,449
—     
       
420,290     
 
14,524     
17,245     
52,844     
33,423
—     
       
555,231     
 
23,797     
12,897     
60,283     
19,403
—     
       
252,422     
 
10,286     
14,298     
64,502     
70,694
—     
       
143,834     
 
6,781     
6,113     
32,963     
65,269
—  
 
76,878
2,513  
8,390  
25,948  
7,753
290,776
343,858
337,134
378,275
321,323
182,462
74,865
35,172
33,798
34,767
32,379
23,541
15,142
11,238
60,817
25,368
652
60,268
801,347
2,387
24,460
57     
       
475,683     
       
(41,316)
—     
       
553,713     
       
(144,628)
2,033     
       
492,622     
       
(72,332)
—
112,085     
       
587,302      1,418,076     
       
(32,071)     (1,165,654)
111,830     
       
422,947     
       
(279,113)
907  
 
156,074  
 
(79,196)
35,118
26,621
7,877
—
—
—
—
—
21,256
(8,388)
8,175
2,676
627
674
(1,096)    
790     
(41,592)    
       
(6,780)
—     
944     
(57,906)    
       
(9,085)
(17,854)    
1,059     
(73,242)    
       
(90,548)
—     
727     
(58,631)    
       
(49,729)
78,741     
1,275     
(118,592)    
       
(35,900)
4,532     
643     
(54,561)    
       
(48,759)
89,576  
595  
(58,826) 
 
32,019
(48,096)    
14,624     
       
(33,472)
(153,713)    
50,634     
       
(103,079)
(162,880)    
56,157     
       
(106,723)
(81,800)     (1,201,554)    
24,689     
154,445     
       
       
(57,111)     (1,047,109)
(327,872)    
114,302     
       
(213,570)
(47,177) 
(4,548) 
 
(51,725)
—
3,019     
       
(33,472)   $ (100,060)   $
147,752     
       
41,029    $
—
—     
       
(57,111)   $(1,047,109)   $ (213,570)   $
—
—  
 
(51,725)
(3.64)   $
(11.10)   $
(11.09)   $
(6.20)   $
(113.53)   $
(23.18)   $
(4.82)
—
(3.64)   $
       
—    $
0.32
(10.78)   $
       
—    $
15.36
4.27    $
       
1.88    $
—
(6.20)   $
       
2.50    $
—
(113.53)   $
       
—    $
—
(23.18)    
       
—    $
—
(4.82) 
 
—
$
$
     
  $
9,199
9,284
9,311
9,309
9,223
9,215
10,729
50
Gain on sale of marketable
securities
Gain (loss) from derivative
financial instruments
Net gain (loss) on
extinguishment of debt
Other income
Interest expense
Total other income (expenses)
Loss from continuing operations
before income taxes
Benefit from income taxes
Loss from continuing operations    
Income from discontinued
operations,
net of income taxes
Net income (loss)
Basic and diluted net income
(loss) per share:
Loss from continuing operations   $
Income from discontinued
operations
Net Income (loss)
Dividends per common share
Basic and diluted weighted
average shares outstanding
(1) Includes ad valorem taxes.
Table of Contents
Balance Sheet Data:
2011
2012
As of December 31,
2013
2014
(In thousands)
2015
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2015
2016
$
8,460    $
4,471    $
2,967    $
2,071    $
134,006    $
130,214    $
67,412
2,155,568          1,958,687          2,066,735          2,198,169          1,038,420          1,911,807
915,350  
2,181,640          1,047,226  
1,145,190  
1,355,816
1,195,850     
1,249,330
2,554,930     
1,309,416
2,632,009     
1,186,319
2,264,546     
1,060,654
2,130,112     
789,414
1,037,625
933,534
952,005
870,272
(171,258)
658,255
(207,267)
Cash and cash
equivalents
Property and
equipment, net
Total assets(1)
Total debt(1)
Stockholders’
equity (deficit)
Restated to reclassify debt issuance costs from total assets to total debt in the amount of $10,589, $14,967, $9,286 and $9,791
(1)
Restated to reclassify debt issuance costs from total assets to total debt in the amount of $10,589, $14,967, $9,286 and $9,791
as of December 31, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014, respectively and $23,618 for the six-months ended June 30, 2015.
Cash Flow Data:
Cash flows provided by (used
for)
operating activities from
continuing
operations
Cash flows used for investing
activities
from continuing operations
Cash flows provided by (used
for)
financing activities from
continuing
operations
Cash flows provided by (used
for)
operating activities of
discontinued
operations
Cash flows provided by (used
for)
investing activities of
discontinued
operations
Summary Operating Data:
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Year Ended December 31,
(In thousands)
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2015
2016
$    275,433    $    219,721    $    268,994    $    400,984    $      30,086      24,238     (31,204)
(597,809)
(205,393)
(408,678)
(634,787)
(161,725)    (197,263)    (31,587)
673,381
117,502
(576,140)
232,907
263,574      301,168      (3,803)
—
42,508
(7,715)
—
—
—
—
(344,277)
(178,327)
722,035
—
—
—
—
The following table sets forth certain of our summary operating data for the periods indicated:
Oil & Gas Sales (in thousands):
Natural gas sales
Oil sales
Total oil and gas sales
Net Production Data:
Natural gas (MMcf)
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas equivalent (MMcfe)
Average Sales Price:
Natural gas ($/Mcf)
Six Months Ended
2013
2014
2015
2011
2012
June 30,
2015
2016
Year Ended December 31,
80,244
181,163
231,837
389,770
46,757    $ 50,874  
  $ 354,123    $ 203,651    $ 188,453    $ 165,461    $ 109,753    $
26,004  
97,077     
142,669     
   
     
       
 
       
  $    434,367    $    384,814    $    420,290    $    555,231    $    252,422    $    143,834    $    76,878  
     
 
 
   
   
   
 
  $
19,273     
1,960     
31,034
39,768     
4,313     
65,645
90,593     
838     
95,622
81,762     
1,792     
92,515
55,694     
2,314     
69,577
47,676     
3,089     
66,207
27,344  
772  
31,974
3.91    $
2.49    $
3.38    $
4.16    $
2.30    $
2.43    $
1.86
Oil ($/Bbl)
  $
Average equivalent price ($/Mcfe)   $
Expenses ($ per Mcfe):
Production taxes
Gathering and transportation
Lease operating(1)
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization(2)
$
  $
  $
$
95.73    $
4.54    $
101.09    $
4.16    $
100.20    $
6.04    $
0.04    $
0.30    $
0.48    $
0.13    $
0.28    $
0.55    $
0.21    $
0.25    $
0.76    $
90.37    $
8.46    $
0.36    $
0.20    $
0.92    $
46.19    $
3.81    $
0.16    $
0.22    $
0.97    $
49.53    $
4.63    $
33.69  
2.40
0.22    $
0.20    $
1.06    $
0.08  
0.26  
0.81
3.03    $
3.76    $
4.83    $
5.74    $
4.84    $
5.86    $
2.32
(1)
(2)
Includes ad valorem taxes.
Represents depreciation, depletion and amortization of oil and gas properties only.
51
Table of Contents
Set forth below are unaudited quarterly financial data (in thousands, except per share amounts):
SELECTED QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA
Total oil and gas sales
Operating loss
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per share:
Basic and diluted
Total oil and gas sales
Operating loss
Net loss
Loss per share:
Basic and diluted
Total oil and gas sales
Operating income (loss)
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per share:
Basic and diluted
2016
First
Second
Quarter
Quarter
(In thousands, except per
share
data)
$        36,163    $          40,715  
(22,706) 
   $
   $
4,852  
  
   $
(56,490)   $
(56,577)   $
(5.71)   $
0.41
First
2015
Second
Quarter
Third
Quarter
Fourth
Quarter
(In thousands, except per share data)
Quarter
$         66,522    $         77,312    $
(182,185)   $
  $
  $
(135,068)   $
  
  $
(96,928)   $
(78,502)   $
(14.64)   $
(8.53)   $
61,360    $         47,228  
(290,515) 
(288,543)
(596,026)   $
(544,996)   $
(59.05)   $
(31.26)
First
2014
Fourth
Quarter
Second
Quarter
Third
Quarter
Quarter
(In thousands, except per share data)
$     141,909   $        155,723   $        144,983    $        112,616  
  $
(80,291) 
  $
(58,271) 
  
  $
20,228   $
1,165   $
27,729   $
1,898   $
263    $
(1,903)   $
(0.22)   $
0.11   $
0.19   $
(6.31)
Basic and diluted per share amounts are the same for each of the quarters and for the years ended where a net loss was reported.
All share and per share data presented above has been adjusted to give effect to the Company’s one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock
split which became effective on July 29, 2016.
Table of Contents
52
SUMMARY OIL AND NATURAL GAS RESERVES
The following table summarizes the estimates of our net proved oil and natural gas reserves relating to our continuing operations as
of the dates indicated and the present value attributable to these reserves at such dates based on reserve reports prepared by Lee
Keeling  and  Associates,  Inc.  For  additional  information  relating  to  our  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves,  see  “Risk  Factors—Risks
Related to Our Business—Our reserve estimates depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate. Any material
inaccuracies  in  our  reserve  estimates  or  underlying  assumptions  will  materially  affect  the  quantities  and  present  value  of  our
reserves” and “Business and Properties,” contained in this prospectus.
PROVED RESERVES:
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Oil (Mbbls)
Total (MMcfe)
PROVED DEVELOPED RESERVES:
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Oil (Mbbls)
Total (MMcfe)
2013
2015
As of December 31,
2014
452,653                 495,266                     569,596      
9,229      
   
   
624,971
20,854         
620,388         
 
324,598         
16,247         
422,077
21,976     
584,511     
 
344,278     
13,914     
427,764
311,130      
9,229      
366,505
53
Table of Contents
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our selected historical consolidated financial data and
our  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  notes  to  those  financial  statements  included  elsewhere  in  this
prospectus. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual
results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to
such  differences  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  those  discussed  below  and  elsewhere  in  this  prospectus,  particularly  in  “Risk
Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” The following discussion should be read in conjunction
with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in this prospectus and in our annual report filed on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2015, as adjusted by our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2016, and our quarterly
report filed on Form 10-Q for the three months ended June 30, 2016. All share and per share data presented below has been
restated  to  give  effect  to  our  one-for-five  (1:5)  reverse  stock  split  that  became  effective  on  July  29,  2016,  unless  the  context
otherwise requires.
Overview
We are an independent energy company engaged in the acquisition, exploration, development and production of oil and natural
gas in the United States. At December 31, 2015 we owned interests in 1,575 producing oil and natural gas wells (859.7 net to us)
and  we  operated  952  of  these  wells.  In  managing  our  business,  we  are  concerned  primarily  with  maximizing  return  on  our
stockholders’ equity. To accomplish this goal, we focus on profitably increasing our oil and natural gas reserves and production.
In 2011, we acquired an undeveloped acreage position and some producing oil wells in Gaines and Reeves Counties in West
Texas. We operated these properties, which we designated as our West Texas region, through May 2013 when we sold all of these
properties  for  total  proceeds  of  $823.1  million.  Accordingly,  we  are  presenting  our  West  Texas  operations  as  discontinued
operations  in  our  financial  statements  for  all  periods  presented.  Unless  indicated  otherwise,  the  amounts  in  the  accompanying
tables and discussion relate to our continuing operations.
We use the successful efforts method of accounting, which allows only for the capitalization of costs associated with developing
proven oil and natural gas properties as well as exploration costs associated with successful exploration activities. Accordingly, our
exploration costs consist of costs we incur to acquire and reprocess 3-D seismic data, impairments of our unevaluated leasehold
where we were not successful in discovering reserves and the costs of unsuccessful exploratory wells that we drill.
We generally sell our oil and natural gas at current market prices at the point our wells connect to third party purchaser pipelines or
terminals. We have entered into certain transportation and treating agreements with midstream and pipeline companies to transport
a substantial portion of our natural gas production in North Louisiana to long-haul gas pipelines. We market our products several
different ways depending upon a number of factors, including the availability of purchasers for the product, the availability and cost
of pipelines near our wells, market prices, pipeline constraints and operational flexibility. Accordingly, our revenues are heavily
dependent upon the prices of, and demand for, oil and natural gas. Oil and natural gas prices have historically been volatile and are
likely to remain volatile in the future. Oil and natural gas prices have declined substantially since June 2014 and have continued to
decline into 2016.
Our  operating  costs  are  generally  comprised  of  several  components,  including  costs  of  field  personnel,  insurance,  repair  and
maintenance costs, production supplies, fuel used in operations, transportation costs, workover expenses and state production and
ad valorem taxes.
Like  all  oil  and  natural  gas  exploration  and  production  companies,  we  face  the  constant  challenge  of  replacing  our  reserves.
Although in the past we have offset the effect of declining production rates from existing properties
Table of Contents
54
through successful acquisition and drilling efforts, there can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to offset production
declines or maintain production at current rates through future acquisitions or drilling activity. Our future growth will depend on our
ability to continue to add new reserves in excess of production.
Our operations and facilities are subject to extensive federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to the exploration for, and
the  development,  production  and  transportation  of,  oil  and  natural  gas,  and  operating  safety.  Future  laws  or  regulations,  any
adverse changes in the interpretation of existing laws and regulations or our failure to comply with existing legal requirements may
have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Applicable environmental regulations require
us  to  remove  our  equipment  after  production  has  ceased,  to  plug  and  abandon  our  wells  and  to  remediate  any  environmental
damage our operations may have caused. The present value of the estimated future costs to plug and abandon our oil and gas
wells and to dismantle and remove our production facilities is included in our reserve for future abandonment costs, which was
$16.0 million as of June 30, 2016.
Prices for crude oil and natural gas have been highly volatile, and we are currently experiencing a period of extraordinarily low
prices primarily due to an oversupply of crude oil and natural gas. As prices remain depressed, we will continue to experience low
revenues  and  cash  flows.  We  expect  our  oil  production  to  remain  depressed  until  we  resume  drilling  on  these  properties.  We
expect our natural gas production to remain depressed to the extent that we do not offset this decline from production from the new
wells we plan to drill in 2016 and future periods. Depending upon future prices and our production volumes, our cash flows from our
operating activities may not be sufficient to fund our capital expenditures, and we will need to either continue to curtail drilling
activity or we may seek additional borrowings which would increase our interest expense.
We recognized significant impairments of our proved oil and gas properties in 2015. We may need to recognize further impairments
if oil and natural gas prices remain depressed, and as a result, the expected future cash flows from these properties becomes
insufficient to recover their carrying value. In addition, we may recognize additional impairments of our unevaluated oil and gas
properties should we determine that we no longer intend to retain these properties for future oil and natural gas development.
Six Months Ended June 30, 2016 Compared to Six Months Ended June 30, 2015
Results of Operations
Revenues –
In the first six months of 2016, our oil and natural gas sales decreased by $66.9 million (47%) to $76.9 million from $143.8 million in
the first six months of 2015. Natural gas sales in the first six months of 2016 increased by $4.1 million (9%) from 2015 while oil
sales decreased by $71.1 million (73%) from 2015. Our natural gas production increased by 42% from 2015 while our realized
natural gas price decreased by 23%. The increase in our natural gas production has been driven by our successful natural gas
drilling program that we commenced in 2015. The decrease in oil sales is attributable to the 61% decline in our production and the
32% decrease in realized oil prices. The decline in oil production is attributable to the sale of our East Texas Eagle Ford shale
properties in or near Burleson, Texas in 2015 and the lack of drilling activity in our South Texas Eagle Ford shale properties in
South Texas.
Costs and Expenses –
Production taxes of $2.5 million for the first six months of 2016 decreased $4.3 million as compared with production taxes of $6.8
million for the first six months of 2015. These decreases are mainly related to our lower oil and gas sales in 2016 as well as state
exemptions on our Haynesville shale wells drilled in 2015 and 2016.
Gathering and transportation costs for the first six months of 2016 increased $2.3 million to $8.4 million as compared to $6.1 million
for  the  first  six  months  of  2015.  Our  gathering  and  transportation  costs  have  increased  due  to  the  volume  growth  from  our
Haynesville shale drilling program.
Table of Contents
55
Our  lease  operating  expense  for  the  first  six  months  of  2016  of  $25.9  million  decreased  $7.1  million  or  21%  from  our  lease
operating expense of $33.0 million for the first six months of 2015. This decrease primarily reflects lower costs associated with our
declining oil production. Our lease operating expense of $0.81 per Mcfe produced for the six months ended June 30, 2016 was
$0.25 per Mcfe lower than the lease operating expense of $1.06 per Mcfe for the same period in 2015.
Exploration  costs  of  $7.8  million  in  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016  primarily  related  to  impairments  of  unevaluated
leases. Exploration costs of $65.3 million in the six months ended June 30, 2015 primarily include impairments of unevaluated
leases and rig termination fees.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) for the first six months of 2016 of $74.9 million decreased $107.6 million (59%)
from DD&A expense of $182.5 million for the six months ended June 30, 2015. For the first six months of 2016, our per unit DD&A
rate of $2.32 decreased $3.54 (60%) from our DD&A rate of $5.86 for the first six months of 2015. The lower rates in 2016 reflect the
impairments we recognized in 2015 as well as the increase in production from the lower cost Haynesville shale properties.
General and administrative expenses, which are reported net of overhead reimbursements, decreased $3.9 million (26%) to $11.2
million for the first six months of 2016 from general and administrative expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2015 of $15.1
million. Included in general and administrative expense is stock-based compensation of $2.5 million and $4.0 million for the six
months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The lower general and administrative costs are attributable to a reduction in
personnel and related compensation costs in 2016.
We  assess  the  need  for  impairment  of  the  capitalized  costs  for  our  oil  and  gas  properties  on  a  property  basis.  We  recognized
impairment charges of $3.7 million and $2.4 million on our oil and gas properties during the six months ended June 30, 2016 and
June  30,  2015,  respectively,  primarily  due  to  the  decline  in  management’s  oil  and  natural  gas  price  outlook.  Also  included  in
impairments for the six months ended June 30, 2016 is an impairment of $20.8 million to reduce the carrying value of our South
Texas natural gas properties classified as assets held for sale to their net realizable value less costs to sell. The net loss on sales
and  exchange  of  oil  and  gas  properties  of  $0.9  million  for  the  first  six  months  of  2016  reflects  the  non-monetary  exchange  we
completed in January, 2016 and the sale of certain other oil and gas properties. The loss on sale of oil and gas properties of $111.8
million for the six months ended June 30, 2015 relates to our sale of our Burleson County, Texas oil properties.
Interest expense increased $4.2 million to $58.8 million for the first six months of 2016 from interest expense of $54.6 million in the
first six months of 2015. We did not capitalize any interest during the six months ended June 30, 2016 and we capitalized interest of
$0.9 million on our unevaluated properties during the six months ended June 30, 2015. The increase in interest expense for the six
months ended June 30, 2016 primarily relates to the issuance of $700.0 million of senior secured notes in March 2015, which was
partially offset by the lower interest from our debt reduction program.
We utilize oil and natural gas price swaps to manage our exposure to oil and natural gas prices and protect returns on investment
from our drilling activities. Gains related to our natural gas derivative financial instruments that covered a portion of our production
were $0.7 million for the six months ended June 30, 2016. We had no cash settlements for crude oil or natural gas swaps during the
six months ended June 30, 2015. The following table presents our natural gas prices before and after the effect of cash settlements
of our derivative financial instruments:
Average Realized Oil Price:
Natural gas, per Mcf
Cash settlements of derivative financial instruments, per Mcf
Price per Mcf, including cash settlements of derivative financial
instruments
56
Six Months Ended
2015
2016
June 30,
$            2.43    $            1.86  
0.08
—
$
2.43    $
1.94
Table of Contents
During the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, we recognized a net gain on extinguishment of debt of $89.6 million and
$4.5 million, respectively. We retired $87.5 million and $19.8 million of principal of the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes in the six
months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, respectively, as part of our debt reduction program.
Income taxes for the six months ended June 30, 2016 were a provision of $4.5 million as compared to a benefit of $114.3 million for
the six months ended June 30, 2015. Our effective tax rate was a provision of 9.6% for the first six months of 2016 as compared to a
benefit of 34.9% for the first six months of 2015. During the first quarter of 2016, Louisiana changed its tax laws with respect to the
utilization of net operating losses. As a result of this tax law change we increased our deferred income tax liability related to state
income  taxes  by  $4.5  million.  No  benefit  for  income  taxes  was  reflected  on  the  loss  in  the  first  six  months  of  2016  due  to  the
increase to our valuation allowances related to federal and certain state net operating losses. The effective tax rate for the first six
months of 2015 differed slightly from the expected rate of 35% primarily because of state taxes.
We reported a net loss of $51.7 million, or $4.82 per share, for the six months ended June 30, 2016, as compared to a net loss of
$213.6 million, or $23.18 per share, for the six months ended June 30, 2015. The net loss in the six months ended June 30, 2016
was primarily due to the oil and gas property impairment charges recognized, lower oil and natural gas prices and higher interest
expense.
Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2014
Results of Operations
Revenues –
Our oil and gas sales decreased $302.8 million (55%) in 2015 to $252.4 million from $555.2 million in 2014. Oil sales decreased by
$247.1 million (63%) from 2014 while our natural gas sales decreased by $55.7 million (34%) from 2014. The decrease in oil sales
was  attributable  to  the  28%  decline  in  oil  production  and  a  49%  decrease  in  our  realized  oil  price  in  2015.  Our  natural  gas
production  increased  by  20%  from  2014  while  our  realized  natural  gas  price  decreased  by  45%.  Our  drilling  activity  in  the
Haynesville and Bossier shale fields in East Texas and North Louisiana generated the natural gas production growth.
Costs and Expenses –
Production taxes decreased $13.5 million or 57% to $10.3 million in 2015 from $23.8 million in 2014. The decrease in 2015 is due
to  the  63%  decline  in  our  oil  sales  during  the  year.  Much  of  our  natural  gas  sales  in  2014  and  2015  qualified  for  temporary
exemption from state production taxes.
Gathering and transportation costs in 2015 increased $1.4 million (11%) to $14.3 million as compared to $12.9 million in 2014 due
to the 20% increase in natural gas we produced during 2015. Gathering and transportation per Mcf produced improved from 2014
as the additional volumes produced in the Haynesville shale properties allowed us to lower our unit transportation costs.
Our  lease  operating  expenses,  including  ad  valorem  taxes,  of  $64.5  million  in  2015  were  $4.2  million  or  7%  higher  than  our
operating expenses of $60.3 million in 2014. Our lease operating expense per Mcfe produced rose by 6% to $0.97 per Mcfe in 2015
as compared to $0.92 per Mcfe in 2014. The increase in operating costs mainly reflects the higher lifting costs associated with our
oil wells including additional costs incurred related to adding artificial lift to many of our producing oil wells.
We  incurred  $70.7  million  in  exploration  expense  in  2015  as  compared  to  $19.4  million  in  2014.  Exploration  expense  in  2015
consisted  of  $69.0  million  in  impairments  of  unevaluated  leasehold  costs  and  $1.7  million  in  rig  termination  fees.  Our  2014
exploration  cost  consisted  of  $11.8  million  in  dry  hole  costs,  $6.7  million  in  rig  termination  fees,  $0.5  million  of  impairments  of
unevaluated leasehold costs and $0.4 million for the acquisition of seismic data.
Table of Contents
57
Depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization  expense  (“DD&A”)  of  $321.3  million  decreased  by  $57.0  million  (15%)  from  DD&A  of
$378.3 million in 2014. Our DD&A rate per Mcfe produced averaged $4.84 in 2015 as compared to $5.74 for 2014. The decrease in
DD&A expense and the DD&A rate primarily resulted from higher production from our lower cost natural gas properties.
General and administrative expense of $23.5 million for 2015 was 27% lower than general and administrative expense of $32.4
million for 2014 primarily due to lower employee compensation in 2015 including stock based compensation which decreased to
$8.1 million in 2015 as compared to $10.7 million in 2014.
We assess the need for impairment of the capitalized costs for our oil and gas properties on a property basis. During 2015, with the
substantial decline in management’s estimates of future oil and natural gas prices, we recognized an impairment charge of $801.3
million on our oil and gas properties. During 2014 we recognized an impairment charge of $60.3 million.
We utilized oil and natural gas price swaps to manage our exposure to commodity prices and protect returns on investment from our
drilling activities. We had gains of $2.7 million and $8.2 million on derivative financial instruments in 2015 and 2014, respectively.
Our total net cash received from derivative financial instruments was $1.2 million and $9.1 million in 2015 and 2014, respectively.
The following tables present our oil and natural gas prices before and after the effect of cash settlements of our derivative financial
instruments:
Average Realized Natural Gas Price:
Natural gas, per Mcf
Cash settlements on derivative financial instruments, per Mcf
Price per Mcf, including cash settlements on derivative financial instruments
2014
$4.16    
 
—    
  
    
$4.16
2015
$2.30  
 
0.03  
  
 
$2.33
Average Realized Oil Price:
Oil, per barrel
Cash settlements on derivative financial instruments, per barrel
Price per barrel, including cash settlements on derivative financial instruments
2014
$90.37    
2.13    
 
  
    
       $92.50
2015
$46.19  
—  
 
  
 
       $46.19
Interest expense increased $60.0 million (102%) to $118.6 million in 2015 from interest expense of $58.6 million in 2014. The
increase was primarily related to the refinancing of our bank credit facility with 10% secured senior notes in March 2015 and a
reduction in the interest we capitalized in 2015. We issued $700.0 million of senior secured notes in March 2015. We capitalized
interest of $0.9 million and $10.2 million in 2015 and 2014, respectively.
The benefit from income taxes from continuing operations increased in 2015 to $154.4 million from $24.7 million in 2014 due to the
higher net loss in 2015. Our effective tax rate of 12.9% in 2015 differed from the federal income tax rate of 35% primarily due to a
valuation allowance on deferred tax assets of $282.9 million.
We reported a loss of $1.0 billion or $113.53 per share for 2015 as compared to a loss of $57.1 million or $6.20 per share for 2014.
The loss in 2015 was primarily due to the oil and gas property impairment charges recognized, the loss on sale of oil and gas
properties,  lower  oil  and  natural  gas  prices,  higher  exploration  costs  and  higher  interest  expense.  The  net  loss  in  2014  was
primarily due to impairments of proved and unproved properties, and other exploration costs.
Table of Contents
Revenues –
58
Year Ended December 31, 2014 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2013
Our oil and gas sales increased $134.9 million (32%) in 2014 to $555.2 million from $420.3 million in 2013. Oil sales in 2014
increased  by  $157.9  million  (68%)  from  2013  while  our  natural  gas  sales  decreased  by  $23.0  million  (12%)  from  2013.  The
increase in oil sales was attributable to the 86% growth in oil production offset by a 10% decrease in our realized oil prices in
2014.  Our  drilling  activity  in  the  Eagleville  and  Giddings  fields  in  South  Texas  principally  generated  the  growth  in  the  oil
production. With limited drilling in our natural gas properties in 2014, our natural gas production fell by 29% from 2013 while our
realized natural gas prices increased by 23%.
Costs and Expenses –
Production taxes increased $9.3 million or 64% to $23.8 million in 2014 from $14.5 million in 2013. The increase in 2014 was due
to  the  68%  growth  in  our  oil  sales  during  the  year.  Much  of  our  natural  gas  sales  in  2013  and  2014  qualified  for  a  temporary
exemption from state production taxes.
Gathering and transportation costs in 2014 decreased $4.3 million (25%) to $12.9 million as compared to $17.2 million in 2013 due
to the lower natural gas volumes that we produced in North Louisiana in 2014.
Our  lease  operating  expenses,  including  ad  valorem  taxes,  of  $60.3  million  in  2014  were  $7.5  million  or  14%  higher  than  our
operating expenses of $52.8 million in 2013. Our lease operating expense per Mcfe produced increased by 21% to $0.92 per Mcfe
in 2014 as compared to $0.76 per Mcfe in 2013. The increase in operating costs mainly reflects our growing oil production. Our oil
wells are typically more costly to operate on a per Mcfe basis than our natural gas wells. The increase in our per unit costs is also
partially  attributable  to  the  lower  production  on  a  Mcfe  basis.  Oil  production  comprised  39%  of  our  total  production  in  2014  as
compared to 20% in 2013.
We  incurred  $19.4  million  in  exploration  expense  in  2014  as  compared  to  $33.4  million  in  2013.  Exploration  expense  in  2014
consisted  of  $11.8  million  in  dry  hole  costs,  $6.7  million  in  rig  termination  fees,  $0.5  million  of  impairments  of  unevaluated
leasehold  costs  and  $0.4  million  for  the  acquisition  of  seismic  data.  Our  2013  exploration  cost  consisted  of  $33.0  million  of
impairments of unevaluated leasehold costs and $0.4 million for the acquisition of seismic data.
DD&A of $378.3 million increased by $41.2 million (12%) from DD&A of $337.1 million in 2013. Our DD&A rate per Mcfe produced
averaged $5.74 in 2014 as compared to $4.83 for 2013. The increase in DD&A primarily resulted from the increased development
costs per Mcfe associated with the oil wells drilled in 2014 and 2013.
General and administrative expense of $32.4 million for 2014 was 7% lower than general and administrative expense of $34.8
million for 2013. The decrease is primarily related to stock-based compensation which decreased by $2.1 million to $10.7 million in
2014 as compared to $12.8 million in 2013.
We recorded impairments to our oil and gas properties of $60.3 million and $0.7 million in 2014 and 2013, respectively. These
impairments  relate  to  older,  conventional  oil  and  gas  properties  with  declining  production  and  limited  potential  for  future
investments.
We utilized oil price swaps to manage our exposure to oil prices and protect returns on investment from our drilling activities in
2013 and 2014. We had a gain of $8.2 million and a loss of $8.4 million on derivative financial instruments in 2014 and 2013,
respectively. Our total net cash received from derivative financial instruments was $9.1 million in 2014 and $2.3 million in 2013.
Table of Contents
59
The following table presents our crude oil equivalent prices before and after the effect of cash settlements of our derivative financial
instruments:
Average Realized Oil Price:
Oil, per barrel
Cash settlements on derivative financial instruments, per barrel
Price per barrel, including cash settlements on derivative financial instruments
2014
2013
$100.20            $90.37  
2.13  
   
   
 
          $101.19            $92.50
0.99
Interest  expense  decreased  $14.6  million  (20%)  to  $58.6  million  in  2014  from  interest  expense  of  $73.2  million  in  2013.  The
decrease was primarily related to lower interest expense due to the retirement in September 2013 of our 8 3⁄8% senior notes due in
2017. We capitalized interest of $10.2 million and $4.7 million in 2014 and 2013, respectively, which reduced interest expense. We
had interest expense allocated to discontinued operations of $8.4 million in 2013 of which $2.0 million was capitalized. Average
borrowings  under  our  bank  credit  facility  increased  to  $319.2  million  in  2014  as  compared  to  $201.5  million  for  2013  and  the
average interest rate on the outstanding borrowings under our bank credit facility of 2.0% in 2014 was lower than the interest rate of
2.6% in 2013. Interest expense related to our outstanding senior notes decreased by 21% due to the retirement of our 8 3⁄8% senior
notes offset partially by the issuance an additional $100.0 million of our 7 3⁄4% senior notes in 2014.
The benefit from income taxes from continuing operations decreased in 2014 to $24.7 million from $56.2 million in 2013 due to the
lower net loss from continuing operations in 2014. Our effective tax rate of 30.2% in 2014 differed from the federal income tax rate of
35% primarily due to the effect of nondeductible compensation, state income taxes and an increase in the valuation allowance for
state income tax net operating loss carry forwards.
We reported a net loss from continuing operations of $57.1 million or $6.20 per share for 2014 as compared to a loss of $106.7
million or $11.09 per share for 2013. The net loss in 2014 was primarily due to impairments of proved and unproved properties and
other  exploration  costs.  The  loss  in  2013  was  due  to  impairments  of  proved  and  unproved  properties  and  a  loss  on  early
extinguishment of debt.
Net income from discontinued operations for 2013 of $147.8 million, or $15.36 per share, included a gain on the sale of our West
Texas  oil  and  gas  properties  of  $230.0  million  ($148.6  million  after  income  taxes).  Excluding  the  gain,  the  net  loss  from
discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2013 was $0.8 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Funding for our activities has historically been provided by our operating cash flow, debt or equity financings or proceeds from
asset sales. For the six months ended June 30, 2016, our primary source of funds was cash on hand. Cash used for operating
activities for the six months ended June 30, 2016 was $31.2 million as compared to cash provided by operating activities of $24.2
million for the first six months of 2015. This decrease primarily reflects our lower revenues from oil and gas sales and working
capital changes.
For 2015, our primary source of funds was operating cash flow, borrowings and net proceeds from asset sales. Cash provided by
operating activities in 2015 of $30.1 million decreased $370.9 million from $401.0 million in 2014. Cash flow was lower than 2014
due to decreased revenues related to the decreased oil production and lower oil and gas prices along with higher interest expense
from our senior notes issued in 2015. Our other primary source of funds in 2015 included net proceeds from the issuance of the
senior secured notes of $683.8 million, $40.0 million of net borrowings under our bank credit facility and net proceeds from asset
sales of $102.5 million. In 2014, our primary source of funds was operating cash flow and borrowings. Cash provided by operating
activities from continuing operations in 2014 of $401.0 million increased $132.0 million (49%) from $269.0 million in 2013 primarily
due to the higher revenues related to increased oil production and higher natural gas prices in 2014. Our other primary source of
funds  during  2014  included  $103.3  million  of  proceeds  from  an  additional  issuance  of  our  7  3⁄4%  senior  unsecured  notes  and
$165.0 million of borrowings under our bank revolving credit facility.
Table of Contents
60
Our primary needs for capital, in addition to funding our ongoing operations, relate to the acquisition, development and exploration
of our oil and gas properties and the repayment of our debt. In the first six months of 2016, we incurred capital expenditures of $30.4
million primarily for our development and exploration activities. In 2015, our capital expenditures of $243.2 million represented a
decrease of $345.4 million as compared to 2014 capital expenditures of $588.6 million, mainly due to our significant reduction in
drilling  activity  during  2015  in  response  to  the  low  commodity  price  environment  throughout  the  year.  During  2014  our  capital
expenditures  of  $588.6  million  represented  an  increase  of  $107.7  million  as  compared  to  2013  capital  expenditures  of  $480.9
million due primarily to our high level of drilling activity during 2014.
Our capital expenditure activity related to our continuing operations, on an accrual basis, is summarized in the following table:
Year Ended December 31,
2013
2014
2015
(In thousands)
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2015
2016
$
6,450
$
2,400
$
—     $
—     $
—
130,113  
461  
317,241  
—  
26,348
480,613(1)
—  
  
1,089  
  
26,798  
  
—  
  
2,455  
  
 
  
30,342  
  
11  
  
 
   $        480,873(1)   $        588,614(1)   $        243,247     $        178,496     $        30,353
12,972    
767    
184,393    
11,985    
31,237    
    
241,354    
1,893
6,928    
377    
133,870    
11,534    
23,938    
    
176,647    
1,849
91,960  
3,386  
398,604  
51,725  
39,282
587,357(1)
1,257
260
Exploration and development:
Acquisitions of proved oil and gas
properties
Acquisitions of unproved oil and gas
properties
Developmental leasehold costs
Development drilling
Exploratory drilling
Other development costs
Other
Total
(1)
Net  of  reimbursements  received  from  joint  venture  partner  of  $51.5  million  and  $28.7  million  in  2013  and  2014,
respectively.
We expect to fund our development and exploration activities with future operating cash flow, proceeds from anticipated asset sales
and from cash on hand. Our cash flows for the first six months of 2016 were significantly impacted by the low oil and natural gas
prices  and  a  reduction  in  accounts  payable  due  to  our  lower  drilling  activity.  The  timing  of  most  of  our  capital  expenditures  is
discretionary  because  we  have  no  material  long-term  capital  expenditure  commitments.  Consequently,  we  have  a  significant
degree of flexibility to adjust the level of our capital expenditures as circumstances warrant. We presently have no contracts for
future drilling services. We have maximum commitments of $5.3 million to transport and treat natural gas through July 2019. We
also have obligations to incur future payments for dismantlement, abandonment and restoration costs of oil and gas properties
which are currently estimated to be incurred primarily after 2020.
With the substantial decline in oil and natural gas prices in 2015, which have continued into 2016, we continue to experience
declining  cash  flows  and  reductions  in  our  overall  liquidity.  At  current  oil  and  natural  gas  prices,  operating  cash  flow  was  not
sufficient to cover our fixed debt service costs. Our capital expenditures have been funded with asset sale proceeds or from cash on
hand.  Beginning  in  2015,  we  redirected  our  drilling  program  to  natural  gas  and  drilled  ten  successful  horizontal  wells  on
Haynesville and Bossier shale properties in North Louisiana employing an enhanced completion design using longer laterals and
larger well stimulations. The well results were successful but natural gas prices substantially declined in response to a very warm
winter.  In  order  to  preserve  liquidity,  we  recently  released  our  last  operated  rig  after  drilling  and  completing  three  additional
successful Haynesville shale wells in 2016. While the reduction in drilling activity will allow us to preserve more of the cash on our
balance sheet, it will result in future reductions to natural gas production and proved oil and natural gas reserves.
If the Exchange Offer is consummated, we are planning to resume our drilling program later this year. We are planning to drill five
(4.5 net) additional wells in 2016 and 19 (15.7 net) wells in 2017. Capital expenditures for this program would approximate $46.0
million in the second half of 2016 and $147.0 million in 2017. Restarting
Table of Contents
61
the drilling program is dependent on successful completion of the Exchange Offer. The Exchange Offer, if successful, would free up
cash flow from operations to allow us to fund our capital expenditures. To the extent that the Exchange Offer is not completed, we
will pursue other initiatives to enhance liquidity, which may not be sufficient to fund this drilling program. Such initiatives could
include additional asset divestitures or entering into a drilling joint venture on our Haynesville shale properties.
In March 2015, we issued $700.0 million of 10% senior secured notes (the “Secured Notes”) which are due on March 15, 2020.
Interest on the Secured Notes is payable semi-annually on each March 15 and September 15. Net proceeds from the issuance of
the Secured Notes of $683.8 million were used to retire our bank credit facility and for general corporate purposes. We also have
outstanding (i) $288.5 million of 7 3⁄4% senior notes (the “2019 Notes”) which are due on April 1, 2019 and bear interest which is
payable semi-annually on each April 1 and October 1 and (ii) $174.6 million of 9 1⁄2% senior notes (the “2020 Notes”) which are due
on June 15, 2020 and bear interest which is payable semi-annually on each June 15 and December 15. The Secured Notes are
secured on a first priority basis equally and ratably with our revolving credit facility described below, subject to payment priorities in
favor of the revolving credit facility by the collateral securing the revolving credit facility, which consists of, among other things, at
least 80% of our and its subsidiaries’ oil and gas properties. The Secured Notes, the 2019 Notes and 2020 Notes are our general
obligations and are guaranteed by all of our subsidiaries. Such subsidiary guarantors are 100% owned and all of the guarantees
are  full  and  unconditional  and  joint  and  several  obligations.  There  are  no  restrictions  on  our  ability  to  obtain  funds  from  our
subsidiaries through dividends or loans. As of June 30, 2016, we had no material assets or operations which are independent of
our subsidiaries.
During 2015 we purchased $23.9 million in principal amount of the 2019 Notes and $105.6 million in principal amount of the 2020
Notes for an aggregate purchase price of $42.7 million. The gain of $82.4 million recognized on the purchase of the 2019 Notes
and 2020 Notes and the loss resulting from the write-off of deferred loan costs associated with our prior bank credit facility of $3.7
million are included in the net gain on extinguishment of debt, which is reported as a component of other income (expense). During
the six months ended June 30, 2016, we retired $87.5 million in principal amount of the 2019 Notes and $19.8 million of the 2020
Notes in exchange in the aggregate for the issuance of 2,748,403 shares of common stock and $3.5 million in cash. A gain of $89.6
million was recognized on the exchanges and purchases of the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes during the six months ended June
30, 2016 for the difference between the market value of the stock on the closing date of the exchanges and sales and the net
carrying  value  of  the  debt  and  the  related  net  premium  and  net  debt  issuance  costs.  The  gain  is  included  in  the  net  gain  on
extinguishment of debt, which is reported as a component of other income (loss).
We have a $50.0 million revolving credit facility with Bank of Montreal and Bank of America, N.A. The revolving credit facility is a
four  year  credit  commitment  that  matures  on  March  4,  2019.  Indebtedness  under  the  revolving  credit  facility  is  secured  by
substantially all of our and our subsidiaries’ assets and is guaranteed by all of our subsidiaries. Borrowings under the revolving
credit facility bear interest at our option at either (1) LIBOR plus 2.5% or (2) the base rate (which is the higher of the administrative
agent’s prime rate, the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or 30 day LIBOR plus 1.0%) plus 1.5%. A commitment fee of 0.5% per annum is
payable quarterly on the unused credit line. The revolving credit facility contains covenants that, among other things, restrict the
payment of cash dividends and repurchases of common stock, limit the amount of consolidated debt that we may incur and limit our
ability to make certain loans, investments and divestitures. The only financial covenants are the maintenance of a current ratio of at
least 1.0 to 1.0 and the maintenance of an asset coverage ratio of proved developed reserves to total debt outstanding under the
revolving credit facility of at least 2.5 to 1.0. We were in compliance with these covenants as of June 30, 2016.
Upon successful completion of the Exchange Offer, we believe that our future cash flow from operations, proceeds from asset sales,
cash on hand and available borrowings under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations and future growth
as contemplated under our current business plan. However, if our plans or assumptions change or if our assumptions prove to be
inaccurate or we do not consummate the
Table of Contents
62
Exchange Offer, we may be required to seek asset dispositions, joint ventures, additional debt or other alternatives, all of which
involve  uncertainties,  potential  delays  and  other  risks.  We  cannot  provide  any  assurance  that  we  will  be  able  to  achieve  such
alternatives, or if such alternatives are achieved, that we will be able to achieve them on acceptable terms.
The following table summarizes our aggregate liabilities and commitments as of December 31, 2015 by year of maturity:
$
10% senior secured
notes
7 3⁄4% senior
unsecured notes
9 1⁄2% senior
unsecured notes
Interest on debt
Operating leases
Natural gas
transportation and
treating agreements   
Contracted drilling
services
2016
2017
2018
2019
(In thousands)
2020
Thereafter
Total
—   $
—
—   $
—
—   $
—   $
700,000   $
—   $
700,000
—
376,090
—
—
376,090
—    
117,612    
1,994
—    
117,612    
2,021
—    
117,612    
2,060
—    
95,752    
1,560
194,367    
23,046    
1,560
—    
—    
1,560
194,367  
471,634  
10,755
2,199
1,780
1,696
690
—
—
6,365
1,593
1,593  
  
    
 
 $        123,398   $        121,413   $        121,368   $        474,092   $        918,973   $        1,560   $    1,760,804
—
—
—
—
—
Future interest costs are based upon the effective interest rates of our outstanding senior notes.
We  have  obligations  to  incur  future  payments  for  dismantlement,  abandonment  and  restoration  costs  of  oil  and  gas  properties.
These payments are currently estimated to be incurred primarily after 2020. We record a separate liability for the fair value of these
asset retirement obligations, which totaled $16.0 million as of June 30, 2016.
Federal and State Taxation
As of December 31, 2015, we had $558.7 million in U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards. The utilization of $34.7 million of
the  U.S.  federal  net  operating  loss  carryforward  is  limited  to  approximately  $1.1  million  per  year  pursuant  to  a  prior  change  of
control of an acquired company. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2014, a valuation allowance of $23.0 million, with a tax effect of
$8.0 million, has been established for the estimated U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards that will not be utilized as a result
of the prior change in control. As of December 31, 2015, we have also established a valuation allowance of $775.3 million, with a
tax effect of $271.4 million, against our other U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards that are not subject a change in control,
due  to  the  uncertainty  of  generating  future  taxable  income  prior  to  the  expiration  of  the  carry-over  period.  In  addition,  as  of
December 31, 2015, we have established a valuation allowance of $957.7 million, with a tax effect of $49.8 million, against our
Louisiana state net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty of generating taxable income in the state of Louisiana prior to the
expiration of the carry-over period. As of December 31, 2014, we had a valuation allowance of $742.2 million, with a tax effect of
$38.6 million, against our Louisiana state deferred tax assets.
Future use of our net operating loss carryforwards may be limited in the event that a cumulative change in the ownership of our
common  stock  by  more  than  50%  occurs  within  a  three-year  period.  Such  a  change  in  ownership  could  result  in  a  substantial
portion  of  our  net  operating  loss  carryforwards  being  eliminated  or  becoming  restricted,  and  we  would  need  to  recognize  a
valuation allowance reflecting the restricted use of these net operating loss carryforwards in the period when such an ownership
change occurred. We may also need to recognize additional valuation allowances on our net operating loss carryforwards in future
periods if we incur significant losses and accordingly a tax benefit may not be recognized on such losses. In 2015, we adopted a
Rights Plan intended to prevent these potential limitations on our ability to utilize our net operating loss carryforwards. Completion
of the Exchange Offer could result in a change of control and impact the utilization of our net operating loss carry-forwards. See
“Certain United States Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
Table of Contents
63
Our federal income tax returns for the years subsequent to December 31, 2011 remain subject to examination. Our income tax
returns in one major state income tax jurisdiction remain subject to examination for the year ended December 31, 2008 and various
periods subsequent to December 31, 2010. We currently believe that our significant filing positions are highly certain and that all of
our other significant income tax filing positions and deductions would be sustained upon audit or the final resolution would not have
a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we have not established any significant reserves for uncertain
tax positions. Interest and penalties resulting from audits by tax authorities have been immaterial and are included in the provision
for income taxes in the consolidated statements of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us
to make estimates and use assumptions that can affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues or expenses.
Successful  efforts  accounting.        We  are  required  to  select  among  alternative  acceptable  accounting  policies.  There  are  two
generally acceptable methods for accounting for oil and gas producing activities. The full cost method allows the capitalization of all
costs associated with finding oil and natural gas reserves, including certain general and administrative expenses. The successful
efforts method allows only for the capitalization of costs associated with developing proven oil and natural gas properties as well as
exploration costs associated with successful exploration projects. Costs related to exploration that are not successful are expensed
when it is determined that commercially productive oil and gas reserves were not found. We have elected to use the successful
efforts method to account for our oil and gas activities and we do not capitalize any of our general and administrative expenses.
Oil  and  natural  gas  reserve  quantities.        The  determination  of  depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization  expense  is  highly
dependent on the estimates of the proved oil and natural gas reserves attributable to our properties. The determination of whether
impairments should be recognized on our oil and gas properties is also dependent on these estimates, as well as estimates of
probable reserves. Reserve engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of oil and natural gas
that cannot be precisely measured. The accuracy of any reserve estimate depends on the quality of available data, production
history and engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. Because all reserve estimates are to some degree imprecise,
the quantities and timing of oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered, production and operating costs, the amount and timing
of future development expenditures and future oil and natural gas prices may all differ materially from those assumed in these
estimates.  The  information  regarding  present  value  of  the  future  net  cash  flows  attributable  to  our  proved  oil  and  natural  gas
reserves are estimates only and should not be construed as the current market value of the estimated oil and natural gas reserves
attributable to our properties. Thus, such information includes revisions of certain reserve estimates attributable to proved properties
included  in  the  preceding  year’s  estimates.  Such  revisions  reflect  additional  information  from  subsequent  activities,  production
history of the properties involved and any adjustments in the projected economic life of such properties resulting from changes in
product prices. Any future downward revisions could adversely affect our financial condition, our future prospects and the value of
our common stock.
Impairment  of  oil  and  gas  properties.        We  evaluate  our  properties  on  a  field  area  basis  for  potential  impairment  when
circumstances  indicate  that  the  carrying  value  of  an  asset  may  not  be  recoverable.  If  impairment  is  indicated  based  on  a
comparison of the asset’s carrying value to its undiscounted expected future net cash flows, then it is recognized to the extent that
the carrying value exceeds fair value. A significant amount of judgment is involved in performing these evaluations since the results
are based on estimated future events. Expected future cash flows are determined using estimated future prices based on market
based forward prices applied to projected future production volumes. The projected production volumes are based on the property’s
proved and risk adjusted probable oil and natural gas reserves estimates at the end of the period. At December 31, 2015, we
excluded  probable  undeveloped  reserves  from  our  impairment  analysis  given  our  limited  capital  resources  available  for  future
drilling activities. The estimated future cash flows that we use in our assessment of the need
Table of Contents
64
for an impairment are based on a corporate forecast which considers forecasts from multiple independent price forecasts. Prices
are not escalated to levels that exceed observed historical market prices. Costs are also assumed to escalate at a rate that is based
on  our  historical  experience,  currently  estimated  at  2%  per  annum.  The  oil  and  natural  gas  prices  used  for  determining  asset
impairments will generally differ from those used in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows because the
standardized measure requires the use of the average first day of the month historical price for the year. During 2015, our oil and
natural gas price outlook declined significantly and our access to capital to develop our proved and probable undeveloped reserves
was limited. Accordingly, we recognized impairment charges of $801.3 million to reduce the capitalized costs of our evaluated oil
and natural gas properties. It is reasonably possible that our estimates of undiscounted future net cash flows attributable to its oil
and  gas  properties  may  change  in  the  future.  The  primary  factors  that  may  affect  estimates  of  future  cash  flows  include  future
adjustments, both positive and negative, to proved and appropriate risk-adjusted probable oil and gas reserves, results of future
drilling activities, future prices for oil and natural gas, and increases or decreases in production and capital costs. As a result of
these changes, there may be further impairments in the carrying values of our evaluated oil and gas properties. Specifically, as part
of the impairment review performed at December 31, 2015, we observed that a decline in excess of 30% for our future cash flow
estimates for our Eagleville field in South Texas could result in an additional impairment being recorded in an amount that could be
at least $130.0 million. In addition, we may recognize additional impairments of our unevaluated oil and gas properties should we
determine that we no longer intend to retain these propertied for future oil and natural gas development.
Income Taxes.     The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and
liabilities  are  recognized  for  the  future  tax  consequences  attributable  to  differences  between  the  financial  statement  carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, as well as the future tax consequences attributable to the future
utilization of existing tax net operating loss and other types of carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using
enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences and carryforwards are
expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income
in the period that the change in rate is enacted.
In recording deferred income tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our deferred
income  tax  assets  will  be  realized  in  the  future.  The  ultimate  realization  of  deferred  income  tax  assets  is  dependent  upon  the
generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those deferred income tax assets would be deductible. We believe
that  after  considering  all  the  available  objective  evidence,  historical  and  prospective,  with  greater  weight  given  to  historical
evidence, we are not able to determine that it is more likely than not that all of our deferred tax assets will be realized. As a result, in
2015 we established an additional valuation allowance of $775.3 million, with a tax effect of $271.4 million, for our estimated U.S.
federal net operating loss carryforwards and other U.S. federal tax assets and an additional valuation allowance of $215.5 million,
with a tax effect of $11.2 million, for our estimated Louisiana state net operating loss carryforwards that are not expected be utilized
due to the uncertainty of generating taxable income prior to the expiration of the respective U.S. federal and Louisiana state carry-
over periods. During the six months ended June 30, 2016, we recorded an additional valuation allowance of $17.9 million and $4.9
million against our net federal deferred tax assets and our state deferred tax assets (net of the federal tax benefit). We will continue
to assess the valuation allowance against deferred tax assets considering all available information obtained in future reporting
periods.
Stock-based compensation.    We follow the fair value based method in accounting for equity-based compensation. Under the fair
value based method, compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized on a
straight-line basis over the award vesting period.
Recent  accounting  pronouncements.    
In  May  2014,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued  Accounting
Standards  Update  (“ASU”)  2014-09, Revenue  from  Contracts  with  Customers  (Topic  606)  (“ASU  2014-09”),  which  supersedes
nearly all existing revenue recognition guidance under existing generally
Table of Contents
65
accepted accounting principles. This new standard is based upon the principal that revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of
goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for
those  goods  or  services.  ASU  2014-09  also  requires  additional  disclosure  about  the  nature,  amount,  timing  and  uncertainty  of
revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts. ASU 2014-09 is effective for annual and interim periods beginning after
December 15, 2017. Early adoption is permitted beginning with periods after December 15, 2016 and entities have the option of
using either a full retrospective or modified approach to adopt ASU 2014-09. We are currently evaluating the new guidance and
have not determined the impact this standard may have on our financial statements or decided upon the method of adoption.
In August 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40):
Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern  (“ASU  2014-15”).  ASU  2014-15  provides
guidance about management’s responsibility to evaluate whether there is substantial doubt about an entity’s ability to continue as a
going concern and sets rules for how this information should be disclosed in the financial statements. ASU 2014-15 is effective for
annual periods ending after December 15, 2016 and interim periods thereafter. Early adoption is permitted. We have elected to not
adopt ASU 2014-15 early and do not expect adoption of ASU 2014-15 to have any impact on our consolidated financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases, (“ASU 2016-02”). ASU 2016-02 requires lessees to put most leases
on their balance sheets, but recognize lease costs in their financial statements in a manner similar to accounting for leases prior to
ASC 2016-02. ASU 2016-02 is effective for annual periods ending after December 15, 2018 and interim periods thereafter. Early
adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the new guidance and has not determined the impact this standard may
have on its financial statements or decided upon the method of adoption.
In March 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-09, Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, (“ASU 2016-
09”). ASU 2016-09 will change how companies account for certain aspects of share-based payments, including recognizing the
income tax effects of awards in the income statement when the awards vest or are settled. ASC 2016-09 revises guidance on
employers’ accounting for employee’s use of shares to satisfy the employer’s statutory income tax withholding obligation and the
treatment of forfeitures. ASU 2016-09 is effective for annual periods ending after December 15, 2016 and interim periods thereafter.
Early adoption is permitted, but all guidance must be adopted in the same period. The Company is currently evaluating the new
guidance and has not determined the impact this standard may have on its financial statements or decided upon the method of
adoption.
Related Party Transactions
Along with M. Jay Allison, our Chairman and CEO, and Roland O. Burns, our President, Chief Financial Officer and a director, we
formed an entity in 2010 in which we jointly owned and operated a private airplane. The entity was owned 80% by us and 10% by
each of Messrs. Allison and Burns. Each party funded their respective share of the acquisition costs of the airplane in exchange for
their  ownership  interest.  This  arrangement  was  approved  by  our  audit  committee  and  board  of  directors.  In  January  2015,  we
acquired from Messrs. Allison and Burns their collective 20% interest in the entity for aggregate consideration of $1,680,000, which
amount was based upon the then fair market value of the airplane (the only asset owned by the entity). The airplane is leased to
and managed by a third party operator. The airplane, which is intended to be used primarily for company business, also provides
charter services to third parties. The termination of this related party relationship was approved by our audit committee and the
board  of  directors  in  accordance  with  our  policy  on  related  party  transactions.  We  have  not  entered  into  any  other  business
transactions with our significant stockholders or any other related parties.
Table of Contents
66
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK
Oil and Natural Gas Prices
Our  financial  condition,  results  of  operations  and  capital  resources  are  highly  dependent  upon  the  prevailing  market  prices  of
natural gas and oil. These commodity prices are subject to wide fluctuations and market uncertainties due to a variety of factors,
some of which are beyond our control. Factors influencing oil and natural gas prices include the level of global demand for crude
oil, the foreign supply of oil and natural gas, the establishment of and compliance with production quotas by oil exporting countries,
weather conditions that determine the demand for natural gas, the price and availability of alternative fuels and overall economic
conditions. It is impossible to predict future oil and natural gas prices with any degree of certainty. Sustained weakness in natural
gas and oil prices may adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations, and may also reduce the amount of oil and
natural gas reserves that we can produce economically. Any reduction in our natural gas and oil reserves, including reductions due
to  price  fluctuations,  can  have  an  adverse  effect  on  our  ability  to  obtain  capital  for  our  exploration  and  development  activities.
Similarly,  any  improvements  in  natural  gas  and  oil  prices  can  have  a  favorable  impact  on  our  financial  condition,  results  of
operations and capital resources. Based on our oil and natural gas production for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and our
outstanding natural gas price swap agreements, a $0.10 change in the price per Mcf of natural gas would have changed our cash
flow by approximately $2.5 million and a $1.00 change in the price per barrel of oil would have resulted in a change in our cash
flow from continuing operations for such period by approximately $0.7 million.
Interest Rates
At June 30, 2016, we had approximately $1.2 billion of long-term debt outstanding. Of this amount, $700.0 million bears interest at a
fixed rate of 10%, $288.5 million bears interest at a fixed rate of 7 3⁄4% and $174.6 million bears interest at a fixed rate of 9 1⁄2%. The
fair market value of our fixed rate debt as of June 30, 2016 was $730.2 million based on the market price of approximately 64% of
the face amount. At June 30, 2016, we had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving credit facility, which is subject to variable
rates of interest that are tied at our option to either LIBOR or the corporate base rate.
Table of Contents
67
BUSINESS AND PROPERTIES
The following table summarizes the estimated proved oil and natural gas reserves for our ten largest fields as of December 31,
2015:
East Texas / North Louisiana:
Logansport
Beckville
Toledo Bend
Waskom
Blocker
Other
South Texas:
Eagleville
Fandango
Rosita
Javelina
Las Hermanitas
Other
Other
Total
Oil
Natural
Gas
Total
(MMcfe)(1)               %
(MBbls)       
 
18    
105    
—    
48    
29    
101    
     
301    
     
 
8,701    
—    
—    
35    
—    
35    
     
8,771    
     
157    
     
9,229
(MMcf)       
 
422,504    
23,923    
18,796    
8,642    
6,707    
13,062    
     
493,634    
     
 
9,119    
27,487    
20,258    
4,251    
3,210    
2,998    
     
67,323    
     
8,639    
     
569,596
422,614    
24,551    
18,796    
8,931    
6,881    
13,667    
      
495,440    
      
 
61,327    
27,487    
20,258    
4,459    
3,210    
3,207    
      
119,948    
      
9,583    
      
624,971
67.6% 
3.9% 
3.0% 
1.4% 
1.1% 
2.3%
79.3%
9.8% 
4.4% 
3.2% 
0.7% 
0.5% 
0.6%
19.2%
1.5%
100.0%
(1) Oil is converted to natural gas equivalents by using a conversion factor of one barrel of oil for six Mcf of natural
gas based upon the approximate relative energy content of oil to natural gas, which is not indicative of oil and
natural gas prices.
East Texas/North Louisiana Region
Approximately 79%, or 495.4 Bcfe of our proved reserves are located in East Texas and North Louisiana where we own interests in
921 producing wells (573.0 net to us) in 28 field areas. We operate 644 of these wells. The largest of our fields in this region are the
Logansport, Beckville, Toledo Bend, Waskom and Blocker fields. Production from this region averaged 107 MMcf of natural gas per
day and 158 barrels of oil per day during 2015 or 108 MMcfe per day. Most of the reserves in this area produce from the upper
Jurassic aged Haynesville or Bossier shale or Cotton Valley formations and the Cretaceous aged Travis Peak/Hosston formation.
In 2015, we spent $109.9 million drilling ten wells (9.6 net to us), $1.4 million on other development and $0.8 million on leasehold
costs in this region.
Logansport
The Logansport field located in DeSoto Parish, Louisiana primarily produces from the Haynesville and Bossier shale formations at
a depth of 11,100 to 11,500 feet and from multiple sands in the Cotton Valley and Hosston formations at an average depth of 8,000
feet.  Our  proved  reserves  of  422.6  Bcfe  in  the  Logansport  field  represent  approximately  68%  of  our  proved  reserves.  We  own
interests in 250 wells (168.7 net to us) and operate 182 of these wells in this field. In 2015 we drilled nine wells (8.6 net to us) in the
Logansport field. Our 2016 drilling program will be focused primarily on drilling additional horizontal wells in Logansport targeting
the Haynesville shale formation each with a planned lateral length of 7,500 to 10,000 feet.
Table of Contents
68
Beckville
The Beckville field, located in Panola and Rusk Counties, Texas, has estimated proved reserves of 24.6 Bcfe which represents
approximately 4% of our proved reserves. We operate 187 wells in this field and own interests in 72 additional wells for a total of
259 wells (156.2 net to us). The Beckville field produces primarily from the Cotton Valley formation at depths ranging from 9,000 to
10,000 feet. The field is also prospective for future Haynesville shale development.
Toledo Bend
The Toledo Bend field, located in DeSoto and Sabine Parishes in Louisiana, is productive in the Haynesville shale from 11,400 to
11,800  feet  and  in  the  Bossier  shale  from  10,880  to  11,300  feet.  Our  proved  reserves  of  18.8  Bcfe  in  the  Toledo  Bend  field
represent approximately 3% of our reserves. We own interests in 76 producing wells (39.3 net to us) and operate 41 of these wells
in this field. During 2015 we drilled one well (0.9 net to us) in the Toledo Bend field.
Waskom
The  Waskom  field,  located  in  Harrison  and  Panola  Counties  in  Texas,  represents  approximately  1%  (8.9  Bcfe)  of  our  proved
reserves. We own interests in 59 wells (35.5 net to us) and operate 43 wells in this field. The Waskom field produces from the
Cotton Valley formation at depths ranging from 9,000 to 10,000 feet and from the Haynesville shale formation at depths of 10,800 to
10,900 feet.
Blocker
Our proved reserves of 6.9 Bcfe in the Blocker field located in Harrison County, Texas represent approximately 1% of our proved
reserves. We own interests in 74 wells (68.4 net to us) and operate 69 of these wells. Most of this production is from the Cotton
Valley formation between 8,600 and 10,150 feet and the Haynesville shale formation between 11,100 and 11,450 feet.
South Texas Region
Approximately 19%, or 20.0 MMBOE (119.9 Bcfe), of our proved reserves are located in South Texas, where we own interests in
322 producing wells (208.2 net to us). We own interests in 13 field areas in the region, the largest of which are the Eagleville,
Fandango, Rosita, Javelina and Las Hermanitas fields. Net daily production rates from this region averaged 8,105 barrels of oil and
20 MMcf of natural gas during 2015 or 11,485 BOE per day. We have no current plans to drill or recomplete wells in South Texas
during 2016 due to the continued low oil price environment.
Eagleville
We have 26,416 acres (19,293 net to us) in McMullen, Atascosa, Frio, La Salle, Karnes and Wilson Counties which comprise our
Eagleville field. The Eagle Ford shale is found between 7,500 feet and 11,500 feet across our acreage position. At December 31,
2015 we had 196 wells (138.1 net to us) producing in the Eagleville field. Our proved reserves in this field are estimated to be 10.2
MMBOE (61.3 Bcfe) (85% oil) and represent 10% of our total proved reserves. We spent $17.4 million in 2015 to complete four oil
wells (4.0 net to us) and $24.2 million for other development activity in Eagleville.
Fandango
We own interests in 17 wells (17.0 net to us) in the Fandango field located in Zapata County, Texas. We operate all of these wells
which produce from the Wilcox formation at depths from approximately 13,000 to 18,000 feet. Our proved reserves of 27.5 Bcfe in
this field represent approximately 4% of our total proved reserves.
Table of Contents
Rosita
69
We own interests in 24 wells (13.2 net to us) in the Rosita field, located in Duval County, Texas. We operate 23 of these wells
which produce from the Wilcox formation at depths from approximately 9,300 to 17,000 feet. Our proved reserves of 20.3 Bcfe in this
field represent approximately 3% of our total proved reserves.
Javelina
We own interests in and operate 17 wells (17.0 net to us) in the Javelina field in Hidalgo County in South Texas. These wells
produce primarily from the Vicksburg formation at a depth of approximately 10,900 to 12,500 feet. Proved reserves attributable to
our interests in the Javelina field are 4.5 Bcfe, which represents approximately 1% of our total proved reserves.
Las Hermanitas
We own interests in and operate 11 natural gas wells (11.0 net to us) in the Las Hermanitas field, located in Duval County, Texas.
These wells produce from the Wilcox formation at depths from approximately 11,400 to 11,800 feet. Our proved reserves of 3.2 Bcfe
in this field represent approximately 1% of our total proved reserves.
Other Regions
Approximately  2%,  or  9.6  Bcfe,  of  our  proved  reserves  are  in  other  regions,  primarily  in  New  Mexico  and  the  Mid-Continent
region. We also have a large acreage position in Mississippi and Louisiana in the emerging Tuscaloosa Marine shale play. We
own interests in 332 producing wells (78.5 net to us) in 15 fields within these regions. Net daily production from our other regions
during 2015 totaled 3 MMcf of natural gas and 199 barrels of oil or 5 MMcfe per day.
Major Property Acquisitions
As a result of our acquisitions of producing oil and gas properties, we have added 1.1 Tcfe of proved oil and natural gas reserves
over the past 25 years. In recent years we have focused more on acreage acquisition and drilling for reserve growth and have not
completed any significant acquisitions of producing properties.
Regulation
General. Various aspects of our oil and natural gas operations are subject to extensive and continually changing regulation, as
legislation affecting the oil and natural gas industry is under constant review for amendment or expansion. Numerous departments
and agencies, both federal and state, are authorized by statute to issue, and have issued, rules and regulations binding upon the oil
and  natural  gas  industry  and  its  individual  members.  The  Federal  Energy  Regulatory  Commission,  or  “FERC”,  regulates  the
transportation and sale for resale of natural gas in interstate commerce pursuant to the Natural Gas Act of 1938, or “NGA”, and the
Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, or “NGPA”. In 1989, however, Congress enacted the Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act, which
removed all remaining price and nonprice controls affecting all “first sales” of natural gas, effective January 1, 1993, subject to the
terms of any private contracts that may be in effect. While sales by producers of natural gas and all sales of crude oil, condensate
and natural gas liquids can currently be made at uncontrolled market prices, in the future Congress could reenact price controls or
enact other legislation with detrimental impact on many aspects of our business. Under the provisions of the Energy Policy Act of
2005 (the “2005 Act”), the NGA has been amended to prohibit any form of market manipulation with the purchase or sale of natural
gas, and the FERC has issued new regulations that are intended to increase natural gas pricing transparency. The 2005 Act has
also significantly increased the penalties for violations of the NGA. The FERC has issued Order No. 704 et al. which requires a
market participant to make an annual filing if it has sales or purchases equal to or greater than 2.2 million MMBtu in the reporting
year to facilitate price transparency.
Table of Contents
70
Regulation  and  transportation  of  natural  gas.        Our  sales  of  natural  gas  are  affected  by  the  availability,  terms  and  cost  of
transportation. The price and terms for access to pipeline transportation are subject to extensive regulation. The FERC requires
interstate pipelines to provide open-access transportation on a not unduly discriminatory basis for similarly situated shippers. The
FERC frequently reviews and modifies its regulations regarding the transportation of natural gas, with the stated goal of fostering
competition within the natural gas industry.
Intrastate natural gas transportation is subject to regulation by state regulatory agencies. The Texas Railroad Commission has
been  changing  its  regulations  governing  transportation  and  gathering  services  provided  by  intrastate  pipelines  and  gatherers.
While the changes by these state regulators affect us only indirectly, they are intended to further enhance competition in natural gas
markets. We cannot predict what further action the FERC or state regulators will take on these matters; however, we do not believe
that we will be affected differently in any material respect than other natural gas producers with which we compete by any action
taken.
Additional proposals and proceedings that might affect the natural gas industry are pending before Congress, the FERC, state
commissions and the courts. The natural gas industry historically has been very heavily regulated; therefore, there is no assurance
that the less stringent regulatory approach pursued by the FERC, Congress and state regulatory authorities will continue.
Federal leases.    Some of our operations are located on federal oil and natural gas leases that are administered by the Bureau of
Land Management (“BLM”) of the United States Department of the Interior. These leases are issued through competitive bidding
and  contain  relatively  standardized  terms.  These  leases  require  compliance  with  detailed  Department  of  Interior  and  BLM
regulations and orders that are subject to interpretation and change. These leases are also subject to certain regulations and orders
promulgated  by  the  Department  of  Interior’s  Bureau  of  Ocean  Energy  Management,  Regulation  &  Enforcement  (“BOEMRE”),
through its Minerals Revenue Management Program, which is responsible for the management of revenues from both onshore and
offshore leases.
Oil  and  natural  gas  liquids  transportation  rates.        Our  sales  of  crude  oil,  condensate  and  natural  gas  liquids  are  not  currently
regulated  and  are  made  at  market  prices.  In  a  number  of  instances,  however,  the  ability  to  transport  and  sell  such  products  is
dependent  on  pipelines  whose  rates,  terms  and  conditions  of  service  are  subject  to  FERC  jurisdiction  under  the  Interstate
Commerce Act. In other instances, the ability to transport and sell such products is dependent on pipelines whose rates, terms and
conditions of service are subject to regulation by state regulatory bodies under state statutes. The price received from the sale of
these products may be affected by the cost of transporting the products to market.
The FERC’s regulation of pipelines that transport crude oil, condensate and natural gas liquids under the Interstate Commerce Act
is generally more light-handed than the FERC’s regulation of natural gas pipelines under the NGA. FERC-regulated pipelines that
transport  crude  oil,  condensate  and  natural  gas  liquids  are  subject  to  common  carrier  obligations  that  generally  ensure  non-
discriminatory  access.  With  respect  to  interstate  pipeline  transportation  subject  to  regulation  of  the  FERC  under  the  Interstate
Commerce Act, rates generally must be cost-based, although settlement rates agreed to by all shippers are permitted and market-
based rates are permitted in certain circumstances. Effective January 1, 1995, the FERC implemented regulations establishing an
indexing system (based on inflation) for transportation rates governed by the Interstate Commerce Act that allowed for an increase
or decrease in the transportation rates. The FERC’s regulations include a methodology for such pipelines to change their rates
through the use of an index system that establishes ceiling levels for such rates. The mandatory five year review in 2005 revised
the methodology for this index to be based on Producer Price Index for Finished Goods (PPI-FG) plus 1.3 percent for the period
July 1, 2006 through June 30, 2011. The mandatory five year review in 2012 revised the methodology for this index to be based on
PPI-FG  plus  2.65  percent  for  the  period  July  1,  2011  through  June  30,  2016.  The  regulations  provide  that  each  year  the
Commission will publish the oil pipeline index after the PPI-FG becomes available.
Table of Contents
71
With respect to intrastate crude oil, condensate and natural gas liquids pipelines subject to the jurisdiction of state agencies, such
state regulation is generally less rigorous than the regulation of interstate pipelines. State agencies have generally not investigated
or  challenged  existing  or  proposed  rates  in  the  absence  of  shipper  complaints  or  protests.  Complaints  or  protests  have  been
infrequent and are usually resolved informally.
We do not believe that the regulatory decisions or activities relating to interstate or intrastate crude oil, condensate or natural gas
liquids pipelines will affect us in a way that materially differs from the way it affects other crude oil, condensate and natural gas
liquids producers or marketers.
Environmental regulations.    We are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws. These laws, among other things, govern the
issuance of permits to conduct exploration, drilling and production operations, the amounts and types of materials that may be
released into the environment, the discharge and disposition of waste materials, the remediation of contaminated sites and the
reclamation and abandonment of wells, sites and facilities. Numerous governmental departments issue rules and regulations to
implement and enforce such laws, which are often difficult and costly to comply with and which carry substantial civil and even
criminal penalties for failure to comply. Some laws, rules and regulations relating to protection of the environment may, in certain
circumstances, impose strict liability for environmental contamination, rendering a person liable for environmental damages and
cleanup cost without regard to negligence or fault on the part of such person. Other laws, rules and regulations may restrict the rate
of oil and natural gas production below the rate that would otherwise exist or even prohibit exploration and production activities in
sensitive areas. In addition, state laws often require various forms of remedial action to prevent pollution, such as closure of inactive
pits  and  plugging  of  abandoned  wells.  The  regulatory  burden  on  the  oil  and  natural  gas  industry  increases  our  cost  of  doing
business and consequently affects our profitability. These costs are considered a normal, recurring cost of our on-going operations.
Our domestic competitors are generally subject to the same laws and regulations.
We believe that we are in substantial compliance with current applicable environmental laws and regulations and that continued
compliance with existing requirements will not have a material adverse impact on our operations. However, environmental laws
and regulations have been subject to frequent changes over the years, and the imposition of more stringent requirements or new
regulatory schemes such as carbon “cap and trade” programs could have a material adverse effect upon our capital expenditures,
earnings or competitive position, including the suspension or cessation of operations in affected areas. As such, there can be no
assurance that material cost and liabilities will not be incurred in the future.
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, or “CERCLA”, imposes liability, without regard to
fault,  on  certain  classes  of  persons  that  are  considered  to  be  responsible  for  the  release  of  a  “hazardous  substance”  into  the
environment. These persons include the current or former owner or operator of the disposal site or sites where the release occurred
and companies that disposed or arranged for the disposal of hazardous substances. Under CERCLA, such persons may be subject
to joint and several liability for the cost of investigating and cleaning up hazardous substances that have been released into the
environment, for damages to natural resources and for the cost of certain health studies. In addition, companies that incur liability
frequently also confront third party claims because it is not uncommon for neighboring landowners and other third parties to file
claims for personal injury and property damage allegedly caused by hazardous substances or other pollutants released into the
environment from a polluted site.
The  Federal  Solid  Waste  Disposal  Act,  as  amended  by  the  Resource  Conservation  and  Recovery  Act  of  1976,  or  “RCRA”,
regulates  the  generation,  transportation,  storage,  treatment  and  disposal  of  hazardous  wastes  and  can  require  cleanup  of
hazardous waste disposal sites. RCRA currently excludes drilling fluids, produced waters and other wastes associated with the
exploration,  development  or  production  of  oil  and  natural  gas  from  regulation  as  “hazardous  waste”.  Disposal  of  such  non-
hazardous oil and natural gas exploration, development and production wastes usually are regulated by state law. Other wastes
handled  at  exploration  and  production  sites  or  used  in  the  course  of  providing  well  services  may  not  fall  within  this  exclusion.
Moreover, stricter standards for waste handling and disposal may be imposed on the oil and natural gas industry in the future. From
time to time,
Table of Contents
72
legislation is proposed in Congress that would revoke or alter the current exclusion of exploration, development and production
wastes  from  RCRA’s  definition  of  “hazardous  wastes”,  thereby  potentially  subjecting  such  wastes  to  more  stringent  handling,
disposal and cleanup requirements. If such legislation were enacted, it could have a significant impact on our operating costs, as
well as the oil and natural gas industry in general. The impact of future revisions to environmental laws and regulations cannot be
predicted.
Our operations are also subject to the Clean Air Act, or “CAA”, and comparable state and local requirements. Amendments to the
CAA were adopted in 1990 and contain provisions that may result in the gradual imposition of certain pollution control requirements
with  respect  to  air  emissions  from  our  operations.  On  April  17,  2012,  the  U.  S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency  or  “EPA”
promulgated new emission standards for the oil and gas industry. These rules require a nearly 95 percent reduction in volatile
organic  compounds  (“VOCs”)  emitted  from  hydraulically  fractured  gas  wells  by  January  1,  2015.  This  significant  reduction  in
emissions is to be accomplished primarily through the use of “green completions” (i.e., capturing natural gas that currently escapes
to  the  air).  These  rules  also  have  notification  and  reporting  requirements.  On  September  23,  2014,  EPA  revised  the  emission
requirements for storage tanks emitting certain levels of VOCs requiring a 95% reduction of VOC emissions by April 15, 2014 and
April 15, 2015 (depending upon the date of construction of the storage tank). On December 19, 2014, EPA finalized updates and
clarifications to these emission standards for the oil and gas industry. We believe our operations comply in all material respects
with  these  emission  limitations.  In  June  2016,  the  EPA  finalized  new  regulations  that  require  further  reductions  in  VOC  and
methane  emissions.  In  addition  to  reducing  emissions  from  hydraulically  fractured  wells,  the  rules  require  emission  reductions
further downstream, including equipment in the natural gas transmission segment of the industry. As a result of these rules, we may
be required to incur certain capital expenditures in the future for air pollution control equipment in connection with obtaining and
maintaining operating permits and approvals for air emissions. However, we believe our operations will not be materially adversely
affected by any such requirements, and the requirements are not expected to be any more burdensome to us than to other similarly
situated companies involved in oil and natural gas exploration and production activities.
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, as amended, or the “Clean Water Act”, imposes restrictions and controls on the
discharge of produced waters and other wastes into navigable waters. Permits must be obtained to discharge pollutants into state
and federal waters and to conduct construction activities in waters and wetlands. Certain state regulations and the general permits
issued under the Federal National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program prohibit the discharge of produced waters and
sand, drilling fluids, drill cuttings and certain other substances related to the oil and natural gas industry into certain coastal and
offshore  waters,  unless  otherwise  authorized.  Further,  the  EPA  has  adopted  regulations  requiring  certain  oil  and  natural  gas
exploration and production facilities to obtain permits for storm water discharges. Costs may be associated with the treatment of
wastewater or developing and implementing storm water pollution prevention plans. The Clean Water Act and comparable state
statutes provide for civil, criminal and administrative penalties for unauthorized discharges for oil and other pollutants and impose
liability on parties responsible for those discharges for the cost of cleaning up any environmental damage caused by the release
and for natural resource damages resulting from the release. We believe that our operations comply in all material respects with the
requirements of the Clean Water Act and state statutes enacted to control water pollution.
The  Federal  Safe  Drinking  Water  Act  of  1974,  as  amended,  requires  EPA  to  develop  minimum  federal  requirements  for
Underground Injection Control (“UIC”) programs and other safeguards to protect public health by preventing injection wells from
contaminating underground sources of drinking water. The UIC program does not regulate wells that are solely used for production.
However, EPA has authority to regulate hydraulic fracturing when diesel fuels are used in fluids or propping agents. In February
2014, EPA issued new guidance on when UIC permitting requirements apply to fracking fluids containing diesel. We believe our
operations will not be materially adversely affected by the new guidance, and the requirements are not expected to be any more
burdensome to us than to other similarly situated companies involved in oil and natural gas exploration and production activities.
Table of Contents
73
Federal regulators require certain owners or operators of facilities that store or otherwise handle oil to prepare and implement spill
prevention,  control,  countermeasure  and  response  plans  relating  to  the  possible  discharge  of  oil  into  surface  waters.  The  Oil
Pollution Act of 1990 (“OPA”) contains numerous requirements relating to the prevention and response to oil spills in the waters of
the United States. The OPA subjects owners of facilities to strict joint and several liability for all containment and cleanup costs and
certain other damages relating to a spill. Non-compliance with OPA may result in varying civil and criminal penalties and liabilities.
Executive Order 13158, issued on May 26, 2000, directs federal agencies to safeguard existing Marine Protected Areas, or “MPAs”,
in the United States and establish new MPAs. The order requires federal agencies to avoid harm to MPAs to the extent permitted by
law and to the maximum extent practicable. It also directs the EPA to propose new regulations under the Clean Water Act to ensure
appropriate  levels  of  protection  for  the  marine  environment.  This  order  has  the  potential  to  adversely  affect  our  operations  by
restricting  areas  in  which  we  may  carry  out  future  exploration  and  development  projects  and/or  causing  us  to  incur  increased
operating expenses.
Certain  flora  and  fauna  that  have  officially  been  classified  as  “threatened”  or  “endangered”  are  protected  by  the  Endangered
Species Act. This law prohibits any activities that could “take” a protected plant or animal or reduce or degrade its habitat area. If
endangered  species  are  located  in  an  area  we  wish  to  develop,  the  work  could  be  prohibited  or  delayed  and/or  expensive
mitigation might be required.
Other  statutes  that  provide  protection  to  animal  and  plant  species  and  which  may  apply  to  our  operations  include,  but  are  not
necessarily  limited  to,  the  Oil  Pollution  Act,  the  Emergency  Planning  and  Community  Right  to  Know  Act,  the  Marine  Mammal
Protection  Act,  the  Marine  Protection,  Research  and  Sanctuaries  Act,  the  Fish  and  Wildlife  Coordination  Act,  the  Fishery
Conservation  and  Management  Act,  the  Migratory  Bird  Treaty  Act  and  the  National  Historic  Preservation  Act.  These  laws  and
regulations may require the acquisition of a permit or other authorization before construction or drilling commences and may limit or
prohibit construction, drilling and other activities on certain lands lying within wilderness or wetlands and other protected areas and
impose substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from our operations. The permits required for our various operations are subject
to revocation, modification and renewal by issuing authorities. In addition, laws such as the National Environmental Policy Act and
the Coastal Zone Management Act may make the process of obtaining certain permits more difficult or time consuming, resulting in
increased costs and potential delays that could affect the viability or profitability of certain activities.
Certain statutes such as the Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act require the reporting of hazardous chemicals
manufactured, processed, or otherwise used, which may lead to heightened scrutiny of the company’s operations by regulatory
agencies  or  the  public.  In  2012,  the  EPA  adopted  a  new  reporting  requirement,  the  Petroleum  and  Natural  Gas  Systems
Greenhouse  Gas  Reporting  Rule  (40  C.F.R.  Part  98,  Subpart  W),  which  requires  certain  onshore  petroleum  and  natural  gas
facilities to begin collecting data on their emissions of greenhouse gases (“GHGs”) in January 2012, with the first annual reports of
those emissions due on September 28, 2012. GHGs include gases such as methane, a primary component of natural gas, and
carbon dioxide, a byproduct of burning natural gas. Different GHGs have different global warming potentials with CO2 having the
lowest global warming potential, so emissions of GHGs are typically expressed in terms of CO2 equivalents, or CO2e. The rule
applies  to  facilities  that  emit  25,000  metric  tons  of  CO2e  or  more  per  year,  and  requires  onshore  petroleum  and  natural  gas
operators to group all equipment under common ownership or control within a single hydrocarbon basin together when determining
if the threshold is met. These greenhouse gas reporting rules were amended on October 22, 2015 to expand the number of sources
and operations that are subject to these rules. We have determined that these reporting requirements apply to us and we believe
we have met all of the EPA required reporting deadlines and strive to ensure accurate and consistent emissions data reporting.
Other EPA actions with respect to the reduction of greenhouse gases (such as EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Endangerment Finding,
and EPA’s Prevention of Significant Deterioration and Title V Greenhouse Gas Tailoring Rule) and various state actions have or
could impose mandatory reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. We are unable to predict at this time how much the cost of
compliance with any legislation or regulation of greenhouse gas emissions will be in future periods.
Table of Contents
74
Such  changes  in  environmental  laws  and  regulations  which  result  in  more  stringent  and  costly  reporting,  or  waste  handling,
storage, transportation, disposal or cleanup activities, could materially affect companies operating in the energy industry. Adoption
of new regulations further regulating emissions from oil and gas production could adversely affect our business, financial position,
results  of  operations  and  prospects,  as  could  the  adoption  of  new  laws  or  regulations  which  levy  taxes  or  other  costs  on
greenhouse gas emissions from other industries, which could result in changes to the consumption and demand for natural gas. We
may also be assessed administrative, civil and/or criminal penalties if we fail to comply with any such new laws and regulations
applicable to oil and natural gas production.
In June 2009, the United States House of Representatives passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009. A similar
bill, the Clean Energy Jobs and American Power Act, introduced in the Senate, did not pass. Both bills contained the basic feature
of  establishing  a  “cap  and  trade”  system  for  restricting  greenhouse  gas  emissions  in  the  United  States.  Under  such  a  system,
certain sources of greenhouse gas emissions would be required to obtain greenhouse gas emission “allowances” corresponding to
their annual emissions of greenhouse gases. The number of emission allowances issued each year would decline as necessary
over time to meet overall emission reduction goals. As the number of greenhouse gas emission allowances declines each year, the
cost or value of allowances is expected to escalate significantly. It appears that the prospects for a cap and trade system such as
that  proposed  in  these  bills  have  dimmed  significantly;  however,  the  EPA  has  moved  ahead  with  its  efforts  to  regulate  GHG
emissions from certain sources by rule. The EPA issued Subpart W of the Final Mandatory Reporting of Greenhouse Gases Rule,
which required petroleum and natural gas systems that emit 25,000 metric tons of CO2e or more per year to begin collecting GHG
emissions  data  under  a  new  reporting  system.  We  believe  we  have  met  all  of  the  reporting  requirements  under  these  new
regulations. Beyond measuring and reporting, the EPA issued an “Endangerment Finding” under section 202(a) of the Clean Air
Act, concluding greenhouse gas pollution threatens the public health and welfare of current and future generations. The EPA has
adopted regulations that would require permits for and reductions in greenhouse gas emissions for certain facilities. States in which
we operate may also require permits and reductions in GHG emissions. Since all of our oil and natural gas production is in the
United States, these laws or regulations that have been or may be adopted to restrict or reduce emissions of greenhouse gases
could require us to incur substantial increased operating costs, and could have an adverse effect on demand for the oil and natural
gas we produce. In June 2016, the EPA finalized rules that regulate methane and volatile organic compound emissions from new
and modified oil and gas sources.
Other federal agencies, including the Bureau of Land Management, have also imposed new or more stringent regulations on the oil
and gas sector that will have the effect of further reducing methane emissions. In 2010 the Bureau of Land Management began
implementation  of  a  proposed  oil  and  gas  leasing  reform.  The  leasing  reform  requires,  among  other  things,  a  more  detailed
environmental  review  prior  to  leasing  oil  and  natural  gas  resources  on  federal  lands,  increased  public  engagement  in  the
development of Master Leasing Plans prior to leasing areas where intensive new oil and gas development is anticipated, and a
comprehensive parcel review process with greater public involvement in the identification of key environmental resource values
before  a  parcel  is  leased.  New  leases  would  incorporate  adaptive  management  stipulations,  requiring  lessees  to  monitor  and
respond  to  observed  environmental  impacts,  possibly  through  the  implementation  of  expensive  new  control  measures  or
curtailment of operations, potentially reducing profitability. The leasing reform policy could have the effect of reducing the amount of
new federal lands made available for lease, increasing the competition for and cost of available parcels. On March 26, 2015, the
Bureau of Land Management adopted a new rule concerning hydraulic fracturing on federal land. On June 21, 2016, a federal
district judge in Wyoming struck down the rule, finding that the Bureau of Land Management lacked the authority to promulgate
environmental regulations relating to hydraulic fracturing. The federal government has appealed this decision to the 10th Circuit
Court of Appeals. Due to the ongoing litigation, we cannot at this time predict what effect the new rule will have on our operations.
On  August  16,  2012,  the  EPA  adopted  final  regulations  under  the  Clean  Air  Act  that,  among  other  things,  require  additional
emissions controls for natural gas and natural gas liquids production, including New Source
Table of Contents
75
Performance Standards to address emissions of sulfur dioxide and volatile organic compounds (“VOCs”) and a separate set of
emission standards to address hazardous air pollutants frequently associated with such production activities. The final regulations
require  the  reduction  of  VOC  emissions  from  natural  gas  wells  through  the  use  of  reduced  emission  completions  or  “green
completions” on all hydraulically fractured wells constructed or refractured after January 1, 2015. For well completion operations
occurring at such well sites before January 1, 2015, the final regulations allow operators to capture and direct flowback emissions
to completion combustion devices, such as flares, in lieu of performing green completions. These regulations also establish specific
new requirements regarding emissions from dehydrators, storage tanks and other production equipment. On September 23, 2014,
the EPA revised the emission requirements for storage tanks emitting certain levels of VOCs requiring a 95% reduction of VOC
emissions by April 15, 2014 and April 15, 2015 (depending on the date of construction of the storage tank). In June 2016, the EPA
finalized additional amendments to these rules that would require further reductions in VOC and methane emissions. In addition to
reducing  emissions  from  hydraulically  fractured  wells,  the  rules  require  emission  reductions  further  downstream,  including
equipment in the natural gas transmission segment of the industry. As a result of these rules, we may be required to incur certain
capital expenditures in the future for air pollution control equipment in connection with obtaining and maintaining operating permits
and  approvals  for  air  emissions.  However,  we  believe  our  operations  will  not  be  materially  adversely  affected  by  any  such
requirements, and the requirements are not expected to be any more burdensome to us than to other similarly situated companies
involved in oil and natural gas exploration and production activities.
In addition, efforts have been made and continue to be made in the international community toward the adoption of international
treaties or protocols that would address global climate change issues. Most recently in 2015, the United States participated in the
United Nations Conference on Climate Change, which led to the creation of the Paris Agreement. The United States signed the
Paris  Agreement  on  April  22,  2016  and  indicated  that  it  intends  to  ratify  the  agreement  in  2016.  The  Paris  Agreement,  once
effective, would require ratifying countries to review and “represent a progression” in the ambitions of their nationally determined
contributions, which set GHG emission reduction goals, every five years.
Regulation of oil and natural gas exploration and production.    Our exploration and production operations are subject to various
types of regulation at the federal, state and local levels. Such regulations include requiring permits and drilling bonds for the drilling
of wells, regulating the location of wells, the method of drilling and casing wells and the surface use and restoration of properties
upon which wells are drilled. Many states also have statutes or regulations addressing conservation matters, including provisions
for the unitization or pooling of oil and natural gas properties, the establishment of maximum rates of production from oil and natural
gas wells and the regulation of spacing, plugging and abandonment of such wells. Some state statutes limit the rate at which oil
and natural gas can be produced from our properties.
State regulation.    Most states regulate the production and sale of oil and natural gas, including requirements for obtaining drilling
permits,  the  method  of  developing  new  fields,  the  spacing  and  operation  of  wells  and  the  prevention  of  waste  of  oil  and  gas
resources. The rate of production may be regulated and the maximum daily production allowable from both oil and gas wells may
be established on a market demand or conservation basis or both.
Office and Operations Facilities
Our executive offices are located at 5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500 in Frisco, Texas 75034 and our telephone number is
(972) 668-8800. We lease office space in Frisco, Texas covering 66,382 square feet at a monthly rate of $124,466. This lease
expires on December 31, 2021. We also own production offices and pipe yard facilities near Marshall, Jourdanton and Zapata,
Texas and Logansport, Louisiana.
Table of Contents
Employees
76
As of July 29, 2016, we had 117 employees and utilized contract employees for certain of our field operations. We consider our
employee relations to be satisfactory.
Legal Proceedings
We are not a party to any legal proceedings which management believes will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated
results of operations or financial condition.
Table of Contents
77
MANAGEMENT
Directors and Executive Officers
The following table sets forth certain information concerning our directors and executive officers.
Name
M. Jay Allison
Roland O. Burns
Mack D. Good
D. Dale Gillette
Michael D. McBurney
Daniel K. Presley
Russell W. Romoser
LaRae L. Sanders
Richard D. Singer
Blaine M. Stribling
Elizabeth B. Davis
David K. Lockett
Cecil E. Martin
Frederic D. Sewell
David W. Sledge
Jim L. Turner
Position with Company
Age
60    Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors
  56    President, Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Director
  65    Chief Operating Officer
  70    Vice President of Legal and General Counsel
  60    Vice President of Marketing
  55    Vice President of Accounting, Controller and Treasurer
  64    Vice President of Reservoir Engineering
  54    Vice President of Land
  62    Vice President of Financial Reporting
  45    Vice President of Corporate Development
  53    Director
  62    Director
  75    Director
  81    Director
  59    Director
  70    Director
A brief biography of each person who serves as a director or executive officer follows below.
Executive Officers
M. Jay Allison has been our Chief Executive Officer since 1988. Mr. Allison was elected Chairman of the Board in 1997 and has
been a director since 1987. From 1988 to 2013, Mr. Allison served as our President. From 1981 to 1987, he was a practicing oil and
gas attorney with the firm of Lynch, Chappell & Alsup in Midland, Texas. Mr. Allison was Chairman of the board of directors of Bois
d’Arc Energy, Inc. from the time of its formation in 2004 until its merger with Stone Energy Corporation in 2008. Mr. Allison currently
also  serves  as  a  Director  of  Tidewater,  Inc.  and  is  on  the  Board  of  Regents  for  Baylor  University.  Mr.  Allison  has  28  years  of
executive leadership experience in the oil and gas industry. Mr. Allison combines his educational background in business and in
commercial law, along with his entrepreneurial spirit, his driven work ethic and extensive knowledge of the oil and gas industry, to
pursue disciplined investments intended to enhance stockholder value. Mr. Allison’s service on the board of directors and audit
committee of Tidewater, Inc. also provides him with knowledge, experience and insight from a global perspective.
Roland O. Burns has been our President since 2013, Chief Financial Officer since 1990, Secretary since 1991 and a director since
1999. Mr. Burns served as our Senior Vice President from 1994 to 2013 and Treasurer from 1990 to 2013. From 1982 to 1990,
Mr. Burns was employed by the public accounting firm, Arthur Andersen. During his tenure with Arthur Andersen, Mr. Burns worked
primarily in the firm’s oil and gas audit practice. Mr. Burns was a director, Senior Vice President and the Chief Financial Officer of
Bois d’Arc Energy, Inc. from the time of its formation in 2004 until its merger with Stone Energy Corporation in 2008. Mr. Burns
currently serves on the Board of Directors of the Cotton Bowl Athletic Association. Mr. Burns is an experienced financial executive
with  extensive  knowledge  and  experience  in  financial  reporting,  internal  controls  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry,  treasury  and  risk
management, mergers and acquisitions, and regulatory compliance. Mr. Burns works with Mr. Allison to evaluate and consider
business development opportunities and financing proposals. Mr. Burns, who is our principal contact with investors and investment
bankers, updates the Board on trends in the capital markets, including the availability of debt and equity financing and transactional
activity in the oil and gas industry.
Table of Contents
78
Mack D. Good returned as our Chief Operating Officer in March 2015. Mr. Good previously served as our Chief Operating Officer
from 2004 until 2011, when he retired. From 1997 until 2004 he served in various other management and engineering positions
with  us.  From  1983  until  1997  Mr.  Good  was  with  Enserch  Exploration,  Inc.,  serving  in  various  engineering  and  operations
management positions. Mr. Good received a B.S. of Biology/Chemistry from Oklahoma State University in 1975 and a B.S. degree
of Petroleum Engineering from the University of Tulsa in 1983.
D. Dale Gillette became our General Counsel and Vice President of Legal in 2014. He has been our General Counsel since 2006.
From 2006 until November 2014, Mr. Gillette was also our Vice President of Land. Prior to joining us, Mr. Gillette practiced law
extensively in the energy sector for 34 years, most recently as a partner with Gardere Wynne Sewell LLP, and before that with
Locke  Liddell  &  Sapp  LLP  (now  known  as  Locke  Lord  LLP).  During  that  time  he  represented  independent  exploration  and
production  companies  and  large  financial  institutions  in  numerous  oil  and  gas  transactions.  Mr.  Gillette  has  also  served  as
corporate counsel in the legal department of Mesa Petroleum Co. and in the legal department of Enserch Corp. Mr. Gillette holds
B.A. and J.D. degrees from the University of Texas and is a member of the State Bar of Texas.
Michael D. McBurney has been our Vice President of Marketing since 2013. Mr. McBurney has over 33 years of energy industry
experience  within  the  oil,  natural  gas,  LNG,  and  power  segments.  For  the  past  seven  years  Mr.  McBurney  worked  for  EXCO
Resources, Inc., an independent exploration and production company where he was responsible for natural gas and natural gas
liquids marketing. From 2000 to 2006, Mr. McBurney was with FPL Energy of Florida, where he was responsible for Fuel and
Transportation logistics for large scale power generation facilities located throughout the U.S. Mr. McBurney received a B.B.A. in
Finance from the University of North Texas in 1978.
Daniel K. Presley was named our Treasurer in 2013. Mr. Presley, who has been with us since 1989, also continues to serve as our
Vice President of Accounting and Controller, positions he has had held since 1997 and 1991, respectively. Prior to joining us,
Mr.  Presley  had  six  years  of  experience  with  several  independent  oil  and  gas  companies  including  AmBrit  Energy,  Inc.  Prior
thereto, Mr. Presley spent two and one-half years with B.D.O. Seidman, a public accounting firm. Mr. Presley received a B.B.A.
degree from Texas A & M University in 1983.
Russell  W.  Romoser  has  been  our  Vice  President  of  Reservoir  Engineering  since  2012.  Mr.  Romoser  has  over  39  years  of
experience  as  a  reservoir  engineer  both  with  industry  and  with  a  petroleum  engineering  consulting  firm.  Prior  to  joining  us,
Mr. Romoser served eleven years as the Acquisitions Engineering Manager for EXCO Resources, Inc. Mr. Romoser received a
B.S. Degree in Petroleum Engineering in 1975 and a Masters Degree in Petroleum Engineering in 1976 from the University of
Texas and is a Registered Professional Engineer in Oklahoma and Texas.
LaRae L. Sanders was named our Vice President of Land in November 2014. Ms. Sanders has been with us since 1995. She has
served as Land Manager since 2007, and has been instrumental in all of our active development programs and major acquisitions.
Prior  to  joining  us,  Ms.  Sanders  held  positions  with  Bridge  Oil  Company  and  Kaiser-Francis  Oil  Company,  as  well  as  other
independent exploration and production companies. Ms. Sanders is a Certified Professional Landman with 35 years of experience.
She became the nation’s first Certified Professional Lease and Title Analyst in 1990.
Richard D. Singer has been our Vice President of Financial Reporting since 2005. Mr. Singer has over 39 years of experience in
financial  accounting  and  reporting.  Prior  to  joining  us,  Mr.  Singer  most  recently  served  as  an  assistant  controller  for  Holly
Corporation from 2004 to 2005 and as assistant controller for Santa Fe International Corporation from 1988 to 2002. Mr. Singer
received a B.S. degree from the Pennsylvania State University in 1976 and is a Certified Public Accountant.
Blaine M. Stribling has been our Vice President of Corporate Development since 2012. From 2007 to early 2012, Mr. Stribling
served as our Asset & Corporate Development Manager. Prior to joining us, Mr. Stribling managed
Table of Contents
79
a development project team at Encana Oil & Gas from 2005 to 2007. Prior to 2005 he worked in various petroleum engineering
operations management positions of increasing responsibility for several independent oil and gas exploration and development
companies. Mr. Stribling received a B.S. Degree in Petroleum Engineering from the Colorado School of Mines.
Outside Directors
Elizabeth B. Davis has served as a director since 2014. Dr. Davis is currently the President of Furman University. Dr. Davis was the
Executive Vice President and Provost for Baylor University until 2014, and served as Interim Provost from 2008 to 2010. Prior to her
appointment as Provost, she was a professor of accounting in the Hankamer School of Business at Baylor University where she
also served as associate dean for undergraduate programs and as acting chair for the Department of Accounting and Business
Law. Prior to joining Baylor University, she worked for the public accounting firm Arthur Andersen from 1984 to 1987. Dr. Davis
brings  to  the  Board  executive  experience  from  her  leadership  roles  in  higher  education  as  well  as  expertise  in  finance  and
accounting from her teaching and research experiences.
David  K.  Lockett  has  served  as  a  director  since  2001.  Mr.  Lockett  was  a  Vice  President  with  Dell  Inc.  and  held  executive
management positions in several divisions within Dell from 1991 until his retirement from Dell in 2012. Since 2014, Mr. Lockett has
served as President of Austex Fence & Deck in Austin, Texas. Between 2012 and 2014, Mr. Lockett, who has over 35 years of
experience in the technology industry, provided consulting services to small and mid-size companies. Mr. Lockett was a director of
Bois d’Arc Energy, Inc. from 2005 until its merger with Stone Energy Corporation in 2008. Mr. Lockett joined Dell during its start-up
years  and  worked  in  executive  level  positions  at  Dell  throughout  his  tenure  there.  He  is  an  experienced  manager,  having
supervised  large  organizations  through  a  series  of  business  cycles  in  the  highly  competitive  personal  computer/peripheral
business.  Mr.  Lockett  shares  the  good  business  judgment  and  insight  gained  from  these  experiences  with  the  Board  and  also
provides guidance from the perspective gained from a long career in a global market-focused company.
Cecil E. Martin has served as a director since 1989 and is currently the chairman of our audit committee and our Lead Director.
Mr.  Martin  is  an  independent  commercial  real  estate  investor  who  has  primarily  been  managing  his  personal  real  estate
investments  since  1991.  From  1973  to  1991,  he  also  served  as  chairman  of  a  public  accounting  firm  in  Richmond,  Virginia.
Mr. Martin was a director and chairman of the audit committee of Bois d’Arc Energy, Inc. from 2005 until its merger with Stone
Energy Corporation in 2008. Mr. Martin also served on the board of directors of Crosstex Energy, Inc. and Crosstex Energy, L.P.
until  their  merger  with  EnLink  Midstream  and  EnLink  Midstream  Partners  LP,  respectively,  in  March  2014.  Mr.  Martin  currently
serves on the board of directors of Garrison Capital, Inc. He served as chairman of the compensation committee at Crosstex Energy
L.P. and currently serves as chairman of the Audit Committee at Garrison Capital, Inc. Mr. Martin is a Certified Public Accountant.
Mr. Martin brings to our Board a combination of financial literacy and business management experience as well as an excellent
understanding  of  the  capital  markets.  Mr.  Martin  has  a  strong  background  in  internal  controls,  financial  reporting  and  financial
analysis. He works closely with our Chief Financial Officer, independent public accountants and internal auditors on a wide range
of issues. His service on the compensation and audit committees of other publicly traded companies allows him to bring a wide
range of experience and insights as part of his service on our Board.
Frederic D. Sewell has served as a director since 2012. Mr. Sewell has extensive experience in the oil and gas industry, where he
has had a distinguished career as an executive leader and a petroleum engineer. Mr. Sewell was the co-founder of Netherland,
Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”), a worldwide oil and gas consulting firm, where he served as the Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer until his retirement in 2008. Mr. Sewell is presently the President and Chief Executive Officer of Sovereign Resources LLC,
an exploration and production company that he founded. Mr. Sewell has over 50 years of experience as a petroleum engineer.
During his career with NSAI, Mr. Sewell established relationships with many of the leading energy firms in the United States and
gained extensive knowledge of domestic and international oil and gas operations. Mr. Sewell managed the
80
Table of Contents
growth  of  NSAI,  which  he  co-founded  in  1969,  into  one  of  the  most  respected  worldwide  upstream  petroleum  consulting
organizations in the world. Mr. Sewell brings expertise and extensive knowledge of petroleum engineering, the geology of North
American oil and gas basins and the estimation of oil and gas reserves to our Board.
David W. Sledge has served as a director since 1996. Mr. Sledge is the Chief Operating Officer of ProPetro Services, Inc. Mr.
Sledge was President and Chief Operating Officer of Sledge Drilling Company until it was acquired by Basic Energy Services, Inc.
in  2007  and  served  as  a  Vice  President  of  Basic  Energy  Services,  Inc.  from  2007  to  2009.  He  served  as  an  area  operations
manager  for  Patterson-UTI  Energy,  Inc.  from  2004  until  2006.  From  2009  through  2011,  and  from  1996  until  2004,  Mr.  Sledge
managed his personal investments in oil and gas exploration activities. Mr. Sledge was a director of Bois d’Arc Energy, Inc. from
2005 until its merger with Stone Energy Corporation in 2008. Mr. Sledge is a past director of the International Association of Drilling
Contractors  and  is  a  past  chairman  of  the  Permian  Basin  chapter  of  this  association.  Mr.  Sledge  is  an  experienced  oil  field
executive who has managed and started drilling and oil field service companies during a career that spans more than 30 years. Mr.
Sledge’s  experience  ranges  from  founding  and  directing  the  operations  of  a  drilling  rig  business  to  serving  as  an  executive
manager  for  one  of  the  largest  drilling  companies  in  the  United  States.  Mr.  Sledge  has  extensive  contacts  in  the  oil  and  gas
industry, which, coupled with his oil field experience, makes him a valuable resource in understanding industry trends, operating
practices and business prospects.
Jim L. Turner has served as a director since 2014. Mr. Turner currently serves as principal of JLT Beverages, L.P., a position he has
held  since  1996.  Mr.  Turner  is  also  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  JLT  Automotive,  Inc.  Mr.  Turner  served  as  President  and  Chief
Executive Officer of Dr. Pepper/Seven Up Bottling Group, Inc., from its formation in 1999 through 2005, when he sold his interest in
that company. Prior to that, Mr. Turner served as Owner/Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of the Turner Beverage
Group, the largest privately owned independent bottler in the United States. Mr. Turner currently serves as non-executive chairman
of the board of directors for Dean Foods Company and as the chairman of the board of trustees of Baylor Scott & White Health, the
largest not-for-profit healthcare system in the state of Texas. He is also a director of Crown Holdings, Inc., INSURICA, and Davaco,
Inc. Mr. Turner brings his extensive business experience as chairman and chief executive officer of a large corporation to the Board.
Mr. Turner has valuable experience in business development, finance and mergers and acquisitions. Mr. Turner’s service as a
director  of  two  NYSE-listed  companies,  including  his  service  as  the  chairman  of  the  board  and  chairman  of  the  compensation
committee, provides substantial experience and insight to our Board.
Determinations of Director Independence
Under rules adopted by the NYSE, we must have a majority of independent directors on our Board. No Board member qualifies as
independent unless the Board affirmatively determines that the director has no material relationship with us (either directly, or as a
partner, stockholder or officer of an organization that has a relationship with us). In evaluating each director’s independence, the
Board  considers  all  relevant  facts  and  circumstances,  relationships  and  transactions  between  each  director,  his  or  her  family
members or any business, charity or other entity in which the director has an interest, on the one hand, and us, our affiliates, or our
executives, on the other. As a result of this review, the Board affirmatively determined that among the director nominees, Dr. Davis
and Messrs. Lockett, Martin and Sewell are independent from us and our management. Of the directors continuing in office, the
Board  has  determined  that  Messrs.  Sledge  and  Turner  are  independent  according  to  the  NYSE’s  rules.  The  Board  evaluates
independence on an on-going basis.
Table of Contents
Board Committees
81
In  addition  to  the  executive  committee,  the  Board  has  three  committees  which  are  composed  entirely  of  independent  directors.
Membership of these committees is as follows:
Audit
Cecil E. Martin, Chair
Elizabeth B. Davis
Frederic D. Sewell
Compensation
  David K. Lockett, Chair
  Cecil E. Martin
  Jim L. Turner
Corporate
Governance/Nominating
 
  Frederic D. Sewell, Chair
  David W. Sledge
  Elizabeth B. Davis
Each of these committees operates pursuant to a written charter which can be found in the “Corporate Governance” section of our
website at www.comstockresources.com. As stated earlier, documents and information on our website are not incorporated herein
by reference. These documents are also available in print from the Corporate Secretary, 5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500,
Frisco, Texas 75034.
The audit committee reviews and approves the Company’s financial statements and earnings releases, oversees the internal audit
function  and  reviews  the  Company’s  internal  accounting  controls.  The  audit  committee  oversees  the  implementation  of  the
Company’s compliance policies and programs relating to the Company’s financial statements and monitors ongoing compliance
matters and concerns. The audit committee also reviews related party transactions. The audit committee has the sole authority to
appoint, review and discharge our independent registered public accountants.
The compensation committee is responsible for overseeing and approving the Company’s compensation programs including our
non-employee  director  compensation  program.  It  is  also  responsible  for  reviewing  and  approving  the  compensation  plans  and
decisions for all executive officers. It also oversees and regularly reviews the compensation program for all our employees and
supervises the compensation and benefits policies and plans of the Company. The compensation committee frequently meets in
executive sessions to discuss and approve compensation plans and decisions. The compensation committee is assisted in these
matters by an independent compensation consultant, hired by and serving at the pleasure of the committee.
The corporate governance/nominating committee is responsible for developing, overseeing, reviewing and monitoring compliance
with  the  Company’s  policies,  programs  and  practices  relating  to  corporate  governance,  including  the  Company’s  corporate
governance guidelines, and for evaluating and monitoring compliance with the Company’s policies, and making recommendations
to  the  Board  on  various  governance  issues.  The  committee  is  also  responsible  for  reviewing  and  recommending  to  the  Board
director nominees, recommending committee assignments and conducting an annual review of Board and committee effectiveness.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
Our compensation committee is comprised entirely of independent directors. None of the members of the committee during 2015 or
as of the date of this prospectus is or has been an officer or employee of the Company and no executive officer of the Company has
served  on  the  compensation  committee  or  board  of  directors  of  any  company  that  employed  any  member  of  the  Company’s
compensation committee or Board.
Related Party Transactions
The Board has in place a written policy regarding the approval of related party transactions. At regularly scheduled audit committee
meetings, management will recommend any related party transactions that are contemplated, and such transactions will require the
audit  committee’s  approval.  Generally,  a  “related  party”  is  each  of  our  executive  officers,  directors,  nominees  for  director,  any
stockholder owning greater than five percent of our outstanding shares, including any immediate family member of each of the
foregoing,  and  any  entity  owned  or  controlled  by  any  of  the  foregoing.  Transactions  that  are  available  to  all  of  our  employees
generally or totaling less than $5,000 when aggregated with all similar transactions are excluded from the policy.
Table of Contents
82
With respect to the standards applied by the audit committee when deciding whether to approve a related party transaction, the
audit committee shall approve or ratify the transaction if it is on terms believed to be comparable to those that could be obtained in
arm’s length dealings with an unrelated third party.
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Comstock’s  executive  compensation  programs  are  intended  to  align  pay  outcomes  with  performance  achievements,  grow
stockholder value, attract and retain executive talent and support the Company’s business strategy. We believe that our executive
compensation  programs  as  currently  designed  align  executive  pay  with  Company  performance,  stockholder  expectations  and
prevailing market practices.
90% of the shares voted at this year’s annual meeting approved our 2015 executive compensation by supporting our “Say on Pay”
proposal.
2015 was a very challenging year for the Company as oil and natural gas prices fell by 49% and 45%, respectively. Given the
difficult industry conditions, the compensation committee determined that no employee bonuses would be paid, including awards
earned by our executive officers under the Annual Incentive Plan.
Key Compensation Program Features
•
Aligns  pay  and  performance,  using  an  annual  incentive  bonus  plan  that  is  based  entirely  on  achieving  financial
performance goals and by providing 50% of LTI equity awards in PSUs based on relative TSR versus our peer group
•
•
•
•
Market  competitive,  by  benchmarking  compensation  against  a  revised  peer  group  of  appropriately  sized  oil  and  gas
exploration and production companies and by implementing pay changes that directly reflect the practices of this peer
group
Incorporates  stockholder  interests,  by  aligning  pay  with  stockholder  value  creation,  holding  discussions  with  large
stockholders to obtain their feedback on our compensation programs and implementing many of their suggestions
Employs  best  practices  in  corporate  governance,  including  adopting  stock  ownership  guidelines,  clawback  and  anti-
hedging policies and eliminating excise and other tax gross ups in our compensation plans
Governed by independent directors that are advised by independent consultants
Company Performance
2015 was a challenging year for us and for the industry generally. Oil and natural gas prices fell by 49% and 45%, respectively. The
low  prices  significantly  reduced  our  revenues  and  cash  flow.  The  successful  results  from  our  return  to  development  of  our
Haynesville/Bossier shale assets in North Louisiana was the highlight of 2015. We drilled ten enhanced completion horizontal
natural gas wells which all had the highest initial production rates of any wells drilled in the Company’s history. The successful
drilling program added 161 billion cubic feet to our proved reserves base which offset much of the effect of low oil and gas prices.
We were also able to grow our natural gas production by 20% with a limited capital expenditure budget.
Compensation Program Objectives
Our compensation committee has responsibility for establishing and administering the compensation objectives, policies and plans
for  our  executive  officers.  The  compensation  program  and  the  executive  officers’  compensation  are  determined  by  the
compensation committee. The committee bases its decisions concerning specific compensation elements and total compensation
paid or awarded to our executive officers on several different objectives, which include:
•
Providing compensation that is competitive with the compensation of companies that have operations similar to us and are
in similar markets for executive talent;
Table of Contents
83
•
•
•
Encouraging focus on both short-term and long-term performance, promoting stockholder value through strategic business
decisions and the achievement of performance objectives;
Providing performance-based incentive compensation intended to vary with company and individual performance, while
appropriately moderating the impact of the cyclical nature of our business; and
Facilitating  ownership  of  our  common  stock  by  our  executive  officers  through  equity-based  incentives  so  that
management’s interests are closely aligned with those of stockholders in terms of both risk and reward.
Our executive team, led by M. Jay Allison, our CEO, and Roland O. Burns, our President and Chief Financial Officer, is highly
regarded in the industry. The long tenure of Messrs. Allison and Burns leading our company is a key factor in driving stockholder
value. The committee believes it is critical to continually invest in retaining this leadership team and reward them for performance.
Their  experience  is  particularly  critical  at  this  time  as  we  continue  to  strategically  position  the  Company  to  be  more  balanced
between  oil  and  natural  gas  production  and  reserves.  The  executive  team’s  compensation  will  reflect  our  performance  when
measured against these objectives.
Our compensation committee held five meetings during 2015 and it has met once during 2016. In December 2015, the committee
approved  base  salaries  for  2016.  In  February  2016,  the  achievement  of  performance-based  annual  incentives  for  2015  was
reviewed and approved and LTI awards were approved.
Compensation Components
The purpose and key features of each component of our executive compensation program are summarized below:
Component
Base salary
Annual incentive
award
Performance-
based restricted
stock unit awards
(PSUs)
Table of Contents
Restricted stock
awards
Executive Life
Insurance Program
Employment
Agreements
Other Benefits
Objective
Key Features
tenure,  and  contribution
Reflects  each  executive’s  level  of  responsibility,
the
leadership, 
achievement 
business
objectives and is designed to be competitive with
our peer group
the  Company’s
of
to
Measures and rewards achievement of short-term
performance  goals 
the  annual
business plan
that  apply
to
Aligns  the  long-term  interests  of  our  executive
officers  with  our  stockholders  by  determining  the
number  of  shares  earned  for  each  performance
period by our TSR in comparison to the peer group
84
Motivates  our  executive  officers  to  achieve  our
business  objectives  by  tying  incentives  to  the
performance  of  our  common  stock  over  the  long
term;  motivates  our  executive  officers  to  remain
with 
in
incentive values during periods of high commodity
price volatility
the  Company  by  mitigating  swings
Fixed  compensation  that  is  reviewed  annually  and
adjusted as appropriate.
Performance-based cash incentives made up 100%
of  our  named  executive  officers’  2015  annual
incentive  awards  and  were  based  on 
the
achievement of pre-established performance goals.
The  performance  goals  are  established  and  target
awards are approved during March for each year. A
target  award  is  established,  as  well  as  threshold
performance  and  maximum  performance  award
levels.
Performance-based  LTI  awards  represent  50%  of
our  named  executive  officers’  LTI  awards.  The
ultimate  number  of  units  earned  is  based  on  the
achievement of our TSR relative to the peer group.
Restricted stock awards which vest over three years
under which the ultimate value realized varies with
our  common  stock  price.  Restricted  stock  awards
represent 50% of our named executive officers’ LTI
awards.
Provides  life  insurance  protection  and  retirement
savings for our executive officers
The Company’s contributions each year equal 5% of
each  executive’s  salary  and  prior  year’s  bonus,
used to purchase life insurance coverage.
Provide 
industry  appropriate  post-termination
compensation  in  certain  circumstances  to  our
CEO, President and Chief Operating Officer
Employment agreements were amended in 2014 to
align  with  market  practice  and  reflect  current
governance  standards.  Severance  benefits  related
to  a  change 
the
executive’s  employment  has  been  involuntarily  or
constructively  terminated  (“double  trigger”).  There
are  no  golden  parachute  excise  tax  or  other  tax
“gross-ups”.
in  control  now  require
that
401(k)  Plan  participation  and  employee  welfare
plan  programs  designed  to  be  competitive  in
recruiting and retaining employees
Our  executive  officers  participate  in  the  retirement
and welfare plan programs on the same terms as all
other employees.
The compensation committee has not established formal policies or guidelines with respect to the mix of base salary, annual cash
bonus and stock-based awards to be paid or awarded to the executive officers. In general, the compensation committee believes
that a greater percentage of the compensation for our executives should be stock-based awards and should be based on individual
and overall corporate performance to align the interests of our executives with our stockholders.
Roles and Responsibilities
In  2015,  the  compensation  committee  and  the  Board  made  all  compensation  decisions  for  the  Company’s  executive  officers
including  the  CEO.  The  committee  retained  Meridian  Compensation  Partners,  LLC  (“Meridian”)  to  review  our  compensation
program including peer benchmarking analysis to assess the competitiveness of our compensation levels, design, practices and
processes. Meridian is an independent compensation consulting firm and does not provide any other services outside of matters
pertaining  to  executive  and  director  compensation  and  related  corporate  governance  matters.  Meridian  reports  directly  to  the
compensation committee, which is the sole party responsible for determining the scope of services performed, the directions given
regarding the performance of those services, and the approval of the payment of invoices for those services.
The  compensation  committee  has  the  sole  authority  to  retain  or  terminate  its  compensation  consultant.  The  compensation
consultant’s role with the Company is limited to executive compensation matters and no such services are performed unless at the
direction  of  and  with  the  approval  of  the  committee.  In  connection  with  its  engagement  of  Meridian,  the  committee  considered
various factors bearing on their independence, including the
Table of Contents
85
amount of fees paid by the Company in 2015 and the percentage of total revenues they represented; their policies and procedures
for preventing conflicts of interest and compliance therewith; any personal and business relationship of any of their personnel with
any of our compensation committee members or executive officers; and their policies prohibiting stock ownership by their personnel
engaged  in  any  Company  matter  and  the  compliance  therewith.  After  reviewing  these  factors,  the  compensation  committee
determined that Meridian is independent and that their engagement did not present any conflict of interest.
Determining Market Compensation
Peer Group
Meridian  assisted  our  compensation  committee  by  making  recommendations  regarding  market  compensation.  This  included
recommending an appropriate peer group against which to benchmark our executives’ compensation. Selection of the companies
within the peer group was based not only upon the total revenue and market capitalization of companies within the exploration and
production industry, but also the core areas in which the companies compete and the complexity of their operations.
For 2015, the peer group companies utilized by the compensation committee were:
Approach Resources Inc.
Bill Barrett Corporation
Carrizo Oil & Gas, Inc.
Cimarex Energy Co.
Laredo Petroleum, Inc.
Oasis Petroleum Inc.
PDC Energy, Inc.
Rosetta Resources Inc.*
SM Energy Company
Stone Energy Corporation
Swift Energy Company
Ultra Petroleum Corp.
*Removed from Peer Group for 2015.
During 2015, the stock of Rosetta Resources, Inc. ceased trading on public markets, and accordingly, this company was removed
from our peer group for 2015.
For 2016, the compensation committee adopted a new peer group comprised of fifteen companies that have median revenues of
approximately  $293  million,  median  assets  of  $1.4  billion,  median  market  capitalization  of  $405  million  and  median  enterprise
value of $1.2 billion. For 2016, the peer group companies are:
Approach Resources Inc.
Bill Barrett Corporation
Bonanza Creek Energy, Inc.
Callon Petroleum Holdings, Inc.
Carrizo Oil & Gas, Inc.
Eclipse Resources Corporation
Jones Energy, Inc.
Laredo Petroleum, Inc.
Matador Resources, Inc.
Oasis Petroleum, Inc.
PDC Energy, Inc.
Parsley Energy Corporation
Rex Energy Corporation
Stone Energy Corporation
Ultra Petroleum Corp.
The composition of our peer group is reviewed each year and may change based on business combinations, asset acquisitions
and/or sales, and other types of transactions that cause peer companies to no longer exist or no longer be comparable.
Benchmarking Compensation
On an annual basis, the compensation of our executives and all our employees are benchmarked against our peer group and
reviewed for market competitiveness. Meridian compiled compensation data for the peer group from a variety of sources, including
proxy statements and other publicly filed documents. Peer benchmarking is only one of many considerations used to determine
market compensation. Meridian also provided the compensation committee with compensation data from the 2015 North America
Oil and Gas Exploration & Production Compensation Survey, administered by Meridian (data effective as of June 1, 2015).
Table of Contents
Determination of Base Salaries
86
Base  salaries  for  executive  officers  are  based  on  each  individual’s  responsibilities,  experience  and  performance,  taking  into
account among other things, the individual’s initiative, contributions to our overall performance, managerial ability and handling of
special projects. These same factors are applied to establish base salaries for other key management employees. Base salaries for
executive  officers  generally  are  reviewed  annually  for  possible  adjustment.  The  compensation  committee  determines  the  base
salary of our executive officers including the CEO.
In December 2015, our compensation committee reviewed base salaries for all NEOs for 2016 and determined that it would hold
their base salaries flat in 2016 based on benchmarking data and current industry conditions.
Determination of Annual Incentives
Annual cash bonuses are provided to promote achievement of our business objectives of increasing stockholder value by growing
production  and  reserves  on  a  profitable  basis.  All  of  our  full-time  employees  participate  in  an  annual  bonus  plan.  In  2012,  the
compensation  committee  adopted  the  performance  bonus  plan,  the  2012  Incentive  Compensation  Plan  (the  “Annual  Incentive
Plan”), for the CEO and President. Beginning in 2014, all of our executive officers are included in the Annual Incentive Plan. Annual
bonus awards are paid from a performance-based bonus pool that will allow for full tax deductibility of the bonuses paid under
Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code.
The  compensation  committee  set  the  funding  for  the  2015  performance-based  bonus  pool  at  5%  of  the  Company’s  EBITDAX
(earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, amortization and exploration expense), a measure of profitability that is commonly used
within the oil and gas exploration and production industry. Individual bonus awards were determined through the Annual Incentive
Plan  based  on  the  achievement  of  financial,  strategic  and  operational  objectives.  In  March  2015,  the  compensation  committee
approved target bonus opportunities for the executive officers, expressed as a percentage of their annual base salary. The bonus
targets were determined based on the results of Meridian’s competitive benchmarking analysis, and are reviewed annually.
The 2015 threshold, target, and maximum bonus opportunities for our NEOs that were established by the compensation committee
were as follows:
Position
 
CEO
President
Chief Operating Officer
General Counsel
Vice President of Accounting
Table of Contents
87
Threshold
Target
(Percentage of Annual Base Salary)
50%  
45%  
40%  
30%  
30%
100%  
90%  
80%  
60%  
60%
Maximum  
 
200%  
180%  
160%  
120%  
120%
The  executives  had  the  opportunity  to  earn  bonus  awards  within  a  range  of  0%  to  a  maximum  of  200%  of  their  target  bonus
opportunity, based on the Company’s performance relative to pre-determined bonus components and goal levels. For 2015, the
bonus components and goal levels were as follows:
Production Growth
Capital Efficiency % (Improvement in Finding
Costs)
Reserve Replacement %
Weighting   
 
20%
Threshold    
  5% over 2014
Target
10% over 2014
Maximum  
 15% over 2014
20%
15% over 2014
20% over 2014
30% over 2014
Reserve Replacement %
Other Key Objectives
* Total Shareholder Return (TSR)
* Enhancing Liquidity
* Total Producing costs per Mcfe
* Leadership Development
* Execution of Strategic Plan
100%
75%
20%    
40%
125%
Each  bonus  component  was  weighted  and  up  to  50%  of  the  weighted  portion  of  target  bonus  could  have  been  earned  for
achievement of the threshold goal level; up to 100% could have been earned for achievement of the target goal level; and up to
200% could have been earned for achievement of the maximum goal level. For performance between the threshold, target and
maximum goal levels, weighted bonus contributions were determined using straight-line interpolation. If performance for a bonus
component was below the threshold goal level, no bonus was earned for that bonus component.
The Company’s achievement of the defined performance goals in 2015 was as follows:
Production Growth
Capital Efficiency %
Reserve Replacement %
Other Key Objectives
Achievement
Exceeded Target
1%
75%
148%
% of Target
Below Threshold
Maximum
Maximum
110%
Based  on  the  achievement  of  goals  in  2015,  our  NEOs  would  have  earned  payouts  of  124%  of  their  target  awards.  Given  the
difficult  industry  conditions,  the  compensation  committee  decided  not  to  pay  employee  bonuses  for  2015  and  accordingly  no
awards were made under the Annual Incentive Plan.
Long-term Incentive Awards
Our executives are eligible to receive long-term incentive awards under our stockholder approved 2009 Plan, which allows the
compensation committee to select from among a variety of award vehicles to make individual awards. The committee believes
long-term  incentive  awards  align  the  interests  of  the  executives  with  the  interests  of  our  stockholders,  provide  competitive  total
compensation opportunities and support the attraction and retention of key talent.
Restricted stock awards typically vest over three years. One-third of the PSUs granted could be earned based on the Company’s
TSR performance relative to a peer group in each of one-, two- and three-year performance periods. The use of three performance
periods allows us to properly manage the shares available for such awards under the 2009 Plan.
Table of Contents
88
During February 2015, the compensation committee approved LTI awards to the executives which consisted of an equal mix of
PSUs and restricted stock. In connection with his return to the Company, the compensation committee awarded 50,000 shares of
restricted stock to Mr. Good, our Chief Operating Officer, which vest one third in each of the three subsequent years. In making
decisions concerning these awards, the committee considered competitive benchmarking data, the performance of the Company,
individual  performance,  and  other  factors  the  committee  deemed  relevant.  The  following  table  reflects  the  LTI  awards  made  in
February 2015 to our NEOs:
CEO
President
Chief Operating Officer
General Counsel
Vice President of Accounting
(Units)
44,600
26,000
PSU Awards
4,097
4,097
—
Restricted
Stock Awards
(Shares)
44,600
26,000
50,000
4,097
4,097
To determine the PSUs earned, the committee certifies our TSR relative percentile. The number of shares that may be earned
ranges from 0% to 200% of the target PSUs granted. If our relative TSR performance is less than the 20th percentile, none of the
PSUs are earned. If our relative TSR performance is the 50th percentile, 100% of the target PSUs are earned. If our relative TSR
performance is at least the 90th percentile, 200% of the target PSUs are earned. Earned PSUs are interpolated between threshold,
target and maximum performance. The executive’s earned PSUs, as certified annually, are delivered to him in the form of shares of
restricted stock, which vest only if the executive remains employed following the end of the three-year performance period. The
restricted stock vests over three years, one-third per year from the date of grant.
The Company’s TSR performance in 2015 resulted in one-third of the PSU grants awarded in 2012 and 2014 being forfeited by the
Company’s executive officers. The remaining 2014 PSUs could be earned based on the Company’s relative TSR performance
against its 2014 peer group for the remaining performance periods of January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2016. The Company’s
executive officers earned 24% of one-third of the PSU grants awarded in 2015 based on the one year TSR performance at the 27th
percentile for the period January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2015. The remaining 2015 PSUs could be earned based on the
Company’s relative TSR performance for the remaining performance periods of January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2016 and
January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2017.
Executive Life Insurance Plan
We have an executive life insurance plan for our executive officers. The purpose of this plan is to provide additional life insurance
protection to our executive officers and savings for their retirement. Under this plan, we contribute five percent of each participant’s
annual cash compensation to purchase a variable universal life insurance policy. Each participant directs the investment of the
policy’s cash values among a selection of mutual funds offered by the carrier. During employment, the participants may designate a
beneficiary to receive payment of the death benefit (reduced by the amount of the premiums paid by us, which are repaid to us), but
have no other rights of ownership in the policy. Upon a participant’s termination of employment, the policy will be transferred to the
participant. Contributions to this plan totaled $218,500 in 2015.
Other Benefits
Our executive officers receive medical, group life insurance and other benefits including matching contributions under our 401(k)
plan that are available generally to all of our salaried employees over 21 years of age. We have no defined benefit retirement plans
for any of our employees.
Table of Contents
89
Other Matters Affecting Our Executive Compensation
Limitation on Income Tax Deduction for Executive Compensation
Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code generally limits the corporate income tax deduction for compensation paid to each
executive  officer,  other  than  the  Chief  Financial  Officer,  shown  in  the  summary  compensation  table  to  $1  million,  unless  the
compensation is “performance-based compensation” and qualifies under certain other exceptions. Our policy is primarily to design
and  administer  compensation  plans  which  support  the  achievement  of  long-term  strategic  objectives  and  enhance  stockholder
value. The committee also attempts to structure compensation programs that are tax-advantageous to us to the extent the programs
are consistent with our compensation philosophy. Awards of time-vested restricted stock and certain forms of cash compensation
do not qualify under Section 162(m). Awards under our Annual Incentive Plan and awards of PSUs are intended to qualify as
“performance-based compensation.”
Risk and Our Employee Compensation Program
The  compensation  committee  reviewed  the  possible  relationship  between  risk  and  our  incentive  compensation  program  for  all
employees. The compensation committee believes that there are no compensation incentives which encourage excessive risk and
are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company. The design of our incentive compensation program, which
seeks  to  eliminate  any  excessive  risks,  includes  (1)  basing  cash  bonuses  on  the  achievement  of  our  business  objectives  of
increasing stockholder value by growing production and reserves on a profitable basis, (2) the vesting of restricted stock awards
annually over three years, (3) the use of equity as a significant portion of incentive compensation, and (4) stock ownership and
retention requirements for our officers.
Clawback Provisions
Our  CEO  and  President  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  are  currently  subject  to  the  forfeiture  of  bonuses  and  profits  stipulated  by
Section 304 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002. In addition, the compensation committee adopted a recoupment policy during 2012
which would allow us to recoup excess incentive compensation from current or former executives at the vice president level or
above who received incentive-based compensation during the three year period preceding the date on which we are required to
prepare  a  financial  restatement.  This  policy  applies  to  incentive  compensation  granted  on  or  after  December  1,  2012.  Our
compensation  committee  will  adopt  provisions  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  when  final  regulatory
guidance is issued by the SEC.
Summary Compensation Table
The  following  table  reflects  the  elements  of  compensation  earned  by  our  named  executive  officers  under  our  executive
compensation programs.
Salary: Values shown represent the base salary earnings of the named executive officers.
Bonus: Values reflect the discretionary cash bonus earned by the named executive officers.
Grant Date Fair Value of Stock Awards: This column represents the grant date fair value of grants of restricted stock and PSUs.
Non-Equity  Incentive  Plan  Compensation:  This  column  represents  the  cash  bonus  earned  under  the  Company’s  Annual
Incentive Plan.
Non-Qualified  Deferred  Compensation  Earnings:  This  column  reflects  “above  market”  earnings  on  non-qualified  deferred
compensation plans. This is the difference between (i) actual earnings on the cash surrender values of universal life insurance
policies owned by us insuring each executive under our Executive Life Insurance Plan, and (ii) market interest rates, as determined
pursuant to the SEC’s rules.
Table of Contents
90
All Other Compensation: This column represents the value of the additional benefits provided by us that include the employer
match under our 401(k) plan, life insurance premiums paid by us for the benefit of certain executive officers, incremental costs
incurred for personal use of our corporate aircraft, and the value of insurance provided by the Company.
Name and
Principal Position   Year     Salary     Bonus    
M. Jay Allison
802,000
—
2015
$
Grant
Date Fair
Value of
Stock
Awards(1)    
$
2,174,994
Non-Equity
Incentive Plan
Compensation
—
Non-Qualified
Deferred
Compensation
Earnings
—
All Other
Compensation
(2)(3)
$
161,692
Total
$
3,138,686
2014
$
802,000
—
$
2,444,401
$
505,260
$
78,490
$
138,817
$
3,968,968
2013
 
2015
$
$
802,000
543,500
—
—
$
—
1,267,934
$
1,100,000
—
$
303,579
—
$
$
136,371
105,097
$
$
2,341,950
1,916,531
2014
$
543,500
—
$
1,425,908
$
308,165
$
19,571
$
49,193
$
2,346,337
2013
 
2015
$
$
543,500
281,250
—
—
$
—
1,445,000
$
617,778
—
$
218,993
—
$
$
48,513
15,900
$
$
1,428,784
1,742,150
2014
—
—
—
2013
 
2015
$
—
346,000
—
—
$
—
199,786
—
—
—
—
—
—
$
—
—
—
22,258
$
—
568,044
2014
$
346,000
—
$
222,727
$
130,788
$
9,644
$
21,353
$
730,512
2013
$
336,500
$
295,000
—
2015
$
250,000
2014
$
250,000
—
$
199,786
—
$
—
$
39,398
$
20,468
$
691,366
1,628
$
16,828
$
468,242
—
$
207,542
$
94,500
$
8,782
$
16,480
$
577,304
2013
$
227,750
$
225,000
—
—
$
58,874
$
16,116
$
527,740
Chief Executive
Officer
Roland O. Burns
President and Chief
Financial Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating
Officer(4)
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of
Land and General
Counsel
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of
Accounting,
Controller and
Treasurer
(1) The amounts in this column represent the aggregate grant date fair value of restricted stock grants and grants of PSUs.
(2) Perquisites  provided  to  Mr.  Allison  and  Mr.  Burns  in  2015  of  $21,148  and  $51,419,  respectively,  represent  the  Company’s
incremental costs incurred for their personal use of its corporate aircraft. Except for these amounts, perquisites provided by us to
executive officers did not exceed $10,000 for 2013, 2014 and 2015 and they are accordingly excluded from this table.
(3) Amounts in this column include life insurance premiums paid by us of $101,031 for Mr. Allison and $31,460 for Mr. Burns in
2013, 2014, and 2015, respectively.
(4) Mr. Good rejoined the Company in March 2015 following a brief retirement.
Grants of Plan-Based Awards in Fiscal Year 2015
In February 2015, the compensation committee made the following awards under the Annual Incentive Plan to the NEOs:
Name and
Principal Position
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
Roland O. Burns
President and Chief Financial Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer(1)
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of Legal and General Counsel
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of Accounting, Controller and Treasurer
Estimated Future Payouts Under
Non-Equity Incentive Plan Awards  
 
  Threshold     Target      Maximum  
$1,604,000
$   401,000
$802,000
$ 244,575
$489,150
$ 978,300
$ 150,000
$300,000
$ 600,000
$ 103,800
$207,600
$ 415,200
75,000
$150,000
$
$ 300,000
(1) Mr. Good rejoined the Company in March 2015 following a brief retirement.
The threshold, target and maximum amounts represent the potential amount payable under the Annual Incentive Plan based upon
achievement of the performance goals established for 2015. The compensation committee elected not to pay out any awards from
the Annual Incentive Plan for 2015.
Table of Contents
91
In February 2015, the compensation committee also made the following equity-based awards under the 2009 Plan to the NEOs:
Name and
Principal Position
M. Jay Allison
Stock Awards
Estimated Future Payouts Under
Equity Incentive Plan Awards
(Units)
Restricted
Stock
(Shares)
Grant Date
February 11, 2015
Threshold(1)    Target(1)    Maximum(1)   
89,200
44,600
22,300
Grant Date
Fair Value of
Stock
Number of
shares of
Stock(2)
44,600   $ 2,174,994
Awards(3)
Chief Executive Officer
Roland O. Burns
President and Chief Financial
Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer(4)
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of Legal and
General Counsel
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of Accounting,
Controller and Treasurer
February 11, 2015
February 23, 2015
February 11, 2015
February 11, 2015
13,000
26,000
—
2,049
2,049
—
4,097
4,097
52,000
—
8,194
8,194
26,000
50,000
$ 1,267,934
$ 1,445,000
4,097
$
199,786
4,097
$
199,786
(1) This amount represents PSUs granted under our 2009 Plan. PSUs represent the right to receive, upon settlement of the PSUs
after the completion of a vesting period, a number of shares of our common stock that may be from zero to two times the number
of PSUs granted on the award date, depending on the extent to which our performance criteria have been achieved and the
extent to which the PSUs have vested. The performance criteria for the PSUs are based on the relative ranking of our TSR for
the performance period and the TSR of certain peer companies for the performance period. The PSUs vest one third annually
over three performance periods, one year ending December 31, 2015, two years ending December 31, 2016 and three years
ending December 31, 2017.
(2) The restricted stock grants vest one third on each of February 20, 2016, 2017 and 2018.
(3) The grant date fair value of restricted stock awards was based upon the closing price for the company’s stock on February 11,
2015 of $26.85 per share ($28.90 per share as of February 23, 2015 for Mr. Good). The grant date fair value of PSUs was
determined to be $21.90 per unit. The grant date fair value of PSUs was computed based on the target award levels. Total PSU
awards in 2015 were 94,250 units with a target value of $2,065,648.
(4) Mr. Good rejoined the Company in March 2015 following a brief retirement.
Table of Contents
92
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End
The  following  table  sets  forth  certain  information  with  respect  to  the  value  of  outstanding  equity  awards  held  by  our  named
executives at December 31, 2015. There were no stock option awards outstanding.
Name and
Principal Position
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
Number of
Shares of
Stock That
Have Not 
Vested(#)  
63,739
(5)
16,936
(6)
14,867
Stock Awards
Market
Value of
Shares of
Stock That
Have Not
Vested(1)     
$
595,958
$
158,352
Number of
Equity
Incentive
Awards That
Have Not
Vested(#)(2)  
3,568
(5)
21,332
(6)
14,867
Market Value
of Equity
Incentive
Awards That
Have Not
Vested(3)
33,361
$
$
199,452
Roland O. Burns
President and Chief Financial Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer(4)
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of Land and General Counsel
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of Accounting, Controller and
Treasurer
(7)  
(5)
29,163
$ 139,005    
  
$
272,667
9,874
(6)
8,667
(7)  
(5)
16,667
16,667
(6)
16,667
(7)  
(5)
4,443
1,745
(6)
1,366
(7)  
(5)
4,163
1,720
(6)
1,366
(7)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
92,320
81,035
155,833
155,833
155,835
41,541
16,315
12,768
38,918
16,074
12,768
(7)  
(5)
2,080
12,438
(6)
8,667
(7)
—
—
—
328
(5)
1,761
(6)
1,366
(7)  
(5)
330
1,734
(6)
1,366
(7)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
139,005  
  
19,448
116,293
81,035
—
—
—
3,065
16,460
12,768
3,078
16,209
12,768
(1) Market value was based on the closing price for our common stock on the last trading day of 2015 of $9.35 per share.
(2) This column represents the number of outstanding PSUs. The number of PSUs for unvested grants reflect the target award
levels.
(3) This  column  represents  the  payout  value  for  the  PSUs  which  were  earned  in  2016  and  the  projected  pay  out  values  of
unearned PSUs. The projected payout values are determined by multiplying the target number of shares by $9.35, the closing
price  of  our  common  stock  on  the  last  business  day  of  2015.  The  actual  payout  will  depend  upon  our  actual  performance
compared to our peer group’s performance at the end of each performance period and the date on which the payouts occur.
(4) Mr. Good rejoined the Company in March 2015 following a brief retirement.
(5) Vested in 2016. Only 24% of the first one-third of the 2015 PSUs vested in 2016, all other PSUs with 2016 vesting dates were
forfeited.
(6) Vest in 2017.
(7) Vest in 2018.
93
Table of Contents
Option Exercises and Stock Vested
There were no stock options exercised during 2015. The following table sets forth certain information with respect to the value of
restricted stock and performance share units which vested during the year ended December 31, 2015.
Name and
Principal Position
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
Roland O. Burns
President and Chief Financial Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of Land and General Counsel
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of Accounting, Controller and Treasurer
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation
Restricted Stock
Performance Share Units  
Number of
Number of
Shares
Acquired on
Vesting(#)     
43,472  
  
18,296  
  
—  
  
2,718  
  
2,477
Value
Shares
Realized
on Vesting    
$ 1,473,393  
  
$ 618,968  
  
—  
  
91,276  
  
83,155
$
$
Acquired on
Vesting(#)     
—  
  
—  
  
—  
  
—  
  
—
Value
Realized
on Vesting 
—
—
—
—
—
The following table sets forth certain information with respect to the non-qualified deferred compensation of the named executives
in  2015.  Under  our  Executive  Life  Insurance  Plan,  we  contribute  annually  five  percent  of  each  executive’s  annual  cash
compensation to purchase a variable universal life insurance policy on his life. During employment, he may designate a beneficiary
to receive payment of the death benefit (reduced by the amount of the premiums paid by us, which are repaid to us), but has no
other rights of ownership in the policy. Upon his having attained four years of service and electing retirement, or upon a change in
control, the policy is transferred to him. No withdrawals or distributions were made during 2015.
Name and
Principal Position
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
Roland O. Burns
President and Chief Financial Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of Land and General Counsel
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of Accounting, Controller and Treasurer
Company
$
Contributions(1)    
$
65,363  
  
42,583  
  
—  
  
23,839  
  
17,225
$
$
Aggregate
Earnings
(Losses)(2)    
 
($2,250)  
  
($2,626)  
  
—  
  
($3,010)  
  
$1,628
Aggregate
Balance at
End of Year 
$ 2,443,803
$ 1,214,423
$
$
—
241,402
337,443
(1) Company contributions have not been included in the Summary Compensation Table for this or any prior years.
(2) Above market portion of the aggregate earnings has been included in the Summary Compensation Table in each year.
Potential Payments upon Termination or Change in Control
Employment Agreements
We have employment agreements with our CEO, President and Chief Operating Officer. The employment agreements provide that
our CEO, President and Chief Operating Officer will maintain the confidentiality of our confidential and proprietary information for as
long as the information is not publicly disclosed. These agreements include separate provisions wherein our CEO, President and
Chief Operating Officer will receive certain prescribed benefits based upon changes in their employment status or in the event of a
change in control.
Table of Contents
94
The compensation committee believes that it is in our best interests as well as the best interests of our stockholders to offer such
benefits to these executive officers. We compete for executive talent in a highly competitive market in which companies routinely
offer similar benefits to senior executives. The compensation committee believes that providing change in control benefits to senior
executives  allows  them  to  evaluate  objectively  whether  a  potential  change  in  control  transaction  is  in  the  best  interest  of  our
stockholders, without having to be concerned regarding their future employment. It allows them to focus on the negotiations during
such a transaction when we would require thoughtful leadership to ensure a successful outcome.
A “change in control” is defined to include a variety of events, including significant changes in stock ownership, changes in our
Board, certain mergers and consolidations, and the sale or disposition of all or substantially all of our consolidated assets.
Potential Payments Upon Termination
Under  the  employment  agreements,  we  are  required  to  provide  compensation  to  these  officers  in  the  event  we  terminate  the
executive’s  employment  without  cause  or  the  executive  terminates  his  employment  with  good  reason,  including  assignment  of
duties inconsistent with his position or requiring him to be based at another location. If the executive dies, the agreements provide
for payment of six months of annualized total compensation (current base salary and target bonus) to the executive’s estate. The
agreements provide for the payment of severance benefits if the executive’s employment is terminated by us without cause or by
the executive for good reason (other than within twelve months following a change in control) in an amount equal to 150% of the
sum of his then current salary and most recent bonus, plus a payment equal to the cost of continued medical benefits for eighteen
months.  If  there  is  a  change  in  control  and,  within  twelve  months  thereafter,  the  executive  terminates  his  employment  for  good
reason or if the executive’s employment is terminated by us without cause, the severance benefit payable to the executive is 299%
of the sum of his base salary and highest annual bonus plus a payment equal to the cost of continued medical benefits for eighteen
months.
The  following  tables  quantify  compensation  that  would  become  payable  under  the  employment  agreements  and  other
arrangements if the NEO’s employment had terminated on December 31, 2015, based on, where applicable, our closing stock price
on that date. Due to the number of factors that affect the amount of any benefits provided upon the events discussed below, actual
amounts paid or distributed may be different. Under the 2009 Plan, unvested equity awards will vest for all employees in the event
of a change in control or in the event of death or disability. This is reflected in the table “Termination Following a Change in Control”
in the “Value of Unvested Stock Awards.” Under our Executive Life Insurance Plan, the NEOs are entitled to receive a distribution of
the life insurance policies insuring their lives in the event of termination of employment. This is reflected in the table below in the
“Present Value of Deferred Compensation Benefits.”
Table of Contents
Termination Following a Change in Control
Name and
Principal Position
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
Roland O. Burns 
President and Chief Financial Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of Land and General Counsel
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of Accounting, Controller and
Treasurer
(1) Amount equal to 299% of annual base salary.
95
Salary(1)    
$2,397,980  
 
$1,625,065  
 
$1,121,250  
 
—  
 
—
Bonus(2)
   
$11,960,000  
 
$ 3,976,700  
 
$ 2,137,850  
 
—  
 
—
Present Value
of Deferred
Compensation
$
Benefits
$     2,443,803  
 
1,214,423  
 
—  
 
241,402  
 
337,443
$
$
Continuation
of Health
Benefits(3)
59,745  
 
59,745  
 
59,745  
 
—  
 
—
$
$
$
Value of
Unvested
Stock
Awards(4)  
$1,636,952
$ 879,574
$ 467,501
$ 135,210
$ 131,871
Amount equal to 299% of highest bonus paid during the employee’s tenure with the Company.
Amount equal to 299% of highest bonus paid during the employee’s tenure with the Company.
(2)
(3) Amount equal to the cost of continued medical and dental coverage for 18 months.
(4) The value of the stock awards is based on our December 31, 2015 closing stock price of $9.35 per share; PSU awards vesting
in 2016 and 2017 are assumed to achieve maximum award performance.
Involuntary Termination Without Cause or Termination With Good Reason
Salary(1)     
$1,203,000  
  
$ 815,250  
  
$ 562,500  
  
—  
  
—
Bonus(2)    
—  
 
  
—  
  
—  
  
—  
  
—
Present Value
of Deferred
Compensation
Benefits
2,443,803  
  
1,214,423  
  
—  
  
$241,402  
  
$337,443
$
$
Continuation
of Health
Benefits(3)
59,745
59,745
59,745
—
—
$
$
$
Name and
Principal Position
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
Roland O. Burns 
President and Chief Financial Officer
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer
D. Dale Gillette 
Vice President of Land and General Counsel
Daniel K. Presley 
Vice President of Accounting, Controller and
Treasurer
(1) Amount equal to 150% of annual base salary.
(2) Amount equal to 150% of annual bonus.
(3) Amount equal to the cost of continued medical and dental coverage for 18 months.
Table of Contents
96
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners
Ownership of our common stock is shown in terms of “beneficial ownership.” Generally, a person “beneficially owns” shares if he or
she has either the right to vote those shares or dispose of them. More than one person may be considered to beneficially own the
same  shares.  The  percentages  shown  in  this  prospectus  compare  the  stockholder’s  beneficially  owned  shares  with  the  total
number of shares of our common stock outstanding on July 29, 2016, after giving effect to a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split which
became effective on July 29, 2016 (approximately 12,504,562 shares, subject to minor variations resulting from the treatment of
fractional shares in the reverse stock split) plus the number of unissued shares as to which such owner has the right to acquire
voting  or  dispositive  power  of  on  or  before  July  29,  2016.  The  following  table  lists  the  stockholders  known  to  have  been  the
beneficial owners of more than 5% of the common stock outstanding as of July 29, 2016:
Name of Beneficial Owner
Dimensional Fund Advisors LP
Shares Beneficially Owned  
  Percent    
  Number
Dimensional Fund Advisors LP
Palisades West, Building One, 6300 Bee Cave Road, Austin, Texas 78746
Galatyn Equity Holdings LP
47 Highland Park Village, Suite 200, Dallas, Texas 75205
Hodges Capital Holdings, Inc.
2905 Maple Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75201
Carl H. Westcott
100 Crescent Court, Suite 1620, Dallas, Texas 75201
638,087(1)
664,587(2)
1,240,504(3)
1,212,400(4)
5.1%
5.3%
9.9%
9.7%
(1) Represents shares held on December 31, 2015, based on filing on Schedule 13G/A dated February 9, 2016.
(2) Represents shares held on December 31, 2015, based on filing on Schedule 13G/A dated January 23, 2015.
(3) Represents shares held on December 31, 2015, based on filing on Schedule 13G dated February 10, 2016.
(4) Represents shares held on May 31, 2016, based on filing on Schedule 13D/A dated May 25, 2016, as modified by filing on
Form 4 dated May 31, 2016.
Table of Contents
Security Ownership of Management
97
The  following  table  sets  forth  information  as  of  June  30,  2016  concerning  beneficial  ownership  information  for  our  directors,
nominees for director and executive officers:
Name of Beneficial Owner(1)
M. Jay Allison
Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer
Roland O. Burns
Director Nominee, President, Chief Financial Officer and Secretary
Elizabeth B. Davis, PhD
Director Nominee
D. Dale Gillette
Vice President of Legal and General Counsel
Mack D. Good
Chief Operating Officer
David K. Lockett
Director Nominee
Cecil E. Martin
Director Nominee
Michael D. McBurney
Vice President of Marketing
Daniel K. Presley
Vice President of Accounting, Controller and Treasurer
Russell W. Romoser
Vice President of Reservoir Engineering
LaRae L. Sanders
Shares Beneficially Owned  
      Percent     
      Number
401,919(2)
218,828(2)
3.2%
1.7%
12,188
29,431
78,181
23,851
31,024
14,377
29,844
14,796
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Vice President of Land
Frederic D. Sewell
Director Nominee
Richard D. Singer
Vice President of Financial Reporting
David W. Sledge
Director
Blaine M. Stribling
Vice President of Corporate Development
Jim L. Turner
Director
All Executive Officers and Directors as a Group (16 Persons)
*
Indicates less than one percent
16,988(3)
17,244
16,949
31,074
18,674
31,460  
986,828
*
*
*
*
*
*
7.9%
(1) The address of each beneficial owner is c/o Comstock Resources, Inc., 5300 Town and Country Blvd, Suite 500, Frisco, Texas
75034.
(2) 269,683 shares owned by Mr. Allison and 152,508 shares owned by Mr. Burns are pledged as security for lines of credit held in
their respective names.
(3) Includes shares issuable pursuant to stock options which are presently exercisable or exercisable on or before December 14,
2016 by Ms. Sanders for 2,000 shares.
Table of Contents
98
DESCRIPTION OF OTHER INDEBTEDNESS
The  following  descriptions  are  only  summaries  of  certain  of  the  material  provisions  of  the  agreements  summarized  and  do  not
purport to be complete and are qualified in their entirety by reference to provisions of the agreements being summarized. We urge
you to read the agreements governing each of the facilities and notes described below. Copies of the agreements will be contained
in our filings with the SEC and can be obtained as described under the heading “Where You Can Find Additional Information.” You
may  also  request  a  copy  of  these  agreements  at  our  address  set  forth  under  the  heading  “Questions  and  Answers  About  the
Exchange Offer—Who is making the Exchange Offer?”
Revolving Credit Facility
We have a revolving credit facility with Bank of Montreal, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and Bank of America, N.A.,
as syndication agent. The credit facility is a four-year revolving credit commitment with borrowing capacity of up to $50.0 million in
the aggregate, none of which is currently outstanding. The credit facility terminates on March 4, 2019. Our obligations under the
credit facility are guaranteed by the same subsidiary guarantors that will guarantee the new notes. Indebtedness under the credit
facility  is  secured  by  substantially  all  of  our  and  our  subsidiaries’  assets.  Pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  intercreditor  agreement
entered into among Bank of Montreal, as administrative agent and collateral agent, The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company,
N.A., as trustee for the Old Senior Secured Notes, and us, the revolving credit facility is secured, on an equal and ratable, first
priority basis with the Old Senior Secured Notes by liens on certain of our assets, except that the proceeds of the collateral shall
first  be  applied  to  repay  in  full  our  obligations  under  the  revolving  credit  facility  before  being  applied  to  repay  the  Old  Senior
Secured  Notes.  If  the  Exchange  Offer  is  consummated,  the  trustee  for  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  would  enter  into  an
intercreditor agreement with the collateral agent on substantially similar terms as the intercreditor agreement pertaining to the Old
Senior Secured Notes. Further, pursuant to the Consent Solicitation, the collateral securing the Old Senior Secured Notes would be
released upon completion of the Exchange Offer.
Borrowings under the revolving credit facility bear interest at our option at either (1) LIBOR plus 2.5% or (2) the base rate (which is
the higher of the administrative agent’s prime rate, the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or 30 day LIBOR plus 1.0%) plus 1.5%. The
revolving credit facility contains various affirmative and negative covenants which, among other things, prohibit the payment of cash
dividends and cash repurchases of common stock, limit the amount of additional indebtedness that we may incur, restrict asset
dispositions,  limit  hedging  arrangements  and  limit  our  ability  to  enter  into  certain  transactions  and  make  certain  loans  and
investments. The only financial covenants are the maintenance of a current ratio, which must not be less than 1.0 to 1.0, and a
coverage ratio of the value of our developed oil and gas reserves as compared to the amounts outstanding under the revolving
credit facility, which must not be less than 2.5 to 1.0.
10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020
In March 2015, we issued $700.0 million of Old Senior Secured Notes, all of which are currently outstanding. Interest on the Old
Senior Secured Notes accrues at the rate of 10% per annum and is payable in cash on March 15 and September 15 of each year.
The Old Senior Secured Notes mature on March 15, 2020. The Old Senior Secured Notes are secured on a first priority basis
equally  and  ratably  with  our  revolving  credit  facility,  subject  to  payment  priorities  in  favor  of  the  revolving  credit  facility  by  the
collateral securing the revolving credit facility, which consists of, among other things, at least 80% of our and our subsidiaries’ oil
and gas properties. The Old Senior Secured Notes are our general obligations and are guaranteed by all of our subsidiaries. The
indenture governing the Old Senior Secured Notes (the “Existing Secured Notes Indenture”) restricts our ability
Table of Contents
99
and  the  ability  of  our  restricted  subsidiaries  to,  among  other  things:  (i)  incur  or  guarantee  additional  indebtedness;  (ii)  pay
distributions  or  dividends  on  capital  stock  or  repurchase  capital  stock  or  make  certain  restricted  payments;  (iii)  make  certain
investments;  (iv)  sell  certain  assets;  and  (v)  enter  into  transactions  with  affiliates.  These  covenants  are  subject  to  a  number  of
exceptions and qualifications.
7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019
In  March  2011,  we  issued  $300.0  million  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  Old  2019  Notes.  In  May  2014,  we  issued  an
additional  $100.0  million  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  Old  2019  Notes.  There  is  currently  outstanding  $288.5  million
aggregate principal amount of the Old 2019 Notes. Interest on the Old 2019 Notes accrues at the rate of 7 3⁄4% per annum and is
payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The Old 2019 Notes mature on April 1, 2019. The Old 2019 Notes are guaranteed
on a senior unsecured basis by the same subsidiary guarantors that will guarantee the new notes. The Old 2019 Notes and the
guarantees are our and the guarantors’ general unsecured senior obligations and rank equal in right of payment with all of our and
the guarantors’ other existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness that is not by its terms subordinated to the Old 2019 Notes,
including the Old 2020 Notes. The indenture and supplemental indenture governing the Old 2019 Notes (together, the “Existing
2019 Notes Indenture”) restrict our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things: (i) incur or guarantee
additional indebtedness; (ii) pay distributions or dividends on capital stock or repurchase capital stock or make certain restricted
payments; (iii) make certain investments; (iv) sell certain assets; and (v) enter into transactions with affiliates. These covenants are
subject to a number of exceptions and qualifications.
9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020
In June 2012, we issued $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the Old 2020 Notes. There is currently outstanding, $174.6
million aggregate principal amount of Old 2020 Notes. Interest on the Old 2020 Notes accrues at the rate of 9 1⁄2% per annum and
is payable on June 15 and December 15. The Old 2020 Notes mature on June 15, 2020. The Old 2020 Notes are guaranteed on a
senior  unsecured  basis  by  the  same  subsidiary  guarantors  that  will  guarantee  the  new  notes.  The  Old  2020  Notes  and  the
guarantees are our and the guarantors’ general unsecured senior obligations and rank equal in right of payment with all of our and
the guarantors’ other existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness that is not by its terms subordinated to the Old 2020 Notes,
including the Old 2019 Notes. The indenture and supplemental indenture governing the Old 2020 Notes (together, the “Existing
2020 Notes Indenture” and together with the Existing 2019 Notes Indenture and the Existing Secured Notes Indenture, the “Existing
Indentures”) restrict our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things: (i) incur or guarantee additional
indebtedness; (ii) pay distributions or dividends on capital stock or repurchase capital stock or make certain restricted payments;
(iii) make certain investments; (iv) sell certain assets; and (v) enter into transactions with affiliates. These covenants are subject to a
number of exceptions and qualifications.
Table of Contents
Exchange Offer
100
GENERAL TERMS OF THE EXCHANGE OFFER AND CONSENT SOLICITATION
We are offering, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this prospectus, to exchange our new notes, and in certain
instances,  warrants,  for  any  and  all  of  our  old  notes  validly  tendered  to  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent,  and  not  validly
withdrawn, on or prior to the Expiration Date. The exchange consideration will be in full satisfaction of the principal amount of the
old notes that are tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer, and any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding the Closing
Date  on  the  old  notes  that  are  tendered  and  accepted  in  the  Exchange  Offer,  will  be  paid  in  cash  on  the  date  on  which  the
Exchange Offer is completed.
Upon the terms and subject to the conditions of the Exchange Offer, (i) for old notes tendered at or prior to the Early Tender Date,
accepted for exchange and not validly withdrawn, holders of old notes will be eligible to receive the applicable Early Exchange
Consideration set forth in the table below; and (ii) for old notes tendered after the Early Tender Date and prior to the Expiration
Date,  accepted  for  exchange  and  not  validly  withdrawn,  holders  of  old  notes  will  be  eligible  to  receive  the  applicable  Late
Exchange Consideration set forth in such table.
Title of Old Notes to be Tendered  
10% Senior Secured Notes due
2020
7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019
9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020
Early Exchange Consideration
per $1,000 Principal Amount of Old Notes
if Tendered and Not Withdrawn
Prior to Early Tender Date(1)(2)
$1,000 principal amount of Senior Secured
Toggle Notes due 2020 and warrants
exercisable for 1.50 shares of common
stock of the Company
$1,000 principal amount of 7 3⁄4%
Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019  
$1,000 principal amount of 9 1⁄2%
Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020
Late Exchange Consideration
per $1,000 Principal Amount of Old Notes
if Tendered After the Early Tender Date
and Not Withdrawn Prior to the Expiration Date(1)
(2)
$950 principal amount of Senior Secured Toggle
Notes due 2020 and warrants exercisable for
1.50 shares of common stock of the Company
$950 principal amount of 7 3⁄4% Convertible
Secured PIK Notes due 2019
$950 principal amount of 9 1⁄2% Convertible
Secured PIK Notes due 2020
(1) Only whole principal amounts or number of securities shall be issued (with the principal amounts or number of securities to be
issued to be adjusted by rounding up or down to the nearest whole principal amount or number of securities and a half amount
or more of the number of securities shall be rounded up).
(2) The warrants contain an exercise price of $0.01 per share. The share and per share data reflects the one-for-five (1:5) reverse
stock split that became effective on July 29, 2016.
Tenders of old notes may be withdrawn prior to the Withdrawal Deadline. Any old note withdrawn pursuant to the terms of the
Exchange  Offer  shall  not  thereafter  be  considered  tendered  for  any  purpose  unless  and  until  such  old  note  is  again  tendered
pursuant to the Exchange Offer.
Our  obligation  to  accept  old  notes  that  are  tendered  is  subject  to  the  conditions  described  below  under  “—Conditions  of  the
Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation.”
Holders of old notes do not have any appraisal or dissenters’ rights in connection with the Exchange Offer. We intend to conduct
the Exchange Offer in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations of the SEC.
We currently expect the new notes to be recorded at the same carrying value as the old notes are reflected in our accounting
records  on  the  date  of  the  Exchange  Offer,  as  adjusted  for  the  value  associated  with  embedded  derivatives,  if  any.  All  costs
associated with the Exchange Offer will be expensed.
Consent Solicitation
We  are  soliciting  consents  from  holders  of  old  notes  upon  the  terms  and  subject  to  the  conditions  set  forth  herein  and  in  the
accompanying Letter of Transmittal. We intend to obtain consents from holders representing a majority of the aggregate outstanding
principal amount of the respective series of old notes; provided, that
Table of Contents
101
regarding  a  consent  to  release  the  collateral  with  respect  to  the  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes,  we  need  to  obtain  consents  from
holders representing at least 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of such old notes. Since not less than 95% in
aggregate principal amount of the old notes must be tendered to consummate the Exchange Offer and because consents to the
Proposed Amendments are required if holders tender their old notes, the minimum threshold for the consents will automatically be
achieved if the Minimum Condition is satisfied.
If consents representing a majority of the outstanding principal amount of the respective old notes are delivered (and not revoked)
prior to the Expiration Date, we will, subject to consummation of the Exchange Offer, execute a supplemental indenture with respect
to  each  series  of  the  old  notes  (the  “Supplemental  Indentures”)  with  The  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  Trust  Company,  N.A.,  as
Trustee, giving effect to the Proposed Amendments. The Proposed Amendments will be effective as to and bind all old notes at
such time as the respective Supplemental Indenture has been executed and all conditions precedent to the Exchange Offer have
been satisfied or validly waived and we have irrevocably accepted for exchange in the Exchange Offer all validly tendered old
notes (other than those old notes that have been validly withdrawn), regardless of whether a consent was given in respect of any
particular old note. If consents from holders representing at least 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Old
Senior  Secured  Notes  are  delivered  (and  not  revoked)  prior  to  the  Expiration  Date,  we  will,  subject  to  consummation  of  the
Exchange Offer, direct the collateral agent under the Existing Secured Notes Indenture to release all liens securing the Old Senior
Secured Notes.
Holders that tender old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer prior to the Expiration Date will be deemed automatically to have
delivered a consent with respect to all such old notes.
Holders may not revoke consents except as described under “—Withdrawal of Tenders; Revocation of Consents.”
For a description of the Proposed Amendments, please see “Proposed Amendments to Existing Indentures and Old Notes.”
Any questions or requests for assistance or for additional copies of this prospectus, the Letter of Transmittal or related documents
may be directed to the Information and Exchange Agent at one of its telephone numbers set forth on the last page hereof. A holder
may also contact such holder’s broker, dealer, commercial bank, trust company or other nominee for assistance concerning the
Exchange Offer.
Early Tender Date, Expiration Date, Extensions, Amendments or Termination
The Early Tender Date for the Exchange Offer is 5:00 P.M., New York City time, on August 12, 2016, subject to our right to extend
that time and date in our sole discretion (which right is subject to applicable law), in which case the Early Tender Date means the
latest time and date to which such Early Tender Date is extended. The Expiration Date is 11:59 P.M., New York City time, on
August 26, 2016, subject to our right to extend that time and date in our sole discretion (which right is subject to applicable law), in
which  case  the  Expiration  Date  means  the  latest  time  and  date  to  which  the  Exchange  Offer  is  extended.  To  extend  an  Early
Tender Date or the Expiration Date, we will notify the Information and Exchange Agent and will make a public announcement
thereof  before  9:00  a.m.,  New  York  City  time,  on  the  next  business  day  after  the  previously  scheduled  Early  Tender  Date  or
Expiration  Date,  as  applicable.  During  any  extension  of  the  Early  Tender  Date  or  the  Expiration  Date,  all  old  notes  previously
tendered in the extended Exchange Offer will remain subject to the Exchange Offer and, subject to compliance with the terms of the
Exchange  Offer  and  applicable  law,  may  be  accepted  for  exchange  by  us.  The  Exchange  Offer  may  not  be  extended  without
extending the Consent Solicitation, and the Consent Solicitation may not be extended without extending the Exchange Offer.
Any waiver, amendment or modification of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation will apply to all old notes tendered pursuant
to the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation. If we make a change that we determine
Table of Contents
102
to be material in any of the terms of the Exchange Offer or waive a condition of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation that we
determine to be material, we will give oral (to be confirmed in writing) or written notice of such amendment or such waiver to the
Information  and  Exchange  Agent  and  will  disseminate  additional  Exchange  Offer  and  consent  documents  and  extend  the
Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation and any withdrawal or revocation rights as we determine necessary and to the extent
required by law.
We may terminate the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation if any condition is not satisfied on or prior to the Expiration Date.
There  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will  exercise  our  right  to  extend,  terminate  or  amend  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation.
Announcements
Any  extension,  termination  or  amendment  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation  will  be  followed  as  promptly  as
practicable by announcement thereof, such announcement in the case of an extension to be issued no later than 9:00 a.m., New
York City time, on the next business day following the previously scheduled Expiration Date. Without limiting the manner in which
we  may  choose  to  make  such  announcement,  we  will  not,  unless  otherwise  required  by  law,  have  any  obligation  to  publish,
advertise or otherwise communicate any such announcement other than by making a release to an appropriate news agency or
another means of announcement that we deem appropriate.
Acceptance of Old Notes for Exchange; Accrual of Interest
Acceptance of Old Notes for Exchange
If the conditions to the Exchange Offer are satisfied, or if we waive all of the conditions that have not been satisfied, we will accept,
at the Closing Date and after we receive completed and duly executed Letters of Transmittal or Agent’s Messages (as defined
below) with respect to any and all of the old notes tendered for exchange at such time, the old notes for exchange by notifying the
Information and Exchange Agent of our acceptance. The notice may be oral if we promptly confirm it in writing.
An  “Agent’s  Message”  is  a  message  transmitted  by  The  Depository  Trust  Company  (“DTC”),  received  by  the  Information  and
Exchange Agent and forming part of the timely confirmation of a book entry transfer (“Book–Entry Confirmation”), which states that
DTC has received an express acknowledgement from you that you have received this prospectus and agree to be bound by the
terms of the Letter of Transmittal, and that we may enforce such agreement against you.
We expressly reserve the right, in our sole discretion, to delay acceptance for exchange of, or exchange of, old notes tendered
under the Exchange Offer (subject to Rule 14e-1c under the Exchange Act, which requires that we issue the offered consideration
or return the old notes deposited pursuant to the Exchange Offer promptly after termination or withdrawal of the Exchange Offer), or
to terminate the Exchange Offer and not accept for exchange any old notes not previously accepted for exchange, (1) if any of the
conditions to the Exchange Offer shall not have been satisfied or validly waived by us, or (2) in order to comply in whole or in part
with any applicable law.
In  all  cases,  the  new  notes  will  be  issued  only  after  timely  receipt  by  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent  of  (1)  Book–Entry
Confirmation  of  the  old  notes  into  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent’s  account  at  DTC  (or  receipt  of  the  old  notes  by  the
Information and Exchange Agent in certificated form, if the notes are certificated), (2) the properly completed and duly executed
Letter of Transmittal (or a facsimile thereof) or an Agent’s Message in lieu thereof, and (3) any other documents required by the
Letter of Transmittal. The Exchange Offer is scheduled to expire at the Expiration Date, unless extended by us.
For purposes of the Exchange Offer, we will have accepted for exchange tendered old notes, if, as and when we give oral or written
notice to the Information and Exchange Agent of our acceptance of the old notes for
Table of Contents
103
exchange pursuant to the Exchange Offer. In all cases, the exchange of old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer will be made by
the deposit of any exchange consideration with the Information and Exchange Agent, which will act as your agent for the purposes
of receiving new notes and warrants, as applicable, from us, and delivering new notes and warrants, as applicable, to you. If, for
any reason whatsoever, acceptance for exchange of, or exchange of, any old notes tendered pursuant to the Exchange Offer are
delayed (whether before or after our acceptance for exchange of, or exchange of, the old notes) or we extend the Exchange Offer or
are unable to accept for exchange the old notes tendered pursuant to the Exchange Offer, then, without prejudice to our rights set
forth herein, we may instruct the Information and Exchange Agent to retain tendered old notes and those old notes may not be
withdrawn, subject to the limited circumstances described in “—Withdrawal of Tenders; Revocation of Consents” below.
We will have the right, which may be waived, to reject the defective tender of old notes as invalid and ineffective. If we waive our
rights to reject a defective tender of old notes, subject to the other terms and conditions set forth in the Offer Documents, you will be
entitled to the new notes.
We will pay or cause to be paid all transfer taxes with respect to the exchange of any old notes unless the box titled “Special
Payment or Issuance Instructions” or the box titled “Special Delivery Instructions” on the Letter of Transmittal has been completed,
as described in the instructions thereto.
Accrued Interest
If old notes are validly tendered and accepted for exchange pursuant to the Exchange Offer, the holders of such old notes will be
entitled to accrued and unpaid interest on those old notes in cash on the date on which the Exchange Offer is completed, and
interest shall accrue on the new notes from and after the Closing Date.
Under  no  circumstances  will  any  special  interest  be  payable  because  of  any  delay  in  the  transmission  new  notes  to  you  with
respect to exchanged old notes or otherwise.
We will pay all fees and expenses of the Information and Exchange Agent in connection with the Exchange Offer.
Procedures for Tendering Old Notes
General
In order to participate in the Exchange Offer, you must tender your old notes to the Information and Exchange Agent as described
below. It is your responsibility to tender your old notes. We have the right to waive any defects. However, we are not required to
waive defects and are not required to notify you of defects in your tender.
If you have any questions or need help in tendering your old notes, please contact the Information and Exchange Agent whose
addresses and telephone numbers are listed on the back cover page of this prospectus.
If delivery is by mail, we recommend that registered mail, properly insured, with return receipt requested, be used. In all cases,
sufficient time should be allowed to assure timely delivery. No Letters of Transmittal and Consent or old notes should be sent to the
Company.
Proper Tender
Except as set forth below with respect to ATOP procedures, for a holder to tender old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer, a
properly completed and duly executed Letter of Transmittal (or a facsimile thereof), together with any signature guarantees and any
other documents required by the Instructions to the Letter of Transmittal, or an Agent’s Message in lieu thereof, must be received by
the Information and Exchange Agent at the address or
Table of Contents
104
facsimile number set forth on the back cover of this prospectus prior to the Expiration Date, and the old notes must be transferred
pursuant  to  the  procedures  for  book–entry  transfer  described  below  and  a  Book–Entry  Confirmation  must  be  received  by  the
Information and Exchange Agent on or prior to the Expiration Date.
In all cases, the exchange of old notes tendered and accepted for exchange pursuant to the Exchange Offer will be made only after
timely receipt by the Information and Exchange Agent of:
•
•
•
a Book–Entry Confirmation with respect to such old notes (or, if certificated, old notes are to be delivered with the Letter of
Transmittal);
the Letter of Transmittal (or a facsimile thereof) properly completed and duly executed, or an Agent’s Message in lieu
thereof; and
any required signature guarantees and other documents required by the Letter of Transmittal.
Deemed Consent by Tender
The tender of old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer and in accordance with the procedures described in the Offer Documents
will be deemed to automatically constitute delivery of a consent with respect to the old notes tendered, except as provided herein.
All references to procedures for tendering old notes shall include such deemed delivery of consents.
Tender Procedures for Notes Held Through a Custodian
If you are a beneficial owner of old notes, but the holder is a custodial entity such as a bank, broker, dealer, trust company or other
nominee, and you seek to tender old notes, you must provide appropriate instructions to such holder in order to tender through
ATOP with respect to such old notes. Beneficial owners may be instructed to complete and deliver an instruction letter to such
holder for this purpose. We urge you to contact such person that holds old notes for you if you wish to tender your old notes.
Book–Entry Transfer
The Information and Exchange Agent has or will establish an account with respect to the old notes at DTC for purposes of the
Exchange Offer, and any financial institution that is a participant in the DTC system (a “DTC Participant”) and whose name appears
on a security position listing as the record owner of the old notes may make book–entry delivery of old notes by causing DTC to
transfer the old notes into the Information and Exchange Agent’s account at DTC in accordance with DTC’s procedure for transfer.
Although delivery of old notes may be effected through book–entry transfer into the Information and Exchange Agent’s account at
DTC, either an Agent’s Message or a Letter of Transmittal (or a facsimile thereof) properly completed and duly executed, along with
any required signature guarantees and any other required documents, must be transmitted to and received by the Information and
Exchange Agent at one of the addresses set forth on the back cover of this prospectus prior to the Expiration Date.
Tender of Notes Through ATOP
In lieu of physically completing and signing the Letter of Transmittal and delivering it to the Information and Exchange Agent, DTC
participants may electronically transmit their acceptance of the Exchange Offer through ATOP, for which the transaction will be
eligible. In accordance with ATOP procedures, DTC will then verify the acceptance of the Exchange Offer and send an Agent’s
Message to the Information and Exchange Agent for its acceptance.
If  a  holder  transmits  its  acceptance  through  ATOP,  delivery  of  such  tendered  old  notes  must  be  made  to  the  Information  and
Exchange Agent pursuant to the book–entry delivery procedures set forth herein. Unless such holder delivers the old notes being
tendered to the Information and Exchange Agent by book–entry delivery, we
Table of Contents
105
may, at our option, treat such tender as defective for purposes of delivery of tenders, acceptance for exchange and the right to
receive new notes. Delivery of documents to DTC (physically or by electronic means) does not constitute delivery to the Information
and Exchange Agent. If you desire to tender your old notes prior to the Expiration Date, you must allow sufficient time for completion
of the ATOP procedures during the normal business hours of DTC on such date.
Signature Guarantees
Signatures on all Letters of Transmittal and Consent must be guaranteed by a recognized participant in the Securities Transfer
Agents  Medallion  Program,  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  Medallion  Signature  Program  or  the  Stock  Exchange  Medallion
Program (a “Medallion Signature Guarantor”), unless the Letter of Transmittal is delivered, and any old notes tendered thereby are
tendered (i) by a registered holder of old notes (or by a participant in DTC whose name appears on a security position listing as the
owner  of  such  old  notes)  who  has  not  completed  either  the  box  entitled  “Special  Delivery  Instructions”  or  “Special  Issuance
Instructions” on the Letter of Transmittal or (ii) for the account of a member firm of a registered national securities exchange, a
member of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority or a commercial bank or trust company having an office or correspondent in
the United States (each of the foregoing being referred to as an “Eligible Institution”). If the old notes are registered in the name of a
person other than the signer of the Letter of Transmittal, or if old notes not accepted for exchange or not tendered are to be returned
to a person other than such holder, then the signatures on the Letters of Transmittal and Consent accompanying the tendered old
notes must be guaranteed by a Medallion Signature Guarantor as described above.
Determination of Validity of Tenders
All questions as to the validity, form, eligibility (including time of receipt) and acceptance for exchange of any tendered old notes
pursuant to any of the procedures described above, and the form and validity (including time of receipt of notices of withdrawal) of
all  documents  will  be  determined  by  us  in  our  sole  discretion,  which  determination  will  be  final  and  binding.  We  reserve  the
absolute right to reject any or all tenders of any old notes determined by us not to be in proper form, or if the acceptance of or
exchange of such old notes may, in the opinion of our counsel, be unlawful. We also reserve the right to waive any conditions to the
Exchange Offer that we are legally permitted to waive.
Your tender will not be deemed to have been made until all defects or irregularities in your tender have been cured or waived. All
questions as to the form and validity (including time of receipt) of any delivery or withdrawal of a tender will be determined by us in
our sole discretion, which determination shall be final and binding. Neither we, the Information and Exchange Agent nor any other
person or entity is under any duty to give notification of any defects or irregularities in any tender or withdrawal of any old notes, or
will incur any liability for failure to give any such notification.
Please send all materials to the Information and Exchange Agent only and not to us.
Withdrawal of Tenders; Revocation of Consents
Your right to withdraw old notes tendered (and also thereby revoke the consent deemed delivered with such old notes) will expire at
11:59 P.M., New York City time, on August 26, 2016, subject to our right to extend that time and date in our sole discretion (which
right is subject to applicable law), in which case the Withdrawal Deadline is the latest time and date to which such Withdrawal
Deadline is extended. Withdrawal of old notes prior to the Withdrawal Deadline also constitutes revocation of consent with respect
to such old notes. Consents may only be revoked by properly withdrawing such tendered old notes. You may not withdraw old
notes after the Withdrawal Deadline.
Subject  to  applicable  law,  if,  for  any  reason  whatsoever,  acceptance  for  exchange  of  or  exchange  of  any  old  notes  tendered
pursuant to the Exchange Offer is delayed (whether before or after our acceptance for exchange of old notes) or we extend the
Exchange Offer or are unable to accept for exchange or exchange the old notes tendered
Table of Contents
106
pursuant to the Exchange Offer, we may instruct the Information and Exchange Agent to retain tendered old notes, and those old
notes may not be withdrawn, except to the extent that you are entitled to the withdrawal rights set forth herein.
To be effective, a written or facsimile transmission notice of withdrawal of a tender or a properly transmitted “Request Message”
through DTC’s ATOP system must:
•
•
•
•
be received by the Information and Exchange Agent at one of the addresses specified on the back cover of this prospectus
prior to the Expiration Date;
specify the name of the holder of the old notes to be withdrawn;
contain  the  description  of  the  old  notes  to  be  withdrawn  and  the  aggregate  principal  amount  represented  by  such  old
notes; and
be signed by the holder of the old notes in the same manner as the original signature on the Letter of Transmittal or be
accompanied by documents of transfer sufficient to have the trustee register the transfer of the old notes into the name of
the person withdrawing the old notes.
If the old notes to be withdrawn have been delivered or otherwise identified to the Information and Exchange Agent, a signed notice
of withdrawal is effective immediately upon receipt by the Information and Exchange Agent of written or facsimile transmission of
the notice of withdrawal or revocation (or receipt of a Request Message) even if physical release is not yet effected. A withdrawal of
old notes can only be accomplished in accordance with the foregoing procedures.
If you withdraw old notes, you will have the right to re–tender the old notes on or prior to the Expiration Date in accordance with the
procedures described above for tendering outstanding old notes.
If we amend or modify the terms of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation, or the information concerning the Exchange Offer
and  Consent  Solicitation,  in  a  manner  determined  by  us  to  constitute  a  material  change  to  the  holders,  we  will  disseminate
additional  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation  materials  and  extend  the  period  of  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation, including any withdrawal rights, to the extent required by law and as we determine necessary. An extension of the
Expiration Date will not affect a holder’s withdrawal rights, unless otherwise provided or as required by applicable law.
Conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Exchange Offer, we will not be required to accept for exchange or to exchange old
notes tendered pursuant to the Exchange Offer, and may terminate, amend or extend the Exchange Offer or delay or refrain from
accepting for exchange, or exchanging, the notes or transferring any exchange consideration, if any of the following shall occur:
•
•
•
failure to obtain tenders from holders of the old notes satisfying the Minimum Condition;
failure  to  obtain,  secure  or  enter  into  any  material  agreement,  understanding,  arrangement  or  other  related  document,
including, without limitation, an amendment to our bank credit facility, that would otherwise prevent the consummation of
the Exchange Offer or the Consent Solicitation;
consents  representing  at  least  a  majority  of  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  respective  series  of  the  old  notes
approving  the  Proposed  Amendments  are  not  delivered  (and  not  withdrawn);  provided,  that  regarding  the  consent  to
release collateral with respect to the Old Senior Secured Notes, consents representing at least 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate
principal amount of the Old Senior Secured Notes must be received;
Table of Contents
107
•
•
•
•
any order, statute, rule, regulation, executive order, stay, decree, judgment or injunction shall have been enacted, entered,
issued,  promulgated  or  enforced  by  any  court  or  governmental  authority  that  prohibits  or  materially  restricts  the
consummation  of  the  Exchange  Offer  or  Consent  Solicitation,  including  any  applicable  interpretation  of  the  staff  of  the
SEC;
there  shall  be  instituted  or  pending  any  action,  proceeding,  application,  claim  or  counterclaim  by  any  government  or
governmental authority or agency, domestic or foreign, or by any other person, domestic or foreign, before any court or
governmental  regulatory  or  administrative  agency,  authority  or  tribunal,  domestic  or  foreign,  that,  in  our  reasonable
judgment, following the receipt of advice of counsel, would make the acceptance for exchange of, or exchange of, some or
all of the old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer illegal;
there shall have occurred or be likely to occur any event affecting our business or financial affairs that, in our reasonable
judgment, would prevent or materially restrict or delay consummation of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation; or
the Exchange Offer is not completed by September 15, 2016.
In  addition,  pursuant  to  NYSE  rules,  we  may  not  issue  shares  of  our  common  stock  representing  in  excess  of  19.9%  of  our
outstanding shares without the approval of our stockholders. If the Exchange Offer is completed, we intend to call a special meeting
of  stockholders  as  soon  as  reasonably  practicable  for  stockholders  of  record  as  of  the  Closing  Date  to  consider  the  following
matters:  (1)  a  proposal  to  amend  our  restated  articles  of  incorporation  to  increase  the  number  of  shares  of  our  common  stock
authorized for issuance, in order to provide a sufficient number of authorized shares of common stock for the issuance of shares
upon conversion of the new notes and exercise of the warrants; (2) a proposal to issue shares of common stock in excess of 19.9%
of the currently outstanding shares that would be issued upon conversion of the new notes and exercise of the warrants; and (3)
any other matters properly brought before the meeting. If the required stockholder approval is delayed, convertibility of the New
2019 Convertible Notes and New 2020 Convertible Notes will be delayed and if such approval is not obtained by December 31,
2016, convertibility of such notes will terminate and be of no further force and effect and the failure to obtain such stockholder
approval will result in a default under such New Convertible Notes. If such default continues for 90 days, it will become an Event of
Default. Such default may in turn result in a default under the New Senior Secured Notes.
These conditions are for our benefit and may be asserted by us or may be waived by us, including any action or inaction by us
giving rise to any condition, or may be waived by us, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time, in our reasonable
discretion. We may additionally terminate the Exchange Offer if any condition is not satisfied on or prior to the Expiration Date. If
any of these events occur, subject to the termination rights described above, we may (i) return tendered old notes to you, (ii) extend
the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation and retain all tendered old notes until the expiration of the extended Exchange Offer
and Consent Solicitation, or (iii) amend the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation in any respect by giving oral or written notice
of such amendment to the Information and Exchange Agent and making public disclosure of such amendment to the extent required
by law.
We have not made a decision as to what circumstances would lead us to waive any condition, and any such waiver would depend
on circumstances prevailing at the time of such waiver. Although we have no present plans or arrangements to do so, we reserve
the  right  to  amend,  at  any  time,  the  terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer.  We  will  give  holders  notice  of  such  amendments  as  may  be
required by applicable law.
In addition, this Exchange Offer will not be consummated until the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part has been
declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation, we will accept tendered old notes for exchange
at the Closing Date. If we do not accept tendered old notes for exchange in the Exchange Offer, the Proposed Amendments will not
become effective.
108
Table of Contents
Soliciting Dealer Fees
We have agreed to pay a soliciting dealer fee equal to $5.00 for each $1,000 principal amount of old notes that are validly tendered
for exchange and not validly withdrawn pursuant to the Exchange Offer to retail brokers that are appropriately designated by their
clients to receive this fee, but only if the old notes of each applicable series that are tendered by or for that beneficial owner have an
aggregate principal amount of $250,000 or less. Soliciting dealer fees will only be paid to retail brokers upon consummation of the
Exchange Offer. No soliciting dealer fees will be paid if the Exchange Offer is not consummated, and the fees will be payable
thereafter upon request by the soliciting dealers and presentation of such supporting documentation as we may reasonably request.
Information and Exchange Agent
We  have  appointed  D.F.  King  &  Co.,  Inc.  as  the  Information  and  Exchange  Agent  for  the  Exchange  Offer.  You  should  direct
questions,  requests  for  assistance,  and  requests  for  additional  copies  of  this  prospectus  and  the  Letter  of  Transmittal  that  may
accompany this prospectus to such agent addressed as follows:
D.F. King & Co., Inc.
48 Wall Street, 22nd Floor | New York, New York 10005
Banks and Brokers Call Collect: (212) 269-5550 | All Others Call Toll Free: (877) 732-3619
Email: crk@dfking.com
By Facsimile Transmission (for Eligible Institutions only): (212) 709-3328
Confirmation: (212) 232-3235
Attn: Peter Aymar
Delivery to an address other than set forth above will not constitute a valid delivery.
Dealer Manager
We  have  retained  Merrill  Lynch,  Pierce,  Fenner  &  Smith  Incorporated  to  act  as  Dealer  Manager  in  connection  with  the
Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation  and  will  pay  the  Dealer  Manager  a  customary  fee  as  compensation  for  its
services.  We  will  also  reimburse  the  Dealer  Manager  for  legal  expenses  related  to  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation. The obligations of the Dealer Manager to perform this function are subject to certain conditions. We have
agreed to indemnify the Dealer Manager against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the federal securities laws.
Questions regarding the terms of the Exchange Offer or the Consent Solicitation may be directed to the Dealer Manager at
its address and telephone number set forth below.
The Dealer Manager and its respective affiliates are full service financial institutions engaged in various activities, which
may  include  sales  and  trading,  commercial  and  investment  banking,  advisory,  investment  management,  investment
research,  principal  investment,  hedging,  market  making,  brokerage  and  other  financial  and  non-financial  activities  and
services. The Dealer Manager and its respective affiliates have from time to time provided, and may in the future provide, a
variety of these services to us and to persons and entities with  relationships  with  us,  for  which  it  has  received  or  will
receive customary fees and expenses. The Dealer Manager was an initial purchaser and an underwriter in connection with
the old notes.
In  the  ordinary  course  of  their  various  business  activities,  the  Dealer  Manager  and  its  respective  affiliates,  officers,
directors and employees have from time to time, and may in the future, purchase, sell or hold a broad array of investments
and actively trade debt or equity securities of the Company or its affiliates (including any of the old notes), derivatives,
loans,  commodities,  currencies,  credit  default  swaps  and  other  financial  instruments  of  the  Company  for  their  own
account  and  for  the  accounts  of  their  customers,  and  such  investment  and  trading  activities  may  involve  or  relate  to
assets, securities and/or instruments of us (directly, as collateral securing other obligations or otherwise) and/or persons
and entities with relationships with us. To the extent that the Dealer Manager or its affiliates hold old notes during the
Exchange Offer, they may tender such old notes pursuant to
Table of Contents
109
the  terms  of  the  Exchange  Offer.  The  Dealer  Manager  and  its  respective  affiliates  may  also  communicate  independent
investment  recommendations,  market  color  or  trading  ideas  and/or  publish  or  express  independent  research  views  in
respect of such assets, securities or instruments and may at any time hold, or recommend to clients that they should
acquire, long and/or short positions in such assets, securities and instruments.
BofA Merrill Lynch
Attention: Debt Advisory
The Hearst Building
214 North Tryon Street, 14th Floor
Charlotte, North Carolina 28255
Toll-Free: (888) 292-0070
Collect: (980) 388-4813 and (646) 855-2464
110
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
Table of Contents
After  giving  effect  to  the  one-for  five  (1:5)  reverse  stock  split  which  became  effective  on  July  29,  2016,  our  authorized
capital stock consists of 50,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.50 per share, and 5,000,000 shares of preferred
stock, par value $10.00 per share. At July 29, 2016, we had approximately 12,504,562 shares of common stock (on a split-
adjusted basis and subject to minor variations resulting from the treatment of fractional shares in the reverse stock split)
and  no  shares  of  preferred  stock  issued  and  outstanding.  At  that  date,  we  also  had  options,  warrants  and  rights
outstanding to purchase 11,730 shares of our common stock and performance share units equivalent to 269,253 shares of
our  common  stock  that  would  be  issuable  based  on  achievement  of  the  performance  criteria  under  the  terms  of  our
performance share unit awards (in each case on a split-adjusted basis).
The following is a summary of the key terms and provisions of our equity securities. You should refer to the applicable
provisions  of  our  restated  articles  of  incorporation,  amended  and  restated  bylaws  and  Nevada  law  for  a  complete
statement of the terms and rights of our capital stock.
Common Stock
Each holder of common stock is entitled to one vote per share. Subject to the rights, if any, of the holders of any series of
preferred stock pursuant to applicable law or the provision of the certificate of designation creating that series, all voting
rights are vested in the holders of shares of common stock. Holders of shares of common stock have no right to cumulate
votes  in  the  election  of  directors,  thus,  the  holders  of  a  majority  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  can  elect  all  of  the
members of the board of directors standing for election. All outstanding shares of common stock are fully paid and non-
assessable.  Any  additional  common  stock  we  offer  and  issue  under  this  prospectus,  and  any  related  prospectus
supplement, will also be fully paid and non-assessable.
Dividends may be paid to the holders of common stock when, as, and if declared by the board of directors out of funds
legally  available  for  their  payment,  subject  to  the  rights  of  the  holders  of  preferred  stock,  if  any.  In  the  event  of  our
voluntary  or  involuntary  liquidation,  dissolution,  or  winding  up,  the  holders  of  common  stock  will  be  entitled  to  share
equally,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  shares  of  common  stock  held  by  them,  in  any  of  our  assets  available  for
distribution  after  the  payment  in  full  of  all  debts  and  distributions  and  after  the  holders  of  all  series  of  outstanding
preferred stock, if any, have received their liquidation preferences in full. Holders of common stock are not entitled to
preemptive purchase rights in future offerings of our common stock. Although our restated articles of incorporation do
not  specifically  deny  preemptive  rights,  pursuant  to  Nevada  law,  our  stockholders  do  not  have  preemptive  rights  with
respect to shares that are registered under Section 12 of the Exchange Act and our common stock is so registered.
Anti-Takeover Provisions
Our restated articles of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws and Nevada law include certain provisions which
may  have  the  effect  of  delaying  or  deterring  a  change  in  control  or  in  our  management  or  encouraging  persons
considering unsolicited tender offers or other unilateral takeover proposals to negotiate with our board of directors rather
than  pursue  non-negotiated  takeover  attempts.  These  provisions  include  authorized  blank  check  preferred  stock,
restrictions  on  business  combinations,  and  the  availability  of  authorized  but  unissued  common  stock.  In  2014,  our
stockholders  approved  amended  and  restated  bylaws  which  provided  for  declassification  our  board  of  directors.  The
entirety of our board of directors will be declassified after the 2017 annual stockholders meeting. Additionally, we adopted
a rights plan in 2015 to preserve our accumulated net operating losses, which, while not intended to be an anti-takeover
measure, effectively deters purchases of our common stock in certain circumstances and could make us more difficult to
acquire. See “—Rights Plan.”
Table of Contents
Rights Plan
111
In 2015, we entered into a net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) rights plan (the “Rights Plan”) with American Stock
Transfer  &  Trust  Company,  LLC,  as  rights  agent.  In  connection  with  adopting  the  Rights  Plan,  the  board  of  directors
declared a dividend of one preferred share purchase right (“Right”) for each outstanding share of our common stock. In
addition, one Right automatically attached to each share of common stock issued after the initial adoption of the Rights
Plan.
The Rights Plan was adopted in an effort to prevent potential significant limitations under Section 382 of the Code on our
ability to utilize our current NOLs to reduce our future tax liabilities. If we experience an “ownership change,” as defined in
Section 382 of the Code, our ability to fully utilize our NOLs on an annual basis will be substantially limited, and the timing
of the usage of the NOLs could be substantially delayed, which could accordingly significantly impair the value of those
benefits. The Rights Plan works by imposing a significant penalty upon any person or group that acquires 4.9% or more of
our outstanding common stock without the approval of the board of directors (an “Acquiring Person”). The Rights Plan
also gives discretion to the board of directors to determine that someone is an Acquiring Person even if they do not own
4.9% or more of our outstanding common stock but do own 4.9% or more in value of our outstanding stock, as determined
pursuant to Section 382 of the Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder. Stockholders who currently own 4.9%
or  more  of  our  common  stock  will  not  trigger  the  Rights  unless  they  acquire  additional  shares,  subject  to  certain
exceptions  set  forth  in  the  Rights  Plan.  In  addition,  the  board  of  directors  has  established  procedures  to  consider
requests to exempt certain acquisitions of our securities from the Rights Plan if the board of directors determines that
doing so would not limit or impair the availability of the NOLs or is otherwise in the best interests of the Company. While
the  Rights  Plan  is  intended  to  preserve  our  NOLs,  it  effectively  deters  current  and  potential  future  purchases  of  our
common stock above 4.9% of the total outstanding shares and could make it more difficult for a third party to acquire us.
Our board of directors intends to terminate the Rights Plan immediately prior to the completion of the Exchange Offer.
Combination with Interested Stockholders Statute
Sections 78.411 to 78.444 of the Nevada Revised Statutes (N.R.S.), which apply to any Nevada corporation subject to the
reporting  requirements  of  Section  12  of  the  Exchange  Act,  including  us,  prohibits  an  “interested  stockholder”  from
entering  into  a  “combination”  with  the  corporation  for  two  years,  unless  certain  conditions  are  met.  A  “combination”
includes:
•
•
any merger of the corporation or any subsidiary of the corporation with an “interested stockholder,” or any other entity,
whether or not itself an “interested stockholder,” which is, or after and as a result of the merger would be, an affiliate or
associate of an “interested stockholder;”
any sale, lease, exchange, mortgage, pledge, transfer, or other disposition in one transaction, or a series of transactions, to
or with an “interested stockholder” or any affiliate or associate of an “interested stockholder,” of assets of the corporation or
any subsidiary:
(i)         having an aggregate market value equal to more than 5% of the aggregate market value of the corporation’s assets,
determined on a consolidated basis;
(ii)         having an aggregate market value equal to more than 5% of the aggregate market value of all outstanding voting
shares of the corporation; or
(iii)         representing more than 10% of the earning power or net income, determined on a consolidated basis, of the
corporation; or
•
the issuance or transfer by the corporation or any subsidiary, of any shares of the corporation or any subsidiary to an
the issuance or transfer by the corporation or any subsidiary, of any shares of the corporation or any subsidiary to an
“interested stockholder” or any affiliate or associate of an “interested stockholder,”
Table of Contents
112
having an aggregate market value equal to 5% or more of the aggregate market value of all of the outstanding voting
shares of the corporation, except under the exercise of warrants or rights to purchase shares offered, or a dividend or
distribution paid or made, pro rata to all stockholders of the resident domestic corporation;
the  adoption  of  any  plan,  or  proposal  for  the  liquidation  or  dissolution  of  the  corporation,  under  any  agreement,
arrangement or understanding, with the “interested stockholder,” or any affiliate or associate of the “interested stockholder;”
If any of the following actions occurs
i)
a reclassification of the corporation’s securities, including, without limitation, any splitting of shares, share dividend,
or  other  distribution  of  shares  with  respect  to  other  shares,  or  any  issuance  of  new  shares  in  exchange  for  a
proportionately greater number of old shares;
ii)
recapitalization of the corporation;
iii) merger or consolidation of the corporation with any subsidiary;
iv) or any other transaction, whether or not with or into or otherwise involving the interested stockholder,
•
•
under any agreement, arrangement or understanding, whether or not in writing, with the interested stockholder or any
affiliate  or  associate  of  the  interested  stockholder,  which  has  the  immediate  and  proximate  effect  of  increasing  the
proportionate share of the outstanding shares of any class or series of voting shares or securities convertible into voting
shares of the corporation or any subsidiary of the corporation which is beneficially owned by the interested stockholder or
any affiliate or associate of the interested stockholder, except as a result of immaterial changes because of adjustments of
fractional shares.
•
any receipt by an “interested stockholder” or any affiliate or associate of an “interested stockholder,” except proportionately
as a stockholder of the corporation, of the benefit of any loan, advance, guarantee, pledge or other financial assistance or
any tax credit or other tax advantage provided by or through the corporation.
An “interested stockholder” is a person who is:
•
•
directly  or  indirectly,  the  beneficial  owner  of  10%  or  more  of  the  voting  power  of  the  outstanding  voting  shares  of  the
corporation; or
an affiliate or associate of the corporation, which at any time within two years immediately before the date in question was
the  beneficial  owner,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  10%  or  more  of  the  voting  power  of  the  then  outstanding  shares  of  the
corporation.
A corporation to which the Combinations with Interested Stockholders Statute applies may not engage in a “combination”
within two years after the interested stockholder first became an interested stockholder, unless the combination meets all
of the requirements of the corporation’s articles of incorporation and (i) the combination or the transaction by which the
person first became an interested stockholder is approved by the board of directors before the person first became an
interested stockholder, or (ii)(a) the combination is approved by the board of directors and (b) at or after that time, the
combination  is  approved  at  an  annual  or  special  meeting  of  the  stockholders,  and  not  by  written  consent,  by  the
affirmative  vote  of  the  stockholders  representing  at  least  sixty  percent  (60%)  of  the  outstanding  voting  power  of  the
corporation  not  beneficially  owned  by  the  interested  stockholder  or  the  affiliates  or  associates  of  the  interested
stockholder. If this approval is not obtained, the combination may be consummated after the two year period expires if
either (i)(a) the combination or transaction by which the person first became an interested stockholder is approved by the
board  of  directors  before  such  person  first  became  an  interested  stockholder,  (b)  the  combination  is  approved  by  a
majority of the outstanding voting power of the corporation not beneficially owned by the interested stockholder or any
affiliate or associate
Table of Contents
113
of the interested stockholder, or (c) the combination otherwise meets the requirements of the Combination with Interested
Stockholders statute. Alternatively, a combination with an interested stockholder engaged in more than 2 years after the
date  the  person  first  became  an  interested  stockholder  may  be  permissible  if  the  aggregate  amount  of  cash  and  the
market value of consideration other than cash to be received by holders of shares of common stock and holders of any
other class or series of shares meets the minimum requirements set forth in the statue, and prior to the completion of the
combination,  except  in  limited  circumstances,  the  interested  stockholder  has  not  become  the  beneficial  owner  of
additional voting shares of the corporation.
Acquisition of Controlling Interest Statute
In  addition,  Nevada’s  “Acquisition  of  Controlling  Interest  Statute,”  prohibits  an  acquiror,  under  certain  circumstances,
from  voting  shares  of  a  target  corporation’s  stock  after  crossing  certain  threshold  ownership  percentages,  unless  the
acquiror obtains the approval of the target corporation’s stockholders. Sections 78.378 to 78.3793 of the N.R.S. only apply
to  Nevada  corporations  with  at  least  200  stockholders,  including  at  least  100  record  stockholders  who  are  Nevada
residents, that do business directly or indirectly in Nevada and whose articles of incorporation or bylaws in effect 10 days
following the acquisition of a controlling interest by an acquiror do not prohibit its application.
We  do  not  intend  to  “do  business”  in  Nevada  within  the  meaning  of  the  Acquisition  of  Controlling  Interest  Statute.
Therefore, we believe it is unlikely that this statute will apply to us. The statute specifies three thresholds:
•
•
•
•
at least one-fifth but less than one-third;
at least one-third but less than a majority; and
a majority or more, of the outstanding voting power. Once an acquiror crosses one of these thresholds, shares which it
acquired in the transaction taking it over the threshold (or within ninety days preceding the date thereof) become “control
shares” which could be deprived of the right to vote until a majority of the disinterested stockholders restore that right.
A special stockholders’ meeting may be called at the request of the acquiror to consider the voting rights of the acquiror’s
shares. If the acquiror requests a special meeting and gives an undertaking to pay the expenses of said meeting, then the
meeting must take place no earlier than 30 days (unless the acquiror requests that the meeting be held sooner) and no
more than 50 days (unless the acquiror agrees to a later date) after the delivery by the acquiror to the corporation of an
information statement which sets forth the range of voting power that the acquiror has acquired or proposes to acquire and
certain other information concerning the acquiror and the proposed control share acquisition.
If no such request for a stockholders’ meeting is made, consideration of the voting rights of the acquiror’s shares must be
taken at the next special or annual stockholders’ meeting. If the stockholders fail to restore voting rights to the acquiror, or
if the acquiror fails to timely deliver an information statement to the corporation, then the corporation may, if so provided in
its articles of incorporation or bylaws, call certain of the acquiror’s shares for redemption at the average price paid for the
control shares by the acquiror.
Our  restated  articles  of  incorporation  and  amended  and  restated  bylaws  do  not  currently  permit  us  to  redeem  an
acquiror’s  shares  under  these  circumstances.  The  Acquisition  of  Controlling  Interest  Statute  also  provides  that  in  the
event the stockholders restore full voting rights to a holder of control shares that owns a majority of the voting stock, then
all other stockholders who do not vote in favor of restoring voting rights to the control shares may demand payment for
the “fair value” of their shares as determined by a court in dissenters rights proceeding pursuant to Chapter 92A of the
N.R.S..
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for our common stock is American Stock Transfer & Trust Company.
Table of Contents
Listing
114
Our common stock is listed on the NYSE under the symbol “CRK.” On March 24, 2016, we received a notification from the
NYSE informing us that we were no longer in compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing standards for our common
stock because the average closing price of our common stock and our average market capitalization have fallen below the
NYSE’s  requirements.  The  NYSE’s  continued  listing  standards  require  that  (i)  the  average  closing  price  of  a  listed
company’s common stock be at least $1.00 per share and (ii) a listed company’s equity market capitalization be at least
$50 million, in each case over a consecutive 30 trading-day period. As of July 29, 2016, the average closing price of our
common stock over the preceding 30 trading-day period was $0.84 (prior to the reverse stock split) per share and our
average equity market capitalization over the same period was $52.5 million.
We  have  submitted  a  business  plan  to  the  NYSE  demonstrating  our  intent  to  regain  compliance  with  the  NYSE’s
continued listing standards, which plan was accepted by the NYSE. We may regain compliance with the NYSE’s stock
price standard at any time during a six-month cure period commencing on receipt of the NYSE notification if our common
stock has a closing stock price of at least $1.00 and an average closing stock price of at least $1.00 over the 30 trading-day
period ending on the last trading day of that month or the last trading day of the cure period. We must regain compliance
with  respect  to  our  market  capitalization  within  eighteen  months  of  receipt  of  the  NYSE  notification.  Failure  to  regain
compliance  with  the  NYSE’s  continued  listing  standards  within  the  applicable  time  periods  will  result  in  the
commencement of suspension and delisting procedures. To address the minimum closing price requirement, on July 20,
2016, we announced a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of common stock that became effective on July 29, 2016.
Table of Contents
115
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
We will issue warrants in connection with the Exchange Offer to exchanging holders of the Old Senior Secured Notes
pursuant to a warrant agreement with American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC, as warrant agent. The following is
a summary of the material terms of the warrant agreement and does not purport to be complete. We urge you to read the
form of warrant agreement, which has been filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus forms
a part, as the warrant agreement, and not this description, define your rights as a holder of the warrants.
Each  warrant  entitles  the  holder  to  purchase  one  share  of  our  common  stock  at  an  exercise  price  of  $0.01  per  share,
subject to adjustment as discussed below. In lieu of payment of the exercise price, a warrant holder will have the right (but
not the obligation) to require us to convert the warrants, in whole or in part, into a number of shares of our common stock
(net of the applicable exercise price). The warrants will be exercisable for a period of two years. If all of the Old Senior
Secured Notes are validly tendered and accepted in the Exchange Offer, we will issue warrants to acquire in the aggregate
1.05 million shares of our common stock.
The warrants are being registered with the SEC pursuant to the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a
part  and  will  be  freely  transferable  when  issued,  subject  to  restrictions  that  may  apply  to  our  affiliates  or  that  may
otherwise apply pursuant to applicable securities laws.
The warrants permit a warrant holder to elect to exercise the warrant such that no payment of cash will be required in
connection with such exercise (“Net Share Settlement”). If Net Share Settlement is elected, we shall deliver, without any
cash payment therefor, a number of shares of common stock equal to the quotient determined by dividing (i) the Fair
Value  (as  of  the  Exercise  Date,  each  as  defined  in  the  warrant  agreement)  of  the  number  of  shares  of  common  stock
deliverable pursuant to Full Physical Settlement minus the Exercise Price that would be payable pursuant to Full Physical
Settlement by (ii) the Fair Value determined pursuant to the above clause (i).
Upon the occurrence of certain events set forth in the warrant agreement, the number of shares of common stock issuable
upon exercise of a warrant may be increased or reduced and the exercise price may be adjusted upward or downward.
Subject  to  the  exceptions  specified  in  the  warrant  agreement,  adjustments  to  the  number  of  shares  of  common  stock
issuable upon exercise of a warrant and the exercise price of a warrant may be made if we:
•
•
•
•
pay a stock dividend or make another distribution of shares of our common stock to holders of common stock;
subdivide our outstanding shares of common stock into a greater number of shares of common stock (a share split);
combine our outstanding shares of common stock into a smaller number of shares of common stock (a share combination);
or
issue, in a reclassification of our outstanding shares of common stock, other securities of our company.
In the case of any recapitalization, reorganization, consolidation, merger, sale of all or substantially all of our assets or
other transaction which is effected at any time during the exercise period in such a way that the holders of our common
stock are entitled to receive (either directly or upon subsequent liquidation) stock, securities or assets with respect to or in
exchange for such common stock, each of the registered holders of warrants will be entitled to receive, upon exercise of
such warrants and payment of the exercise price, the kind and amount of consideration receivable by the holders of our
common stock. We are prohibited from entering into any such transaction unless, prior to the consummation thereof, the
successor entity (if other than our company) assumes by written instrument the obligation to deliver to each holder of
warrants such stock, securities or assets as such holder may be entitled to acquire.
Table of Contents
116
Warrant holders generally will not have the rights or privileges of holders of common stock, including any voting rights,
until they exercise or convert their warrants and receive shares of our common stock. After the issuance of shares of
common stock upon exercise or conversion of the warrants, each holder will be entitled to one vote for each share held of
record on all matters to be voted on by stockholders.
No fractional shares of common stock will be issued upon exercise or conversion of the warrants. If, upon exercise or
conversion of the warrants, a holder would be entitled to receive a fractional interest in a share, we will round up to the
nearest whole number the number of shares of common stock to be issued to the warrant holder.
Table of Contents
117
DESCRIPTION OF NEW SENIOR SECURED NOTES
Comstock will issue the new Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020 (the “New Senior Secured Notes”) pursuant to an
Indenture (the “Senior Secured Notes Indenture”) by and among Comstock, as issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and The
Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (the “Senior Secured Notes Trustee”). The terms of the New
Senior  Secured  Notes  include  those  stated  in  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  and  those  made  part  of  the  Senior
Secured Notes Indenture by reference to the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 (the “TIA”).
Unless the context requires otherwise, all references to “New Senior Secured Notes” herein shall include all Additional
New Senior Secured Notes.
The following description is a summary of the material provisions of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the New Senior
Secured  Notes,  the  Collateral  Agreements,  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  and  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement. It does not restate those agreements and instruments in their entirety. We urge you to read those agreements
and  instruments  because  they,  and  not  this  description,  will  define  your  rights  as  Holders  of  the  New  Senior  Secured
Notes. Anyone who receives this prospectus may obtain a copy of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the form of New
Senior Secured Notes, the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and the Collateral
Agreements as set forth below under “—Available Information.”
Furthermore, Appendix 1: Comparison of Terms of the New Senior Secured Notes to Old Senior Secured Notes, contains
a summary of “Certain Covenants,” “Events of Default” and “Certain Definitions” of the New Senior Secured Notes as
compared to a summary of “Certain Covenants,” “Events of Default” and “Certain Definitions” of the Old Senior Secured
Notes,  showing  provisions  that  will  be  deleted  or  changed  or  provisions  that  will  be  added.  Such  summary  does  not
restate  the  terms  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  or  the  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  we  urge  you  to  read  the
documents governing the New Senior Secured Notes and the Old Senior Secured Notes, including the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture and the indenture governing the Old Senior Secured Notes, because they, and not that description, define
your rights as a holder of New Senior Secured Notes or Old Senior Secured Notes.
You  can  find  the  definitions  of  certain  terms  used  in  this  “Description  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes”  under  the
subheading “—Certain Definitions.” The registered Holder of a New Senior Secured Note will be treated as the owner of it
for all purposes. Only registered Holders will have rights under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. In this “Description of
New  Senior  Secured  Notes,”  the  words  “Comstock,”  “we,”  “the  Company,”  “us,”  or  “our”  refer  only  to  Comstock
Resources, Inc. and not to any of its subsidiaries.
Brief Description of the New Senior Secured Notes
The New Senior Secured Notes
The New Senior Secured Notes will be:
•
•
•
Table of Contents
•
•
•
•
•
senior obligations of the Company;
equal in right of payment to all existing and future senior Indebtedness of the Company, subject to the terms of
the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement;
secured, on an equal and ratable, first priority basis with the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations (subject to
payment priorities in favor of holders of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations pursuant to the terms of the Pari
Passu Intercreditor Agreement described herein and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens), by liens on the same
collateral that secures such Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations (other than Excluded Collateral);
118
senior in right of payment to all subordinated Indebtedness of the Company;
effectively  senior  to  all  existing  and  future  unsecured  senior  Indebtedness  of  the  Company,  including  the
Company’s  Old  Unsecured  Notes  and  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes  (which  will  become  unsecured  upon
completion of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation), to the extent of the value of the Collateral;
effectively senior to all Junior Lien Obligations of the Company, including Indebtedness under the Company’s
New Convertible Notes, to the extent of the value of the Collateral;
structurally  subordinated  to  the  Indebtedness  and  other  liabilities  of  Subsidiaries  of  the  Company  that  do  not
guarantee the New Senior Secured Notes; and
unconditionally guaranteed by the Subsidiary Guarantors.
The Guarantees
Initially, the New Senior Secured Notes will be guaranteed by all of our current Subsidiaries. Each Subsidiary Guarantee
will be:
•
•
•
•
•
•
a senior obligation of the Subsidiary Guarantor;
equal in right of payment to all existing and future senior Indebtedness of that Subsidiary Guarantor, subject to
the terms of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement;
secured,  on  an  equal  and  ratable,  first  priority  basis  with  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  of  that
Subsidiary Guarantor (subject to payment priorities in favor of holders of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations
pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  described  herein  and  subject  to  Permitted
Collateral  Liens),  by  liens  on  the  same  collateral  that  secures  such  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations
(other than Excluded Collateral);
senior in right of payment to all subordinated Indebtedness of that Subsidiary Guarantor;
effectively senior to all existing and future unsecured senior Indebtedness of the Subsidiary Guarantors, including
the Subsidiary Guarantor’s guarantees of the Company’s Old Unsecured Notes and Old Senior Secured Notes
(which will become unsecured upon completion of the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation), to the extent of
the value of the Collateral; and
effectively senior to all future Junior Lien Obligations of that Subsidiary Guarantor, including Indebtedness under
the Company’s New Convertible Notes, to the extent of the value of the Collateral.
As of the date of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, all of the Company’s Subsidiaries will be “Restricted Subsidiaries.”
However, under the circumstances described below under the subheading “—Certain Covenants—Future Designation of
Restricted  and  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries,”  the  Company  will  be  permitted  to  designate  certain  of  its  Subsidiaries  as
“Unrestricted Subsidiaries.” Unrestricted Subsidiaries will not be subject to many of the restrictive covenants in the Senior
Secured Notes Indenture and will not guarantee the New Senior Secured Notes.
Table of Contents
Principal, Maturity and Interest
119
The Company will issue up to $700,000,000 in aggregate principal amount of New Senior Secured Notes in this Exchange
Offer and Consent Solicitation. The Company will issue the New Senior Secured Notes in denominations of $1.00. The New
Senior Secured Notes will mature on March 15, 2020.
Interest on the New Senior Secured Notes (including interest on any Additional New Senior Secured Notes as described
below) will accrue at the rate of 10.0% per annum, if the Company elects to pay interest in cash, or 11.0% per annum, if the
Company elects to pay interest in kind as described more fully below; provided that not more than $75,000,000 of interest
may be paid in kind on the New Senior Secured Notes. Interest shall be payable semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and
September 15, commencing on March 15, 2017.
The  Company  will  make  each  interest  payment  to  the  Holders  of  record  on  the  immediately  preceding  March  1  and
September 1. Interest will be payable, at the election of the Company (made by delivering a notice to the Senior Secured
Notes Trustee at least 10 business days before the end of the interest period) (i) entirely in cash or (ii) by issuing additional
securities (“Additional New Senior Secured Notes”) with the same terms as the New Senior Secured Notes in a principal
amount equal to all or any portion the applicable amount of interest for the interest period (rounded down to the nearest
whole  dollar); provided  that  notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  herein,  interest  paid  in  the  manner  described  in
clause (ii) above shall not exceed $75,000,000 in the aggregate, and once $75,000,000 of interest has been paid in kind, all
interest  on  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  (including,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  Additional  New  Senior  Secured
Notes) shall be paid entirely in cash. All Additional New Senior Secured Notes issued pursuant to an interest payment as
described  above  will  mature  on  March  15,  2020  and  will  be  governed  by,  and  subject  to  the  terms,  provisions  and
conditions of, the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. The Additional New Senior Secured Notes shall have the same rights
and benefits as the New Senior Secured Notes issued on the Issue Date, and shall be treated together with the New Senior
Secured Notes as a single class for all purposes under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
If  interest  is  paid  by  issuing  Additional  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  then  not  later  than  ten  business  days  prior  to  the
relevant interest payment date, the Company shall deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the paying agent (if
other than the Senior Secured Notes Trustee), (i) with respect to New Senior Secured Notes represented by Certificated
Notes, the required amount of Additional New Senior Secured Notes represented by Certificated Notes (rounded down to
the nearest whole dollar) and a company order to authenticate and deliver such Additional New Senior Secured Notes or
(ii) with respect to New Senior Secured Notes represented by one or more Global Notes, a company order to increase the
outstanding principal amount of such Global Notes by the required amount (rounded down to the nearest whole dollar)
(or,  if  necessary,  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  depositary  or  otherwise,  the  required  amount  of  Additional  New
Senior Secured Notes represented by Global Notes (rounded down to the nearest whole dollar) and a company order to
authenticate and deliver such new Global Notes).
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the payment of accrued interest in connection with any redemption or
purchase of the New Senior Secured Notes as provided below under the heading “—Redemption—Optional Redemption,”
“—Certain Covenants—Change of Control,” and “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales” shall be made solely
in cash.
If an interest payment date falls on a day that is not a business day, the interest payment to be made on such interest
payment  date  will  be  made  on  the  next  succeeding  business  day  with  the  same  force  and  effect  as  if  made  on  such
interest payment date, and no additional interest will accrue as a result of such delayed payment.
Interest on the New Senior Secured Notes will accrue from the most recent interest date to which interest has been paid in
cash or in kind or, if no interest has been paid in cash or in kind, from date of original issuance. Interest will be computed
on the basis of a 360-day year comprised of twelve 30-day months.
Table of Contents
120
Except for the issuance of up to $75,000,000 of Additional New Senior Secured Notes in connection with the payment of
interest,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  will  provide  that  the  Company  may  not  issue  more  than  $700,000,000
aggregate principal amount of New Senior Secured Notes.
Methods of Receiving Payments on the New Senior Secured Notes
If a Holder of New Senior Secured Notes has given wire transfer instructions to the Company or the paying agent, the
Company  will  pay  all  principal  of,  premium,  if  any,  on,  and  interest  on,  that  Holder’s  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  in
accordance with those instructions. All other payments on the New Senior Secured Notes will be made at the office or
agency of the paying agent and registrar within the City and State of New York unless the Company elects to make interest
payments by check mailed to the Holders at their addresses set forth in the register of holders.
Paying Agent and Registrar for the New Senior Secured Notes
The Senior Secured Notes Trustee is acting as paying agent and registrar. The Company may change the paying agent or
registrar without prior notice to the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes, and the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
may act as paying agent or registrar.
Transfer and Exchange
A Holder may transfer or exchange New Senior Secured Notes in accordance with the provisions of the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture. The registrar and the Senior Secured Notes Trustee may require a Holder, among other things, to furnish
appropriate endorsements and transfer documents in connection with a transfer of New Senior Secured Notes. Holders
will be required to pay all taxes due on transfer. The Company will not be required to transfer or exchange any New Senior
Secured Note selected for redemption. Also, the Company will not be required to transfer or exchange any New Senior
Secured Note for a period of 15 days before a selection of New Senior Secured Notes to be redeemed or between a record
date and the next succeeding interest payment date.
Subsidiary Guarantees of New Senior Secured Notes
Each Subsidiary Guarantor will unconditionally guarantee, jointly and severally, to each Holder and the Senior Secured
Notes Trustee, the full and prompt performance of the Company’s obligations under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture
and the New Senior Secured Notes, including the payment of principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the New Senior
Secured Notes pursuant to its Subsidiary Guarantee. The initial Subsidiary Guarantors are currently all of the Company’s
subsidiaries. In the future, certain other Restricted Subsidiaries of the Company may be required to become Subsidiary
Guarantors as described under “—Certain Covenants—Future Subsidiary Guarantees.”
The obligations of each Subsidiary Guarantor will be limited to the maximum amount as will result in the obligations of
such  Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee  not  constituting  a  fraudulent  conveyance  or  fraudulent
transfer  under  applicable  law.  Each  Subsidiary  Guarantor  that  makes  a  payment  or  distribution  under  a  Subsidiary
Guarantee shall be entitled to a contribution from each other Subsidiary Guarantor in a pro rata amount based on the
Adjusted Net Assets of each Subsidiary Guarantor.
A Subsidiary Guarantor may not sell or otherwise dispose of, in one or more related transactions, all or substantially all of
its properties or assets to, or consolidate with or merge with or into (whether or not such Subsidiary Guarantor is the
surviving Person) another Person, other than with respect to a Subsidiary Guarantor, the Company or another Subsidiary
Guarantor, unless:
(1) immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of transactions, no Default or Event of Default exists;
Table of Contents
(2) either:
121
(a)(x) such Subsidiary Guarantor is the surviving Person or (y) the Person acquiring the properties or assets in any such
sale or other disposition or the Person formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger is a Person organized
and existing under the laws of the United States of America, any state thereof or the District of Columbia (such Subsidiary
Guarantor  or  such  Person,  as  the  case  may  be,  being  herein  called  the  “Successor  Guarantor”)  and  the  Successor
Guarantor  (if  other  than  such  Subsidiary  Guarantor)  unconditionally  assumes  all  the  obligations  of  such  Subsidiary
Guarantor  under  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  and  all  other  Senior  Secured  Note
Documents pursuant to a supplemental indenture in form reasonably satisfactory to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee
and such other agreements as are reasonably satisfactory to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Collateral Agent;
or
(b) with respect to a Subsidiary Guarantor, such transaction or series of transactions does not violate the covenants set
forth under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales;
(3) any Collateral owned by or transferred to the Successor Guarantor shall (a) continue to constitute Collateral under the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the Collateral Agreements and (b) be subject to a Pari Passu Lien in favor of the
Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations;
(4) the Successor Guarantor shall take such action (or agree to take such action) as may be reasonably necessary to
cause any property or assets that constitute Collateral owned by or transferred to the Successor Guarantor to be subject
to the Pari Passu Liens in the manner and to the extent required under the Collateral Agreements and shall deliver an
opinion  of  counsel  as  to  the  enforceability  of  any  amendments,  supplements  or  other  instruments  with  respect  to  the
Collateral Agreements to be executed, delivered, filed and recorded, as applicable, and such other matters as the Senior
Secured Notes Trustee or Collateral Agent, as applicable, may reasonably request; and
(5) the Company delivers to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee an officers’ certificate and opinion of counsel, each stating
that  such  sale  or  other  disposition  or  merger  or  consolidation  and  such  supplemental  indenture  and  each  such
amendment comply with this covenant.
The  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  will  provide  that  the  Subsidiary  Guarantee  of  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  will  be
automatically and unconditionally released:
(1) in connection with any sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of such Subsidiary Guarantor
(including by way of merger, consolidation or amalgamation) to a Person that is not (either before or after giving effect to
such transaction) the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary, if the sale or other disposition is conducted in accordance with
the covenants set forth in the immediately preceding paragraph and under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset
Sales,” as applicable;
(2) in connection with any sale or other disposition of Capital Stock of such Subsidiary Guarantor, following which such
Subsidiary Guarantor is no longer a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, if the sale or other disposition is conducted in
accordance  with  the  covenants  set  forth  in  the  immediately  preceding  paragraph  and  under  “—Certain  Covenants—
Limitation on Asset Sales,” as applicable;
Table of Contents
122
(3) upon legal defeasance, covenant defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture as
provided  below  under  “—Legal  Defeasance  or  Covenant  Defeasance  of  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture”  and  “—
Satisfaction and Discharge;” and
(4)  unless  an  Event  of  Default  has  occurred  and  is  continuing,  upon  the  dissolution  or  liquidation  of  the  Subsidiary
Guarantor in compliance with the covenant described in the immediately preceding paragraph.
Security for the New Senior Secured Notes
The  Senior  Secured  Note  Obligations  and  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  will  be  secured  by  first-priority
perfected Liens in the Collateral granted to the Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Senior Secured
Notes and the holders of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations (subject to the payment priorities in favor of the
holders of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations pursuant to the terms of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and
subject  to  Permitted  Collateral  Liens).  Such  Liens  will  also  be  senior  in  priority  to  the  Junior  Liens  securing  New
Convertible Notes.
The Collateral will consist of the same assets that secure the Old Senior Secured Notes and will consist of at least 80% of
the present value of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and Gas Properties that constitute Proved Reserves and substantially all
other assets of the Collateral Grantors. The Senior Secured Notes Indenture will provide for a 60-day period following the
Issue  Date  for  the  Company  to  deliver  the  Mortgages  establishing  the  first-priority  perfected  Liens  on  the  Oil  and  Gas
Properties owned by the Collateral Grantors on the Issue Date that are required to become Mortgaged Properties. Prior to
the recording of the Mortgages, the New Senior Secured Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees will not be secured by
Liens on such Oil and Gas Properties. See “Risk Factors—Risks Relating to the Exchange Offer and Holding the New
Notes—Risks Related to Holding the New Notes—Security over certain collateral, including all mortgages on oil and gas
properties, on which a lien in favor of the collateral agent is required, may not be perfected on the Closing Date.” Except as
otherwise provided in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement, the Senior Secured Notes Indenture will provide that the
Collateral  shall  include  (x)  prior  to  a  default  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (or  any  agreements  refinancing,
replacing,  refunding  or  restating  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  date  of  the  Indenture)  or,  if  no
Revolving  Credit  Agreement  is  then  in  effect,  a  default  under  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  at  least  80%  of  the
present value of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and Gas Properties that constitute Proved Reserves evaluated in the most
recently  completed  Engineering  Report  delivered  pursuant  to  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (or  any  agreements
refinancing, replacing, refunding or restating the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the date of the Indenture) and
(y) after the occurrence of a default under the Revolving Credit Agreement or, if no Revolving Credit Agreement is then in
effect, a default under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, at least 95% of the present value of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil
and Gas Properties.
If no such Engineering Report is delivered pursuant to the Revolving Credit Agreement (or any agreements refinancing,
replacing, refunding or restating the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the date of the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture), the Company shall deliver to the Collateral Agent semi-annually on or before April 1 and October 1 in each
calendar year an officers’ certificate certifying that as of the date of such certificate, (i) no Default has occurred and is
continuing and (ii) the Mortgaged Properties include at least 80% of the present value of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and
Gas  Properties  that  constitute  Proved  Reserves.  In  the  event  that  the  Mortgaged  Properties  do  not  meet  such  80%
requirement, then the Collateral Grantors will be required to grant to the Collateral Agent as security for the Pari Passu
Obligations a first-priority Lien on additional Oil and Gas Properties not already subject to a Lien such that after giving
effect thereto, the Mortgaged Properties will represent at least 80% of the present value of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and
Gas Properties that constitute Proved Reserves. To the extent that any Oil and Gas Properties constituting Collateral are
disposed of after the date of any applicable Engineering Report or certificate delivered pursuant to this paragraph, any
Proved Reserves attributable to such Oil and Gas Properties shall be deemed excluded from such Engineering Report or
certificate for the purpose of determining whether such minimum Mortgage requirement is met after giving effect to such
release.
Table of Contents
123
No Collateral Grantor will be permitted to enter into any agreement that requires the proceeds received from any sale of
Collateral to be applied to repay, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire any Indebtedness of any Person, other
than  (i)  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  (ii)  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  or  (iii)  otherwise  as  may  be
permitted or required by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and the Collateral
Agreements, including with respect to any Permitted Collateral Liens; provided that subject to the covenant “—Certain
Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock,” any such agreement may be entered into to the
extent  that  it  permits  such  proceeds  to  be  applied  to  all  Pari  Passu  Obligations  prior  to  or  instead  of  such  other
Indebtedness.
The Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement
On the Issue Date, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee will enter into the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement with respect to
the Collateral.
Rights of the Controlling Party
Under the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement, the “Controlling Party” has the right to direct the Collateral Agent (i) with
respect to exercise of rights and remedies and (ii) to take other actions with respect to the Collateral (and the Authorized
Representatives of the Non-Controlling Secured Parties shall comply with the instructions delivered by the Controlling
Party with respect to the Collateral in connection with such exercise of rights and remedies and other actions), and the
Non-Controlling  Secured  Parties  have  no  rights  to  take  any  action  with  respect  to  the  Collateral  under  the  Pari  Passu
Intercreditor Agreement (other than certain actions to preserve and protect their claims and interests or otherwise at the
direction or with the consent of the Controlling Party).
Identity of the Controlling Party
The following rules apply for determining the identity of the Controlling Party:
(1) The Revolving Credit Agreement Agent is the initial Controlling Party and will remain the Controlling Party until the
earlier of (a) the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations and (b) the Non-Controlling Parties Enforcement
Date (such date, the “Revolving Credit Control Termination Date”).
(2) If any Senior Secured Note Obligations are outstanding on the Revolving Credit Control Termination Date, then the
Senior Secured Notes Trustee shall become the Controlling Party.
The “Non-Controlling Parties Enforcement Date” is the date that is 180 days after the occurrence of both (a) an event of
default, as defined in the applicable governing instrument for the Series of Pari Passu Obligations for which the Alternate
Controlling Party is the Authorized Representative, as applicable, and (b) the Collateral Agent’s and each other Authorized
Representative’s  receipt  of  written  notice  from  the  Alternate  Controlling  Party  certifying  that  (i)  such  Authorized
Representative  is  the  Alternate  Controlling  Party  and  that  an  event  of  default,  as  defined  in  the  applicable  governing
instruments for that Series of Pari Passu Obligations, has occurred and is continuing and (ii) the Pari Passu Obligations of
that Series are currently due and payable in full (whether as a result of acceleration thereof or otherwise) in accordance
with such applicable governing instruments for that Series of Pari Passu Obligations; provided that the Non-Controlling
Parties Enforcement Date shall be stayed and shall not occur and shall be deemed not to have occurred with respect to
any Collateral (1) at any time that (A) the then current Controlling Party has commenced (or caused the Collateral Agent to
commence) and is diligently pursuing any enforcement action with respect to all or a material portion of such Collateral
and  (B)  each  other  Authorized  Representative  has  received  written  notice  from  the  Controlling  Party  or  the  Collateral
Agent thereof or (2) at any time any Collateral Grantor that has granted a security interest in such Collateral is then a
debtor under or with respect to (or otherwise subject to) any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
With respect to the applicable Controlling Party, at any time, (a) the Collateral Agent shall act or refrain from acting with
respect to the Collateral only on the written instructions of the Controlling Party, (b) the Collateral
Table of Contents
124
Agent  shall  not  follow  any  instructions  with  respect  to  such  Collateral  from  any  Authorized  Representative  or  other
representative of any Non-Controlling Secured Party or other Secured Party (other than the Controlling Party), and (c) no
Authorized Representative of any Non-Controlling Secured Party or other Secured Party (other than the Controlling Party)
will (and will be deemed to have waived any right to) instruct the Collateral Agent to commence any judicial or non-judicial
foreclosure proceedings with respect to, seek to have a trustee, receiver, liquidator or similar official appointed for or over,
attempt any action to take possession of, exercise any right, remedy or power with respect to, or otherwise take any action
to enforce its interests in or realize upon, or take any other action available to it in respect of, the Collateral or otherwise; it
being agreed that only the Collateral Agent, acting on the instructions of the applicable Authorized Representative and in
accordance  with  the  applicable  Collateral  Agreement,  will  be  entitled  to  take  any  such  actions  or  exercise  any  such
remedies  with  respect  to  the  Collateral  (and  each  Non-Controlling  Authorized  Representative  and  Non-  Controlling
Secured  Party  shall  be  deemed  to  have  waived  any  right,  power,  or  remedy,  whether  under  any  agreement  or  any
applicable law (including in equity) to the contrary); provided that without limiting the other provisions of the Pari Passu
Intercreditor Agreement, to the extent that the Collateral Agent, in its sole and absolute discretion, determines that action
by  any  other  Agent  (such  as  joining  in  the  judicial  foreclosure  of  any  deed  of  trust  or  mortgage  on  the  Collateral)  is
necessary or otherwise advisable in order to facilitate or accomplish the desired enforcement result undertaken by the
Collateral  Agent,  upon  request  of  the  Collateral  Agent,  the  applicable  Non-Controlling  Authorized  Representative  shall
advise  such  other  Agent  to  take  such  action  and  otherwise  reasonably  cooperate  with  the  Collateral  Agent  and,  if  for
whatever  reason  such  Non-Controlling  Authorized  Representative  shall  fail  to  so  advise  the  other  Agent  or  the  other
Agent fails to so act and otherwise reasonably cooperate with the Collateral Agent, the Collateral Agent shall be deemed to
have been granted an irrevocable power of attorney by such other Agent empowering the Collateral Agent to take such
actions on behalf of such other Agent; provided, further, that the proceeds of any such enforcement and other amount
received in connection therewith shall be applied pursuant to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, each Secured Party (i) shall be entitled to take certain actions to preserve and protect their claims and interests
with respect to the Pari Passu Obligations, to create, prove, preserve and protect the validity, enforceability, perfection and
priority of the Collateral and actions that unsecured creditors are entitled to take, and (ii) must take certain actions in order
to preserve and protect their secured claims if the failure  to  take  any  such  actions  could  result  in  a  loss  of  all  or  any
material part of such secured claims, in each case of clauses (i) and (ii), to the extent not prohibited by the Pari Passu
Intercreditor Agreement.
No Contest, Protest or Objection
No Non-Controlling Secured Party (nor its Authorized Representative) will (and each shall be deemed to have waived any
right to) contest, protest or object to any foreclosure proceeding or action brought by the Collateral Agent, the Controlling
Party  or  the  Controlling  Secured  Parties  or  any  other  exercise  by  the  Collateral  Agent,  the  Controlling  Party  or  the
Controlling Secured Parties of any rights and remedies relating to the Collateral, or cause the Collateral Agent to do so on
any ground, including, in the case of non-judicial foreclosure of any personal property collateral, that such foreclosure will
not result in a commercially reasonable disposition of the Collateral; provided that nothing in the Pari Passu Intercreditor
Agreement shall prevent any Non-Controlling Secured Party from making a cash bid or credit bid for any Collateral at any
foreclosure sale that results in the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations (provided that any such credit
bid may only be made if the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations has occurred or will occur concurrently
as a result of a cash bid for such collateral in addition to such credit bid). The foregoing shall not be construed to limit the
rights and priorities of any Pari Passu Secured Party, Agent or Authorized Representative with respect to any property not
constituting Collateral. In addition, each of the Pari Passu Secured Parties will agree that it will not (and waives any right to)
challenge, question or contest or support any other Person in challenging, questioning or contesting, in any proceeding
(including any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding), the validity or enforceability of any Pari Passu Obligations or any
Collateral Agreement or the perfection, priority, validity or enforceability of any Lien granted to the Collateral Agent or any
other Pari Passu Secured Party under any Pari Passu Document constituting a Collateral Agreement, or the validity or
enforceability of its priorities, rights or duties established
Table of Contents
125
by, or other provisions of, the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement; provided that nothing in the Pari Passu Intercreditor
Agreement  shall  be  construed  to  prevent  or  impair  the  rights  of  any  of  any  Collateral  Agent  or  any  Authorized
Representative to enforce the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement.
None of the Pari Passu Secured Parties shall be entitled to propose, sponsor, support, vote in favor of or agree to (i) any
Non-Conforming Plan of Reorganization or (ii) any Plan of Reorganization, directly or indirectly, that is pursuant to Section
1129(b)(1) of the Bankruptcy Code that has not been approved by the Majority Lenders (as defined in the Revolving Credit
Agreement).
Waterfall
If (a) the Collateral Agent, upon instruction from the Controlling Party, takes action to enforce rights in respect of any
Collateral, or (b) any distribution is made with respect to any Collateral in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding of any
Collateral Grantor or (c) any Pari Passu Secured Party receives any payment with respect to any Collateral or the proceeds
of any sale, collection or other liquidation of any such Collateral by the Collateral Agent, then the proceeds of any such
distribution or payment (subject, in the case of any such distribution, to the paragraph immediately following) shall be
applied pursuant to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement in the following order of priority:
First, to the payment in full in cash of all unpaid fees, expenses, reimbursements and indemnification amounts incurred by
the Collateral Agent and all fees owed to it in connection with such collection or sale or otherwise in connection with the
Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement or any other Pari Passu Document (regardless of whether allowed or allowable as a
claim in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding), pro rata in accordance with the relative amounts thereof on the date of
any payment or distribution;
Second,  (1)  to  the  payment  in  full  in  cash  of  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations,  including  any  interest,  fees,
costs, expenses, charges or other amounts, in each case whether accrued or incurred before or after the commencement
of  an  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding  (regardless  of  whether  allowed  or  allowable  in  any  such  Insolvency  or
Liquidation  Proceeding),  it  being  understood  that  obligations  in  respect  of  Lender  Provided  Hedging  Agreements  that
have been terminated are outstanding and non-contingent for purposes of this paragraph and (2) the deposit  of  cash
collateral under the sole dominion and control of the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or its designee to collateralize
Letters  of  Credit  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement)  pursuant  to  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  and  the
aggregate  facing  and  similar  fees  which  will  accrue  thereon  through  the  stated  maturity  of  such  Letters  of  Credit
(assuming no drawings thereon before stated maturity);
Third, after the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations has occurred, to the payment in full in cash of the
Senior Secured Note Obligations, including any interest (including the Additional New Senior Secured Notes, if any), fees,
costs, expenses, charges or other amounts, in each case whether accrued or incurred before or after the commencement
of an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding (regardless of whether allowed or allowable as a claim in any such Insolvency
or  Liquidation  Proceeding),  pro  rata  in  accordance  with  the  relative  amounts  thereof  on  the  date  of  any  payment  or
distribution; and
Fourth, any surplus proceeds then remaining after the repayment of the amounts described in the preceding clauses will
be  applied  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  and  thereafter  be  returned  to  the
Company or the applicable Collateral Grantor or to whomever may be lawfully entitled to receive the same or as a court of
competent jurisdiction may direct;
Table of Contents
126
provided that, in any event, if the Pari Passu Obligations include Swap Obligations, no such distributions or payments
shall be allocated to any holder of such Swap Obligations (in its capacity as such) on account of such Swap Obligations to
the extent a guaranty of such Swap Obligations is made by, or such Collateral is owned by, a Collateral Grantor that is not
an “eligible contract participant” as defined in the Commodity Exchange Act and the regulations thereunder at the time
the guaranty of such Collateral Grantor or the grant of such security interest becomes effective with respect to such Swap
Obligations.
Each Holder of a Senior Secured Note, by its acceptance thereof, will be deemed to have acknowledged that this payment
waterfall  and  the  corresponding  provisions  of  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  are  deemed  to  constitute  a
“subordination agreement” enforceable under Section 510(a) of the Bankruptcy Code.
Refrain by Secured Parties; Payment Over
Each Non-Controlling Secured Party acknowledges and agrees that the Collateral Agent shall be entitled, for the benefit of
the Secured Parties, (a) to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of or deal with any Collateral except as prohibited by the Pari
Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  and  (b)  to  act  solely  on  the  written  instructions  of  the  Controlling  Party,  in  each  case,
without regard to any rights to which the Non-Controlling Secured Parties would otherwise be entitled as a result of the
Pari Passu Obligations with respect to the applicable Series. Each Non-Controlling Secured Party agrees that none of the
Collateral Agent, the Controlling Party or any other Secured Party shall have any duty or obligation first to marshal or
realize upon any type of Collateral (or any other collateral securing any of the Pari Passu Obligations), or to sell, dispose of
or otherwise liquidate all or any portion of such Collateral (or any other collateral securing any Pari Passu Obligations), in
any manner that would maximize the return to the Non-Controlling Secured Parties, notwithstanding that the order and
timing of any such realization, sale, disposition or liquidation may affect the amount of proceeds actually received by the
Non-Controlling Secured Parties from such realization, sale, disposition or liquidation.
Separate Classes
Each  party  to  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  (including  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee,  on  behalf  of  the
Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes) acknowledges that the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, including in
respect of the Collateral, constitute claims separate and apart (and of a different nature) from the New Senior Secured
Notes and any other Pari Passu Obligations, including in respect of the Collateral; and because of, among other things,
their differing payment terms, their differing covenant rights, and their differing rights in the Collateral (including vis-a-vis
any Collateral Grantor and/or in directing the exercise of any rights in and remedies against the Collateral), the Revolving
Credit  Agreement  Obligations  are  fundamentally  different  and  distinct  from  (and  substantially  dissimilar,  within  the
meaning of Section 1122 of the Bankruptcy Code, to) the New Senior Secured Notes and any and all other Pari Passu
Obligations and must be separately classified in any Plan of Reorganization, proposed or confirmed in an Insolvency or
Liquidation Proceeding and the Pari Passu Obligations of any Series must be separately classified in any such plan from
the Pari Passu Obligations of any other Series.
DIP Financing
If any Collateral Grantor becomes subject to any bankruptcy case, the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement provides that
(1) if any Collateral Grantor shall, as debtor(s)-in-possession, move for approval of financing (the “DIP Financing”) to be
provided  by  one  or  more  lenders  (the  “DIP Lenders”)  under  Section  364  of  the  Bankruptcy  Code  or  the  use  of  cash
collateral under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code, each Secured Party (other than any Controlling Secured Party or any
Authorized  Representative  of  any  Controlling  Secured  Party)  agrees  that  it  will  raise  no  objection  to,  nor  support  any
Person  objecting  to,  and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  consented  to,  any  such  financing  or  to  the  Liens  on  the  Collateral
securing the same (the “DIP Financing Liens”) or to any use of cash collateral that constitutes Collateral (including any bid
or  sale  procedure  in  respect  thereof),  unless  any  Controlling  Secured  Party,  or  an  Authorized  Representative  of  any
Controlling Secured Party, shall
Table of Contents
127
then oppose or object to such DIP Financing or such DIP Financing Liens or use of cash collateral (and (i) to the extent
that such DIP Financing Liens are senior to the Liens on any such Collateral for the benefit of the Controlling Secured
Parties, each Non-Controlling Secured Party subordinates its Liens with respect to such Collateral on the same terms as
the  Liens  of  the  Controlling  Secured  Parties  (other  than  any  Liens  of  any  Secured  Parties  constituting  DIP  Financing
Liens) are subordinated thereto, and (ii) to the extent that such DIP Financing Liens rank pari passu with the Liens on any
such Collateral granted to secure the Obligations of the Controlling Secured Parties, each Non-Controlling Secured Party
will confirm the priorities with respect to such Collateral as set forth in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement), in each
case so long as:
(1)  such  DIP  Financing  documentation  or  cash  collateral  order  does  not  require  any  Collateral  Grantor  to  propose  a
specific Plan of Reorganization or to liquidate or sell substantially all of its assets prior to the occurrence of an event of
default thereunder;
(2) the Secured Parties of each Series retain the benefit of their Liens on all such Collateral pledged to the DIP Lenders,
including proceeds thereof arising after the commencement of such proceeding, with the same priority vis-à-vis  all  the
other Secured Parties (other than any Liens of the Secured Parties constituting DIP Financing Liens) as existed prior to
the commencement of the bankruptcy case;
(3) the Secured Parties of each Series are granted Liens on any additional Collateral pledged to any Secured Parties as
adequate protection or otherwise in connection with such DIP Financing or use of cash Collateral, with the same priority
vis-à-vis the Secured Parties as set forth in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement;
(4) if any amount of such DIP Financing or cash collateral is applied to repay any of the Pari Passu Obligations, such
amount is applied pursuant to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement; and
(5) if any Secured Parties are granted adequate protection, including in the form of periodic payments, in connection with
such DIP Financing or use of cash Collateral, the proceeds of such adequate protection is applied pursuant to the Pari
Passu Intercreditor Agreement;
provided  that  the  Secured  Parties  of  each  Series  shall  have  a  right  to  object  to  the  grant  of  a  Lien  to  secure  the  DIP
Financing  over  any  assets  subject  to  Liens  in  favor  of  the  Secured  Parties  of  such  Series  that  shall  not  constitute
Collateral; provided,  further,  that  all  Pari  Passu  Secured  Parties  will  have  the  right  to  seek  and  receive  the  adequate
protection  permitted  by  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement; provided,  further,  that  the  Secured  Parties  receiving
adequate  protection  shall  not  object  to  (or  support  any  other  party  in  objecting  to)  any  other  Secured  Party  receiving
adequate  protection  comparable  to  any  adequate  protection  of  any  kind  or  type  (including  Liens,  claims  or  cash
payments) granted to such Secured Parties in connection with a DIP Financing or use of cash collateral.
Nothing in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement will limit the rights of any Non-Controlling Secured Parties to (i) file
claims in any such Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding, (ii) respond to or contest claims seeking the disallowance of, the
valuation of, or challenges to the perfection or the priority of, Pari Passu Obligations or a Lien securing such Pari Passu
Obligations or otherwise make any agreements or file any motions or objections pertaining to the claims of the Holders or
other Pari Passu Secured Parties, in each case not in violation of the terms of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement;
(iii) vote on a plan proposed in any bankruptcy case permitted under the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement; (iv) take
action to create, perfect, preserve or protect their lien, so long as such actions are not adverse to the other liens securing
Pari Passu Obligations or the rights of the Controlling Party or any Controlling Secured Parties to exercise remedies any
other  Pari  Passu  Document;  and  (v)  make  any  election  permitted  under  11  USC  §  1111(b),  (vi)  file  any  pleadings,
objections or motions in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding that assert rights or interests available to unsecured
creditors of any
Table of Contents
128
Collateral Grantor arising under applicable law, but in each case subject to and in accordance with the terms of the Pari
Passu Intercreditor Agreement (it being understood that, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, (A) no objection
to any DIP Financing or use of cash collateral by any Non-Controlling Secured Parties shall be permissible other than in
accordance with the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement, and (B) no objection by any Non-Controlling Secured Party to
any sale or other disposition of any Collateral under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code in any Insolvency or Liquidation
Proceeding  supported  (or  not  objected  to)  by  the  Controlling  Party  or  by  the  Controlling  Secured  Parties  shall  be
permissible other than on the ground, in accordance with clause (viii) of this paragraph, that the Non-Controlling Secured
Parties are being denied the opportunity to make (and intend and have the financial wherewithal to make) a bid for the
subject  Collateral  in  excess  of  the  proposed  purchase  price  in  the  subject  transaction,  which  bid  will  result  in  the
Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations in accordance with clause (viii) below), (vii) take any action to value
the  Collateral  in  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding,  and  (viii)  in  the  case  of  a  sale  or  other  disposition  of  any
Collateral free and clear of its Liens or other claims under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code, make a cash bid or credit
bid for such property (provided that any such credit bid may only be made if a Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement
Obligations has occurred or will occur concurrently as a result of a cash bid for such property in addition to such credit
bid).
Change in Pari Passu Obligations
The Collateral Agent, on behalf of the Authorized Representative of each Series of Pari Passu Obligations, as applicable,
will  acknowledge  that  the  Obligations  of  any  Series  may,  subject  to  the  limitations  set  forth  in  the  other  Pari  Passu
Documents,  be  amended,  restated,  supplemented,  waived,  replaced,  restructured,  repaid,  refunded,  refinanced  or
otherwise modified from time to time, in each case, without notice to, or the consent (except to the extent a consent is
otherwise required to permit such transaction under any Pari Passu Document) of any other Secured Party, all without
affecting the priorities set forth in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement defining the relative rights of the Secured Parties
of any Series; provided that the Authorized Representative for the holders of such Obligations (if not already a party to the
Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement) shall have executed a joinder to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement on behalf of
the holders of such Obligations.
Turnover Obligations
Until the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, any and all Collateral (or assets and property purported to
be Collateral) or proceeds thereof received by any Pari Passu Secured Party (in the form of cash or otherwise) pursuant to
any  Collateral  Agreement  or  by  the  exercise  of  any  rights  available  to  it  under  applicable  law  or  in  any  Insolvency  or
Liquidation Proceeding or in connection with any disposition of, collection on, or in connection with any insurance policy
claim or any condemnation award (or deed in lieu of condemnation) with respect to, such Collateral, is to be paid to the
Collateral  Agent,  which  shall  distribute  such  proceeds  among  the  Pari  Passu  Secured  Parties  in  accordance  with  the
terms of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement.
Amendments
No  provision  of  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  can  be  terminated,  waived,  amended  or  modified  (other  than
pursuant to any joinder agreement) without the consent of the Collateral Agent, each Authorized Representative and, with
respect to any amendment that increases the obligations or reduces the rights of any Collateral Grantor, such Collateral
Grantor.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  each  Secured  Party  agrees  that  the  Collateral  Agent  (at  the  direction  of  the
Controlling Party) may enter into any amendment, supplement, consent, waiver, modification or termination with respect to
any  Collateral  Agreement,  in  each  case,  without  notice  to,  or  the  consent  of  any  Secured  Party,  as  long  as  such
amendment, supplement, consent, waiver, modification or termination would not have the effect of (i) except as permitted
under the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement with respect to DIP Financings, subordinating the Liens of such Secured
Party in the Collateral to any other Lien in the Collateral (other than Permitted Collateral Liens), (ii) effecting any changes in
the application of proceeds of the Collateral that would adversely affect such Secured Party, (iii) making any change in
provisions dealing
129
Table of Contents
with the required vote of holders of the Pari Passu Obligations of such Secured Party required to approve any amendment
or  waiver  or  (iv)  releasing  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  Collateral  from  Liens  securing  the  Pari  Passu  Obligations.  In
determining  whether  an  amendment,  supplement,  consent,  waiver,  modification  or  termination  is  permitted  by  the  Pari
Passu Intercreditor Agreement, the Collateral Agent may conclusively rely on a certificate of an officer of the Company
stating  that  such  amendment,  supplement,  consent,  waiver,  modification  or  termination  is  permitted.  In  addition,  each
Authorized Representative and the Collateral Agent may amend or supplement the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement
without the consent of any other Secured Party (i) to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency, (ii) to make any change
that would provide any additional rights or benefits to the Secured Parties, (iii) to make, complete or confirm any grant of
Collateral permitted or required by the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement or any of the Collateral Agreements and (iv) to
provide  for  additional  obligations  of  the  Company  or  any  Collateral  Grantor  or  Liens  securing  such  obligations  to  the
extent  permitted  by  the  terms  of  the  Pari  Passu  Documents  and  not  otherwise  in  contravention  of  the  Pari  Passu
Intercreditor  Agreement; provided that if any such amendment or supplement increases the obligations or reduces the
rights  of  any  Collateral  Grantor  under  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement,  such  Collateral  Grantor  shall  also  have
consented  to  such  amendment  or  supplement.  In  the  event  of  any  conflict  between  the  terms  of  the  Pari  Passu
Intercreditor  Agreement,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  any  other  Collateral
Agreement or any other Pari Passu Document, the terms of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement shall control.
Single Set of Security Documents
It is intended that none of the Secured Parties will cause or permit to exist any Liens (other than Permitted Collateral Liens
or Junior Liens to the extent permitted to be incurred or to exist under the Pari Passu Documents) on Collateral other than
Liens in favor of the Collateral Agent securing the Pari Passu Obligations.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement
On  the  Issue  Date,  the  Collateral  Agent  will  enter  into  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  with  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agent, to provide for, among other things, the junior nature of the Junior Liens with respect to Pari Passu Liens.
Although the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes will not be parties to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, by
their  acceptance  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  they  will  agree  to  be  bound  thereby.  The  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement  will  permit  the  Pari  Passu  Obligations  and  the  Junior  Lien  Obligations  subject  thereto  to  be  refunded,
refinanced or replaced by certain permitted refinancing indebtedness without affecting the lien priorities set forth in the
Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, in each case without the consent of any holder of Pari Passu Obligations or Junior
Lien Obligations (including Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes).
Lien Priorities
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that, notwithstanding:
(1) anything to the contrary contained in any of the Junior Lien Documents;
(2) how a Lien was acquired (whether by grant, possession, statute, operation of law, subrogation, or otherwise);
(3) the time, manner, order of the grant attachment or perfection of a Lien;
(4) any conflicting provision of the New York Uniform Commercial Code or other applicable law;
(5)  any  defect  in,  or  non-perfection,  setting  aside,  or  avoidance  of,  a  Lien  or  a  Pari  Passu  Document  or  a  Junior  Lien
Document;
Table of Contents
130
(6) the modification of a Pari Passu Obligation or a Junior Lien Obligation; or
(7) the subordination of a Lien on Collateral securing a Pari Passu Obligation to a Lien securing another obligation of the
Company or other Person that is permitted under the Pari Passu Documents as in effect on the Issue Date or securing a
DIP Financing or the subordination of a Lien on Collateral securing a Junior Lien Obligation to a Lien securing another
obligation of the Company or other Persons (other than a Pari Passu Obligation) that is permitted under the Junior Lien
Documents as in effect on the Issue Date;
all  Junior  Liens  at  any  time  granted  by  any  Collateral  Grantor  will  be  subject  and  subordinate  to  all  Pari  Passu  Liens
securing Pari Passu Obligations, subject to the Pari Passu Lien Cap.
The provisions described under “—Lien Priorities” are intended for the benefit of, and will be enforceable as a third party
beneficiary by, each present and future holder of Pari Passu Obligations, and each present and future Collateral Agent as
holder of Pari Passu Liens. No other Person will be entitled to rely on, have the benefit of or enforce those provisions.
In addition, the provisions under the caption “—Lien Priorities” are intended solely to set forth the relative ranking, as
Liens, of the Liens securing Junior Lien Obligations as against the Pari Passu Liens, and the Liens securing Pari Passu
Obligations as against the Junior Liens.
Limitation on Enforcement of Remedies
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that, except as provided below, prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu
Obligations, none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior Lien Obligations may commence any judicial
or  nonjudicial  foreclosure  proceedings  with  respect  to,  seek  to  have  a  trustee,  receiver,  liquidator  or  similar  official
appointed for or over, attempt any action to take possession of, exercise any right, remedy or power with respect to, or
otherwise take any action to enforce its interest in or realize upon, or take any other action available to it in respect of, the
Collateral under any Junior Lien Document, applicable law or otherwise (including but not limited to right of set off). Only
the Collateral Agent will be entitled to take any such actions or exercise any such remedies with respect to the Collateral
prior  to  the  Discharge  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations.  The  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  will  provide  that,
notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  may,  but  will  have  no  obligation  to,  on  behalf  of  the
holders of Junior Lien Obligations, take all such actions (not adverse to the Pari Passu Liens or the rights of the Collateral
Agent and holders of the Pari Passu Obligations) it deems necessary to perfect or continue the perfection of their Junior
Liens in the Collateral or to create, preserve or protect (but not enforce) the Junior Liens in the Collateral. Nothing shall
limit the right or ability of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or the holders of Junior Lien Obligations to (i) purchase (by
credit bid or otherwise) all or any portion of the Collateral in connection with any enforcement of remedies by the Collateral
Agent so long as the Collateral Agent and the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations receive payment in full in cash of all
Pari Passu Obligations after giving effect thereto or (ii) file a proof of claim with respect to the Junior Lien Obligations. Until
the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, the Collateral Agent will have the exclusive right to deal with that portion of the
Collateral consisting of deposit accounts and securities accounts, including exercising rights under control agreements
with respect to such accounts. In addition, whether before or after the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, the Junior Lien
Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  Junior  Lien  Obligations  may  take  any  actions  and  exercise  any  and  all  rights  that
would be available to a holder of unsecured claims; provided, that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and such holders of
Junior  Lien  Obligations  may  not  take  any  of  the  actions  described  below  under  clauses  (1)  through  (9)  of  the  first
paragraph under “—No Interference; Payment Over,” as applicable, or prohibited by the provisions described in the first
four  paragraphs  below  under  “—Agreements  With  Respect  to  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceedings,”  as  applicable;
provided, further, that in the event that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior Lien Obligations becomes a
judgment lien creditor in respect of any Collateral as a result of its enforcement of its rights as an unsecured creditor with
respect to the Junior Lien Obligations, such judgment lien shall be subject to
Table of Contents
131
the terms of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement for all purposes (including in relation to the Pari Passu Obligations),
as the other liens securing the Junior Lien Obligations, are subject to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, both before and during an Insolvency or
Liquidation Proceeding, after a period of 180 days has elapsed (which period will be tolled during any period in which the
Collateral  Agent  is  not  entitled,  on  behalf  of  holders  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations,  to  enforce  or  exercise  any  rights  or
remedies with respect to any Collateral as a result of (x) any injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or (y)
the automatic stay or any other stay in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding) since the date on which the Junior Lien
Collateral  Agent  has  delivered  to  the  Collateral  Agent  written  notice  of  the  acceleration  of  a  series  of  Junior  Lien
Obligations (the “Accelerated Series of Junior Lien Debt” and, such period, the “Junior Lien Standstill Period”), the Junior
Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations in respect of the Accelerated Series of Junior Lien Debt
may  enforce  or  exercise  any  rights  or  remedies  with  respect  to  any  Collateral; provided,  that  notwithstanding  the
expiration of the Junior Lien Standstill Period, in no event may the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any other holder of
Junior Lien Obligations enforce or exercise any rights or remedies with respect to any Collateral, or commence, join with
any Person at any time in commencing, or petition for or vote in favor of any resolution for, any such action or proceeding,
if the Collateral Agent on behalf of the holders of Pari Passu Obligations or any other holder of Pari Passu Obligations
shall have commenced, and shall be diligently pursuing (or shall have sought or requested relief from, or modification of,
the  automatic  stay  or  any  other  stay  or  prohibition  in  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding  to  enable  the
commencement and pursuit thereof), the enforcement or exercise of any rights or remedies with respect to any material
portion of the Collateral or any such action or proceeding (prompt written notice thereof to be given to the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent by the Collateral Agent); provided, further, that at any time after the expiration of the Junior Lien Standstill
Period, if neither the Collateral Agent nor any holder of Pari Passu Obligations shall have commenced and be diligently
pursuing (or shall have sought or requested relief from, or modification of, the automatic stay or any other stay or other
prohibition  in  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding  to  enable  the  commencement  and  pursuit  thereof)  the
enforcement or exercise of any rights or remedies with respect to any material portion of the Collateral or any such action
or proceeding, and the Junior Lien Collateral Agent shall have commenced the enforcement or exercise of any rights or
remedies with respect to any material portion of the Collateral or any such action or proceeding, then for so long as the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent is diligently pursuing such rights or remedies, neither of any holder of Pari Passu Obligations
nor the Collateral Agent shall take any action of a similar nature with respect to such Collateral, or commence, join with
any Person at any time in commencing, or petition for or vote in favor of any resolution for, any such action or proceeding.
Collateral Agent
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that neither the Collateral Agent nor any holder of any Pari Passu
Obligations will have any duties or other obligations to any holder of Junior Lien Obligations with respect to the Collateral,
other than to transfer to the Junior Lien Collateral Agent any remaining Collateral and the proceeds of the sale or other
disposition of any Collateral remaining in its possession following the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, in each case,
without representation or warranty on the part of the Collateral Agent or any holder of Pari Passu Obligations.
In addition, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will further provide that, until the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations
(but subject to the rights of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations and the following
expiration  of  any  of  the  Junior  Lien  Standstill  Period,  as  provided  in  the  paragraph  defining  “Junior  Lien  Standstill
Period”), the Collateral Agent will be entitled, for the benefit of the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations, to sell, transfer or
otherwise  dispose  of  or  deal  with  the  Collateral  without  regard  to  (i)  any  Junior  Lien  therein  granted  to  the  holders  of
Junior Lien Obligations or any rights to which the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior Lien Obligations
would  otherwise  be  entitled  as  a  result  of  such  Junior.  Without  limiting  the  foregoing,  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement will provide that neither the
Table of Contents
132
Collateral Agent nor any holder of any Pari Passu Obligations will have any duty or obligation first to marshal or realize
upon the Collateral, or to sell, dispose of or otherwise liquidate all or any portion of the Collateral, in any manner that
would maximize the return to the holders of Junior Lien Obligations, notwithstanding that the order and timing of any such
realization, sale, disposition or liquidation may affect the amount of proceeds actually received by the holders of Junior
Lien Obligations, from such realization, sale, disposition or liquidation.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of
Junior Lien Obligations will waive any claim that may be had against the Collateral Agent, any of its officers, directors,
employees and agents, as the case may be, or any holder of any Pari Passu Obligations, or any of its officers, directors,
employees and agents, as the case may be, arising out of any actions which the Collateral Agent or such holder of Pari
Passu Obligations takes or omits to take (including actions with respect to the creation, perfection or continuation of Liens
on any Collateral, actions with respect to the foreclosure upon, sale, release or depreciation of, or failure to realize upon,
any Collateral, and actions with respect to the collection of any claim for all or any part of the Pari Passu Obligations from
any account debtor, Collateral Grantor or any other party) in accordance with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and
the Pari Passu Documents or the valuation, use, protection or release of any security for such Pari Passu Obligations.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
Collateral Agent:
(i) shall not be subject to any fiduciary or other implied duties of any kind or nature to any Person, regardless of whether
an event of default under any Secured Debt Document has occurred and is continuing;
(ii) shall not have any duty to take any discretionary action or exercise any discretionary powers, except discretionary
rights and powers expressly contemplated hereby or by the other Security Documents; provided, that the Collateral Agent
shall not be required to take any action that, in its opinion or the opinion of its counsel, may expose it to liability or that is
contrary to any Pari Passu Document or applicable law;
(iii) shall not, except as expressly set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and in the Pari Passu Documents,
have any duty to disclose, and shall not be liable for the failure to disclose, any information relating to the Company or any
of its Affiliates that is communicated to or obtained by the Person serving as the Collateral Agent or any of its Affiliates in
any capacity;
(iv) shall not be liable for any action taken or not taken by it (A) with the consent or at the request of the Controlling Party
(as  defined  in  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement)  or  (B)  in  the  absence  of  its  own  gross  negligence  or  willful
misconduct, which may include reliance in good faith on a certificate of an authorized officer of the Company stating that
such  action  is  permitted  by  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement;  and  shall  be  deemed  not  to  have
knowledge of any event of default under any series of Secured Debt unless and until written notice describing such event
of default is given by the Company to the Collateral Agent by the Authorized Representative of such Secured Debt;
(v) shall not be responsible for or have any duty to ascertain or inquire into (A) any statement, warranty or representation
made  in  or  in  connection  with  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  any  Pari  Passu  Document  or  any  Junior  Lien
Document,  (B)  the  contents  of  any  certificate,  report  or  other  document  delivered  hereunder  or  thereunder  or  in
connection herewith or therewith, (C) the performance or observance of any of the covenants, agreements or other terms
or  conditions  set  forth  herein  or  therein  or  the  occurrence  of  any  event  of  default  or  other  default,  (D)  the  validity,
enforceability, effectiveness or genuineness of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, any Pari Passu Document, any
Junior Lien Document or any other agreement, instrument or document, or
Table of Contents
133
the  creation,  perfection  or  priority  of  any  Lien  purported  to  be  created  by  any  Pari  Passu  Document  or  Junior  Lien
Document, (E) the value or the sufficiency of the Collateral, (F) the satisfaction of any condition set forth in any Pari Passu
Document or Junior Lien Document, (G) the state of title to any property purportedly owned by the Company or any other
Person, or (H) the percentage or other measurement of the Company’s or any other Person’s property which is subject to
any Lien or security interests, other than to confirm receipt of items expressly required to be delivered to Collateral Agent;
(vi) the Collateral Agent shall not have any fiduciary duties or contractual obligations of any kind or nature under any Pari
Passu Document or Junior Lien Document (but shall be entitled to all protection provided to the Collateral Agent herein);
(vii) with respect to any Pari Passu Document or Junior Lien Document may conclusively assume that the Company and
the  other  Collateral  Grantors  have  complied  with  all  of  their  obligations  thereunder  unless  advised  in  writing  by  the
Authorized Representative thereunder to the contrary specifically setting forth the alleged violation;
(viii)  may  conclusively  rely  on  any  certificate  of  an  officer  of  the  Company  provided  pursuant  to  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement;
(ix)  whenever  reference  is  made  in  any  Pari  Passu  Document  or  Junior  Lien  Document  to  any  action  by,  consent,
designation,  specification,  requirement  or  approval  of,  notice,  request  or  other  communication  from,  or  other  direction
given or action to be undertaken or to be (or not to be) suffered or omitted by the Collateral Agent or to any election,
decision,  opinion,  acceptance,  use  of  judgment,  expression  of  satisfaction  or  other  exercise  of  discretion,  rights  or
remedies to be made (or not to be made) by the Collateral Agent, it is understood that in all cases the Collateral Agent shall
be acting, giving, withholding, suffering, omitting, making or otherwise undertaking and exercising the same (or shall not
be  undertaking  and  exercising  the  same)  solely  as  directed  in  writing  in  accordance  with  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor
Agreement;  this  provision  is  intended  solely  for  the  benefit  of  the  Collateral  Agent  and  its  successors  and  permitted
assigns and is not intended to and will not entitle the other parties hereto to any defense, claim or counterclaim under or in
relation to any Pari Passu Document or Junior Lien Document, or confer any rights or benefits on any party;
(x) notwithstanding any other provision of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or any Pari Passu Document or any
Junior Lien Document to the contrary, the Collateral Agent shall not be liable for any indirect, incidental, consequential,
punitive or special losses or damages, regardless of the form of action and whether or not any such losses or damages
were foreseeable or contemplated;
(xi) the Collateral Agent shall not be required to expand or risk any of its own funds or otherwise incur any financial or
other  liability  in  the  performance  of  any  of  its  duties  under  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  and  shall  not  be
obligated to take any legal or other action thereunder, which might in its judgment involve or cause it to incur any expense
or liability, unless it shall have been furnished with acceptable indemnification; and
(xii) may (and any of its Affiliates may) accept deposits from, lend money to, act as the financial advisor or in any other
advisory  capacity  for  and  generally  engage  in  any  kind  of  business  with  any  of  the  Company  or  any  other  Collateral
Grantor or any Subsidiary or Affiliate thereof as if such Person were not the Collateral Agent and without any duty to any
other holder of the Pari Passu Obligations or Junior Lien Obligations, including any duty to account therefor.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that the Collateral Grantors agree that they shall defend
and  be  jointly  and  severally  liable  to  reimburse  and  indemnify  the  Collateral  Agent  for  reasonable  expenses  actually
incurred by the Collateral Agent in connection with the execution, delivery, administration and
134
Table of Contents
enforcement of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and from and against any and all liabilities, obligations, losses,
damages,  penalties,  actions,  judgments,  suits,  costs,  actual  reasonable  expenses  or  disbursements  of  any  kind  and
nature whatsoever that may be imposed on, incurred by or asserted against the Collateral Agent, in any way relating to or
arising out of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or any other document delivered in connection therewith or the
transactions  contemplated  thereby,  or  the  enforcement  of  any  of  the  terms  thereof,  in  each  case,  except  to  the  extent
caused by its gross negligence or willful misconduct.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that each holder of the Pari Passu Obligations and the
Junior Lien Obligations (i) acknowledge that, in addition to acting as the initial Collateral Agent, and the initial Junior Lien
Collateral Agent, Bank of Montreal also serves as the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and that Bank of Montreal or on
or  more  of  its  Affiliates  may  have  jointly  arranged,  syndicated,  placed  or  otherwise  participated  in  the  facilities  and
indebtedness contemplated by the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Junior Lien Obligations, and (ii) waive any right to
make  any  objection  or  claim  against  Bank  of  Montreal,  and  of  its  Affiliates  or  its  counsel  (or  any  successor  Collateral
Agent or Junior Lien Collateral Agent or its counsel) based on any alleged conflict of interest or breach of duties arising
from the Collateral Agent or Junior Lien Collateral Agent, and the initial Bank of Montreal or its Affiliates also serving in
such other capacities.
No Interference; Payment Over
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of Junior Lien
Obligations:
(1) will not take or cause to be taken any action the purpose or effect of which is, or could be, to make any Lien that the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent or the holders of Junior Lien Obligations have on the Collateral pari passu with, or to give the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior Lien Obligations any preference or priority relative to, any Lien that the
Collateral  Agent  holds  on  behalf  of  the  holders  of  any  Pari  Passu  Obligations  secured  by  any  Collateral  or  any  part
thereof;
(2) will not challenge or question in any proceeding the validity or enforceability of any Pari Passu Obligations or Pari
Passu Documents or the validity, attachment, perfection or priority of any Lien held by the Collateral Agent on behalf of
the holders of any Pari Passu Obligations, or the validity or enforceability of the priorities, rights or duties established by
the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement;
(3) will not take or cause to be taken any action the purpose or effect of which is, or could be, to interfere, hinder or delay,
in any manner, whether by judicial proceedings or otherwise, any sale, transfer or other disposition of the Collateral by the
Collateral Agent or the holders of any Pari Passu Obligations in an enforcement action;
(4) will have no right to (A) direct the Collateral Agent or any holder of any Pari Passu Obligations to exercise any right,
remedy or power with respect to any Collateral or (B) consent to the exercise by the Collateral Agent or any holder of any
Pari Passu Obligations of any right, remedy or power with respect to any Collateral;
(5) will not institute any suit or assert in any suit or in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding, any claim against the
Collateral  Agent  or  any  holder  of  any  Pari  Passu  Obligations  seeking  damages  from  or  other  relief  by  way  of  specific
performance, instructions or otherwise with respect to, and neither the Collateral Agent nor any holders of any Pari Passu
Obligations will be liable for, any action taken or omitted to be taken by the Collateral Agent or such holders of Pari Passu
Obligations with respect to any Collateral securing such Pari Passu Obligations;
(6) prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, will not seek, and will waive any right, to have any Collateral or any
part thereof marshaled upon any foreclosure or other disposition of such Collateral;
Table of Contents
135
(7) prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, will not attempt, directly or indirectly, whether by judicial proceedings
or otherwise, to challenge the enforceability of any provision of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement;
(8) will not object to forbearance by the Collateral Agent or any holder of Pari Passu Obligations; and
(9) prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, will not assert, and thereby waive, to the fullest extent permitted by
law, any right to demand, request, plead or otherwise assert or claim the benefit of any marshalling, appraisal, valuation or
other similar right that may be available under applicable law with respect to the Collateral or any similar rights a junior
secured creditor may have under applicable law.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that if the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and any holder of Junior Lien
Obligations  obtains  possession  of  any  Collateral  or  realizes  any  proceeds  or  payment  in  respect  of  any  Collateral,
pursuant to the exercise of any rights or remedies with respect to any of the Collateral under any Security Document, or by
the exercise of any rights available to it under applicable law or in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding at any time
prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, then it will hold such Collateral, proceeds or payment in trust for the
Collateral Agent and the holders of Pari Passu Obligations and transfer such Collateral, proceeds or payment, as the case
may be, to the Collateral Agent as promptly as practicable. Each of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of
Junior  Lien  Obligations  will  further  agree  that  if,  at  any  time,  any  of  them  obtains  written  notice  that  all  or  part  of  any
payment with respect to any Pari Passu Obligations previously made shall be rescinded for any reason whatsoever, they
will promptly pay over to the Collateral Agent any payment received by them and then in their possession or under their
direct control in respect of any such Collateral subject to a Pari Passu Lien and shall promptly turn any such Collateral
then held by them over to the Collateral Agent, and the provisions set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will
be reinstated as if such payment had not been made, until the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations. All Junior Liens will
remain attached to and enforceable against all proceeds so held or remitted, subject to the priorities set forth in the Junior
Lien Intercreditor Agreement. The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that the provisions described in this
paragraph  will  not  apply  to  any  proceeds  of  Collateral  realized  in  a  transaction  not  prohibited  by  the  Pari  Passu
Documents and as to which the possession or receipt thereof by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior
Lien Obligations is otherwise permitted by the Pari Passu Documents.
Automatic Release of Junior Liens
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that, prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent and each holder of Junior Lien Obligations will agree that, if the Collateral Agent or the holders of Pari
Passu Obligations release their Lien on any Collateral, the Junior Lien on such Collateral will terminate and be released
automatically and without further action if (i) such release is permitted under the Junior Lien Documents (it being agreed
that the Collateral Agent may conclusively rely upon a written request of the Company stating that the release of such Lien
is  permitted  under  the  Junior  Lien  Documents),  (ii)  such  release  is  effected  in  connection  with  the  Collateral  Agent’s
foreclosure upon, or other exercise of rights or remedies with respect to, such Collateral, or (iii) such release is effected in
connection with a sale or other disposition of any Collateral (or any portion thereof) under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy
Code or any other provision of the Bankruptcy Code if the Collateral Agent and the holders of Pari Passu Obligations shall
have consented to such sale or disposition of such Collateral; provided in the case of each of clauses (i), (ii), and (iii), (A)
the net proceeds of such Collateral are applied pursuant to the provisions described in “—Application of Proceeds” and
(B)  the  Junior  Liens  on  such  Collateral  securing  the  Junior  Lien  Obligations,  shall  remain  in  place  (and  shall  remain
subject and subordinate to all Pari Passu Liens securing Pari Passu Obligations subject to the Pari Passu Lien Cap) with
respect  to  any  proceeds  of  a  sale,  transfer  or  other  disposition  of  Collateral  not  paid  to  the  holders  of  Pari  Passu
Obligations or that remain after the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations.
Table of Contents
136
Agreements With Respect to Insolvency or Liquidation Proceedings
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement is a “subordination agreement” under Section 510(a) of the Bankruptcy Code. If
either  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  becomes  subject  to  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding  and,  as
debtor(s)-in-possession, or if any receiver or trustee for such Person or Persons, moves for DIP Financing to be provided
by one or more DIP Lenders under Section 364 of the Bankruptcy Code or the use of cash collateral under Section 363 of
the Bankruptcy Code, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent
and any holder of Junior Lien Obligations will raise any objection, contest or oppose (or join or support any third party in
objecting,  contesting  or  opposing),  and  will  waive  any  claim  such  Person  may  now  or  hereafter  have,  to  any  such
financing or to the DIP Financing Liens, or to any use, sale or lease of cash collateral that constitutes Collateral or to any
grant  of  administrative  expense  priority  under  Section  364  of  the  Bankruptcy  Code,  unless  (1)  the  Collateral  Agent
opposes or objects to such DIP Financing, such DIP Financing Liens or such use of cash collateral or (2) the terms of
such DIP Financing provide for the sale of a substantial part of the Collateral (other than a sale or disposition pursuant to
Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code with respect to which the holders of the Junior Lien Obligations are deemed to have
consented  pursuant  to  the  provisions  described  in  “—Agreements  With  Respect  to  Insolvency  or  Liquidation
Proceedings”) or require the confirmation of a plan of reorganization containing specific terms or provisions (other than
repayment in cash of such DIP Financing on the effective date thereof). To the extent such DIP Financing Liens are senior
to, or rank Pari Passu with, the Pari Passu Liens on Collateral securing Pari Passu Obligations, the Junior Lien Collateral
Agent will, for themselves and on behalf of holders of the Junior Lien Obligations, subordinate the Junior Liens on the
Collateral that secure the Junior Lien Obligations to the Liens on the Collateral that secure Pari Passu Obligations and to
such DIP Financing Liens, so long as the Junior Lien Collateral Agent, on behalf of holders of the Junior Lien Obligations,
retains Junior Liens on all the Collateral, including proceeds thereof arising after the commencement of any Insolvency or
Liquidation Proceeding, with the same priority relative to the Liens on the Collateral as existed prior to the commencement
of the case under the Bankruptcy Code. Furthermore, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that prior to the
Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, without the written consent of the Collateral Agent in its sole discretion, none of the
Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  any  holder  of  Junior  Lien  Obligations  will  propose,  support  or  enter  into  any  DIP
Financing.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of Junior Lien
Obligations will be deemed to have consented to and will not object to, oppose or contest (or join with or support any third
party  objecting  to,  opposing  or  contesting)  a  sale  or  other  disposition,  a  motion  to  sell  or  dispose  or  the  bidding
procedure for such sale or disposition of any Collateral (or any portion thereof) under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code
or any other provision of the Bankruptcy Code if (1) the Collateral Agent or the requisite holders of Pari Passu Obligations
shall have consented to such sale or disposition of such Collateral, (2) all Pari Passu Liens on the Collateral securing the
Pari  Passu  Obligations  and  Junior  Liens  on  the  Collateral  securing  the  Junior  Lien  Obligations,  shall  attach  to  the
proceeds of such sale in the same respective priorities as set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement with respect
to the Collateral, (3) the waterfall described in “—Application of Proceeds” is complied with in connection with such credit
bid and (4) each of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations shall have the right to credit
bid all or any portion of the Collateral so long as the Collateral Agent and the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations receive
payment in full in cash of all Pari Passu Obligations after giving effect thereto. The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will
further provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations will waive any claim that
may be had against the Collateral Agent or any holder of Pari Passu Obligations arising out of any DIP Financing Liens
(granted in a manner that is consistent with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement) or administrative expense priority
under Section 364 of the Bankruptcy Code. The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will further provide that the Junior
Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations will not file or prosecute in any Insolvency or Liquidation
Proceeding any motion for adequate protection (or any comparable request for relief) based upon their interest  in  the
Collateral,  and  will  not  object  to,  oppose  or  contest  (or  join  with  or  support  any  third  party  objecting  to,  opposing  or
contesting) (a) any request by the Collateral Agent or any holder of Pari Passu Obligations for adequate protection or (b)
any objection by the Collateral
Table of Contents
137
Agent or any holder of Pari Passu Obligations to any motion, relief, action or proceeding based on the Collateral Agent or
any holder of Pari Passu Obligations claiming a lack of adequate protection, except that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent
and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations:
(1) may freely seek and obtain relief granting adequate protection only in the form of a replacement lien co-extensive in all
respects  with,  but  subordinated  to,  and  with  the  same  relative  priority  to  the  Pari  Passu  Liens  as  existed  prior  to  the
commencement  of  the  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding,  all  Liens  granted  in  the  Insolvency  or  Liquidation
Proceeding to, or for the benefit of, the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations; and
(2) may freely seek and obtain any relief upon a motion for adequate protection (or any comparable relief), without any
condition or restriction whatsoever, at any time after the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations.
In  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding,  none  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  any  holder  of  Junior  Lien
Obligations shall support or vote for any plan of reorganization or disclosure statement of any Collateral Grantor unless
such plan is accepted by the class of holders of the Pari Passu Obligations in accordance with Section 1126(c) of the
Bankruptcy Code or otherwise provides for the payment in full in cash of all Pari Passu Obligations (including all post-
petition interest approved by the bankruptcy court, fees and expenses and cash collateral of all letters of credit) on the
effective date of such plan of reorganization or except as otherwise provided in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement,
the holders of the Junior Lien Obligations shall remain entitled to vote their claims in any such Insolvency or Liquidation
Proceeding.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of
Junior Lien Obligations will waive any claim that may be had against the Collateral Agent or any holder of any Pari Passu
Obligations arising out of any election by the Collateral Agent or any holder of Pari Passu Obligations in any proceeding
instituted under the Bankruptcy Code, of the application of Section 1111(b) of the Bankruptcy Code.
Until the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations has occurred, none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of
Junior  Lien  Obligations  shall  seek  relief,  pursuant  to  Section  362(d)  of  the  Bankruptcy  Code  or  otherwise,  from  the
automatic  stay  of  Section  362(a)  of  the  Bankruptcy  Code  or  from  any  other  stay  in  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation
Proceeding in respect of the Collateral if the Collateral Agent has not received relief from the automatic stay (or it has not
been lifted for the Collateral Agent’s benefit), without the prior written consent of the Collateral Agent.
None of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior Lien Obligations shall oppose or seek to challenge any
claim  by  the  Collateral  Agent  or  any  other  holder  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations  for  allowance  (but  not  payment  until  the
Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations has occurred) in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding of Pari Passu Obligations
consisting of post-petition interest, fees or expenses to the extent of the value of the Pari Passu Liens (it being understood
that such value will be determined without regard to the existence of the Junior Liens). Neither the Collateral Agent nor any
holder of Pari Passu Obligations shall oppose or seek to challenge any claim by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any
holder  of  Junior  Lien  Obligations  for  allowance  (but  not  payment  until  the  Discharge  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations  has
occurred) in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding of Junior Lien Obligations consisting of post-petition interest, fees
or expenses to the extent of the value of the Junior Liens, as applicable, on the Collateral; provided that if the Collateral
Agent or any holder of Pari Passu Obligations shall have made any such claim, such claim (i) shall have been approved or
(ii) will be approved contemporaneously with the approval of any such claim by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any
holder of Junior Lien Obligations.
Without the express written consent of the Collateral Agent, none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of
Junior Lien Obligations shall (or shall join with or support any third party in opposing, objecting to or
Table of Contents
138
contesting, as the case may be), in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding involving any Collateral Grantor, (i) oppose,
object to or contest the determination of the extent of any Liens held by any of holder of Pari Passu Obligations or the
value of any claims of any such holder under Section 506(a) of the Bankruptcy Code or (ii) oppose, object to or contest the
payment to the holder of Pari Passu Obligations of interest, fees or expenses, or to the cash collateralization of letters of
credit, under Section 506(b) of the Bankruptcy Code.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, if in any Insolvency or
Liquidation  Proceeding  a  determination  is  made  that  any  Lien  encumbering  any  Collateral  is  not  enforceable  for  any
reason, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations agree that any distribution or recovery
they may receive in respect of any Collateral shall be segregated and held in trust and forthwith paid over to the Collateral
Agent  for  the  benefit  of  the  holders  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations  in  the  same  form  as  received  without  recourse,
representation or warranty (other than a representation of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent that it has not otherwise sold,
assigned, transferred or pledged any right, title or interest in and to such distribution or recovery) but with any necessary
endorsements or as a court of competent jurisdiction may otherwise direct. The Junior Lien Collateral Agent appoints the
Collateral Agent, and any officer or agent of the Collateral Agent, with full power of substitution, the attorney-in-fact of each
the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations for the limited purpose of carrying out the
provisions related to this paragraph and taking any action and executing any instrument that the Collateral Agent may
deem  necessary  or  advisable  to  accomplish  the  purposes  of  this  paragraph,  which  appointment  is  irrevocable  and
coupled with an interest.
The Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations will agree that the Collateral Agent shall have
the exclusive right to credit bid the Pari Passu Obligations and further that none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any
holder of Junior Lien Obligations shall (or shall join with or support any third party in opposing, objecting to or contesting,
as the case may be) oppose, object to or contest such credit bid by the Collateral Agent; provided that (A) the waterfall
described in “—Application of Proceeds” is complied with in connection with such credit bid and (B) each of the Junior
Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations shall have the right to credit bid all or any portion of the
Collateral so long as the Collateral Agent and the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations receive payment in full in cash of
all Pari Passu Obligations after giving effect thereto.
Until the expiry of the Junior Lien Standstill Period, in the case of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of
Junior Lien Obligations, without the prior written consent of the Collateral Agent in its sole discretion, the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent agrees it will not file an involuntary bankruptcy claim or seek the appointment of an examiner or a trustee.
The  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  waives  any  right  to  assert  or  enforce  any  claim  under  Section  506(c)  or  552  of  the
Bankruptcy Code as against the Collateral Agent, the holders of Pari Passu Obligations or any of the Collateral.
Notice Requirements and Procedural Provisions
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will also provide for various advance notice requirements and other procedural
provisions typical for agreements of this type, including procedural provisions to allow any successor Collateral Agent to
become a party to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement (without the consent of any holder of Pari Passu Obligations or
Junior Lien Obligations) upon the refinancing or replacement of the Pari Passu Obligations or Junior Lien Obligations as
permitted by the applicable Pari Passu Documents and the Junior Lien Documents.
139
Table of Contents
No New Liens; Similar Documents
So long as the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations has not occurred, neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries
shall grant or permit any additional Liens, or take any action to perfect any additional Liens, on any property to secure:
(1) any Junior Lien Obligation unless it has also granted or substantially contemporaneously grants (or offers to grant) a
Lien  on  such  property  to  secure  the  Pari  Passu  Obligations  and  has  taken  all  actions  required  to  perfect  such  Liens;
provided that the refusal or inability of the Collateral Agent to accept such Lien will not prevent the Junior Lien Collateral
Agent from taking the Lien; or
(2) any Pari Passu Obligation unless it has also granted or substantially contemporaneously grants (or offers to grant) a
Lien on such property to secure the Junior Lien Obligations and has taken all actions required to perfect such Liens;
provided that the refusal, inability or delay of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent to accept such Lien will not prevent the
Collateral Agent from taking the Lien,
with each such Lien to be subject to the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will include an acknowledgement that it is the intention of the parties to the Junior
Lien Intercreditor Agreement that the Collateral subject to a Pari Passu Lien and the Collateral subject to a Junior Lien be
identical; provided  in  no  event  shall  any  Collateral  include  any  Pari  Passu  Excluded  Collateral.  To  the  extent  that  the
foregoing provisions are not complied with for any reason, without limiting any other rights and remedies available to the
Collateral Agent and/or the other holders of Pari Passu Obligations, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or the holders of
Junior Lien Obligations, each of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of the Junior Lien Obligations will agree
that any amounts received by or distributed to any of them pursuant to or as a result of Liens granted in contravention of
this paragraph shall be subject to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement. The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement shall
also provide for further undertakings by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the Collateral Agent and agreements that all
Security  Documents  providing  for  the  Junior  Liens  shall  be  in  all  material  respects  the  same  forms  of  documents
providing  for  the  Pari  Passu  Liens  other  than  as  to  the  priority  nature,  other  modifications  that  make  the  Security
Documents with respect to the Junior Liens less restrictive than the corresponding documents with respect to the Pari
Passu Liens, provisions in the Security Documents for the Junior Liens which relate solely to rights and duties of the
Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  the  Junior  Lien  Obligations  and  such  deletions  or  modifications  of
representations,  warranties  and  covenants  as  are  customary  with  respect  to  security  documents  establishing  Liens
securing publicly traded debt securities.
Insurance
Unless  and  until  the  Discharge  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations  has  occurred  (but  subject  to  the  rights  of  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agent and the holders of Junior Lien Obligations following expiration of any of the Junior Lien Standstill Period,
as  provided  in  the  paragraph  defining  “Junior  Lien  Standstill  Period”),  the  Collateral  Agent  shall  have  the  sole  and
exclusive right, subject to the rights of the obligors under the Pari Passu Documents, to adjust and settle claims in respect
of Collateral under any insurance policy in the event of any loss thereunder and to approve any award granted in any
condemnation or similar proceeding (or any deed in lieu of condemnation) affecting the Collateral. Unless and until the
Discharge  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations  has  occurred,  and  subject  to  the  rights  of  the  obligors  under  the  Pari  Passu
Documents,  all  proceeds  of  any  such  policy  and  any  such  award  (or  any  payments  with  respect  to  a  deed  in  lieu  of
condemnation) in respect of the Collateral shall be paid to the Collateral Agent pursuant to the terms of the Pari Passu
Documents (including for purposes of cash collateralization of letters of credit). If the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any
holder of Junior Lien Obligations shall, at any time, receive any proceeds of any such insurance policy or any such award
or payment in contravention of the foregoing, it shall pay such proceeds over to the Collateral Agent in accordance with
the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement. In addition, if by virtue of being named as an additional insured or loss
Table of Contents
140
payee of any insurance policy of any obligor covering any of the Collateral, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder
of Junior Lien Obligations shall have the right to adjust or settle any claim under any such insurance policy, then unless
and until the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations has occurred, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior
Lien Obligations shall follow the instructions of the Collateral Agent, or of the obligors under the Pari Passu Documents to
the extent the Pari Passu Documents grant such obligors the right to adjust or settle such claims, with respect to such
adjustment or settlement (subject to the rights of the holders of Junior Lien Obligations following expiration of the Junior
Lien Standstill Period).
Amendment to Junior Lien Documents
Prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, without the prior written consent of the Collateral Agent, no Junior Lien
Document may be amended, supplemented, restated or otherwise modified and/or refinanced or entered into to the extent
such  amendment,  supplement,  restatement  or  modification  and/or  refinancing,  or  the  terms  of  any  new  Junior  Lien
Document,  would  (i)  adversely  affect  the  lien  priority  rights  of  the  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  Pari  Passu
Obligations or the rights of the Collateral Agent and the holders of Pari Passu Obligations to receive payments owing
pursuant to the Pari Passu Documents, (ii) except as otherwise provided for in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement,
add any Liens securing the Collateral granted under the Junior Lien Documents, (iii) confer any additional rights on the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior Lien Obligations in a manner adverse to the Collateral Agent or the
holders of Pari Passu Obligations, (iv) contravene the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the Pari
Passu Documents or (v) modify any Junior Lien Document in any manner that would not have been permitted under the
Pari Passu Documents to have been included in such Junior Lien Document if such Junior Lien Document, was entered
into as of the date of such amendment, supplement, restatement or modification.
Application of Proceeds
Prior to the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, and regardless of whether an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding has
been  commenced,  Collateral  or  proceeds  received  in  connection  with  the  enforcement  or  exercise  of  any  rights  or
remedies with respect to any portion of the Collateral will be applied:
first, to the payment in full in cash of all Pari Passu Obligations that are not Excess Pari Passu Obligations in accordance
with the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement,
second, to the payment in full in cash of all Junior Lien Obligations as follows:
(x) first, to the payment in full in cash of all unpaid fees, expenses, reimbursements and indemnification amounts incurred
by  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  all  fees  owed  to  it  in  connection  with  such  collection  or  sale  or  otherwise  in
connection with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the Junior Lien Document; and
(y) second, to the payment in full in cash of the Junior Lien Obligations, including any interest, fees, costs, expenses,
charges  or  other  amounts,  pro  rata  in  accordance  with  the  relative  amounts  thereof  on  the  date  of  any  payment  or
distribution;
third, to the payment in full in cash of all Excess Pari Passu Obligations, and
fourth, to the Company or as otherwise required by applicable law.
Postponement of Subrogation
The  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  will  provide  that  no  payment  or  distribution  to  any  holder  of  Pari  Passu
Obligations pursuant to the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement shall entitle the Junior
Table of Contents
141
Collateral Agent or any holder of Junior Lien Obligations to exercise any rights of subrogation in respect thereof until, in
the  case  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  the  holders  of  Junior  Lien  Obligations,  the  Discharge  of  Pari  Passu
Obligations. Following the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations, each holder of Pari Passu Obligations will execute such
documents, agreements, and instruments as any holder of Junior Lien Obligations may reasonably request to evidence
the transfer by subrogation to any such Person of an interest in the Pari Passu Obligations resulting from payments or
distributions to such holder by such Person, so long as all costs and expenses (including all reasonable legal fees and
disbursements) incurred in connection therewith by such holder of Pari Passu Obligations are paid by such Person upon
request for payment thereof.
Provisions of the Indenture Relating to Security
Release of Liens Securing New Senior Secured Notes
The Senior Secured Notes Indenture will provide that the Collateral Grantors will be entitled to releases of assets included
in  the  Collateral  from  the  Liens  securing  Senior  Secured  Note  Obligations  under  any  one  or  more  of  the  following
circumstances:
(1) upon the full and final payment in cash and performance of all Senior Secured Note Obligations of the Company and
the Subsidiary Guarantors;
(2) with respect to any asset constituting Collateral, if such Collateral is sold or otherwise disposed of to a Person that is
not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary in accordance with the
terms  of  the  covenant  set  forth  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Asset  Sales”  (other  than  the  provisions
thereof  relating  to  the  future  use  of  proceeds  of  such  sale  or  other  disposition); provided  that  to  the  extent  that  any
Collateral  is  sold  or  otherwise  disposed  of  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  covenant  set  forth  under  “—Certain
Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales”, the non-cash consideration received is pledged as Collateral under the Collateral
Agreements  contemporaneously  with  such  sale,  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  set  forth  in  the  Senior  Secured
Notes  Indenture  and  the  Collateral  Agreements; provided,  further,  that  the  Liens  securing  the  Senior  Secured  Note
Obligations will not be released if the sale or disposition is subject to the covenant described below under the caption “—
Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets”;
(3)  upon  Legal  Defeasance,  Covenant  Defeasance  or  satisfaction  and  discharge  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  as
provided  below  under  “—Legal  Defeasance  or  Covenant  Defeasance  of  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture”  and  “—
Satisfaction and Discharge”;
(4)  if  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  released  from  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  Senior
Secured Notes Indenture, that Subsidiary Guarantor’s assets and property included in the Collateral will also be released
from the Liens securing the Senior Secured Note Obligations;
(5) with the requisite consent of Holders of New Senior Secured Notes given in accordance with the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture; or
(6) as provided in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement or the Collateral Agreements.
No Impairment of the Security Interests
Under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, no Collateral Grantor will be permitted to take any action, or knowingly omit to
take any action, which action or omission would have the result of materially impairing the
Table of Contents
142
validity, perfection or priority of the security interests in the Collateral created by the Collateral Agreements (except as
permitted in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement or the Collateral Agreements,
including any action that would result in a Permitted Collateral Lien).
Further Assurances
The Company shall, and shall cause each other Collateral Grantor to, at the Company’s sole cost and expense:
(1)  at  the  request  of  the  Collateral  Agent,  acting  at  the  direction  of  the  Controlling  Party,  execute  and  deliver  all  such
agreements and instruments and take all further action as may be reasonably necessary or desirable (a) to describe more
fully  or  accurately  the  property  intended  to  be  Collateral  or  the  obligations  intended  to  be  secured  by  any  Collateral
Agreement  and/or  (b)  to  continue  and  maintain  the  Collateral  Agent’s  first-priority  perfected  security  interest  in  the
Collateral (subject to the payment priority in favor of the holders of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations set forth in the
Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens); and
(2) at the request of the Collateral Agent, acting at the direction of the Controlling Party, file any such notice filings or other
agreements or instruments as may be reasonably necessary or desirable under applicable law to perfect the Liens created
by the Collateral Agreements.
In addition, from and after the date of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, if the Company or any other Collateral Grantor
acquires any property or asset that constitutes Collateral for the Pari Passu Obligations, if and to the extent that any Pari
Passu  Document  requires  any  supplemental  security  document  for  such  Collateral  or  other  actions  to  achieve  a  first-
priority perfected Lien on such Collateral, the Company shall, or shall cause any other applicable Collateral Grantor to,
promptly (but not in any event no later than the date that is 10 Business Days after which such supplemental security
documents are executed and delivered (or other action taken) under such Pari Passu Documents), to execute and deliver
to the Collateral Agent appropriate security documents (or amendments thereto) in such form as shall be necessary to
grant  the  Collateral  Agent  a  first-priority  perfected  Lien  on  such  Collateral  or  take  such  other  actions  in  favor  of  the
Collateral Agent as shall be reasonably necessary to grant a perfected Lien on such collateral to the Collateral Agent,
subject to the terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Intercreditor Agreements and the other Senior Secured
Note Documents.
Additionally, if (a) a Collateral Grantor acquires any asset or property of a type that is required to constitute Collateral
pursuant to the terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and such asset or property is not automatically subject to a
first-priority perfected Lien in favor of the Collateral Agent, (b) a Subsidiary of the Company that is not already a Subsidiary
Guarantor is required to become a Subsidiary Guarantor pursuant to the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants
—Future Subsidiary Guarantees” or (c) any Collateral Grantor creates any additional Lien upon any Oil and Gas Properties
or any other assets or properties to secure any Pari Passu Obligations or Junior Lien Obligations (or takes additional
actions to perfect any existing Lien on Collateral), then such Collateral Grantor or such other Subsidiary shall, as soon as
practicable after the acquisition of the applicable asset or property, the occurrence of the event requiring such Subsidiary
to become a Subsidiary Guarantor or the creation of any such additional Lien or taking of any such additional perfection
action  (and,  in  any  event,  within  10  Business  Days  after  such  acquisition,  event  or  creation),  (i)  grant  to  the  Collateral
Agent a first-priority perfected Lien in all assets and property of such Collateral Grantor or such other Subsidiary that are
required to, but do not already, constitute Collateral, (ii) deliver any certificates to the Collateral Agent in respect thereof
and (iii) take all other appropriate actions as necessary to ensure the Collateral Agent has a first-priority perfected Lien
therein. All references to a “first-priority perfected Lien” in this paragraph shall be understood to be subject to the Pari
Passu Intercreditor Agreement and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens, if any.
143
Table of Contents
Authorization of Actions to Be Taken
Each Holder of the New Senior Secured Notes, by its acceptance thereof, will be deemed to have consented and agreed to
the terms of the Intercreditor Agreements and each other Collateral Agreement, as originally in effect and as amended,
restated, replaced, supplemented or modified from time to time in accordance with its terms or the terms of the Senior
Secured  Notes  Indenture  or  the  Intercreditor  Agreements,  to  have  authorized  and  directed  the  Senior  Secured  Notes
Trustee and the Collateral Agent to enter into the Intercreditor Agreements and the other Collateral Agreements to which it
is a party, and to have authorized and empowered the Collateral Agent to bind the Holders of the New Senior Secured
Notes as set forth in the Intercreditor Agreements and the other Collateral Agreements to which it is a party and to perform
its obligations and exercise its rights and powers thereunder, including entering into amendments permitted by the terms
of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Intercreditor Agreements or the other Collateral Agreements.
Redemption
Optional Redemption
The Company may, at its option, redeem the New Senior Secured Notes, in whole or in part, at one time or from time to
time, at the redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth below plus accrued and unpaid
interest, if any, on the New Senior Secured Notes redeemed, to the applicable redemption date, subject to the rights of
Holders of New Senior Secured Notes on the relevant record date to receive interest due on the relevant interest payment
date, if redeemed during the twelve-month period beginning on March 15 of the years indicated below (or the Issue Date
for New Senior Secured Notes redeemed prior to March 15, 2017):
Year
2016
2017
2018
2019 and thereafter
Redemption
Price
110.000% 
107.500% 
105.000% 
100.000%
For the avoidance of doubt, any redemption pursuant to the provisions under “—Optional Redemption” shall be paid in
cash.
Selection and Notice
If less than all of the New Senior Secured Notes are to be redeemed at any time, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee will
select New Senior Secured Notes for redemption on a pro rata basis (or, in the case of New Senior Secured Notes issued
in global form, based on a method as The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”) or its nominee or successor may require),
unless otherwise required by law or applicable stock exchange or depositary requirements.
Notices of redemption will be mailed by first-class mail or otherwise given in accordance with DTC procedures at least 30
but not more than 60 days before the redemption date to each Holder of New Senior Secured Notes to be redeemed at its
registered address, except that redemption notices may be mailed more than 60 days prior to a redemption date if the
notice is issued in connection with a defeasance of the New Senior Secured Notes or a satisfaction and discharge of the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture. Notices of redemption may not be conditional.
If any New Senior Secured Note is to be redeemed in part only, the notice of redemption that relates to that New Senior
Secured Note will state the portion of the principal amount of that New Senior Secured Note that is to be redeemed. A new
note in principal amount equal to the unredeemed portion of the original note will be issued in
Table of Contents
144
the name of the Holder of New Senior Secured Notes upon cancellation of the original note. New Senior Secured Notes
called for redemption become due on the date fixed for redemption, subject to the satisfaction of any conditions to the
redemption specified in the notice of redemption. On and after any redemption date, interest ceases to accrue on New
Senior Secured Notes or portions of New Senior Secured Notes called for redemption.
Offers to Purchase
As described below, (i) upon the occurrence of a Change of Control, we will be obligated to make an offer to purchase all
of the New Senior Secured Notes at a purchase price equal to 101% of the principal amount thereof, together with accrued
and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of purchase and (ii) upon certain sales or other dispositions of assets, the Company
may be obligated to make offers to purchase the New Senior Secured Notes with a portion of the Net Available Cash of
such sales or other dispositions at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, together with accrued
and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of purchase. See “—Certain Covenants—Change of Control” and “—Limitation on
Asset Sales.” For the avoidance of doubt, offers to purchase as set forth in clauses (i) and (ii) above shall only be made in
cash.
Sinking Fund
There will be no sinking fund payments for the New Senior Secured Notes.
Covenant Suspension
During any period that the New Senior Secured Notes have a rating equal to or higher than BBB- (or the equivalent) by
S&P  and  Baa3  (or  the  equivalent)  by  Moody’s  (“Investment  Grade  Ratings”)  and  no  Default  or  Event  of  Default  has
occurred and is continuing (such period, a “Covenant Suspension Period”), the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries
will not be subject to the following covenants (collectively, the “Suspended Covenants”):
•
•
•
•
•
•
“—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock;”
“—Limitation on Restricted Payments;”
“—Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates;”
“—Limitation on Asset Sales;”
“—Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries;” and
clause (3) of “—Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets”
In the event that the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries are not subject to the Suspended Covenants for any period
of  time  as  a  result  of  the  preceding  paragraph  and  either  S&P  or  Moody’s  subsequently  withdraws  its  rating  or
downgrades its rating of the New Senior Secured Notes below the applicable Investment Grade Rating, or a Default or
Event  of  Default  occurs  and  is  continuing,  then  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  will  thereafter  again  be
subject  to  the  Suspended  Covenants,  and  compliance  with  the  Suspended  Covenants  with  respect  to  Restricted
Payments made after the time of such withdrawal, downgrade, Default or Event of Default will be calculated in accordance
with the covenant described under “Certain Covenants—Limitation on Restricted Payments” as though such covenant
had been in effect during the entire period of time from the Issue Date.
During  any  Covenant  Suspension  Period,  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company  may  not  designate  any  of  the
Company’s Subsidiaries as Unrestricted Subsidiaries pursuant to the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. The
Table of Contents
145
Company shall give the Senior Secured Notes Trustee written notice of the commencement of any Covenant Suspension
Period promptly, and in any event not later than five (5) Business Days, after the commencement thereof. In the absence of
such notice, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee shall assume the Suspended Covenants apply and are in full force and
effect.  The  Company  shall  give  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  written  notice  of  the  termination  of  any  Covenant
Suspension  Period  not  later  than  five  (5)  Business  Days  after  the  occurrence  thereof.  After  any  such  notice  of  the
termination  of  any  Covenant  Suspension  Period,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  shall  assume  the  Suspended
Covenants apply and are in full force and effect.
Certain Covenants
Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, issue, assume, guarantee or in
any manner become directly or indirectly liable for the payment of (collectively, “incur”) any Indebtedness (including any
Acquired  Indebtedness),  and  the  Company  will  not  issue  any  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  and  will  not  permit  any  of  its
Restricted Subsidiaries to issue any Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock; provided that the Company may incur
Indebtedness (including Acquired Indebtedness) or issue Disqualified Capital Stock, and any Restricted Subsidiary that is
a Subsidiary Guarantor may incur Indebtedness (including Acquired Indebtedness) or issue shares of Disqualified Capital
Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  if  (i)  at  the  time  of  such  event  and  after  giving  effect  thereto  on  a  pro  forma  basis  the
Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  for  the  four  full  quarters  immediately  preceding  such  event,  taken  as  one
period, would have been equal to or greater than 2.25 to 1.0 and (ii) no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and
be continuing at the time such additional Indebtedness is incurred or such Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock is
issued  or  would  occur  as  a  consequence  of  the  incurrence  of  the  additional  Indebtedness  or  the  issuance  of  the
Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock.
The  first  paragraph  of  this  covenant  will  not  prohibit  the  incurrence  of  any  of  the  following  items  of  Indebtedness
(collectively, “Permitted Indebtedness”):
(1)
(2)
(3)
Indebtedness  under  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  in  the  Exchange  Offer  and
Consent Solicitation and up to $75,000,000 of Additional New Senior Secured Notes issued in connection
with the payment of interest thereon;
Indebtedness outstanding or in effect on the Issue Date (and not exchanged in connection with the Exchange
Offer and Consent Solicitation );
obligations  pursuant  to  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations,  but  only  to  the  extent  such  obligations  do  not
exceed 105% of the aggregate principal amount of the Indebtedness covered by such Interest Rate Protection
Obligations; obligations under currency exchange contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business;
hedging arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting production,
purchases  and  resales  against  fluctuations  in  oil  or  natural  gas  prices,  and  any  guarantee  of  any  of  the
foregoing;
(4)
the  Subsidiary  Guarantees  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  (and  any  assumption  of  the  obligations
guaranteed thereby) issued on the Issue Date and up to $75,000,000 of Additional New Senior Secured Notes
issued in connection with the payment of interest thereon;
(5)
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of intercompany Indebtedness between or
among the Company and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; provided that:
(a)
if the Company is the obligor on such Indebtedness and a Subsidiary Guarantor is not the obligee, such
Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in
Table of Contents
146
cash of all Obligations with respect to the New Senior Secured Notes, or if a Subsidiary Guarantor is the
obligor  on  such  Indebtedness  and  neither  the  Company  nor  another  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  the
obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash of all
Obligations with respect to the Subsidiary Guarantee of such Subsidiary Guarantor; and
(b)
any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such Indebtedness being held
by a Person other than the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company and (ii) any sale or
other  transfer  of  any  such  Indebtedness  to  a  Person  that  is  neither  the  Company  nor  a  Restricted
Subsidiary  of  the  Company  will  be  deemed,  in  each  case,  to  constitute  an  incurrence  of  such
Indebtedness  by  the  Company  or  such  Restricted  Subsidiary,  as  the  case  may  be,  that  was  not
permitted by this clause (5);
(6)
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness in exchange for, or the net proceeds of which are used to renew, refund,
refinance,  replace,  defease  or  discharge,  in  whole  or  in  part,  any  Indebtedness  (other  than  intercompany
Indebtedness)  that  was  permitted  by  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  to  be  incurred  under  the  first
paragraph of this covenant or clauses (1), (2) or (11) of this paragraph or this clause (6);
(7)
Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
(8)
in-kind obligations relating to net oil or gas balancing positions arising in the ordinary course of business;
(9)
Indebtedness in respect of bid, performance or surety bonds issued for the account of the Company or any
Restricted Subsidiary in the ordinary course of business, including guaranties and letters of credit supporting
such bid, performance or surety obligations (in each case other than for an obligation for money borrowed);
(10)
Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of $50.0
million at any one time outstanding and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor; and
(11)
(a) Indebtedness under the New 2019 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in an aggregate principal
amount not to exceed $288,516,000 and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor; (b) Indebtedness
under any Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor; (c)
Indebtedness  under  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  in  an  aggregate  principal
amount  not  to  exceed  $174,607,000  and  any  guarantee  thereof  by  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  and  (d)
Indebtedness under any Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary
Guarantor.
For purposes of determining compliance with this covenant, in the event that an item of Indebtedness meets the criteria of
one  or  more  of  the  categories  of  Permitted  Indebtedness  described  in  clauses  (1)  through  (11)  described  above  or  is
entitled to be incurred pursuant to the first paragraph of this covenant, the Company may, in its sole discretion, classify
such item of Indebtedness in any manner that complies with this covenant and such item of Indebtedness will be treated
as having been incurred pursuant to only one of such clauses of the definition of Permitted Indebtedness or the proviso of
the  foregoing  sentence  and  an  item  of  Indebtedness  may  be  divided  and  classified  in  more  than  one  of  the  types  of
Indebtedness  permitted  hereunder; provided that all Indebtedness outstanding on the Issue Date under the Revolving
Credit Agreement shall be deemed incurred under clause (10) of the second paragraph of this covenant and not under the
first  paragraph  or  clause  (2)  of  the  second  paragraph  and  may  not  be  later  reclassified; provided,  further,  that  all
Indebtedness under the New Convertible Notes and Additional New Convertible Notes shall be deemed incurred under
clause (11) of the second paragraph of this covenant and may not be later reclassified.
Table of Contents
147
The amount of any Indebtedness outstanding as of any date shall be (i) the accreted value thereof in the case of any
Indebtedness issued with original issue discount and (ii) the principal amount or liquidation preference thereof, together
with any interest thereon that is more than 30 days past due, in the case of any other Indebtedness.
For purposes of determining compliance with any U.S. dollar-denominated restriction on the incurrence of Indebtedness,
the U.S. dollar-equivalent principal amount of Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency shall be calculated based
on  the  relevant  currency  exchange  rate  in  effect  on  the  date  such  Indebtedness  was  incurred,  in  the  case  of  term
Indebtedness,  or  first  committed,  in  the  case  of  revolving  credit  Indebtedness;  provided  that  if  such  Indebtedness  is
incurred  to  refinance  other  Indebtedness  denominated  in  a  foreign  currency,  and  such  refinancing  would  cause  the
applicable U.S. dollar-denominated restriction to be exceeded if calculated at the relevant currency exchange rate in effect
on the date of such refinancing, such U.S. dollar-denominated restriction shall be deemed not to have been exceeded so
long  as  the  principal  amount  of  such  refinancing  Indebtedness  does  not  exceed  the  principal  amount  of  such
Indebtedness  being  refinanced  (plus  all  accrued  interest  on  the  Indebtedness  being  refinanced  and  the  amount  of  all
expenses and premiums incurred in connection therewith).
Notwithstanding any other provision of this covenant, the maximum amount of Indebtedness that the Company or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  may  incur  pursuant  to  this  covenant  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  exceeded  solely  as  a  result  of
fluctuations in the exchange rate of currencies. The principal amount of any Indebtedness incurred to refinance other
Indebtedness, if incurred in a different currency from the Indebtedness being refinanced, shall be calculated based on the
currency exchange rate applicable to the currencies in which such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness is denominated
that is in effect on the date of such refinancing.
Limitation on Restricted Payments
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly:
(1)
(2)
(3)
declare or pay any dividend on, or make any other distribution to holders of, any shares of Capital Stock of the
Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  (other  than  dividends  or  distributions  payable  solely  in  shares  of
Qualified Capital Stock of the Company or in options, warrants or other rights to purchase Qualified Capital
Stock of the Company);
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire or retire for value any Capital Stock of the Company or any Affiliate
thereof (other than any Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary of the Company) or any options, warrants or other
rights  to  acquire  such  Capital  Stock  (other  than  the  purchase,  redemption,  acquisition  or  retirement  of  any
Disqualified Capital Stock of the Company solely in shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company);
make any principal payment on or repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value, prior to
any  scheduled  principal  payment,  scheduled  sinking  fund  payment  or  maturity,  any  Subordinated
Indebtedness  (excluding  any  intercompany  Indebtedness  between  or  among  the  Company  and  any  of  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries),  except  in  any  case  out  of  the  net  cash  proceeds  of  Permitted  Refinancing
Indebtedness; or
make any Restricted Investment;
(4)
make any Restricted Investment;
(such payments or other actions described in clauses (1) through (4) above being collectively referred to as “Restricted
Payments”), unless at the time of and after giving effect to the proposed Restricted Payment:
(1)
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
Table of Contents
148
(2)
(3)
the Company could incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage
Ratio test set forth in the first paragraph of the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock”
covenant; and
the aggregate amount of all Restricted Payments declared or made after January 1, 2015 shall not exceed the
sum (without duplication) of the following (the “Restricted Payments Basket”):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
50% of the Consolidated Net Income of the Company accrued on a cumulative basis during the period
beginning on January 1, 2015 and ending on the last day of the Company’s last fiscal quarter ending
prior to the date of such proposed Restricted Payment (or, if such Consolidated Net Income is a loss,
minus 100% of such loss); plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than cash,
received  after  January  1,  2015  by  the  Company  from  the  issuance  or  sale  (other  than  to  any  of  its
Restricted Subsidiaries) of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company or any options, warrants or
rights to purchase such shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than cash,
received after January 1, 2015 by the Company (other than from any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) upon
the  exercise  of  any  options,  warrants  or  rights  to  purchase  shares  of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  the
Company; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds received after January 1, 2015 by the Company from the issuance or
sale (other than to any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) of Indebtedness or shares of Disqualified Capital
Stock that have been converted into or exchanged for Qualified Capital Stock of the Company, together
with the aggregate cash received by the Company at the time of such conversion or exchange; plus
to the extent not otherwise included in Consolidated Net Income, the net reduction in Investments in
Unrestricted Subsidiaries resulting from dividends, repayments of loans or advances, or other transfers
of  assets,  in  each  case  to  the  Company  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  after  January  1,  2015  from  any
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  from  the  redesignation  of  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  as  a  Restricted
Subsidiary (valued in each case as provided in the definition of “Investment”), not to exceed in the case
of  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  the  total  amount  of  Investments  (other  than  Permitted  Investments)  in
such  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  made  by  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  such
Unrestricted Subsidiary after January 1, 2015.
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries may take the following actions so
long  as  (in  the  case  of  clauses  (3),  (4),  (5)  and  (8)  below)  no  Default  or  Event  of  Default  shall  have  occurred  and  be
continuing:
the payment of any dividend on any Capital Stock of the Company within 60 days after the date of declaration
(1)
the payment of any dividend on any Capital Stock of the Company within 60 days after the date of declaration
thereof, if at such declaration date such declaration complied with the provisions of the preceding paragraph
(and  such  payment  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  paid  on  such  date  of  declaration  for  purposes  of  any
calculation required by the provisions of the preceding paragraph);
(2)
the payment of any dividend payable from a Restricted Subsidiary to the Company or any other Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company;
Table of Contents
149
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement of any shares of any class of Capital Stock of the
Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, in exchange for, or out of the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds from, a
substantially  concurrent  issuance  and  sale  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of  shares  of  Qualified
Capital Stock of the Company;
the purchase, redemption, repayment, defeasance or other acquisition or retirement for value of Subordinated
Indebtedness in exchange for, or out of the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds from, a substantially concurrent
issuance and sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary) of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company;
the purchase, redemption, repayment, defeasance or other acquisition or retirement for value of Subordinated
Indebtedness  (other  than  Disqualified  Capital  Stock)  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the  aggregate  net  cash
proceeds  of,  a  substantially  concurrent  incurrence  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of  Subordinated
Indebtedness of the Company so long as (a) the principal amount of such new Indebtedness does not exceed
the principal amount (or, if such Subordinated Indebtedness being refinanced provides for an amount less than
the principal amount thereof to be due and payable upon a declaration of acceleration thereof, such lesser
amount as of the date of determination) of the Subordinated Indebtedness being so purchased, redeemed,
repaid, defeased, acquired or retired, plus the amount of any premium required to be paid in connection with
such  refinancing  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Indebtedness  refinanced  or  the  amount  of  any  premium
reasonably  determined  by  the  Company  as  necessary  to  accomplish  such  refinancing,  plus  the  amount  of
expenses  of  the  Company  incurred  in  connection  with  such  refinancing,  (b)  such  new  Indebtedness  is
subordinated  to  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  at  least  to  the  same  extent  as  such  Subordinated
Indebtedness so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or retired and (c) such new Indebtedness
has an Average Life to Stated Maturity that is longer than the Average Life to Stated Maturity of the New Senior
Secured Notes and such new Indebtedness has a Stated Maturity for its final scheduled principal payment that
is at least 91 days later than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled principal payment of the New Senior
Secured Notes;
loans made to officers, directors or employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary approved by the
Board  of  Directors  in  an  aggregate  amount  not  to  exceed  $1.0  million  outstanding  at  any  one  time,  the
proceeds  of  which  are  used  solely  (a)  to  purchase  common  stock  of  the  Company  in  connection  with  a
restricted  stock  or  employee  stock  purchase  plan,  or  to  exercise  stock  options  received  pursuant  to  an
employee or director stock option plan or other incentive plan, in a principal amount not to exceed the exercise
price of such stock options, or (b) to refinance loans, together with accrued interest thereon, made pursuant to
item (a) of this clause (6);
the repurchase of Equity Interests deemed to occur upon the exercise of stock or other equity options to the
extent such Equity Interests represent a portion of the exercise price of those stock or other equity options and
any  repurchase  or  other  acquisition  of  Equity  Interests  is  made  in  lieu  of  or  to  satisfy  withholding  taxes  in
connection  with  any  exercise  or  exchange  of  stock  options,  warrants,  incentives  or  other  rights  to  acquire
Equity Interests; and
other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $35.0 million.
other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $35.0 million.
The actions described in clauses (1), (3), (4) and (6) above shall be Restricted Payments that shall be permitted to be made
in accordance with the preceding paragraph but shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available for Restricted
Payments under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph (provided that any dividend paid pursuant to clause (1)
above shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph
when declared, but not also when subsequently paid pursuant to such clause (1)),
Table of Contents
150
and  the  actions  described  in  clauses  (2),  (5),  (7)  and  (8)  above  shall  be  permitted  to  be  taken  in  accordance  with  this
paragraph and shall not reduce the amount that would otherwise be available for Restricted Payments under clause (3) of
the second preceding paragraph.
The  amount  of  all  Restricted  Payments  (other  than  cash)  will  be  the  Fair  Market  Value  on  the  date  of  the  Restricted
Payment of the asset(s) or securities proposed to be transferred or issued by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary,
as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted Payment.
Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, enter into or suffer to exist
any transaction or series of related transactions (including, without limitation, the sale, purchase, exchange or lease of
assets or property or the rendering of any services) with, or for the benefit of, any Affiliate of the Company (other than the
Company or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) (each, an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless
(1)
such transaction or series of related transactions is on terms that are no less favorable to the Company or such
Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, than those that would be available in a comparable arm’s length
transaction with unrelated third parties; and
(2)
the Company delivers to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee:
(a)
(b)
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving aggregate
consideration  in  excess  of  $10.0  million  but  no  greater  than  $25.0  million,  an  officers’  certificate
certifying that such Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions complies with this covenant;
and
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving aggregate
consideration in excess of $25.0 million, an officers’ certificate certifying that such Affiliate Transaction
or  series  of  Affiliate  Transactions  complies  with  this  covenant  and  that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or
series of Affiliate Transactions has been approved by a majority of the Disinterested Directors of the
Company.
The following items will not be deemed to be Affiliate Transactions and, therefore, will not be subject to the provisions of
the prior paragraph:
(1)
(2)
loans or advances to officers, directors and employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary made in
the ordinary course of business in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.0 million outstanding at any one
time;
indemnities of officers, directors, employees and other agents of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary
permitted by corporate charter or other organizational document, bylaw or statutory provisions;
the  payment  of  reasonable  and  customary  fees  to  directors  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
(3)
the  payment  of  reasonable  and  customary  fees  to  directors  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries who are not employees of the Company or any Affiliate;
(4)
the Company’s employee compensation and other benefit arrangements;
(5)
transactions exclusively between or among the Company and any of the Restricted Subsidiaries or exclusively
between or among such Restricted Subsidiaries, provided such transactions are not otherwise prohibited by
the Senior Secured Notes Indenture; and
151
Table of Contents
(6)
any Restricted Payment permitted to be paid pursuant to the terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture
described under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments.”
Limitation on Liens
The Company will not, and will not permit any of the Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, create, incur, assume
or suffer to exist any Lien of any kind securing Indebtedness on any of its property or assets, except for Permitted Liens.
Limitation on Asset Sales
The  Company  will  not,  and  will  not  permit  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  to,  consummate  any  Asset  Sale  unless  (i)  the
Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, receives consideration at the time of such Asset Sale at least
equal to the Fair Market Value of the assets and property subject to such Asset Sale and (ii) all of the consideration paid to
the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary in connection with such Asset Sale is in the form of cash, Cash Equivalents,
Liquid  Securities,  Exchanged  Properties  or  the  assumption  by  the  purchaser  of  liabilities  of  the  Company  (other  than
liabilities  of  the  Company  that  are  by  their  terms  subordinated  to  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes)  or  liabilities  of  any
Subsidiary Guarantor that made such Asset Sale (other than liabilities of a Subsidiary Guarantor that are by their terms
subordinated to such Subsidiary Guarantor’s Subsidiary Guarantee), in each case as a result of which the Company and
its remaining Restricted Subsidiaries are no longer liable for such liabilities (“Permitted Consideration”); provided that the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  shall  be  permitted  to  receive  assets  and  property  other  than  Permitted
Consideration,  so  long  as  the  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value  of  all  such  assets  and  property  other  than  Permitted
Consideration received from Asset Sales since the Issue Date and held by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary at
any one time shall not exceed 10% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
The Net Available Cash from Asset Sales by the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary may be applied by the Company or
such Restricted Subsidiary, to the extent the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary elects (or is required by the terms of
any Senior Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary), to
•
•
purchase,  repay  or  prepay  Pari  Passu  Obligations  or  other  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor  secured  by  Permitted  Collateral  Liens  (and,  to  the  extent  required  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the
Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date)  in  the  case  of  revolving  obligations,  to
correspondingly reduce commitments with respect thereto); or
reinvest  in  Additional  Assets  (including  by  means  of  an  Investment  in  Additional  Assets  by  a  Restricted
Subsidiary with Net Available Cash received by the Company or another Restricted Subsidiary); provided that if
such  Asset  Sale  includes  Oil  and  Gas  Properties,  after  giving  effect  to  such  Asset  Sale  the  Company  is  in
compliance with the Collateral requirements of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
Any Net Available Cash from an Asset Sale not applied in accordance with the preceding paragraph within 365 days from
the  date  of  such  Asset  Sale  shall  constitute  “Excess  Proceeds.”  When  the  aggregate  amount  of  Excess  Proceeds
exceeds $10.0 million, the Company will be required to make an offer (the “Asset Sale Offer”) to all Holders of New Senior
Secured Notes and all Holders of other Indebtedness that is pari passu with the New Senior Secured Notes containing
provisions similar to those set forth in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture with respect to offers to purchase or redeem
with the proceeds of sales of assets to purchase the maximum principal amount of New Senior Secured Notes and such
other pari passu Indebtedness that may be purchased out of the Excess Proceeds; provided to the extent such Excess
Proceeds were received in respect of the sale or transfer of assets that constituted Collateral, an Asset Sale Offer will be
made  solely  to  the  holders  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations.  The  offer  price  in  any  Asset  Sale  Offer  will  be  equal  to  100%  of
principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the Purchase Date (subject to the right of Holders of record
on the relevant record date
Table of Contents
152
to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the Purchase Date), and will be payable in cash. If
the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  tendered  by  Holders  thereof  exceeds  the  amount  of
available Excess Proceeds allocated for repurchases of New Senior Secured Notes pursuant to the Asset Sale Offer for
New Senior Secured Notes, then such Excess Proceeds will be allocated pro rata according to the principal amount of the
New Senior Secured Notes tendered and the Senior Secured Notes Trustee will select the New Senior Secured Notes to be
purchased in accordance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. To the extent that any portion of the amount of Excess
Proceeds  remains  after  compliance  with  the  second  sentence  of  this  paragraph  and  provided  that  all  Holders  of  New
Senior  Secured  Notes  have  been  given  the  opportunity  to  tender  their  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  for  purchase  as
described  in  the  following  paragraph  in  accordance  with  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  the  Company  and  its
Restricted Subsidiaries may use such remaining amount for purposes permitted by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture
and the amount of Excess Proceeds will be reset to zero.
Within 30 days after the 365th day following the date of an Asset Sale, the Company shall, if it is obligated to make an offer
to purchase the New Senior Secured Notes pursuant to the preceding paragraph, deliver a written Asset Sale Offer notice,
by first-class mail, to the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes, with a copy to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee (the
“Asset  Sale  Offer  Notice”),  accompanied  by  such  information  regarding  the  Company  and  its  Subsidiaries  as  the
Company believes will enable such Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes to make an informed decision with respect
to the Asset Sale Offer. The Asset Sale Offer Notice will state, among other things:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
that the Company is offering to purchase New Senior Secured Notes pursuant to the provisions of the Senior
Secured Notes Indenture;
that any New Senior Secured Note (or any portion thereof) accepted for payment (and duly paid on the Purchase
Date) pursuant to the Asset Sale Offer shall cease to accrue interest on the Purchase Date;
that any New Senior Secured Note (or portions thereof) not properly tendered will continue to accrue interest;
the purchase price and purchase date, which shall be, subject to any contrary requirements of applicable law, no
less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the date the Asset Sale Offer Notice is mailed (the “Purchase
Date”);
the aggregate principal amount of New Senior Secured Notes to be purchased;
a description of the procedure which Holders of New Senior Secured Notes must follow in order to tender their
New Senior Secured Notes and the procedures that Holders of New Senior Secured Notes must follow in order
to withdraw an election to tender their New Senior Secured Notes for payment; and
all other instructions and materials necessary to enable Holders to tender New Senior Secured Notes pursuant to
the Asset Sale Offer.
The Company will comply, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any
other securities laws or regulations thereunder to the extent such laws and regulations are applicable in connection with
the purchase of New Senior Secured Notes as described above. To the extent that the provisions of any securities laws or
regulations  conflict  with  the  provisions  relating  to  the  Asset  Sale  Offer,  the  Company  will  comply  with  the  applicable
securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations described above by virtue thereof.
Table of Contents
Future Subsidiary Guarantees
153
If the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries acquires or creates another Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary on
or after the Issue Date, or any Subsidiary of the Company that is not already a Subsidiary Guarantor has outstanding or
guarantees any Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement, then the Company will (1) (x) cause such Subsidiary
to execute and deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee a supplemental indenture pursuant to which such Subsidiary
will become a Subsidiary Guarantor and (y) execute amendments to the Collateral Agreements pursuant to which it will
grant a Pari Passu Lien on any Collateral held by it in favor of the Collateral Agent, for the benefit of the Secured Parties,
and become a Collateral Grantor thereunder, and cause such Liens to be perfected as required thereby and (2) deliver to
the Senior Secured Notes Trustee one or more opinions of counsel in connection with the foregoing as specified in the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create or suffer to exist or
allow  to  become  effective  any  consensual  encumbrance  or  restriction  of  any  kind  on  the  ability  of  any  Restricted
Subsidiary:
•
•
•
to pay dividends, in cash or otherwise, or make any other distributions on its Capital Stock, or make payments on
any Indebtedness owed, to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary; provided that the priority that any
series of preferred stock of a Restricted Subsidiary has in receiving dividends or liquidating distributions before
dividends or liquidating distributions are paid in respect of common stock of such Restricted Subsidiary shall not
constitute  a  restriction  on  the  ability  to  make  dividends  or  distributions  on  Capital  Stock  for  purposes  of  this
covenant;
to make loans or advances to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary; or
to transfer any of its property or assets to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary
(any  such  restrictions  being  collectively  referred  to  herein  as  a  “Payment  Restriction”).  However,  the  preceding
restrictions will not apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of:
(1)
(2)
(3)
customary provisions restricting subletting or assignment of any lease governing a leasehold interest of the
Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, or customary restrictions in licenses relating to the property covered
thereby and entered into in the ordinary course of business;
any instrument governing Indebtedness of a Person acquired by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary at
the time of such acquisition, which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any other Person, other than
the Person, or the property or assets of the Person, so acquired, provided that such Indebtedness was not
incurred in anticipation of such acquisition;
any instrument governing Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that is not a
Subsidiary Guarantor; provided that (a) such Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock is permitted under the
covenant described in “—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” and (b) the terms and
conditions  of  any  Payment  Restrictions  thereunder  are  not  materially  more  restrictive  than  the  Payment
Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Senior Secured Notes Indenture as in effect
on the Issue Date;
(4)
the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date  or  any  agreement  that  amends,  modifies,
supplements, restates, extends, renews, refinances or replaces the Revolving Credit
Table of Contents
154
Agreement; provided that the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions thereunder are not materially
more restrictive than the Payment Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the
Issue Date;
(5)
the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the New Senior Secured Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees; or
(6)
the Convertible Notes Indentures, the New Convertible Notes and any subsidiary guarantees thereof, in each
case as in effect on the Issue Date.
Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, enter into any Sale/ Leaseback Transaction
unless (1) the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, would be able to incur Indebtedness in an
amount equal to the Attributable Indebtedness with respect to such Sale/ Leaseback Transaction or (2) the Company or
such Restricted Subsidiary receives proceeds from such Sale/ Leaseback Transaction at least equal to the Fair Market
Value  thereof  and  such  proceeds  are  applied  in  the  same  manner  and  to  the  same  extent  as  Net  Available  Cash  and
Excess Proceeds from an Asset Sale.
Change of Control
If a Change of Control occurs, each Holder of New Senior Secured Notes will have the right to require the Company to
repurchase all or any part (in integral multiples of $1.00) of that Holder’s New Senior Secured Notes pursuant to a change
of control offer (a “Change of Control Offer”) on the terms set forth in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. In the Change
of Control Offer, the Company will offer a payment (the “Change of Control Payment”) in cash equal to 101% (or, at the
Company’s election, a higher percentage) of the aggregate principal amount of New Senior Secured Notes repurchased,
plus  accrued  and  unpaid  interest,  if  any,  on  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  repurchased  to  the  date  of  purchase  (the
“Change of Control Payment Date”), subject to the rights of Holders of New Senior Secured Notes on the relevant record
date to receive interest due on the relevant interest payment date. No later than 30 days following any Change of Control,
the Company will deliver a notice to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and paying agent and each Holder of the New
Senior Secured Notes describing the transaction or transactions that constitute the Change of Control and offering to
repurchase New Senior Secured Notes on the Change of Control Payment Date specified in the notice, which date will be
no earlier than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date such notice is mailed, pursuant to the procedures required
by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and described in such notice. The Company will comply with the requirements of
Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any other securities laws and regulations to the extent those requirements, laws
and regulations are applicable in connection with the repurchase of the New Senior Secured Notes as a result of a Change
of  Control.  To  the  extent  that  the  provisions  of  any  securities  laws  or  regulations  conflict  with  the  Change  of  Control
provisions  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  the  Company  will  comply  with  the  applicable  securities  laws  and
regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations under the Change of Control provisions of the Senior
Secured Notes Indenture by virtue of such compliance.
On or before the Change of Control Payment Date, the Company will, to the extent lawful:
(1) accept for payment all New Senior Secured Notes or portions of New Senior Secured Notes properly tendered and not
withdrawn pursuant to the Change of Control Offer;
(2) deposit with the paying agent an amount equal to the Change of Control Payment in respect of all New Senior Secured
Notes or portions of New Senior Secured Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn; and
155
Table of Contents
(3) deliver or cause to be delivered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and paying agent the New Senior Secured Notes
properly  accepted  together  with  an  officers’  certificate  stating  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  New  Senior  Secured
Notes or portions of New Senior Secured Notes being purchased by the Company.
The paying agent will promptly deliver to each Holder of New Senior Secured Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn
the Change of Control Payment for such New Senior Secured Notes (or if all New Senior Secured Notes are then in global
form, make such payment through the facilities of DTC), and the Senior Secured Notes Trustee will promptly authenticate
and mail (or cause to be transferred by book entry) to each Holder a New Senior Secured Note equal in principal amount to
any  unpurchased  portion  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  surrendered,  if  any; provided  that  each  such  New  Senior
Secured Note will be in a principal amount that is in integral multiples of $1.00. The Company will publicly announce the
results of the Change of Control Offer on or as soon as practicable after the Change of Control Payment Date.
The  provisions  described  above  that  require  the  Company  to  make  a  Change  of  Control  Offer  following  a  Change  of
Control  will  be  applicable  whether  or  not  any  other  provisions  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  are  applicable.
Except as described above with respect to a Change of Control, the Senior Secured Notes Indenture does not contain
provisions that permit the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes to require that the Company repurchase or redeem
the New Senior Secured Notes in the event of a takeover, recapitalization or similar transaction.
The Company will not be required to make a Change of Control Offer upon a Change of Control if (1) a third party makes
the Change of Control Offer in the manner, at the times and otherwise in compliance with the requirements set forth in the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture applicable to a Change of Control Offer made by the Company and purchases all New
Senior Secured Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn under the Change of Control Offer, or (2) notice of redemption
has  been  given  pursuant  to  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  as  described  above  under  “—Redemption—Optional
Redemption,” unless and until there is a default in payment of the applicable redemption price.
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  herein,  a  Change  of  Control  Offer  may  be  made  in  advance  of  a
Change of Control, conditioned upon the consummation of such Change of Control, if a definitive agreement is in place
for the Change of Control at the time the Change of Control Offer is made.
If Holders of not less than 90% in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding New Senior Secured Notes validly tender
and do not withdraw such New Senior Secured Notes in a Change of Control Offer and the Company, or any third party
making a Change of Control Offer in lieu of the Company as described above, purchases all of the New Senior Secured
Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn by such Holders, the Company will have the right, upon not less than 30 nor
more than 60 days’ prior notice, given not more than 30 days following such purchase pursuant to the Change of Control
Offer described above, to redeem all New Senior Secured Notes that remain outstanding following such purchase at a
redemption price in cash equal to the applicable Change of Control Purchase Price plus, to the extent not included in the
Change of Control Purchase Price, accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.
The definition of Change of Control includes a phrase relating to the direct or indirect sale, lease, transfer, conveyance or
other disposition of “all or substantially all” of the properties or assets of the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries,
taken  as  a  whole.  Although  there  is  a  limited  body  of  case  law  interpreting  the  phrase  “substantially  all,”  there  is  no
precise  established  definition  of  the  phrase  under  applicable  law.  Accordingly,  the  ability  of  a  Holder  of  New  Senior
Secured Notes to require the Company to repurchase its New Senior Secured Notes as a result of a sale, lease, transfer,
conveyance or other disposition of less than all of the assets of the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries, taken as a
whole, to another Person or group may be uncertain.
The Change of Control provisions of the New Senior Secured Notes may, in certain circumstances, make more difficult or
discourage a sale or takeover of the Company and, thus, the removal of incumbent management.
Table of Contents
156
Subject to the limitations discussed below, the Company could, in the future, enter into certain transactions, including
acquisitions,  refinancings  or  other  recapitalizations,  that  would  not  constitute  a  Change  of  Control  under  the  Senior
Secured Notes Indenture, but that could increase the amount of Indebtedness outstanding at such time or otherwise affect
the Company’s capital structure or credit ratings. Restrictions on the Company’s ability to Incur additional Indebtedness
are  contained  in  the  covenants  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—  Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified
Capital Stock” and “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Restricted Payments.” Such restrictions in the Senior Secured
Notes  Indenture  can  be  waived  only  with  the  consent  of  Holders  of  a  majority  in  principal  amount  of  the  New  Senior
Secured Notes then outstanding. Except for the limitations contained in such covenants, however, the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture will not contain any covenants or provisions that may afford Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes
protection in the event of a highly leveraged transaction.
The  Company’s  ability  to  repurchase  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  pursuant  to  the  Change  of  Control  Offer  may  be
limited by a number of factors. The ability of the Company to pay cash to the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes
following the occurrence of a Change of Control may be limited by the Company’s and the Restricted Subsidiaries’ then
existing financial resources, and sufficient funds may not be available when necessary to make any required repurchases.
See “Risk Factors—Risks Related to the Exchange Offer and Holding the New Notes—Risks Related to Holding the New
Notes—We may not have the ability to purchase the new notes upon a change of control or upon certain sales or other
dispositions of assets, or to make the cash payment due upon conversion or at maturity.”
Future  agreements  governing  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  its  Subsidiaries  may  contain  prohibitions  of  certain
events, including events that would constitute a Change of Control and including repurchases or other prepayments in
respect  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes.  The  exercise  by  the  Holders  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  of  their  right  to
require the Company to repurchase the New Senior Secured Notes upon a Change of Control could cause a default under
these other agreements, even if the Change of Control itself does not, due to the financial effect of such repurchases on
the Company or its Subsidiaries. In the event a Change of Control occurs at a time when the Company is prohibited from
purchasing or redeeming New Senior Secured Notes, the Company could seek the consent of its other applicable debt
holders or lenders to purchase the New Senior Secured Notes or could attempt to refinance the borrowings that contain
such  prohibition.  If  the  Company  does  not  obtain  a  consent  or  repay  those  borrowings,  the  Company  will  remain
prohibited from purchasing New Senior Secured Notes. In that case, the Company’s failure to purchase tendered New
Senior Secured Notes would constitute an Event of Default under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, which could, in
turn, constitute a default under other Indebtedness of the Company.
Reports
The Senior Secured Notes Indenture provides that, whether or not the Company is subject to the reporting requirements
of Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, to the extent not prohibited by the Exchange Act, the Company will file
with the Commission, and make available to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Holders of the New Senior Secured
Notes without cost to any Holder, the annual reports and the information, documents and other reports (or copies of such
portions  of  any  of  the  foregoing  as  the  Commission  may  by  rules  and  regulations  prescribe)  that  are  specified  in
Sections 13 and 15(d) of the Exchange Act and applicable to a U.S. corporation within the time periods specified therein
with respect to an accelerated filer. In the event that the Company is not permitted to file such reports, documents and
information  with  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Act,  the  Company  will  nevertheless  make  available  such
Exchange Act information to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes without
cost to any Holder as if the Company were subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange
Act within the time periods specified therein with respect to a non-accelerated filer.
If  the  Company  has  designated  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  as  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries,  then,  to  the  extent  material,  the
quarterly and annual financial information required by the preceding paragraph will include a reasonably
Table of Contents
157
detailed  presentation,  either  on  the  face  of  the  financial  statements  or  in  the  footnotes  thereto,  and  in  Management’s
Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of  Operations,  of  the  financial  condition  and  results  of
operations of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries separate from the financial condition and results of operations
of the Unrestricted Subsidiaries of the Company.
The availability of the foregoing materials on the Commission’s website or on the Company’s website shall be deemed to
satisfy the foregoing delivery obligations.
The Senior Secured Notes Indenture also provides that the Company will deliver all reports and other information required
to be delivered under the TIA within the time periods set forth in the TIA.
Future Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries
The Board of Directors of the Company may designate any Restricted Subsidiary to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary if:
(1)
the  Company  would  be  permitted  to  make  (i)  a  Permitted  Investment  or  (ii)  an  Investment  pursuant  to  the
covenant described under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments” above, in either case, in an amount equal to
the Fair Market Value of all outstanding Investments owned by the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries
in such Subsidiary at the time of such designation;
(2)
such Restricted Subsidiary meets the definition of an “Unrestricted Subsidiary”;
(3)
(4)
the  designation  would  not  constitute  or  cause  (with  or  without  the  passage  of  time)  a  Default  or  Event  of
Default and no Default or Event of Default would be in existence following such designation; and
the Company delivers to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee a certified copy of a resolution of the Board of
Directors  of  Company  giving  effect  to  such  designation  and  an  officers’  certificate  certifying  that  such
designation complied with the preceding conditions and was permitted by the covenant described under “—
Limitation on Restricted Payments”.
If a Restricted Subsidiary is designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, the aggregate Fair Market Value of all outstanding
Investments  owned  by  the  Company  and  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  the  Subsidiary  designated  as  an  Unrestricted
Subsidiary will be deemed to be an Investment made as of the time of the designation and will reduce the amount available
for Restricted Payments under the covenant set forth under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments” or under one or more
clauses of the definition of Permitted Investments, as determined by the Company.
If,  at  any  time,  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  designated  as  such  would  fail  to  meet  the  preceding  requirements  as  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary, then such Subsidiary will thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary for purposes of the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture and any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary will be deemed to be Incurred by a Restricted
Subsidiary as of such date and, if such Indebtedness is not permitted to be Incurred as of such date under the covenant
set forth under “—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock,” the Company or the applicable Restricted
Subsidiary will be in default of such covenant.
The  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company  may  at  any  time  designate  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  to  be  a  Restricted
Subsidiary if:
(a)
the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries could Incur the Indebtedness which is deemed to be Incurred
upon such designation under the “—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified
Table of Contents
158
Capital Stock” covenant, equal to the total Indebtedness of such Subsidiary calculated on a pro forma basis as
if such designation had occurred on the first day of the four-quarter reference period;
(b)
the designation would not constitute or cause a Default or Event of Default; and
(c)
the Company delivers to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee a certified copy of a resolution of the Board of
Directors  of  the  Company  giving  effect  to  such  designation  and  an  officers’  certificate  certifying  that  such
designation  complied  with  the  preceding  conditions,  including  the  Incurrence  of  Indebtedness  under  the
covenant described under “—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock”.
Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets
The Company will not, in any single transaction or series of related transactions, merge or consolidate with or into any
other Person, or sell, assign, convey, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the properties and
assets  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  on  a  consolidated  basis  to  any  Person  or  group  of  Affiliated
Persons, and the Company will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to enter into any such transaction or series of
related transactions if such transaction or series of transactions, in the aggregate, would result in the sale, assignment,
conveyance, transfer, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of the properties and assets of the Company and
its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any other Person or group of Affiliated Persons, unless at the time
and after giving effect thereto:
(1)
either (a) if the transaction is a merger or consolidation, the Company shall be the surviving Person of such
merger or consolidation, or (b) the Person (if other than the Company) formed by such consolidation or into
which  the  Company  is  merged  or  to  which  the  properties  and  assets  of  the  Company  or  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries, as the case may be, are sold, assigned, conveyed, transferred, leased or otherwise disposed of
(any such surviving Person or transferee Person being the “Surviving Entity”) shall be a corporation organized
and existing under the laws of the United States of America, any state thereof or the District of Columbia and
shall, in either case, expressly assume by a supplemental indenture to the Senior Secured Notes Indenture
executed and delivered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, in form satisfactory to the Senior Secured Notes
Trustee, and pursuant to agreements reasonably satisfactory to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the
Collateral Agent, as applicable, all the obligations of the Company under the New Senior Secured Notes, the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the other Senior Secured Note Documents to which the Company is a
party, and, in each case, such Senior Secured Note Documents shall remain in full force and effect;
(2)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of related transactions on a pro forma basis (and
treating any Indebtedness not previously an obligation of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries
which becomes an obligation of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in connection with or as a
result  of  such  transaction  as  having  been  incurred  at  the  time  of  such  transaction),  no  Default  or  Event  of
Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
(3)
except in the case of the consolidation or merger of any Restricted Subsidiary with or into the Company or
another Restricted Subsidiary, either:
(a)
immediately before and immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a pro forma
basis (assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the period of four fiscal
quarters  ending  immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or  transactions,  with  the
appropriate adjustments with
Table of Contents
159
respect to the transaction or transactions being included in such pro forma calculation), the Company
(or the Surviving Entity if the Company is not the continuing obligor under the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture) could incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage
Ratio  test  set  forth  in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  “Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital
Stock” covenant; or
(b)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a pro forma basis (assuming that
the  transaction  or  transactions  occurred  on  the  first  day  of  the  period  of  four  fiscal  quarters  ending
immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or  transactions,  with  the  appropriate
adjustments  with  respect  to  the  transaction  or  transactions  being  included  in  such  pro  forma
calculation), the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company (or the Surviving Entity if the Company
is not the continuing obligor under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture) will be equal to or greater than
the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company immediately before such transaction or transactions;
(4)
(5)
if the Company is not the continuing obligor under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, then each Subsidiary
Guarantor, unless it is the Surviving Entity, shall have by supplemental indenture to the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture  confirmed  that  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  shall  apply  to  the
Surviving Entity’s obligations under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the New Senior Secured Notes;
any Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity shall (a) continue to constitute Collateral under
the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the Collateral Agreements and (b) be subject to a Pari Passu Lien in
favor of the Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations;
(6)
(7)
the Surviving Entity shall take such action (or agree to take such action) as may be reasonably necessary to
cause any property or assets that constitute Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity to be
subject to the Pari Passu Liens in the manner and to the extent required under the Collateral Agreements and
shall  deliver  an  opinion  of  counsel  as  to  the  enforceability  of  any  amendments,  supplements  or  other
instruments  with  respect  to  the  Collateral  Agreements  to  be  executed,  delivered,  filed  and  recorded,  as
applicable, and such other matters as the Senior Secured Notes Trustee or Collateral Agent, as applicable,
may reasonably request; and
the Company (or the Surviving Entity if the Company is not the continuing obligor under the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture) shall have delivered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, in form and substance reasonably
satisfactory to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, an officers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel each stating
that such consolidation, merger, transfer, lease or other disposition and any supplemental indenture in respect
thereto comply with the requirements under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and that the requirements of
this paragraph have been complied with.
Upon  any  consolidation  or  merger  or  any  sale,  assignment,  lease,  conveyance,  transfer  or  other  disposition  of  all  or
substantially all of the properties and assets of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis in
accordance  with  the  foregoing,  in  which  the  Company  is  not  the  continuing  corporation,  the  Surviving  Entity  shall
succeed to, and be substituted for, and may exercise every right and power of, the Company under the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture and the other Senior Secured Note Documents with the same effect as if the Surviving Entity had been
named as the Company therein, and thereafter the Company, except in the case of a lease, will be discharged from all
obligations  and  covenants  under  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  and  the  other
Senior Secured Note Documents and may be liquidated and dissolved.
Table of Contents
Events of Default
160
The following are “Events of Default” under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
default in any payment of interest with respect to the New Senior Secured Notes when due, which default
continues for 30 days;
default in the payment when due (at maturity, upon optional redemption, upon declaration of acceleration or
otherwise) of the principal of, or premium, if any, on, the New Senior Secured Notes;
failure by the Company to comply with the provisions described under the captions “—Certain Covenants—
Limitation on Asset Sales,” “—Certain Covenants—Change of Control,” or “—Merger, Consolidation and Sale
of Assets”;
(a)  except  with  respect  to  the  covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Reports,”  failure  by  the
Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries for 60 days after notice to the Company by the Senior Secured
Notes Trustee or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the New Senior Secured Notes
then  outstanding  voting  as  a  single  class  to  comply  with  any  covenant  or  agreement  (other  than  a  default
referred to in clauses (1), (2) and (3) above) contained in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Collateral
Agreements or the New Senior Secured Notes, or (b) failure by the Company for 120 days after notice to the
Company by the Senior Secured Notes Trustee or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount
of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  then  outstanding  voting  as  a  single  class  to  comply  with  the  covenant
described under “—Certain Covenants—Reports;”
default under the Revolving Credit Agreement, if that default:
default under the Revolving Credit Agreement, if that default:
(5)
(a)
is  caused  by  a  failure  to  pay  principal  of,  or  interest  or  premium,  if  any,  on,  any  Revolving  Credit
Agreement Obligation prior to the expiration of the grace period, if any, provided in the Revolving Credit
Agreement on the date of such default; or
(b)
permits the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or any Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties to
accelerate all or any part of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations prior to their Stated Maturity,
provided that if any such default is cured or waived, or the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations occurs,
within a period of 30 days from the occurrence of such default, such Event of Default and any consequential acceleration
of the New Senior Secured Notes shall be automatically rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any
judgment or decree;
(6)
default (other than a default referred to in clause (5) above) under any mortgage, indenture or instrument under
which there is issued or by which there is secured or evidenced any Indebtedness for money borrowed by the
Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries (or the payment of which is guaranteed by the Company or any
of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries),  whether  such  Indebtedness  or  guarantee  now  exists  or  is  created  after  the
Issue Date, if that default:
(a)
is caused by a failure to pay principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on, such Indebtedness prior to
the  expiration  of  the  grace  period  provided  in  such  Indebtedness  on  the  date  of  such  default  (a
“Payment Default”); or
161
Table of Contents
(b)
results in the acceleration of such Indebtedness prior to its Stated Maturity,
and, in either case, the principal amount of any such Indebtedness, together with the principal amount of any other such
Indebtedness  under  which  there  has  been  a  Payment  Default  or  the  maturity  of  which  has  been  so  accelerated,
aggregates $25.0 million or more; provided that if any such default is cured or waived or any such acceleration rescinded,
or such Indebtedness is repaid, within a period of 60 days from the continuation of such default beyond the applicable
grace period or the occurrence of such acceleration, as the case may be, such Event of Default and any consequential
acceleration  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  shall  be  automatically  rescinded,  so  long  as  such  rescission  does  not
conflict with any judgment or decree;
(7)
failure  by  the  Company  or  any  of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  pay  final  judgments  entered  by  a  court  or
courts  of  competent  jurisdiction  aggregating  in  excess  of  $25.0  million,  which  judgments  are  not  paid,
discharged or stayed for a period of 60 days;
(8)
the occurrence of the following:
(a) except as permitted by the Senior Secured Note Documents, any Collateral Agreement establishing the Pari Passu
Liens ceases for any reason to be enforceable; provided that it will not be an Event of Default under this clause (8)(a) if the
sole result of the failure of one or more Collateral Agreements to be fully enforceable is that any Pari Passu Lien purported
to be granted under such Collateral Agreements on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value
of not more than $10.0 million, ceases to be an enforceable and perfected first-priority Lien, subject only to the payment
priorities  in  favor  of  the  holders  of  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Pari  Passu
Intercreditor Agreement and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided, further, that if such failure is susceptible to
cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after any officer of the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary becomes aware of such failure, which failure has not been cured during such time period;
(b) except as permitted by the Senior Secured Note Documents, any Pari Passu Lien purported to be granted under any
Collateral Agreement on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value in excess of $10.0 million,
ceases to be an enforceable and perfected first-priority Lien, subject only to the payment priorities in favor of the holders
of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations pursuant to the terms of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and subject to
Permitted Collateral Liens; provided that if such failure is susceptible to cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect
thereto until 30 days after any officer of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary becomes aware of such failure, which
failure has not been cured during such time period; and
(c) the Company or any other Collateral Grantor, or any Person acting on behalf of any of them, denies or disaffirms, in
writing,  any  obligation  of  the  Company  or  any  other  Collateral  Grantor  set  forth  in  or  arising  under  any  Collateral
Agreement establishing Pari Passu Liens.
(9)
except as permitted by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, any Subsidiary Guarantee is held in any judicial
proceeding  to  be  unenforceable  or  invalid  or  ceases  for  any  reason  to  be  in  full  force  and  effect,  or  any
Subsidiary  Guarantor,  or  any  Person  duly  acting  on  behalf  of  any  such  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  denies  or
disaffirms its obligations under its Subsidiary Guarantee;
(10)
certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency described in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture with respect to the
Company or any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Significant Subsidiary, or any group of Restricted Subsidiaries
that, taken together, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary; and
162
Table of Contents
(11)
the Required Stockholder Approval is not obtained and the Charter Amendment has not become effective, in
each case by December 31, 2016, and such failure shall continue for a period of 90 days.
The Senior Secured Notes Trustee shall not be charged with knowledge of any Default or Event of Default with respect to
the New Senior Secured Notes unless a written notice of such Default or Event of Default shall have been given to an
officer of the Senior Secured Notes Trustee with direct responsibility for the administration of the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture and the New Senior Secured Notes, by the Company or any Holder of New Senior Secured Notes.
In the case of an Event of Default described in clause (10) above with respect to the Company or a Subsidiary Guarantor,
all outstanding New Senior Secured Notes will become due and payable immediately without further action or notice. If any
other  Event  of  Default  occurs  and  is  continuing,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  or  the  Holders  of  at  least  25%  in
aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding New Senior Secured Notes may declare all the New Senior Secured
Notes to be due and payable immediately.
If  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  are  accelerated  or  otherwise  become  due  prior  to  their  maturity  date,  the  amount  of
principal of, accrued and unpaid interest and premium on the New Senior Secured Notes that becomes due and payable
shall equal the redemption price applicable with respect to an optional redemption of the New Senior Secured Notes, in
effect on the date of such acceleration as if such acceleration were an optional redemption of the New Senior Secured
Notes accelerated.
Without  limiting  the  generality  of  the  foregoing,  it  is  understood  and  agreed  that  if  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  are
accelerated  or  otherwise  become  due  prior  to  their  maturity  date,  in  each  case,  in  respect  of  any  Event  of  Default
(including,  but  not  limited  to,  upon  the  occurrence  of  a  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  event  (including  the  acceleration  of
claims by operation of law)), the premium applicable with respect to an optional redemption of the New Senior Secured
Notes will also be due and payable, in cash, as though the New Senior Secured Notes were optionally redeemed and shall
constitute part of the Senior Secured Note Obligations, in view of the impracticability and extreme difficulty of ascertaining
actual damages and by mutual agreement of the parties as to a reasonable calculation of each Holder’s lost profits as a
result thereof. Any premium payable above shall be presumed to be the liquidated damages sustained by each Holder as
the  result  of  the  early  redemption  and  the  Company  agrees  that  it  is  reasonable  under  the  circumstances  currently
existing. The premium shall also be payable in the event the New Senior Secured Notes (and/or the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture) are satisfied or released by foreclosure (whether by power of judicial proceeding), deed in lieu of foreclosure or
by any other means. THE COMPANY EXPRESSLY WAIVES (TO THE FULLEST EXTENT IT MAY LAWFULLY DO SO) THE
PROVISIONS  OF  ANY  PRESENT  OR  FUTURE  STATUTE  OR  LAW  THAT  PROHIBITS  OR  MAY  PROHIBIT  THE
COLLECTION  OF  THE  FOREGOING  PREMIUM  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  ANY  SUCH  ACCELERATION.  The  Company
expressly agrees (to the fullest extent it may lawfully do so) that: (A) the premium is reasonable and is the product of an
arm’s length transaction between sophisticated business people, ably represented by counsel; (B) the premium shall be
payable notwithstanding the then prevailing market rates at the time payment is made; (C) there has been a course of
conduct between Holders and the Company giving specific consideration in this transaction for such agreement to pay
the  premium;  and  (D)  the  Company  shall  be  estopped  hereafter  from  claiming  differently  than  as  agreed  to  in  this
paragraph. The Company expressly acknowledges that its agreement to pay the premium to Holders as herein described
is a material inducement to Holders to purchase the New Senior Secured Notes.
Subject to certain limitations, Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding  New  Senior
Secured Notes may direct the Senior Secured Notes Trustee in its exercise of any trust or power. The Senior Secured
Notes Trustee may withhold from Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes notice of any continuing Default or Event of
Default  if  it  determines  that  withholding  notice  is  in  their  interest,  except  a  Default  or  Event  of  Default  relating  to  the
payment of principal of, or premium, if any, or interest on the New Senior Secured Notes.
Table of Contents
163
Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  relating  to  the  duties  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes
Trustee,  in  case  an  Event  of  Default  occurs  and  is  continuing,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  will  be  under  no
obligation to exercise any of the rights or powers under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture at the request or direction of
any Holders of New Senior Secured Notes unless such Holders have offered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, and the
Senior Secured Notes Trustee has received, indemnity or security (or both) satisfactory to it against any loss, liability or
expense. Except to enforce the right to receive payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest, if any, when due, no
Holder of a note may pursue any remedy with respect to the Senior Secured Notes Indenture or the New Senior Secured
Notes unless:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
such Holder has previously given the Senior Secured Notes Trustee written notice that an Event of Default is
continuing;
Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding New Senior Secured Notes
have made a written request to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee to pursue the remedy;
such  Holders  have  offered  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee,  and  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  has
received (if requested), security or indemnity (or both) satisfactory to it against any loss, liability or expense;
the Senior Secured Notes Trustee has not complied with such request within 60 days after its receipt of the
request and the offer of security or indemnity (or both) satisfactory to it; and
Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding New Senior Secured Notes have
not given the Senior Secured Notes Trustee  a  direction  inconsistent  with  such  request  within  such  60-day
period.
The Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding New Senior Secured Notes by notice to
the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  may,  on  behalf  of  the  Holders  of  all  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  rescind  an
acceleration  or  waive  any  existing  Default  or  Event  of  Default  and  its  consequences  under  the  Senior  Secured  Notes
Indenture except a continuing Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, or premium, if any, interest, if any,
on, the New Senior Secured Notes (other than a payment Default or Event of Default that resulted from an acceleration that
has been rescinded).
The  Company  is  required  to  deliver  to  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  annually  a  statement  in  writing  regarding
compliance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. Within 10 days of becoming aware of any Default or Event of Default,
the Company is required to deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee a statement in writing specifying such Default or
Event of Default.
Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance of Senior Secured Notes Indenture
The Company may at any time elect to have all of its obligations discharged with respect to the outstanding New Senior
Secured Notes and all obligations of the Subsidiary Guarantors discharged with respect to their Subsidiary Guarantees
(“Legal Defeasance”) except for:
(1)
(2)
Table of Contents
the rights of Holders of outstanding New Senior Secured Notes to receive payments in respect of, the principal
of, and premium or interest, if any, on, such New Senior Secured Notes when such payments are due from the
trust referred to below;
the Company’s obligations with respect to the New Senior Secured Notes concerning issuing temporary New
Senior Secured Notes, registration of New Senior Secured Notes, mutilated, destroyed, lost or stolen New
Senior  Secured  Notes  and  the  maintenance  of  an  office  or  agency  for  payment  and  money  for  security
payments held in trust;
164
(3)
the  rights,  powers,  trusts,  duties,  indemnities  and  immunities  of  the  Agents,  and  the  Company’s  and  the
Subsidiary Guarantors’ obligations in connection therewith; and
(4)
the Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance provisions of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
If the Company exercises either its Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance option, each Subsidiary Guarantor will be
released and relieved of any obligation under its Subsidiary Guarantee.
In addition, the Company may elect to have the obligations of the Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors released with
respect to certain covenants (including its obligation to make Change of Control Offers and Asset Sale Offers) that are
described in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture (“Covenant Defeasance”) and thereafter any omission to comply with
those covenants will not constitute a Default or Event of Default with respect to the New Senior Secured Notes. In the
event Covenant Defeasance occurs, all Events of Default described under “—Events of Default” (except those relating to
payments  on  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  or  bankruptcy,  receivership,  rehabilitation  or  insolvency  events)  will  no
longer constitute an Event of Default with respect to the New Senior Secured Notes.
In order to exercise either Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance:
(1)
(2)
the Company must irrevocably deposit with the paying agent, in trust, for the benefit of the Holders of the New
Senior Secured Notes, cash in U.S. dollars, non-callable Government Securities, or a combination of cash in
U.S. dollars and non-callable Government Securities, in amounts as will be sufficient without consideration of
any reinvestment of interest, in the opinion of a nationally recognized investment bank, appraisal firm or firm of
independent public accountants expressed in a written certification thereof delivered to the Trustee, to pay the
principal of, and premium, if any, and interest, if any, on, the outstanding New Senior Secured Notes on the
stated date for payment thereof or on the applicable redemption date, as the case may be, and the Company
must specify whether the New Senior Secured Notes are being defeased to such stated date for payment or to
a particular redemption date;
in the case of Legal Defeasance, the Company must deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, registrar
and  paying  agent  an  opinion  of  U.S.  counsel  who  is  acceptable  to  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee
confirming  that  (a)  the  Company  has  received  from,  or  there  has  been  published  by,  the  Internal  Revenue
Service a ruling or (b) since the Issue Date, there has been a change in the applicable federal income tax law,
in either case to the effect that, and based thereon such opinion of counsel will confirm that, the Holders of the
outstanding  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  will  not  recognize  income,  gain  or  loss  for  federal  income  tax
purposes  as  a  result  of  such  Legal  Defeasance  and  will  be  subject  to  federal  income  tax  on  the  same
amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such Legal Defeasance
had not occurred;
in the case of Covenant Defeasance, the Company must deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, registrar
(3)
(4)
Table of Contents
(5)
(6)
(7)
in the case of Covenant Defeasance, the Company must deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, registrar
and  paying  agent  an  opinion  of  counsel  reasonably  acceptable  to  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee
confirming that the Holders of the outstanding New Senior Secured Notes will not recognize income, gain or
loss for Federal income tax purposes as a result of such Covenant Defeasance and will be subject to Federal
income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if
such Covenant Defeasance had not occurred;
no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing on the date of such deposit (other than a Default
or Event of Default resulting from, or otherwise in connection with, the borrowing of funds to be applied to such
deposit (and any similar concurrent deposit relating to other Indebtedness) and the grant of any Lien securing
such borrowing);
165
such  Legal  Defeasance  or  Covenant  Defeasance  will  not  result  in  a  breach  or  violation  of,  or  constitute  a
default under, any material agreement or instrument (other than the Senior Secured Notes Indenture) to which
the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries is a party or by which the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries is bound;
the  Company  must  deliver  to  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee,  registrar  and  paying  agent  an  officers’
certificate stating that the deposit was not made by the Company with the intent of preferring the Holders of
New  Senior  Secured  Notes  over  the  other  creditors  of  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  with  the
intent of defeating, hindering, delaying or defrauding any creditors of the Company, any Subsidiary Guarantor
or others; and
the  Company  must  deliver  to  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee,  registrar  and  paying  agent  an  officers’
certificate  and  an  opinion  of  counsel,  each  stating  that  all  conditions  precedent  relating  to  the  Legal
Defeasance or the Covenant Defeasance have been complied with.
Satisfaction and Discharge
The Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the other Senior Secured Note Documents will be discharged and will cease to
be of further effect as to all New Senior Secured Notes issued thereunder (except as to rights of registration of transfer or
exchange of the New Senior Secured Notes and as otherwise specified in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture) when:
(1)
either:
(a)
(b)
all  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  that  have  been  authenticated,  except  lost,  stolen  or  destroyed  New
Senior  Secured  Notes  that  have  been  replaced  or  paid  and  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  for  whose
payment money has been deposited in trust and thereafter repaid to the Company, have been delivered
to the registrar for cancellation; or
all  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  that  have  not  been  delivered  to  the  registrar  for  cancellation  have
become due and payable or will become due and payable within one year by reason of the mailing of a
notice  of  redemption  or  otherwise  and  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  has  irrevocably
deposited or caused to be deposited with the paying agent as trust funds in trust solely for the benefit of
the Holders, cash in U.S. dollars, non-callable Government Securities, or a combination of cash in U.S.
dollars and non-callable Government Securities, in amounts as will be sufficient, without consideration
of any reinvestment of interest, in the opinion of a nationally recognized investment bank, appraisal firm
or firm of independent public accountants expressed in a written certification thereof delivered to the
Trustee to pay and discharge the entire Indebtedness on the New Senior Secured Notes not delivered
to the registrar for cancellation of principal, premium, if any, and accrued interest, if any, on, the New
Senior Secured Notes to the date of maturity or redemption;
(2)
in respect of clause (1)(b), the deposit will not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a default under,
any other instrument to which the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor is a party or by which the Company
or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  bound  (other  than  with  respect  to  the  borrowing  of  funds  to  be  applied
concurrently to make the deposit required to effect such satisfaction and discharge and any similar concurrent
deposit relating to other Indebtedness, and in each case the granting of Liens to secure such borrowings);
(3)
the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor has paid or caused to be paid all sums payable by it under the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture; and
166
Table of Contents
(4)
the Company has delivered irrevocable instructions to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, registrar and paying
agent under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture to apply the deposited money toward the payment of the New
Senior Secured Notes at maturity or on the redemption date, as the case may be.
In  addition,  the  Company  must  deliver  an  officers’  certificate  and  an  opinion  of  counsel  to  the  Senior  Secured  Notes
Trustee, registrar and paying agent stating that all conditions precedent to satisfaction and discharge have been satisfied.
Amendments and Waivers
Except  as  provided  in  the  succeeding  paragraphs,  the  Senior  Secured  Note  Documents  may  be  amended  or
supplemented  with  the  consent  of  the  Holders  of  at  least  a  majority  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  New  Senior
Secured Notes then outstanding (including, without limitation, consents obtained in connection with a purchase of, or
tender offer or exchange offer for, New Senior Secured Notes), and any existing Default or Event of Default or compliance
with any provision of Senior Secured Note Documents may be waived with the consent of the Holders of a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding New Senior Secured Notes (including, without limitation, consents
obtained in connection with a purchase of, or tender offer or exchange offer for, New Senior Secured Notes), in each case
in addition to any required consent of holders of other Pari Passu Obligations that may be required with respect to an
amendment of or waiver under a Collateral Agreement or any Intercreditor Agreement.
Without the consent of each Holder of New Senior Secured Notes affected, an amendment, supplement or waiver may not:
(1)
(2)
reduce the percentage of principal amount of New Senior Secured Notes whose Holders must consent to an
amendment, supplement or waiver;
reduce the principal of, or change the fixed maturity of, any note or alter the provisions with respect to the
redemption  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  (other  than  with  respect  to  minimum  notice  required  for
redemption or provisions relating to the covenants described above under “—Certain Covenants—Change of
Control”  and  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Asset  Sales”),  including  any  provision  relating  to  the
premium payable upon any such purchase or redemption;
(3)
reduce the rate of or change the time for payment of interest, including default interest, on any note;
(4)
(5)
impair the right of any Holder of New Senior Secured Notes to institute suit for the enforcement of any payment
on or after the Stated Maturity thereof (or, in the case of redemption, on or after the redemption date);
waive a Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, or interest, or premium, if any, on, the New
Senior Secured Notes (except a rescission of acceleration of the New Senior Secured Notes by the Holders of
at least a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding New Senior Secured Notes and a
waiver of the payment default that resulted from such acceleration);
(6)
make any note payable in money other than that stated in the New Senior Secured Notes;
(7)
make any change in the provisions of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture relating to waivers of past Defaults
or  the  rights  of  Holders  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  to  receive  payments  of  principal  of,  or  interest,  or
premium, if any, on, the New Senior Secured Notes;
Table of Contents
167
(8)
(9)
waive  a  redemption  payment  with  respect  to  any  note  (other  than  a  payment  required  by  the  covenants
described  above  under  the  captions  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Asset  Sales”  and  “—Certain
Covenants—Change of Control”);
release  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  from  any  of  its  obligations  under  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee  or  the  Senior
Secured Notes Indenture, except in accordance with the terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture; or
(10)
make any change in the preceding amendment, supplement and waiver provisions.
The  consent  of  Holders  representing  at  least  two-thirds  of  outstanding  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  will  be  required  to
release the Liens for the benefit of the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes on all or substantially all of the Collateral,
other than in accordance with the Senior Secured Note Documents.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  without  the  consent  of  any  Holder  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  the  Company,  the
Guarantors,  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  and  the  Collateral  Agent,  may  amend  or  supplement  any  of  the  Senior
Secured Note Documents:
(1)
to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
to provide for uncertificated New Senior Secured Notes in addition to or in place of certificated New Senior
Secured Notes;
to provide for the assumption of the Company’s or a Subsidiary Guarantor’s obligations to Holders of New
Senior Secured Notes and Subsidiary Guarantees in the case of a merger or consolidation or sale of all or
substantially all of the Company’s or such Subsidiaries Guarantor’s assets, as applicable;
to make any change that would provide any additional rights or benefits to the Holders of New Senior Secured
Notes or that does not adversely affect the legal rights under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture of any such
Holder in any material respect;
to conform the text of any Senior Secured Note Document to any provision of this “Description of New Senior
Secured  Notes”  to  the  extent  that  such  provision  in  this  “Description  of  New  Senior  Secured  Notes”  was
intended to set forth, verbatim or in substance, a provision of such Senior Secured Note Document, which
intent may be evidenced by an officers’ certificate to that effect;
(6)
to evidence and provide for the acceptance of the appointment under the Senior Secured Note Documents of a
successor Senior Secured Notes Trustee or Collateral Agent;
(7)
(9)
to  make,  complete  or  confirm  any  grant  of  Collateral  permitted  or  required  by  the  Senior  Secured  Notes
Indenture or any of the Pari Passu Documents;
to add any additional Guarantor or Collateral or to evidence the release of any Guarantor from its Subsidiary
Guarantee or the release of any Liens, in each case as provided in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture or the
other Senior Secured Note Documents, as applicable;
(10)
with respect to the Collateral Agreements, as provided in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement; and
(11)
to comply with any requirement in order to effect or maintain the qualification of the of the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture under the TIA.
168
Table of Contents
In addition to the foregoing, the Intercreditor Agreements may be amended in accordance with its terms and without the
consent of any Holder, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, the Collateral Agent or the Junior Lien Collateral Agent to add
other parties (or any authorized agent thereof or trustee therefor) holding Indebtedness subject thereto and to establish
that the Liens on any Collateral securing such Indebtedness shall rank equally with the Liens on such Collateral securing
the Pari Passu Obligations then outstanding.
The consent of the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes is not necessary under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture
to approve the particular form of any proposed amendment, supplement or waiver. It is sufficient if such consent approves
the substance of the proposed amendment, supplement or waiver.
The Senior Secured Notes Trustee and Collateral Agent will be entitled to rely on officers’ certificates and opinions of
counsel that any such amendment, supplement or waiver is in compliance with the terms of the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture.
No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees and Stockholders
No director, officer, employee, incorporator, stockholder, member, partner or trustee of the Company or any Subsidiary
Guarantor, as such, shall have any liability for any obligations of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor under the
Senior  Secured  Note  Documents  or  for  any  claim  based  on,  in  respect  of,  or  by  reason  of,  such  obligations  or  their
creation. Each Holder by accepting a note waives and releases all such liability. The waiver and release are part of the
consideration for issuance of the New Senior Secured Notes.
The Senior Secured Notes Trustee
The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. will serve as trustee under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. The
Senior Secured Notes Indenture (including provisions of the TIA incorporated by reference therein) contains limitations on
the rights of the Senior Secured Notes Trustee thereunder, should it become a creditor of the Company, to obtain payment
of claims in certain cases or to realize on certain property received by it in respect of any such claims, as security or
otherwise.  The  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  permits  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Trustee  to  engage  in  other
transactions; provided that if it acquires any conflicting interest (as defined in the TIA), it must eliminate such conflict or
resign. The Senior Secured Notes Trustee also serves as the trustee under the Old Indentures and the Convertible Notes
Indentures.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee shall have no responsibility
for  (i)  preparing,  recording,  filing,  re-recording,  or  re-filing  any  financing  statement,  perfection  statement,  continuation
statement or other instrument in any public office or for otherwise ensuring the perfection or maintenance of any security
interest granted pursuant to, or contemplated by, any document; (ii) taking any necessary steps to preserve rights against
any  parties  with  respect  to  the  Collateral;  or  (iii)  taking  any  action  to  protect  against  any  diminution  in  value  of  the
Collateral.
Governing Law
The  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantees  and  the  Intercreditor
Agreements are governed by, and construed and enforced in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
Available Information
Anyone who receives this prospectus may obtain a copy of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the form of New Senior
Secured  Notes,  the  Intercreditor  Agreements  and  the  Collateral  Agreements  without  charge  by  writing  to  Comstock
Resources, Inc., 5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500, Frisco, Texas 75034, Attention: Roland O. Burns.
Table of Contents
Book Entry, Delivery and Form
169
The New Senior Secured Notes will be issued in registered, global form in denominations of integral multiples of $1.00 (the
“Global Notes”). Notes will be issued at the closing of this offering only against payment in immediately available funds.
The Global Notes will be deposited upon issuance with the trustee as custodian for DTC, and registered in the name of
DTC or its nominee, for credit to an account of a direct or indirect participant in DTC as described below.
Except as set forth below, the Global Notes may be transferred, in whole and not in part, only to another nominee of DTC
or to a successor of DTC or its nominee. Beneficial interests in the Global Notes may not be exchanged for definitive New
Senior Secured Notes in registered certificated form, or Certificated Notes, except in the limited circumstances described
below. See “—Exchange of Global Notes for Certificated Notes.” Except in the limited circumstances described below,
owners of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will not be entitled to receive physical delivery of New Senior Secured
Notes in certificated form. In addition, transfers of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will be subject to the applicable
rules  and  procedures  of  DTC  and  its  direct  or  indirect  participants  (including,  if  applicable,  those  of  Euroclear  and
Clearstream), which may change from time to time.
Depository Procedures
The following description of the operations and procedures of DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream are provided solely as a
matter  of  convenience.  These  operations  and  procedures  are  solely  within  the  control  of  the  respective  settlement
systems and are subject to changes by them. The Company takes no responsibility for these operations and procedures
and urges investors to contact the system or their participants directly to discuss these matters.
DTC has advised the Company that DTC is a limited-purpose trust company created to hold securities for its participating
organizations, or collectively, the “Participants”,  and  to  facilitate  the  clearance  and  settlement  of  transactions  in  those
securities  between  the  Participants  through  electronic  book-entry  changes  in  accounts  of  its  Participants.  The
Participants  include  securities  brokers  and  dealers  (including  the  initial  purchasers),  banks,  trust  companies,  clearing
corporations and certain other organizations. Access to DTC’s system is also available to other entities such as banks,
brokers,  dealers  and  trust  companies  that  clear  through  or  maintain  a  custodial  relationship  with  a  Participant,  either
directly or indirectly, or collectively, the “Indirect Participants.”  Persons  who  are  not  Participants  may  beneficially  own
securities held by or on behalf of DTC only through the Participants or the Indirect Participants. The ownership interests
in, and transfers of ownership interests in, each security held by or on behalf of DTC are recorded on the records of the
Participants and Indirect Participants.
DTC has also advised the Company that, pursuant to procedures established by it:
(1) upon deposit of the Global Notes, DTC will credit the accounts of the Participants designated by the initial purchasers
with portions of the principal amount of the Global Notes; and
(2) ownership of these interests in the Global Notes will be shown on, and the transfer of ownership of these interests will
be  effected  only  through,  records  maintained  by  DTC  (with  respect  to  the  Participants)  or  by  the  Participants  and  the
Indirect Participants (with respect to other owners of beneficial interest in the Global Notes).
Investors in the Global Notes who are Participants may hold their interests therein directly through DTC. Investors in the
Global  Notes  who  are  not  Participants  may  hold  their  interests  therein  indirectly  through  organizations  (including
Euroclear and Clearstream) which are Participants.
All interests in a Global Note, including those held through Euroclear or Clearstream, may be subject to the procedures
and requirements of DTC. Those interests held through Euroclear or Clearstream may also be subject
170
Table of Contents
to the procedures and requirements of such systems. The laws of some jurisdictions require that certain Persons take
physical delivery in definitive form of securities that they own. Consequently, the ability to transfer beneficial interests in a
Global Note to such Persons will be limited to that extent. Because DTC can act only on behalf of the Participants, which in
turn act on behalf of the Indirect Participants, the ability of a Person having beneficial interests in a Global Note to pledge
such interests to Persons that do not participate in the DTC system, or otherwise take actions in respect of such interests,
may be affected by the lack of a physical certificate evidencing such interests.
Except as described below, owners of interests in the Global Notes will not have New Senior Secured Notes registered in
their names, will not receive physical delivery of New Senior Secured Notes in certificated form and will not be considered
the registered owners or “holders” thereof under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture for any purpose.
Payments in respect of the principal of, and interest and premium, if any, on a Global Note registered in the name of DTC
or its nominee will be payable to DTC in its capacity as the registered holder under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
Under the terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Company and the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, registrar
and paying agent will treat the Persons in whose names the New Senior Secured Notes, including the Global Notes, are
registered  as  the  owners  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  payments  and  for  all  other
purposes. Consequently, neither the Company, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee nor any Agent of the Company or the
Senior Secured Notes Trustee has or will have any responsibility or liability for:
(1) any aspect of DTC’s records or any Participant’s or Indirect Participant’s records relating to, or payments made on
account of, beneficial ownership interest in the Global Notes or for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any of DTC’s
records or any Participant’s or Indirect Participant’s records relating to the beneficial ownership interests in the Global
Notes; or
(2) any other matter relating to the actions and practices of DTC or any of its Participants, or Indirect Participants.
DTC has advised the Company that its current practice, at the due date of any payment in respect of securities such as the
New Senior Secured Notes, is to credit the accounts of the relevant Participants with the payment on the payment date
unless  DTC  has  reason  to  believe  that  it  will  not  receive  payment  on  such  payment  date.  Each  relevant  Participant  is
credited with an amount proportionate to its beneficial ownership of an interest in the principal amount of the New Senior
Secured  Notes  as  shown  on  the  records  of  DTC.  Payments  by  the  Participants  and  the  Indirect  Participants  to  the
beneficial owners of New Senior Secured Notes will be governed by standing instructions and customary practices and
will be the responsibility of the Participants or the Indirect Participants and will not be the responsibility of DTC, the Senior
Secured Notes Trustee, any Agent or the Company. Neither the Company nor the Senior Secured Notes Trustee or any
other Agent will be liable for any delay by DTC or any of the Participants or the Indirect Participants in identifying the
beneficial owners of the New Senior Secured Notes, and the Company and the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and any
other  Agent  may  conclusively  rely  on  and  will  be  protected  in  relying  on  instructions  from  DTC  or  its  nominee  for  all
purposes.
Transfers between the Participants will be effected in accordance with DTC’s procedures, and will be settled in same-day
funds, and transfers between participants in Euroclear and Clearstream will be effected in accordance with their respective
rules and operating procedures.
Subject to compliance with the transfer restrictions applicable to the New Senior Secured Notes described herein, cross-
market transfers between the Participants, on the one hand, and Euroclear or Clearstream participants, on the other hand,
will be effected through DTC in accordance with DTC’s rules on behalf of Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, by
their respective depositaries; however, such cross-market transactions will require delivery of instructions to Euroclear or
Clearstream, as the case may be, by the counterparty in such
Table of Contents
171
system in accordance with the rules and procedures and within the established deadlines (Brussels time) of such system.
Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, will, if the transaction meets its settlement requirements, deliver instructions
to its respective depositary to take action to effect final settlement on its behalf by delivering or receiving interests in the
relevant Global Note in DTC, and making or receiving payment in accordance with normal procedures for same-day funds
settlement applicable to DTC. Euroclear participants and Clearstream participants may not deliver instructions directly to
the depositories for Euroclear or Clearstream.
DTC has advised the Company that it will take any action permitted to be taken by a Holder of New Senior Secured Notes
only at the direction of one or more Participants to whose account DTC has credited the interests in the Global Notes and
only in respect of such portion of the aggregate principal amount of the New Senior Secured Notes as to which such
Participant or Participants has or have given such direction. However, if there is an Event of Default under the New Senior
Secured Notes, DTC reserves the right to exchange the Global Notes for Certificated Notes, and to distribute such New
Senior Secured Notes to its Participants.
Exchange of Global Notes for Certificated Notes
A Global Note is exchangeable for Certificated Notes in denominations of integral multiples of $1.00 if:
(1) DTC notifies the Company that it is unwilling or unable to continue as depositary for the Global Notes or DTC has
ceased to be a clearing agency registered under the Exchange Act at a time when DTC is required to be so registered in
order to act as depositary and, in either case, the Company fails to appoint a successor depositary within 90 days of such
notice;
(2) the Company, at its option, but subject to DTC’s requirements, notifies the Senior Secured Notes Trustee in writing that
it elects to cause the issuance of the Certificated Notes; or
(3) there has occurred and is continuing a Default or Event of Default with respect to the New Senior Secured Notes and
DTC notifies the trustee of its decision to exchange such Global Notes for Certificated Notes.
In all cases, Certificated Notes delivered in exchange for any Global Note or beneficial interests in Global Notes will be
registered  in  the  names,  and  issued  in  any  approved  denominations,  requested  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  depositary  (in
accordance  with  its  customary  procedures)  and  will  bear  the  applicable  restrictive  legend  referred  to  in  “Notice  to
Investors,” unless that legend is not required by applicable law.
Exchange of Certificated Notes for Global Notes
Certificated Notes may not be exchanged for beneficial interests in any Global Note, except in the limited circumstances
provided in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
Same Day Settlement and Payment
The Company will make payments in respect of the New Senior Secured Notes represented by the Global Notes (including
principal, premium, if any, and interest) by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the accounts specified by DTC or
its nominee. The Company will make all payments of principal, interest and premium, if any, with respect to Certificated
Notes by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the accounts specified by the Holders of the Certificated Notes or,
if no such account is specified, by mailing a check to each such Holder’s registered address. The New Senior Secured
Notes represented by the Global Notes are expected to be eligible to trade in DTC’s Same-Day Funds Settlement System,
and any permitted secondary market trading activity in such New Senior Secured Notes will, therefore, be required by DTC
to be settled in immediately available funds. The Company expects that secondary trading in any Certificated Notes will
also be settled in immediately available funds.
Table of Contents
172
Because of time zone differences, the securities account of a Euroclear or Clearstream participant purchasing an interest
in a Global Note from a Participant will be credited, and any such crediting will be reported to the relevant Euroclear or
Clearstream participant, during the securities settlement processing day (which must be a business day for Euroclear and
Clearstream)  immediately  following  the  settlement  date  of  DTC.  DTC  has  advised  the  Company  that  cash  received  in
Euroclear  or  Clearstream  as  a  result  of  sales  of  interests  in  a  Global  Note  by  or  through  a  Euroclear  or  Clearstream
participant to a Participant will be received with value on the settlement date of DTC but will be available in the relevant
Euroclear  or  Clearstream  cash  account  only  as  of  the  business  day  for  Euroclear  or  Clearstream  following  DTC’s
settlement date.
Certain Definitions
“2019 Convertible Notes Indenture” means the Indenture, dated as of                 , 2016, among the Company, the subsidiary
guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the New 2019
Convertible Notes.
“2020 Convertible Notes Indenture” means the Indenture, dated as of                 , 2016, among the Company, the subsidiary
guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the New 2020
Convertible Notes.
“Acquired Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of a Person (1) existing at the time such Person becomes a Restricted
Subsidiary  or  (2)  assumed  in  connection  with  acquisitions  of  properties  or  assets  from  such  Person  (other  than  any
Indebtedness incurred in connection with, or in contemplation of, such Person becoming a Restricted Subsidiary or such
acquisition).  Acquired  Indebtedness  shall  be  deemed  to  be  incurred  on  the  date  the  acquired  Person  becomes  a
Restricted Subsidiary or the date of the related acquisition of properties or assets from such Person.
“Additional Assets” means:
(1)
(2)
any assets or property (other than cash, Cash Equivalents or securities) used in the Oil and Gas Business or
any business ancillary thereto;
Investments  in  any  other  Person  engaged  in  the  Oil  and  Gas  Business  or  any  business  ancillary  thereto
(including the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of such Person) as a result of which such other
Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary;
(3)
the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary; or
(4)
capital expenditures by the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary in the Oil and Gas Business.
“Additional  New  2019  Convertible  Notes” means  the  additional  securities  issued  under  the  2019  Convertible  Notes
Indenture solely in connection with the payment of interest in kind on the New 2019 Convertible Notes.
“Additional  New  2020  Convertible  Notes”  means  the  additional  securities  issued  under  the  2020  Convertible  Notes
Indenture solely in connection with the payment of interest in kind on the New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“Additional New Convertible Notes” means, collectively, the Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes and the Additional
New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets” means (without duplication), as of the date of determination, the remainder
of:
(1)
the sum of:
(a)
discounted future net revenues from proved oil and gas reserves of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines before any
173
Table of Contents
state,  federal  or  foreign  income  taxes,  as  estimated  by  the  Company  and  confirmed  by  a  nationally
recognized firm of independent petroleum engineers in a reserve report prepared as of the end of the
Company’s most recently completed fiscal year for which audited financial statements are available, as
increased by, as of the date of determination, the estimated discounted future net revenues from:
(i)
(ii)
estimated proved oil and gas reserves acquired since such year-end, which reserves were not
reflected in such year-end reserve report, and
estimated oil and gas reserves attributable to upward revisions of estimates of proved oil and
gas reserves since such year-end due to exploration, development or exploitation activities, in
each case calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in
such year-end reserve report),
and decreased by, as of the date of determination, the estimated discounted future net revenues from:
(iii)
estimated proved oil and gas reserves produced or disposed of since such year-end, and
(iv)
estimated oil and gas reserves attributable to downward revisions of estimates of proved oil
and gas reserves since such year-end due to changes in geological conditions or other factors
which  would,  in  accordance  with  standard  industry  practice,  cause  such  revisions,  in  each
case calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in such
year-end reserve report);
provided that, in the case of each of the determinations made pursuant to clauses (i) through (iv), such increases and
decreases shall be as estimated by the Company’s petroleum engineers, unless there is a Material Change as a result of
such acquisitions, dispositions or revisions, in which event the discounted future net revenues utilized for purposes of
this clause (1)(a) shall be confirmed in writing by a nationally recognized firm of independent petroleum engineers;
(b)
(c)
(d)
the capitalized costs that are attributable to oil and gas properties of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries to which no proved oil and gas reserves are attributable, based on the Company’s books
and records as of a date no earlier than the date of the Company’s latest annual or quarterly financial
statements;
the Net Working Capital on a date no earlier than the date of the Company’s latest annual or quarterly
financial statements; and
the greater of (i) the net book value on a date no earlier than the date of the Company’s latest annual or
quarterly financial statements and (ii) the appraised value, as estimated by independent appraisers, of
other  tangible  assets  (including,  without  duplication,  Investments  in  unconsolidated  Restricted
Subsidiaries) of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries, as of the date no earlier than the date of
the Company’s latest audited financial statements, minus
(2)
the sum of:
(a)
Minority Interests;
174
(b)
(c)
Table of Contents
any  net  gas  balancing  liabilities  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  reflected  in  the
Company’s latest audited financial statements;
to the extent included in (1)(a) above, the discounted future net revenues, calculated in accordance with
Commission  guidelines  (utilizing  the  prices  utilized  in  the  Company’s  year-end  reserve  report),
attributable to reserves which are required to be delivered to third parties to fully satisfy the obligations
of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  with  respect  to  Volumetric  Production  Payments
(determined, if applicable, using the schedules specified with respect thereto); and
(d)
the discounted future net revenues, calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines, attributable
to  reserves  subject  to  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  which,  based  on  the  estimates  of
production and price assumptions included in determining the discounted future net revenues specified
in  (1)(a)  above,  would  be  necessary  to  fully  satisfy  the  payment  obligations  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries  with  respect  to  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  (determined,  if
applicable, using the schedules specified with respect thereto).
“Adjusted  Net  Assets”  of  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  at  any  date  shall  mean  the  amount  by  which  the  fair  value  of  the
properties and assets of such Subsidiary Guarantor exceeds the total amount of liabilities, including, without limitation,
contingent liabilities (after giving effect to all other fixed and contingent liabilities incurred or assumed on such date), but
excluding liabilities under its Subsidiary Guarantee, of such Subsidiary Guarantor at such date.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to any specified Person, any other Person directly or indirectly controlling or controlled by
or under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person; and the term “Affiliated” shall have a meaning
correlative to the foregoing. For the purposes of this definition, “control,” when used with respect to any Person, means
the power to direct the management and policies of such Person, directly or indirectly, whether through the ownership of
voting securities, by contract or otherwise; and the terms “controlling” and “controlled” have meanings correlative to the
foregoing. For purposes of this definition, beneficial ownership of 10% or more of the voting common equity (on a fully
diluted basis) or options or warrants to purchase such equity (but only if exercisable at the date of determination or within
60 days thereof) of a Person shall be deemed to constitute control of such Person.
“Agents” means, collectively, the Collateral Agent, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent and the Senior Secured Notes
Trustee, and “Agent” means any one of them.
“Alternate Controlling Party” means the Senior Secured Notes Trustee.
“Asset Sale” means any sale, issuance, conveyance, transfer, lease or other disposition to any Person other than the
Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (including, without limitation, by means of a Production Payment, net profits
interest, overriding royalty interest, sale and leaseback transaction, merger or consolidation) (collectively, for purposes of
this definition, a “transfer”), directly or indirectly, in one or a series of related transactions, of (i) any Capital Stock of any
Restricted  Subsidiary,  (ii)  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  properties  and  assets  of  any  division  or  line  of  business  of  the
Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  or  (iii)  any  other  properties  or  assets  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its
Restricted Subsidiaries other than (a) a transfer of cash, Cash Equivalents, hydrocarbons or other mineral products in the
ordinary course of business or (b) any lease, abandonment, disposition, relinquishment or farm-out of any oil and gas
properties in the ordinary course of business. For the purposes of this definition, the term “Asset Sale” also shall not
include (A) any transfer of properties or assets (including Capital Stock) that is governed by, and made in accordance
with,  the  provisions  described  under  “—Merger,  Consolidation  and  Sale  of  Assets;”  (B)  any  transfer  of  properties  or
assets to an
Table of Contents
175
Unrestricted Subsidiary, if permitted under the “Limitation on Restricted Payments” covenant; or (C) any transfer (in a
single transaction or a series of related transactions) of properties or assets (including Capital Stock) having a Fair Market
Value of less than $25.0 million.
“Attributable Indebtedness” means, with respect to any particular lease under which any Person is at the time liable and at
any date as of which the amount thereof is to be determined, the present value of the total net amount of rent required to
be paid by such Person under the lease during the primary term thereof, without giving effect to any renewals at the option
of the lessee, discounted from the respective due dates thereof to such date at the rate of interest per annum implicit in the
terms of the lease. As used in the preceding sentence, the net amount of rent under any lease for any such period shall
mean the sum of rental and other payments required to be paid with respect to such period by the lessee thereunder
excluding  any  amounts  required  to  be  paid  by  such  lessee  on  account  of  maintenance  and  repairs,  insurance,  taxes,
assessments, water rates or similar charges. In the case of any lease which is terminable by the lessee upon payment of a
penalty,  such  net  amount  of  rent  shall  also  include  the  amount  of  such  penalty,  but  no  rent  shall  be  considered  as
required to be paid under such lease subsequent to the first date upon which it may be so terminated.
“Authorized Representative” means (a) in the case of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations or the Revolving Credit
Agreement Secured Parties, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, (b) in the case of the Senior Secured Note Obligations
or the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee
and (c) as used in the context of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement under “—Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement,” in
the case of the Junior Lien Obligations, the authorized representative named for the applicable series of New Convertible
Notes in the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture.
“Average Life” means, with respect to any Indebtedness, as at any date of determination, the quotient obtained by dividing
(i) the sum of the products of (a) the number of years (and any portion thereof) from the date of determination to the date or
dates  of  each  successive  scheduled  principal  payment  (including,  without  limitation,  any  sinking  fund  or  mandatory
redemption payment requirements) of such Indebtedness multiplied by (b) the amount of each such principal payment by
(ii) the sum of all such principal payments.
“Bankruptcy Code” means Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.
“Board of Directors” means:
(1)
with respect to a corporation, the board of directors of the corporation or any committee thereof duly authorized
to act on behalf of such board;
(2)
with respect to a partnership, the board of directors of the general partner of the partnership;
(3)
with respect to a limited liability company, the managing member or members or any controlling committee of
managing members thereof; and
(4)
with respect to any other Person, the board or committee of such Person serving a similar function.
“Capital Stock” means, with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests, participations, rights or other equivalents
in the equity interests (however designated) in such Person, and any rights (other than debt securities convertible into an
equity interest), warrants or options exercisable for, exchangeable for or convertible into such an equity interest in such
Person.
“Capitalized Lease Obligation” means any obligation to pay rent or other amounts under a lease of (or other agreement
conveying the right to use) any property (whether real, personal or mixed) that is required to be
Table of Contents
176
classified and accounted for as a capital lease obligation under GAAP, and, for the purpose of the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture, the amount of such obligation at any date shall be the capitalized amount thereof at such date, determined in
accordance with GAAP. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any lease (whether entered into before or after date of the Senior
Secured Notes Indenture) that would have been classified as an operating lease pursuant to GAAP as in effect on the date
of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture will be deemed not to represent a Capitalized Lease Obligation.
“Cash Equivalents” means:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
any evidence of Indebtedness with a maturity of 180 days or less issued or directly and fully guaranteed or
insured by the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof (provided that the full faith
and credit of the United States of America is pledged in support thereof);
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit or acceptances with a maturity of 180 days or less of any
financial institution that is a member of the Federal Reserve System having combined capital and surplus and
undivided profits of not less than $500 million;
commercial paper with a maturity of 180 days or less issued by a corporation that is not an Affiliate of the
Company and is organized under the laws of any state of the United States or the District of Columbia and
rated at least A-1 by S&P or at least P-1 by Moody’s;
repurchase obligations with a term of not more than seven days for underlying securities of the types described
in clause (1) above entered into with any commercial bank meeting the specifications of clause (2) above;
(5)
(6)
(7)
overnight  bank  deposits  and  bankers  acceptances  at  any  commercial  bank  meeting  the  qualifications
specified in clause (2) above;
deposits  available  for  withdrawal  on  demand  with  any  commercial  bank  not  meeting  the  qualifications
specified in clause (2) above but which is a lending bank under the Revolving Credit Agreement, provided all
such deposits do not exceed $5.0 million in the aggregate at any one time;
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit with any commercial bank organized in the United States
not  meeting  the  qualifications  specified  in  clause  (2)  above,  provided  that  such  deposits  and  certificates
support bond, letter of credit and other similar types of obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business;
and
(8)
investments in money market or other mutual funds substantially all of whose assets comprise securities of the
types described in clauses (1) through (5) above.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any event or series of events by which:
(1)
(2)
Table of Contents
any  “person”  or  “group”  (as  such  terms  are  used  in  Sections  13(d)  and  14(d)  of  the  Exchange  Act)  is  or
becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act), directly or indirectly, of
more than 50% of the total Voting Stock of the Company;
the Company consolidates with or merges into another Person or any Person consolidates with, or merges
into, the Company, in any such event pursuant to a transaction in which the outstanding Voting Stock of the
Company is changed into or exchanged for cash, securities or other property, other than any such transaction
where (a) the outstanding Voting Stock of the
177
Company is changed into or exchanged for Voting Stock of the surviving or resulting Person that is Qualified
Capital Stock and (b) the holders of the Voting Stock of the Company immediately prior to such transaction
own,  directly  or  indirectly,  not  less  than  a  majority  of  the  Voting  Stock  of  the  surviving  or  resulting  Person
immediately after such transaction;
(3)
the Company, either individually or in conjunction with one or more Restricted Subsidiaries, sells, assigns,
conveys,  transfers,  leases  or  otherwise  disposes  of,  or  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  sell,  assign,  convey,
transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of, all or substantially all of the properties and assets of the Company and
such Restricted Subsidiaries, taken as a whole (either in one transaction or a series of related transactions),
including Capital Stock of the Restricted Subsidiaries, to any Person (other than the Company or a Wholly
Owned Restricted Subsidiary);
(4)
the Company is liquidated or dissolved; or
(5)
the occurrence of any other event that constitutes a “Change of Control” under any of the Convertible Note
Indentures or the Old Indentures.
“Charter Amendment” means the amendment of Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of
shares of Comstock’s common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized
shares  of  the  Comstock’s  common  stock  for  the  issuance  of  shares  upon  conversion  of  all  of  the  outstanding  New
Convertible Notes and exercise of all of the warrants.
“Collateral” means all property wherever located and whether now owned or at any time acquired after the date of the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture by any Collateral Grantor as to which a Lien is granted under the Collateral Agreements
to secure the New Senior Secured Notes or any Subsidiary Guarantee.
“Collateral Agent” means the collateral agent for all holders of Pari Passu Obligations. Bank of Montreal will initially serve
as the Collateral Agent.
“Collateral  Agreements”  means,  collectively,  each  Mortgage,  the  Pledge  Agreement,  the  Security  Agreement,  the
Intercreditor Agreements and each other instrument, including any assignment, security agreement, mortgage, deed of
trust, pledge agreement or other security instrument, creating Liens in favor of the Collateral Agent as required by the Pari
Passu Documents or the Intercreditor Agreements, in each case, as the same may be in effect from time to time.
“Collateral Grantors” means the Company and each Subsidiary Guarantor that is party to a Collateral Agreement.
“Commodity Exchange Act” means the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and
any successor statute.
“Consolidated Exploration Expenses” means, for any period, exploration expenses of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio”  means,  for  any  period,  the  ratio  on  a  pro  forma  basis  of  (1)  the  sum  of
Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated Interest Expense, Consolidated Income Tax Expense and Consolidated Non-cash
Charges  each  to  the  extent  deducted  in  computing  Consolidated  Net  Income,  in  each  case,  for  such  period,  of  the
Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, all determined in accordance with GAAP, decreased (to
the extent included in determining Consolidated Net Income) by the sum of (a) the amount of deferred revenues that are
amortized during such period and are attributable to reserves that are subject to Volumetric Production Payments and
(b) amounts recorded in accordance with GAAP as
Table of Contents
178
repayments of principal and interest pursuant to Dollar- Denominated Production Payments, to (2) Consolidated Interest
Expense  for  such  period; provided that (i) the Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio shall be calculated on a pro
forma basis assuming that (A) the Indebtedness to be incurred (and all other Indebtedness incurred after the first day of
such period of four full fiscal quarters referred to in the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on
Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”  through  and  including  the  date  of  determination),  and  (if  applicable)  the
application  of  the  net  proceeds  therefrom  (and  from  any  other  such  Indebtedness),  including  to  refinance  other
Indebtedness, had been incurred on the first day of such four-quarter period and, in the case of Acquired Indebtedness,
on the assumption that the related transaction (whether by means of purchase, merger or otherwise) also had occurred on
such date with the appropriate adjustments with respect to such acquisition being included in such pro forma calculation
and (B) any acquisition or disposition by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of any properties or assets outside
the ordinary course of business, or any repayment of any principal amount of any Indebtedness of the Company or any
Restricted Subsidiary prior to the Stated Maturity thereof, in either case since the first day of such period of four full fiscal
quarters through and including the date of determination, had been consummated on such first day of such four-quarter
period, (ii) in making such computation, the Consolidated Interest Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness
required to be computed on a pro forma basis in accordance with the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—
Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” and (A) bearing a floating interest rate shall be computed as if
the rate in effect on the date of computation had been the applicable rate for the entire period and (B) which was not
outstanding during the period for which the computation is being made but which bears, at the option of the Company, a
fixed or floating rate of interest, shall be computed by applying, at the option of the Company, either the fixed or floating
rate,  (iii)  in  making  such  computation,  the  Consolidated  Interest  Expense  attributable  to  interest  on  any  Indebtedness
under a revolving credit facility required to be computed on a pro forma basis in accordance with the covenant described
under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” shall be computed based upon
the average daily balance of such Indebtedness during the applicable period, provided that such average daily balance
shall be reduced by the amount of any repayment of Indebtedness under a revolving credit facility during the applicable
period,  which  repayment  permanently  reduced  the  commitments  or  amounts  available  to  be  reborrowed  under  such
facility, (iv) notwithstanding clauses (ii) and (iii) of this provision, interest on Indebtedness determined on a fluctuating
basis,  to  the  extent  such  interest  is  covered  by  agreements  relating  to  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations,  shall  be
deemed to have accrued at the rate per annum resulting after giving effect to the operation of such agreements, (v) in
making  such  calculation,  Consolidated  Interest  Expense  shall  exclude  interest  attributable  to  Dollar-Denominated
Production Payments, and (vi) if after the first day of the period referred to in clause (1) of this definition the Company has
permanently retired any Indebtedness out of the Net Cash Proceeds of the issuance and sale of shares of Qualified Capital
Stock of the Company within 30 days of such issuance and sale, Consolidated Interest Expense shall be calculated on a
pro forma basis as if such Indebtedness had been retired on the first day of such period.
“Consolidated Income Tax Expense” means, for any period, the provision for federal, state, local and foreign income taxes
(including  state  franchise  taxes  accounted  for  as  income  taxes  in  accordance  with  GAAP)  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated Interest Expense” means, for any period, without duplication, the sum of (1) the interest expense of the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  for  such  period  as  determined  on  a  consolidated  basis  in  accordance  with
GAAP, including, without limitation, (a) any amortization of debt discount, (b) the net cost under Interest Rate Protection
Obligations  (including  any  amortization  of  discounts),  (c)  the  interest  portion  of  any  deferred  payment  obligation
constituting  Indebtedness,  (d)  all  commissions,  discounts  and  other  fees  and  charges  owed  with  respect  to  letters  of
credit  and  bankers’  acceptance  financing  and  (e)  all  accrued  interest,  in  each  case  to  the  extent  attributable  to  such
period,  (2)  to  the  extent  any  Indebtedness  of  any  Person  (other  than  the  Company  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  is
guaranteed  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary,  the  aggregate  amount  of  interest  paid  (to  the  extent  not
accrued in a prior period) or accrued by such other Person during such period attributable to any such Indebtedness, in
each case to the extent attributable to that period,
Table of Contents
179
(3) the aggregate amount of the interest component of Capitalized Lease Obligations paid (to the extent not accrued in a
prior period), accrued or scheduled to be paid or accrued by the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries during such
period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP and (4) the aggregate amount of dividends paid
(to the extent such dividends are not accrued in a prior period and excluding dividends paid in Qualified Capital Stock) or
accrued  on  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  to  the  extent  such  Disqualified
Capital Stock is owned by Persons other than Restricted Subsidiaries, less, to the extent included in any of clauses (1)
through (4), amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries during such
period.
“Consolidated  Net  Income”  means,  for  any  period,  the  consolidated  net  income  (or  loss)  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted Subsidiaries for such period as determined in accordance with GAAP, adjusted by excluding:
(1)
net after-tax extraordinary gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto);
(2)
net after-tax gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto) attributable to Asset Sales;
(3)
(4)
the net income (or net loss) of any Person (other than the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries), in
which the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries has an ownership interest, except to the extent of the
amount of dividends or other distributions actually paid to the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in
cash by such other Person during such period (regardless of whether such cash dividends or distributions are
attributable to net income (or net loss) of such Person during such period or during any prior period);
the net income of any Restricted Subsidiary to the extent that the declaration or payment of dividends or similar
distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary is not at the date of determination permitted, directly or indirectly, by
operation  of  the  terms  of  its  charter  or  any  agreement,  instrument,  judgment,  decree,  order,  statute,  rule  or
governmental regulation applicable to that Restricted Subsidiary or its stockholders;
(5)
dividends paid in Qualified Capital Stock;
(6)
income  resulting  from  transfers  of  assets  received  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  from  an
income  resulting  from  transfers  of  assets  received  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  from  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary;
(7)
Consolidated Exploration Expenses and any write-downs or impairments of non-current assets; and
(8)
the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles.
“Consolidated  Non-cash  Charges”  means,  for  any  period,  the  aggregate  depreciation,  depletion,  amortization  and
exploration expense and other non-cash expenses of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries reducing Consolidated
Net Income for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP (excluding any such non-cash
charge for which an accrual of or reserve for cash charges for any future period is required).
“Controlling  Secured  Parties”  means,  at  any  time,  the  Series  of  Pari  Passu  Secured  Parties  whose  Authorized
Representative is the Controlling Party for the Collateral at such time.
“Convertible Notes Indentures” means, collectively, the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture and the 2020 Convertible Notes
Indenture.
Table of Contents
180
“Default” means any event, act or condition that is, or after notice or passage of time or both would become, an Event of
Default.
“Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations” means the occurrence of all of the following:
(1) termination or expiration of all commitments to extend credit that would constitute Pari Passu Obligations;
(2) payment in full in cash of the principal of and interest, premium (if any) and fees on all Pari Passu Obligations (other
than any undrawn letters of credit);
(3)  discharge  or  cash  collateralization  (at  105%  of  the  aggregate  undrawn  amount)  of  all  outstanding  letters  of  credit
constituting Pari Passu Obligations;
(4) payment in full in cash of obligations in respect of Secured Swap Obligations that are secured by Pari Passu Liens
(and, with respect to any particular Secured Swap Obligation, termination of such agreement and payment in full in cash of
all  obligations  thereunder  or  such  other  arrangements  as  have  been  made  by  the  counterparty  thereto  (and
communicated to the Collateral Agent)); and
(5) payment in full in cash of all other Pari Passu Obligations that are outstanding and unpaid at the time the Pari Passu
Obligations  are  paid  in  full  in  cash  (other  than  any  obligations  for  taxes,  costs,  indemnifications,  reimbursements,
damages and other liabilities in respect of which no claim or demand for payment has been made at or prior to such time);
provided that, if, at any time after the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations has occurred, any Collateral Grantor enters into
any  Pari  Passu  Document  evidencing  a  Pari  Passu  Obligation  which  incurrence  is  not  prohibited  by  the  applicable
Secured  Debt  Documents,  then  such  Discharge  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations  shall  automatically  be  deemed  not  to  have
occurred for all purposes of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement with respect to such new Pari Passu Obligation (other
than with respect to any actions taken as a result of the occurrence of such first Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations), and,
from and after the date on which the Company designates such Indebtedness as a Pari Passu Obligation in accordance
with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, the obligations under such Pari Passu Document shall automatically and
without any further action be treated as Pari Passu Obligations for all purposes of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement,
including  for  purposes  of  the  lien  priorities  and  rights  in  respect  of  Collateral  set  forth  in  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement, and any Junior Lien Obligations shall be deemed to have been at all times Junior Lien Obligations and at no
time Pari Passu Obligations.
“Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations” means, except to the extent otherwise provided in the Pari Passu
Intercreditor  Agreement,  payment  in  full,  in  cash  (except  for  contingent  indemnities  and  cost  and  reimbursement
obligations  to  the  extent  no  claim  has  been  made)  of  all  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  and,  with  respect  to
letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, delivery of cash collateral or backstop
letters of credit in respect thereof in a manner consistent with the Revolving Credit Agreement and otherwise reasonably
satisfactory to the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and termination of and payment in full in cash of, all Secured Swap
Obligations, in each case after or concurrently with the termination of all commitments to extend credit thereunder and the
termination of all commitments of the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents; provided that  the  Discharge  of  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  shall  not  be  deemed  to  have
occurred if such payments are made with the proceeds of other Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations that constitute an
exchange or replacement for or a refinancing of such Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations.
“Disinterested Director” means, with respect to any transaction or series of transactions in respect of which the Board of
Directors of the Company is required to deliver a resolution of the Board of Directors under the Senior
Table of Contents
181
Secured Notes Indenture, a member of the Board of Directors of the Company who does not have any material direct or
indirect  financial  interest  (other  than  an  interest  arising  solely  from  the  beneficial  ownership  of  Capital  Stock  of  the
Company) in or with respect to such transaction or series of transactions.
“Disqualified Capital Stock” means any Capital Stock that, either by its terms, by the terms of any security into which it is
convertible or exchangeable or by contract or otherwise, is, or upon the happening of an event or passage of time would
be, required to be redeemed or repurchased prior to the date that is 91 days after the final Stated Maturity of the New
Senior Secured Notes or is redeemable at the option of the Holder thereof at any time prior to the date that is 91 days after
the final Stated Maturity of the New Senior Secured Notes, or is convertible into or exchangeable for debt securities at any
time prior to the date that is 91 days after the final Stated Maturity of the New Senior Secured Notes. For purposes of the
covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock,”
Disqualified  Capital  Stock  shall  be  valued  at  the  greater  of  its  voluntary  or  involuntary  maximum  fixed  redemption  or
repurchase price plus accrued and unpaid dividends. For such purposes, the “maximum fixed redemption or repurchase
price” of any Disqualified Capital Stock which does not have a fixed redemption or repurchase price shall be calculated in
accordance  with  the  terms  of  such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  as  if  such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  were  redeemed  or
repurchased on the date of determination, and if such price is based upon, or measured by, the fair market value of such
Disqualified Capital Stock, such fair market value shall be determined in good faith by the board of directors of the issuer
of  such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock; provided  that  if  such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  is  not  at  the  date  of  determination
permitted or required to be redeemed or repurchased, the “maximum fixed redemption or repurchase price” shall be the
book value of such Disqualified Capital Stock.
“Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments”  means  production  payment  obligations  of  the  Company  or  a  Restricted
Subsidiary recorded as liabilities in accordance with GAAP, together with all undertakings and obligations in connection
therewith.
“Engineering Report”  means  a  reserve  report  as  of  each  December  31  and  June  30,  as  applicable,  with  respect  to  all
Hydrocarbons attributable to the Oil and Gas Properties of the Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors prepared by an
independent  engineering  firm  of  recognized  standing  in  accordance  with  accepted  industry  practice  and  all  updates
thereto.
“Equity Interests” means Capital Stock and all warrants, options or other rights to acquire Capital Stock (but excluding
any debt security that is convertible into, or exchangeable for, Capital Stock).
“Event of Default” has the meaning set forth above under the caption “Events of Default.”
“Excess Pari Passu Obligations” means Obligations constituting Pari Passu Obligations for the principal amount of loans,
letters of credit, reimbursement Obligations under the Pari Passu Documents to the extent that such Obligations are in
excess of the Pari Passu Lien Cap.
“Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation” means a series of transactions in which the Company will (i) exchange the New
Senior Secured Notes and warrants for the Old Senior Secured Notes, (ii) exchange the New 2019 Convertible Notes for
the Company’s 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019, (iii) exchange the New 2020 Convertible Notes for the Company’s 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020 and (iv)
solicit the consent of the holders of the Old Senior Secured Notes and Old Unsecured Notes for certain amendments to the Old Indentures, including amendments to eliminate
or amend substantially all restrictive covenants contained in the Old Indentures and release the collateral securing the Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Exchanged Properties” means properties or assets used or useful in the Oil and Gas Business received by the Company
or a Restricted Subsidiary in trade or as a portion of the total consideration for other such properties or assets.
182
Table of Contents
“Excluded Collateral” means any cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets to the extent that such cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets are on deposit or maintained with the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or any other Revolving Credit Agreement
Secured Party (other than the Collateral Agent, in its capacity as such) to cash collateralize letters of credit constituting
Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  or  Secured  Swap  Obligations  constituting  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
Obligations.
“Fair Market Value” means with respect to any asset or property, the sale value that would be obtained in an arm’s-length
free market transaction between an informed and willing seller under no compulsion to sell and an informed and willing
buyer under no compulsion to buy. Fair Market Value of an asset or property equal to or in excess of $10.0 million shall be
determined by the Board of Directors of the Company acting in good faith, whose determination shall be conclusive and
evidenced by a resolution of such Board of Directors delivered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, and any lesser Fair
Market Value may be determined by an officer of the Company acting in good faith.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America as in effect from time to time. All
ratios and computations based on GAAP contained in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture will be computed in conformity
with GAAP.
The  term  “guarantee”  means,  as  applied  to  any  obligation,  (i)  a  guarantee  (other  than  by  endorsement  of  negotiable
instruments for collection in the ordinary course of business), direct or indirect, in any manner, of any part or all of such
obligation and (ii) an agreement, direct or indirect, contingent or otherwise, the practical effect of which is to assure in any
way the payment or performance (or payment of damages in the event of non-performance) of all or any part of such
obligation, including, without limiting the foregoing, the payment of amounts drawn down under letters of credit. When
used as a verb, “guarantee” has a corresponding meaning.
“Hedging Agreement” means (a) any and all rate swap transactions, basis swaps, credit derivative transactions, forward
rate transactions, commodity swaps, commodity options, forward commodity contracts, equity or equity index swaps or
options, bond or bond price or bond index swaps or options or forward bond or forward bond price or forward bond index
transactions,  interest  rate  options,  forward  foreign  exchange  transactions,  cap  transactions,  floor  transactions,  collar
transactions, currency swap transactions, cross-currency rate swap transactions, currency options, spot contracts or any
similar transactions or any combination of any of the foregoing (including any options to enter into any of the foregoing
and  any  agreement,  contract  or  transaction  that  constitutes  a  “swap”  within  the  meaning  of  section  1a(47)  of  the
Commodity Exchange Act), whether or not any such transaction is governed by or subject to any master agreement, and
(b) any and all transactions of any kind, and the related confirmations, which are subject to the terms and conditions of, or
governed by, any form of master agreement published by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc., any
International Foreign Exchange Master Agreement, or any other master agreement (any such master agreement, together
with  any  related  schedules,  a  “Master  Agreement”),  including  any  such  obligations  or  liabilities  under  any  Master
Agreement.
“Holder” means a Person in whose name a New Senior Secured Note (including an Additional New Senior Secured Note)
is registered in the Note Register.
“Hydrocarbon Interest” means all rights, titles, interests and estates now or hereafter acquired in and to oil and gas leases,
oil, gas and mineral leases or other liquid or gaseous hydrocarbon leases, mineral fee interests, overriding royalty and
royalty interests, operating rights, net profit interests, production payment interests and other similar types of interests,
including any reserved or residual interest of whatever nature.
“Hydrocarbons”  means  oil,  gas,  casinghead  gas,  drip  gasoline,  natural  gasoline,  condensate,  distillate,  liquid
hydrocarbons, gaseous hydrocarbons and all products refined or separated therefrom.
Table of Contents
183
“Indebtedness” means, with respect to any Person, without duplication:
(1)
all liabilities of such Person, contingent or otherwise, for borrowed money or for the deferred purchase price of
property or services (excluding any trade accounts payable and other accrued current liabilities incurred and
reserves  established  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business)  and  all  liabilities  of  such  Person  incurred  in
connection with any agreement to purchase, redeem, exchange, convert or otherwise acquire for value any
Capital Stock of such Person, or any warrants, rights or options to acquire such Capital Stock, outstanding on
the  Issue  Date  or  thereafter,  if,  and  to  the  extent,  any  of  the  foregoing  would  appear  as  a  liability  upon  a
balance sheet of such Person prepared in accordance with GAAP;
(2)
all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, notes, debentures or other similar instruments, if, and to
the extent, any of the foregoing would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of such Person prepared in
accordance with GAAP;
(3)
all obligations of such Person with respect to letters of credit;
(4)
all indebtedness of such Person created or arising under any conditional sale or other title retention agreement
with respect to property acquired by such Person (even if the rights and remedies of the seller or lender under
such agreement in the event of default are limited to repossession or sale of such property), but excluding
trade accounts payable arising and reserves established in the ordinary course of business;
(5)
all Capitalized Lease Obligations of such Person;
(6)
(7)
(8)
the  Attributable  Indebtedness  (in  excess  of  any  related  Capitalized  Lease  Obligations)  related  to  any
Sale/Leaseback Transaction of such Person;
all Indebtedness referred to in the preceding clauses of other Persons and all dividends of other Persons, the
payment of which is secured by (or for which the holder of such Indebtedness has an existing right, contingent
or otherwise, to be secured by) any Lien upon property (including, without limitation, accounts and contract
rights) owned by such Person, even though such Person has not assumed or become liable for the payment of
such Indebtedness (the amount of such obligation being deemed to be the lesser of the value of such property
or the amount of the obligation so secured);
all  guarantees  by  such  Person  of  Indebtedness  referred  to  in  this  definition  (including,  with  respect  to  any
Production Payment, any warranties or guaranties of production or payment by such Person with respect to
such  Production  Payment  but  excluding  other  contractual  obligations  of  such  Person  with  respect  to  such
Production Payment); and
(9)
all obligations of such Person under or in respect of currency exchange contracts, oil and natural gas price
hedging arrangements and Interest Rate Protection Obligations.
The  accrual  of  interest,  the  accretion  or  amortization  of  original  issue  discount,  the  payment  of  interest  on  any
Indebtedness in the form of additional Indebtedness with the same terms, and the payment of dividends on Disqualified
Capital  Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  in  the  form  of  additional  shares  of  the  same  class  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred  Stock  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  incurrence  of  Indebtedness  or  an  issuance  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred Stock for purposes of this definition.
Subject  to  clause  (8)  of  the  first  sentence  of  this  definition,  neither  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  nor
Volumetric Production Payments shall be deemed to be Indebtedness. In addition, Disqualified Capital Stock shall not be
deemed to be Indebtedness.
Table of Contents
184
“Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding” means (a) any voluntary or involuntary case or proceeding under any bankruptcy
law with respect to any Collateral Grantor, (b) any other voluntary or involuntary insolvency, reorganization or bankruptcy
case or proceeding, or any receivership, liquidation, reorganization or other similar case or proceeding with respect to any
Collateral Grantor or with respect to any of its assets, (c) any liquidation, dissolution, reorganization or winding up of any
Collateral Grantor whether voluntary or involuntary and whether or not involving insolvency or bankruptcy (other than any
liquidation,  dissolution,  reorganization  or  winding  up  of  any  Subsidiary  of  the  Issuer  permitted  by  the  Pari  Passu
Documents),  (d)  any  assignment  for  the  benefit  of  creditors  or  any  other  marshalling  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  any
Collateral Grantor or (e) any other proceeding of any type or nature in which substantially all claims of creditors of any
Collateral Grantor are determined and any payment or distribution is or may be made on account of such claims.
“Intercreditor Agreements” means, collectively, the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and the Junior Lien Intercreditor
Agreement.
“Interest Rate Protection Obligations” means the obligations of any Person pursuant to any arrangement with any other
Person whereby, directly or indirectly, such Person is entitled to receive from time to time periodic payments calculated by
applying either a floating or a fixed rate of interest on a stated notional amount in exchange for periodic payments made
by such Person calculated by applying a fixed or a floating rate of interest on the same notional amount and shall include,
without limitation, interest rate swaps, caps, floors, collars and similar agreements or arrangements designed to protect
against or manage such Person’s and any of its Subsidiaries exposure to fluctuations in interest rates.
“Investment” means, with respect to any Person, any direct or indirect advance, loan, guarantee of Indebtedness or other
extension of credit or capital contribution by such Person to (by means of any transfer of cash or other property or assets
to others or any payment for property, assets or services for the account or use of others), or any purchase or acquisition
by such Person of any Capital Stock, bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (including derivatives) or evidences of
Indebtedness issued by, any other Person. In addition, the Fair Market Value of the net assets of any Restricted Subsidiary
at  the  time  that  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  designated  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an
“Investment”  made  by  the  Company  in  such  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  at  such  time.  “Investments”  shall  exclude
(1)  extensions  of  trade  credit  or  other  advances  to  customers  on  commercially  reasonable  terms  in  accordance  with
normal trade practices or otherwise in the ordinary course of business, (2) Interest Rate Protection Obligations entered
into in the ordinary course of business or as required by any Permitted Indebtedness or any Indebtedness incurred in
compliance with the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” covenant, but only to the extent that the
stated  aggregate  notional  amounts  of  such  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  do  not  exceed  105%  of  the  aggregate
principal amount of such Indebtedness to which such Interest Rate Protection Obligations relate and (3) endorsements of
negotiable instruments and documents in the ordinary course of business. If the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary
sells or otherwise disposes of any Capital Stock of any direct or indirect Restricted Subsidiary of the Company such that,
after  giving  effect  to  such  sale  or  disposition,  such  Person  is  no  longer  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  the  Company,  the
Company will be deemed to have made an Investment on the date of any such sale or disposition equal to the Fair Market
Value of the Company’s Investments in such Restricted Subsidiary that were not sold or disposed of.
“Issue Date” means the date of original issuance of the New Senior Secured Notes.
“Junior Lien” means any Lien which (i) is also granted to secure the Pari Passu Obligations and (ii) is subordinate to the
Liens securing the Pari Passu Obligations pursuant to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
“Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent”  means,  individually  or  collectively,  as  the  context  may  require,  any  collateral  agent  for
holders of New Convertible Notes. Bank of Montreal will initially serve as the Junior Lien Collateral Agent.
Table of Contents
185
“Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements”  means,  collectively,  each  mortgage,  pledge  agreement,  security  agreement,  the
Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and each other instrument, including any assignment, security agreement, mortgage,
deed of trust, pledge agreement or other security instrument, creating Junior Liens in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral
Agent as required by the documents governing the Junior Lien Obligations.
“Junior Lien Documents” means, collectively, any indenture, credit agreement or other agreement or instrument pursuant
to which Junior Lien Obligations are incurred (including the New Convertible Notes and the Convertible Notes Indentures)
and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements, in each case, as amended, modified, renewed, restated or replaced, in whole or
in part, from time to time.
“Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Intercreditor Agreement among the Collateral Agent, the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent, the Company, each other Collateral Grantor and the other parties from time to time party thereto, to be
entered into on the Issue Date, as it may be amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time in
accordance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and (ii) any replacement thereof that contains terms not materially
less  favorable  to  the  Holders  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  than  the  Junior  Intercreditor  Agreement  referred  to  in
clause (i).
“Junior  Lien  Obligations”  means  (i)  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes,  (ii)  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  and  (iii)
Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  that  is  secured  on  a  junior  basis  with  the  Pari  Passu
Obligations  by  a  Junior  Lien  that  was  permitted  to  be  incurred  and  so  secured  under  each  applicable  Pari  Passu
Document; provided that, in the case of any Indebtedness referred to in this definition:
(1) on or before the date on which such Indebtedness is incurred by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor, such
Indebtedness  is  designated  by  the  Company,  in  an  officers’  certificate  delivered  to  the  Collateral,  as  “Junior  Lien
Obligations”  for  the  purposes  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  and  any  other  applicable  Pari  Passu  Document;
provided that if such Indebtedness is designated as “Junior Lien Obligations,” it cannot also be designated as Pari Passu
Obligations; and
(2) the collateral agent or other representative with respect to such Indebtedness, the Collateral Agent, the Senior Secured
Notes Trustee, the Company and each Subsidiary Guarantor have duly executed and delivered a joinder to the Junior Lien
Intercreditor Agreement and all requirements set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement as to the confirmation,
grant or perfection of the Liens of the holders of Junior Lien Obligations to secure such Indebtedness in respect thereof
are satisfied.
“Lender  Provided  Hedging  Agreement”  means  any  Hedging  Agreement  between  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor and a Secured Swap Counterparty.
“Lien”  means  any  mortgage,  charge,  pledge,  lien  (statutory  or  other),  security  interest,  hypothecation,  assignment  for
security, claim or similar type of encumbrance (including, without limitation, any agreement to give or grant any lease,
conditional sale or other title retention agreement having substantially the same economic effect as any of the foregoing)
upon or with respect to any property of any kind. A Person shall be deemed to own subject to a Lien any property which
such Person has acquired or holds subject to the interest of a vendor or lessor under any conditional sale agreement,
capital lease or other title retention agreement.
“Liquid Securities” means securities (1) of an issuer that is not an Affiliate of the Company, (2) that are publicly traded on
the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  the  American  Stock  Exchange  or  the  Nasdaq  Stock  Market  and  (3)  as  to  which  the
Company is not subject to any restrictions on sale or transfer (including any volume restrictions under Rule 144 under the
Securities Act or any other restrictions imposed by the Securities Act) or as to which a registration statement under the
Securities Act covering the resale thereof is in effect for as long as the securities are held; provided that securities meeting
the requirements of clauses (1), (2) and (3) above shall be treated as Liquid Securities from the date of receipt thereof until
and only until the earlier of (a) the date on which such
Table of Contents
186
securities  are  sold  or  exchanged  for  cash  or  Cash  Equivalents  and  (b)  150  days  following  the  date  of  receipt  of  such
securities. If such securities are not sold or exchanged for cash or Cash Equivalents within 120 days of receipt thereof, for
purposes of determining whether the transaction pursuant to which the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary received the
securities  was  in  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  described  under  “—Certain
Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales,” such securities shall be deemed not to have been Liquid Securities at any time.
“Material Change” means an increase or decrease (except to the extent resulting from changes in prices) of more than
30%  during  a  fiscal  quarter  in  the  estimated  discounted  future  net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  of  the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  calculated  in  accordance  with  clause  (1)(a)  of  the  definition  of  Adjusted
Consolidated Net Tangible Assets; provided that the following will be excluded from the calculation of Material Change:
(i)  any  acquisitions  during  the  quarter  of  oil  and  gas  reserves  with  respect  to  which  the  Company’s  estimate  of  the
discounted  future  net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  has  been  confirmed  by  independent  petroleum
engineers and (ii) any dispositions of properties and assets during such quarter that were disposed of in compliance with
the provisions of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
“Minority Interest” means the percentage interest represented by any class of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that
are not owned by the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary.
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. or any successor to the rating agency business thereof.
“Mortgage”  means  all  mortgages,  deeds  of  trust  and  similar  documents,  instruments  and  agreements  (and  all
amendments, modifications and supplements thereof) creating, evidencing, perfecting or otherwise establishing the Liens
on  Oil  and  Gas  Properties  and  other  related  assets  to  secure  payment  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  the
Subsidiary Guarantees or any part thereof.
“Mortgaged Properties” means any property owned by a Collateral Grantor that is subject to the Liens existing and to exist
under the terms of the Mortgages.
“Net  Available  Cash”  from  an  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction  means  cash  proceeds  received  therefrom
(including  (1)  any  cash  proceeds  received  by  way  of  deferred  payment  of  principal  pursuant  to  a  note  or  installment
receivable  or  otherwise,  but  only  as  and  when  received,  and  (2)  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  Liquid  Securities  and  Cash
Equivalents, and excluding (a) any other consideration received in the form of assumption by the acquiring Person of
Indebtedness  or  other  obligations  relating  to  the  assets  or  property  that  is  the  subject  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback Transaction and (b) except to the extent subsequently converted to cash, Cash Equivalents or Liquid
Securities within 240 days after such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction, consideration constituting Exchanged
Properties or consideration other than as identified in the immediately preceding clauses (1) and (2)), in each case net of
(i) all legal, title and recording expenses, commissions and other fees and expenses incurred, and all federal, state, foreign
and  local  taxes  required  to  be  paid  or  accrued  as  a  liability  under  GAAP  as  a  consequence  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback Transaction, (ii) all payments made on any Indebtedness (but specifically excluding Indebtedness of the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  assumed  in  connection  with  or  in  anticipation  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback Transaction) which is secured by any assets subject to such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction,
in accordance with the terms of any Lien upon such assets, or which must by its terms, or in order to obtain a necessary
consent to such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction or by applicable law, be repaid out of the proceeds from such
Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction,  provided  that  such  payments  are  made  in  a  manner  that  results  in  the
permanent reduction in the balance of such Indebtedness and, if applicable, a permanent reduction in any outstanding
commitment for future incurrences of Indebtedness thereunder, (iii) all distributions and other payments required to be
made  to  minority  interest  holders  in  Subsidiaries  or  joint  ventures  as  a  result  of  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback
Transaction and (d) the deduction of appropriate amounts to be provided by the seller as a reserve, in accordance with
GAAP, against any liabilities associated with the assets disposed of in such Asset Sale or Sale/
Table of Contents
187
Leaseback  Transaction  and  retained  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  after  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback Transaction; provided that if any consideration for an Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction (which
would  otherwise  constitute  Net  Available  Cash)  is  required  to  be  held  in  escrow  pending  determination  of  whether  a
purchase price adjustment will be made, such consideration (or any portion thereof) shall become Net Available Cash only
at such time as it is released to such Person or its Restricted Subsidiaries from escrow.
“Net Cash Proceeds” with respect to any issuance or sale of Qualified Capital Stock or other securities, means the cash
proceeds  of  such  issuance  or  sale  net  of  attorneys’  fees,  accountants’  fees,  underwriters’  or  placement  agents’  fees,
discounts or commissions and brokerage, consultant and other fees and expenses actually incurred in connection with
such issuance or sale and net of taxes paid or payable as a result thereof.
“Net Working Capital” means (1) all current assets of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries, less (2) all current
liabilities of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries, except current liabilities included in Indebtedness, in each case
as set forth in consolidated financial statements of the Company prepared in accordance with GAAP.
“New 2019 Convertible Notes” means the Company’s 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019.
“New 2020 Convertible Notes” means the Company’s 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020.
“New Convertible Notes” means, collectively, the New 2019 Convertible Notes and the New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“Non-Conforming  Plan  of  Reorganization”  means  any  Plan  of  Reorganization  that  does  not  provide  for  payments  in
respect of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations to be made with the priority specified in the Pari Passu Intercreditor
Agreement and that has not been approved by the Majority Lenders (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement).
“Non-Controlling  Authorized  Representative”  means,  at  any  time,  with  respect  to  any  Collateral,  an  Authorized
Representative that is not the Controlling Party with respect to such Collateral at such time.
“Non-Controlling Secured Parties” means, at any time, with respect to any Collateral, the Pari Passu Secured Parties that
are not Controlling Secured Parties with respect to such Collateral at such time.
“Non-Recourse Indebtedness” means Indebtedness or that portion of Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary incurred in connection with the acquisition by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary of any property or
assets and as to which (i) the holders of such Indebtedness agree that they will look solely to the property or assets so
acquired and securing such Indebtedness for payment on or in respect of such Indebtedness, and neither the Company
nor  any  Subsidiary  (other  than  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary)  (a)  provides  credit  support,  including  any  undertaking,
agreement or instrument which would constitute Indebtedness, or (b) is directly or indirectly liable for such Indebtedness,
and (ii) no default with respect to such Indebtedness would permit (after notice or passage of time or both), according to
the terms thereof, any holder of any Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary to declare a default on such
Indebtedness or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated or payable prior to its Stated Maturity.
“Note  Register”  means  the  register  maintained  by  or  for  the  Company  in  which  the  Company  shall  provide  for  the
registration of the New Senior Secured Notes and the transfer of the New Senior Secured Notes.
“Obligations”  means  all  obligations  for  principal,  premium,  interest,  penalties,  fees,  indemnifications,  payments  with
respect to any letters of credit, reimbursements, damages and other liabilities payable under the documentation governing
any Indebtedness.
Table of Contents
188
“Oil and Gas Business” means (i) the acquisition, exploration, development, operation and disposition of interests in oil,
gas  and  other  hydrocarbon  properties,  (ii)  the  gathering,  marketing,  treating,  processing,  storage,  refining,  selling  and
transporting of any production from such interests or properties, (iii) any business relating to or arising from exploration
for or development, production, treatment, processing, storage, refining, transportation or marketing of oil, gas and other
minerals and products produced in association therewith, and (iv) any activity necessary, appropriate or incidental to the
activities described in the foregoing clauses (i) through (iii) of this definition.
“Oil  and  Gas  Properties”  means  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  the  properties  now  or  hereafter  pooled  or  unitized  with
Hydrocarbon Interests; all presently existing or future unitization, pooling agreements and declarations of pooled units
and  the  units  created  thereby  (including  without  limitation  all  units  created  under  orders,  regulations  and  rules  of  any
Governmental Authority have jurisdiction) that may affect all or any portion of the Hydrocarbon Interests; all operating
agreements,  contracts  and  other  agreements  that  relate  to  any  of  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests  or  the  production,  sale,
purchase, exchange or processing of Hydrocarbons from or attributable to such Hydrocarbon Interest; all Hydrocarbons
in  and  under  and  which  may  be  produced  and  saved  or  attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests,  the  lands  covered
thereby  and  all  oil  in  tanks  and  all  rents,  issues,  profits,  proceeds,  products,  revenues  and  other  income  from  or
attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  all  tenements,  hereditaments,  appurtenances  and  properties  in  any  manner
appertaining, belonging, affixed or incidental to the Hydrocarbon Interests, properties, rights, titles, interests and estates
described or referred to above, including any and all property, real or personal, now owned or hereinafter acquired and
situated  upon,  used,  held  for  use  or  useful  in  connection  with  the  operating,  working  or  development  of  any  of  such
Hydrocarbon Interests or property (excluding drilling rigs, automotive equipment or other personal property which may be
on such premises for the purpose of drilling a well or for other similar temporary uses) and including any and all oil wells,
gas wells, injection wells or other wells, buildings, structures, fuel separators, liquid extraction plants, plant compressors,
pumps, pumping units, field gathering systems, tanks and tank batteries, fixtures, valves, fittings, machinery and parts,
engines, boilers, meters, apparatus, equipment, appliances, tools, implements, cables, wires, towers, casing, tubing and
rods,  surface  leases,  rightsofway,  easements  and  servitudes  together  with  all  additions,  substitutions,  replacements,
accessions and attachments to any and all of the foregoing.
“Old Indentures” means (i) the Indenture, dated as of October 9, 2009 (the “Base Indenture”), among the Company, the
subsidiary guarantors named therein, and the Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, as amended and
supplemented  by  the  Third  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  as  of  March  14,  2011,  among  the  Company,  the  subsidiary
guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the Company’s
7    3⁄4%  Senior  Notes  due  2019,  (ii)  the  Base  Indenture,  as  amended  and  supplemented  by  the  Fourth  Supplemental
Indenture, dated as of June 5, 2012, among the Company, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and The Bank of New
York  Mellon  Trust  Company,  N.A.,  as  trustee,  relating  to  the  Company’s  9    1⁄2%  Senior  Notes  due  2020  and  (iii)  the
Indenture, dated as of March 13, 2015, among the Company, the subsidiary guarantors named therein, and the Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., relating to the Company’s Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Old Senior Secured Notes” means the Company’s 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020.
“Old Unsecured Notes” means the Company’s 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019 and 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
“Pari Passu Documents” means, collectively, the Revolving Credit Agreement Documents and the Senior Secured Note
Documents.
“Pari Passu Excluded Collateral” has the meaning set forth in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement.
“Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Amended and Restated Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement among
the Collateral Agent, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, the Company, each other
Collateral Grantor, the other parties from time to time party thereto, The Bank
Table of Contents
189
of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. in its capacity as the trustee under the Old Senior Secured Notes to be entered
into  on  the  Issue  Date,  as  it  may  be  amended,  restated,  supplemented  or  otherwise  modified  from  time  to  time  in
accordance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and (ii) any replacement thereof that contains terms not materially
less favorable to the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes than the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement referred to in
clause (i).
“Pari Passu Lien” means a Lien granted (or purported to be granted) by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor in
favor of the Collateral Agent, at any time, upon any assets or property of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor to
secure any Pari Passu Obligations.
“Pari Passu Lien Cap” means, as of any date, (a) the principal amount of Pari Passu Obligations (including any interest
paid-in-kind) that may be incurred as “Permitted Indebtedness” as of such date, plus (b) the amount of all Secured Swap
Obligations, to the extent such Secured Swap Obligations are secured by the Pari Passu Liens, plus (c) the amount of
accrued and unpaid interest (excluding any interest paid-in-kind) and outstanding fees, to the extent such Obligations are
secured by the Pari Passu Liens. For purposes of this definition, all letters of credit will be valued at the face amount
thereof, whether or not drawn.
“Pari Passu Obligations” means, collectively, (a) the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations and (b) the Senior Secured
Note  Obligations,  in  each  case  whether  accrued  or  incurred  before  or  after  the  commencement  of  an  Insolvency  or
Liquidation Proceeding, and whether or not allowed or allowable in an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
“Pari Passu Secured Parties” means (a) the Collateral Agent, (b) the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, (c) the Holders of the
New Senior Secured Notes and (d) the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties.
“Permitted Collateral Liens” means Liens described in clauses (1), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (12), (17), (18), (19), (20), (21),
(22) and (23) of the definition of “Permitted Liens” that, by operation of law, have priority over the Liens securing the New
Senior Secured Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees.
“Permitted Investments” means any of the following:
(1)
Investments in Cash Equivalents;
(2)
Investments in property, plant and equipment used in the ordinary course of business;
(3)
Investments in the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(4)
(5)
(6)
Investments by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in another Person, if (a) as a result of such
Investment  (i)  such  other  Person  becomes  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  (ii)  such  other  Person  is  merged  or
consolidated  with  or  into,  or  transfers  or  conveys  all  or  substantially  all  of  its  properties  and  assets  to,  the
Company  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  and  (b)  such  other  Person  is  primarily  engaged  in  the  Oil  and  Gas
Business;
entry into operating agreements, joint ventures, partnership agreements, working interests, royalty interests,
mineral  leases,  processing  agreements,  farm-out  agreements,  contracts  for  the  sale,  transportation  or
exchange  of  oil  and  natural  gas,  unitization  agreements,  pooling  arrangements,  area  of  mutual  interest
agreements or other similar or customary agreements, transactions, properties, interests or arrangements, and
Investments and expenditures in connection therewith or pursuant thereto, in each case made or entered into
in the ordinary course of the Oil and Gas Business;
entry  into  any  hedging  arrangements  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  the
Company’s  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary’s  production,  purchases  and  resales  against  fluctuations  in  oil  or
natural gas prices;
190
Table of Contents
(7)
entry into any currency exchange contract in the ordinary course of business;
(8)
Investments in stock, obligations or securities received in settlement of debts owing to the Company or any
Restricted Subsidiary as a result of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings or upon the foreclosure, perfection
or enforcement of any Lien in favor of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, in each case as to debt
owing  to  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  arose  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  of  the
Company or any such Restricted Subsidiary;
(9)
guarantees of Indebtedness permitted under the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock”
covenant;
(10)
investments in Unrestricted Subsidiaries or joint ventures in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any one
time outstanding $15.0 million; and
(11)
other Investments, in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any one time outstanding the greater of (a) $25.0
million and (b) 5% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
“Permitted Liens” means the following types of Liens:
(1)
(2)
Liens  existing  as  of  the  Issue  Date  (excluding  Liens  securing  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  and  any
Subsidiary Guarantor under the Revolving Credit Agreement);
Liens  on  any  property  or  assets  of  the  Company  and  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  securing  the  New  Senior
Secured Notes issued on the Issue Date and up to $75,000,000 of Additional New Senior Secured Notes and
the Subsidiary Guarantees in respect thereof;
(3)
Liens in favor of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(4)
(5)
(6)
Liens for taxes, assessments and governmental charges or claims either (a) not delinquent or (b) contested in
good faith by appropriate proceedings and as to which the Company or its Restricted Subsidiaries shall have
set aside on its books such reserves as may be required pursuant to GAAP;
statutory  Liens  of  landlords  and  Liens  of  carriers,  warehousemen,  mechanics,  suppliers,  materialmen,
repairmen and other Liens imposed by law incurred in the ordinary course of business for sums not delinquent
or being contested in good faith, if such reserve or other appropriate provision, if any, as shall be required by
GAAP shall have been made in respect thereof;
Liens incurred or deposits made in the ordinary course of business in connection with workers’ compensation,
unemployment  insurance  and  other  types  of  social  security,  or  to  secure  the  payment  or  performance  of
tenders, statutory or regulatory obligations, surety and appeal bonds, bids, government contracts and leases,
performance and return of money bonds and other similar obligations (exclusive of obligations for the payment
of borrowed money but including lessee or operator obligations under statutes, governmental regulations or
instruments related to the ownership, exploration and production of oil, gas and minerals on state, Federal or
foreign lands or waters);
(7)
judgment  and  attachment  Liens  not  giving  rise  to  an  Event  of  Default  so  long  as  any  appropriate  legal
proceedings which may have been duly initiated for the review of such judgment shall not have been finally
terminated or the period within which such proceeding may be initiated shall not have expired;
Table of Contents
191
(8)
easements,  rights-of-way,  restrictions  and  other  similar  charges  or  encumbrances  not  interfering  in  any
material  respect  with  the  ordinary  conduct  of  the  business  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries;
(9)
any interest or title of a lessor under any capitalized lease or operating lease;
(10)
(11)
(12)
purchase  money  Liens; provided that (a) the related purchase money Indebtedness shall not be secured by
any  property  or  assets  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  other  than  the  property  or  assets  so
acquired  (including,  without  limitation,  those  acquired  indirectly  through  the  acquisition  of  stock  or  other
ownership interests) and any proceeds therefrom, (b) the aggregate principal amount of Indebtedness secured
by such Liens it otherwise permitted to be incurred under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and does not
exceed the cost of the property or assets so acquired and (c) the Liens securing such Indebtedness shall be
created within 90 days of such acquisition;
Liens securing obligations under hedging agreements that the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary enters
into  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  its  production,  purchases  and  resales
against fluctuations in oil or natural gas prices;
Liens upon specific items of inventory or other goods of any Person securing such Person’s obligations in
respect of bankers’ acceptances issued or created for the account of such Person to facilitate the purchase,
shipment or storage of such inventory or other goods;
(13)
Liens  securing  reimbursement  obligations  with  respect  to  commercial  letters  of  credit  which  encumber
documents and other property or assets relating to such letters of credit and products and proceeds thereof;
(14)
Liens  encumbering  property  or  assets  under  construction  arising  from  progress  or  partial  payments  by  a
customer of the Company or its Restricted Subsidiaries relating to such property or assets;
(15)
Liens  encumbering  deposits  made  to  secure  obligations  arising  from  statutory,  regulatory,  contractual  or
warranty requirements of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, including rights of offset and set-
off;
(16)
Liens  securing  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  which  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  relate  to
Indebtedness that is secured by Liens otherwise permitted under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture;
Liens (other than Liens securing Indebtedness) on, or related to, properties or assets to secure all or part of the
(17)
Liens (other than Liens securing Indebtedness) on, or related to, properties or assets to secure all or part of the
costs incurred in the ordinary course of business for the exploration, drilling, development or operation thereof;
(18)
Liens on pipeline or pipeline facilities which arise by operation of law;
(19)
Liens  arising  under  operating  agreements,  joint  venture  agreements,  partnership  agreements,  oil  and  gas
leases,  farm-out  agreements,  division  orders,  contracts  for  the  sale,  transportation  or  exchange  of  oil  and
natural  gas,  unitization  and  pooling  declarations  and  agreements,  area  of  mutual  interest  agreements  and
other agreements which are customary in the Oil and Gas Business;
(20)
Liens reserved in oil and gas mineral leases for bonus or rental payments or for compliance with the terms of
such leases;
192
Table of Contents
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
Liens  constituting  survey  exceptions,  encumbrances,  easements,  or  reservations  of,  or  rights  to  others  for,
rights-of-way, zoning or other restrictions as to the use of real properties, and minor defects of title which, in the
case of any of the foregoing, were not incurred or created to secure the payment of borrowed money or the
deferred purchase price of property, assets or services, and in the aggregate do not materially adversely affect
the  value  of  properties  and  assets  of  the  Company  and  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  taken  as  a  whole,  or
materially impair the use of such properties and assets for the purposes for which such properties and assets
are held by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiaries;
Liens securing Non-Recourse Indebtedness; provided that the related Non-Recourse Indebtedness shall not
be secured by any property or assets of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary other than the property and
assets acquired (including, without limitation, those acquired indirectly through the acquisition of stock or other
ownership interests) by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary with the proceeds of such Non-Recourse
Indebtedness;
Liens on property existing at the time of acquisition thereof by the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company
and Liens on property or assets of a Subsidiary existing at the time it became a Subsidiary; provided that such
Liens were in existence prior to the contemplation of the acquisition and do not extend to any assets other than
the acquired property;
Liens resulting from the deposit of funds or evidences of Indebtedness in trust for the purpose of defeasing
Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  so  long  as  such  deposit  and  such
defeasance  are  permitted  under  the  covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on
Restricted Payments;”
Junior  Liens  to  secure  the  New  Convertible  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  and  the  Additional  New
Convertible  Notes,  in  each  case  incurred  under  clause  (11)  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted  Indebtedness”;
provided that such Junior Liens are subject to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement;
Liens to secure any Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to renew, refinance, refund, replace, amend,
defease or discharge, as a whole or in part, Indebtedness that was previously so secured; provided that (a) the
new  Lien  shall  be  limited  to  all  or  part  of  the  same  property  and  assets  (plus  improvements,  accessions,
proceeds  or  dividends  or  distributions  in  respect  thereof)  that  secured  (or,  under  the  written  arrangements
under which the original Lien arose, could secure) the Indebtedness being refinanced and (b) the new Lien
has  no  greater  priority  relative  to  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  the  Subsidiary  Guarantees,  and  the
holders  of  the  Indebtedness  secured  by  such  Lien  have  no  greater  intercreditor  rights  relative  to  the  New
Senior Secured Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees and the Holders thereof than the original Liens and the
related Indebtedness and the holders thereof and such new Liens are subject to the Intercreditor Agreements,
as applicable; and
(27)
Liens  securing  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  and  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $50.0 million at any time outstanding; provided that
such Liens are subject to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement.
Notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) through (27) of this definition, the term “Permitted Liens” does not include any
Liens resulting from the creation, incurrence, issuance, assumption or guarantee of any Production Payments other than
Production Payments that are created, incurred, issued, assumed or guaranteed in connection with the financing of, and
within 30 days after, the acquisition of the properties or assets that are subject thereto.
Table of Contents
193
“Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary, the net proceeds
of which are used to renew, extend, refinance, refund or repurchase (including, without limitation, pursuant to a Change of
Control Offer or Asset Sale Offer) outstanding Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary; provided that
(1)  if  the  Indebtedness  (including  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes)  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or
repurchased  is pari  passu  with  or  subordinated  in  right  of  payment  to  either  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  or  the
Subsidiary Guarantees, then such Indebtedness is pari passu with or subordinated in right of payment to the New Senior
Secured Notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees, as the case may be, at least to the same extent as the Indebtedness being
renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased,  (2)  such  Indebtedness  has  a  Stated  Maturity  for  its  final
scheduled principal payment that is no earlier than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled principal payment of the
Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased,  (3)  if  the  Company  or  a  Subsidiary
Guarantor is the issuer of, or otherwise an obligor in respect of the Indebtedness being renewed, refinanced, refunded or
repurchased,  such  Permitted  Refinancing  Indebtedness  is  not  Incurred  by  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  is  not  the
Company or a Subsidiary Guarantor, (4) such Indebtedness has an Average Life at the time such Indebtedness is incurred
that is equal to or greater than the Average Life of the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or
repurchased  and  (5)  if  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased  by  its  terms
provides that interest is payable only in kind, then such Indebtedness may not permit the payment of scheduled interest in
cash; provided, further, that such Indebtedness is in an aggregate principal amount (or, if such Indebtedness is issued at
a price less than the principal amount thereof, the aggregate amount of gross proceeds therefrom is) not in excess of the
aggregate  principal  amount  then  outstanding  of  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or
repurchased (or if the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased was issued at a price
less  than  the  principal  amount  thereof,  then  not  in  excess  of  the  amount  of  liability  in  respect  thereof  determined  in
accordance with GAAP) plus the amount of any premium required to be paid in connection with such renewal, extension
or refinancing, refunding or repurchase pursuant to the terms of the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced,
refunded  or  repurchased  or  the  amount  of  any  premium  reasonably  determined  by  the  Company  as  necessary  to
accomplish  such  renewal,  extension,  refinancing,  refunding  or  repurchase,  plus  the  amount  of  reasonable  fees  and
expenses incurred by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary in connection therewith.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock
company, trust, unincorporated organization or government or any agency or political subdivision thereof.
“Plan of Reorganization” means any plan of reorganization, plan of liquidation, agreement for composition, or other type
of plan or arrangement proposed in or in connection with any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
“Pledge Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy to be entered into on the Issue Date in favor of
the Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes and the Revolving Credit Agreement
Secured Parties and each other pledge agreement in substantially the same form in favor of the Collateral Agent for the
benefit of the holders of the New Senior Secured Notes and the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties delivered in
accordance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the Collateral Agreements.
“Preferred Stock,” as applied to the Capital Stock of any Person, means Capital Stock of such Person of any class or
classes (however designated) that ranks prior, as to the payment of dividends or as to the distribution of assets upon any
voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of such Person, to shares of Capital Stock of any other
class of such Person.
“Production  Payments”  means,  collectively,  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  and  Volumetric  Production
Payments.
“Proved Reserves” means those Hydrocarbons that have been estimated with reasonable certainty, as demonstrated by
geological and engineering data, to be economically recoverable from the Oil and Gas Properties by existing producing
methods under existing economic conditions.
Table of Contents
194
“Qualified Capital Stock” of any Person means any and all Capital Stock of such Person other than Disqualified Capital
Stock.
“Required Stockholder Approval” means the approval by (1) a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of common
stock of the amendment to Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of shares of Comstock’s
common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized shares of Comstock’s
common stock for the issuance of shares upon conversion of the New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary,
exercise of the warrants and (2) a majority of the shares of common stock represented at the special meeting and entitled
to vote on the issuance of the maximum number of shares of common stock that would be issued upon conversion of all
of the outstanding New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary, exercise of all of the warrants.
“Restricted Investment” means (without duplication) (i) the designation of a Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in
the  manner  described  in  the  definition  of  “Unrestricted  Subsidiary”  and  (ii)  any  Investment  other  than  a  Permitted
Investment.
“Restricted Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary of the Company, whether existing on or after the Issue Date, unless such
Subsidiary of the Company is an Unrestricted Subsidiary or is designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary pursuant to the
terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
“Revolving Credit Agreement” means that certain Credit Agreement, dated as of March 4, 2015, among the Company, the
lenders  from  time  to  time  party  thereto  and  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent,  as  amended,  restated,  modified,
renewed, refunded, replaced or refinanced, from time to time.
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent”  means  Bank  of  Montreal  (or  other  agent  designated  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), together with its successors and permitted assigns in such capacity.
“Revolving Credit Agreement Documents” means the Revolving Credit Agreement, the Collateral Agreements and any
other Loan Documents (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement).
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations”  means,  collectively,  (a)  the  Obligations  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement)  of  the  Company  and  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Documents,  in  an
aggregate principal amount for all such Obligations not to exceed $50,000,000, plus interest and all fees, costs, charges,
penalties and expenses, including legal fees and expenses to the extent authorized under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents, in each case whether accrued or incurred before or after the commencement of an Insolvency or Liquidation
Proceeding, and whether or not allowed or allowable in an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding, and (b)  the  Secured
Swap Obligations.
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Secured  Parties”  means,  collectively,  the  Lenders  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), the Secured Swap Counterparties and the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent.
“S&P” means S&P Global Ratings, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., or any successor to the rating agency
business thereof.
“Sale/Leaseback Transaction” means, with respect to the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, any arrangement
with any Person providing for the leasing by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of any principal property,
whereby such property has been or is to be sold or transferred by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to
such Person.
“Secured Debt” means, collectively, Pari Passu Obligations and Junior Lien Obligations.
Table of Contents
195
“Secured Debt Documents” means the Pari Passu Documents and the Junior Lien Documents.
“Secured Swap Counterparty” means, with respect to a Lender Provided Hedging Agreement, a counterparty that at the
time such Hedging Agreement is entered into is a Lender (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement) or an Affiliate of a
Lender  (including  a  Hedging  Agreement  in  existence  prior  to  the  date  hereof  or  prior  to  such  Person  or  its  Affiliate
becoming a Lender); provided that, for the avoidance of doubt, the term “Lender Provided Hedging Agreement” shall not
include  any  Hedging  Agreement  or  transactions  under  any  Hedging  Agreement  entered  into  after  the  time  that  such
counterparty ceases to be a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender.
“Secured  Swap  Obligations”  means  all  obligations  of  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  any  Lender
Provided Hedging Agreement.
“Security Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy dated as of the Issue Date in favor of the
Collateral  Agent  for  the  benefit  of  the  holders  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
Secured Parties and each other security agreement in substantially the same form in favor of the Collateral Agent for the
benefit of the holders of the New Senior Secured Notes and the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties delivered in
accordance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the Collateral Agreements.
“Security Documents” means the Collateral Agreements and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
“Senior Indebtedness” means any Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary (whether outstanding on the
date hereof or hereinafter incurred), unless such Indebtedness is Subordinated Indebtedness.
“Senior  Secured  Note  Documents”  means  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  the  Collateral  Agreements  and  any
agreement instrument or other document evidencing or governing any Senor Secured Note Obligations.
“Senior Secured Note Obligations” means all advances to, and debts, liabilities, obligations, covenants and duties of, the
Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor arising under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the New Senior Secured Notes,
the  Subsidiary  Guarantees  and  the  Collateral  Agreements  (including  all  principal,  premium,  interest,  penalties,  fees,
charges, charges, expenses, indemnifications, reimbursement obligations, damages, guarantees, and other liabilities or
amounts payable or arising thereunder), whether direct or indirect (including those acquired by assumption), absolute or
contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and including interest and fees that accrue after the
commencement by or against the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor of any proceeding in bankruptcy or insolvency
law  naming  such  Person  as  the  debtor  in  such  proceeding,  regardless  of  whether  such  interest  and  fees  are  allowed
claims in such proceeding.
“Series” means (a) with respect to the Pari Passu Secured Parties, each of (i) the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured
Parties (in their capacities as such) and (ii) the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes and the Senior Secured Notes
Trustee and (b) with respect to Pari Passu Obligations, each of (i) the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, and (ii) the
Senior Secured Note Obligations.
“Significant Subsidiary” means any Restricted Subsidiary that would be a “significant subsidiary” as defined in Article 1,
Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X, promulgated pursuant to the Securities Act, as such Regulation is in effect on the Issue Date.
“Stated Maturity”  means,  when  used  with  respect  to  any  Indebtedness  or  any  installment  of  interest  thereon,  the  date
specified in the instrument evidencing or governing such Indebtedness as the fixed date on which the principal of such
Indebtedness or such installment of interest is due and payable.
“Subordinated  Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  which  is  expressly
subordinated in right of payment to the New Senior Secured Notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees, as the case may be.
Table of Contents
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person:
196
(1)
any  corporation,  limited  liability  company,  association  or  other  business  entity  (other  than  a  partnership)  of
which more than 50% of the total voting power of its Voting Stock is at the time owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by that Person or one or more of the other Subsidiaries of that Person (or a combination thereof);
and
any partnership of which (a) more than 50% of the capital accounts, distribution rights, total equity and voting
(2)
any partnership of which (a) more than 50% of the capital accounts, distribution rights, total equity and voting
interests  or  general  and  limited  partnership  interests,  as  applicable,  are  owned  or  controlled,  directly  or
indirectly, by such Person or one or more of the other Subsidiaries of that Person (or a combination thereof),
whether in the form of general, special or limited partnership interests or otherwise, or (b) such Person or any
Subsidiary of such Person is a controlling general partner or otherwise controls such entity.
“Subsidiary  Guarantee”  means  any  guarantee  of  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  by  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  in
accordance with the provisions described under “—Subsidiary Guarantees of New Senior Secured Notes” and “—Certain
Covenants—Future Subsidiary Guarantees.”
“Subsidiary Guarantor” means (1) Comstock Oil & Gas, LP, (2) Comstock Oil & Gas—Louisiana, LLC, (3) Comstock Oil &
Gas GP, LLC, (4) Comstock Oil & Gas Investments, LLC, (5) Comstock Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., (6) each of Comstock’s
other Restricted Subsidiaries, if any, executing a supplemental indenture in which such Subsidiary agrees to be bound by
the terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and (7) any Person that becomes a successor guarantor of the New
Senior  Secured  Notes  in  compliance  with  the  provisions  described  under  “—Subsidiary  Guarantees  of  New  Senior
Secured Notes” and “Certain Covenants—Future Subsidiary Guarantees.”
“Swap  Obligation”  means,  with  respect  to  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  any  obligation  to  pay  or  perform  under  any
agreement,  contract  or  transaction  that  constitutes  a  “swap”  within  the  meaning  of  Section  1(a)(47)  of  the  Commodity
Exchange Act.
“Unrestricted Subsidiary” means:
(1)
any Subsidiary of the Company that at the time of determination will be designated an Unrestricted Subsidiary
by the Board of Directors of the Company as provided below; and
(2)
any Subsidiary of an Unrestricted Subsidiary.
The  Company  may  designate  any  Subsidiary  of  the  Company  (other  than  a  Collateral  Grantor)  as  an  Unrestricted
Subsidiary pursuant to a resolution of the Board of Directors unless such Subsidiary or any of its Subsidiaries owns any
Equity  Interests  or  Indebtedness  of,  or  owns  or  holds  any  Lien  on,  any  property  of,  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary (other than solely any Subsidiary of the Subsidiary to be so designated); provided that the Subsidiary to be so
designated and each Subsidiary of such Subsidiary:
(1)
has no Indebtedness other than Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
(2)
(3)
is not party to any agreement, contract, arrangement or understanding with the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary  unless  the  terms  of  any  such  agreement,  contract,  arrangement  or  understanding  are  no  less
favorable to the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary than those that might be obtained at the time from
Persons who are not Affiliates of the Company;
is a Person with respect to which neither the Company nor any of the Restricted Subsidiaries has any direct or
indirect obligation (a) to subscribe for additional Equity Interests or (b) to maintain or preserve such Person’s
financial condition or to cause such Person to achieve any specified levels of operating results; and
Table of Contents
197
(4)
has  not  guaranteed  or  otherwise  directly  or  indirectly  provided  credit  support  for  any  Indebtedness  of  the
Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries.
“Volumetric Production Payments” means production payment obligations of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary
recorded  as  deferred  revenue  in  accordance  with  GAAP,  together  with  all  undertakings  and  obligations  in  connection
therewith.
“Voting Stock”  of  any  specified  Person  as  of  any  date  means  the  Capital  Stock  of  such  Person  entitling  the  holders
thereof  (whether  at  all  times  or  only  so  long  as  no  senior  class  of  Capital  Stock  has  voting  power  by  reason  of  any
contingency) to vote in the election of members of the Board of Directors of such Person; provided that with respect to a
limited  partnership  or  other  entity  which  does  not  have  a  Board  of  Directors,  Voting  Stock  means  the  managing
membership interest or the Capital Stock of the general partner of such limited partnership or other business entity with
the ultimate authority to manage the business and operations of such Person, as applicable.
“Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary” means any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company to the extent (1) all of the Capital
Stock or other ownership interests in such Restricted Subsidiary, other than directors’ qualifying shares mandated by
applicable law, is owned directly or indirectly by the Company or (2) such Restricted Subsidiary does substantially all of its
business in one or more foreign jurisdictions and is required by the applicable laws and regulations of any such foreign
jurisdiction to be partially owned by the government of such foreign jurisdiction or individual or corporate citizens of such
foreign jurisdiction in order for such Restricted Subsidiary to transact business in such foreign jurisdiction, provided that
the Company, directly or indirectly, owns the remaining Capital Stock or ownership interest in such Restricted Subsidiary
and,  by  contract  or  otherwise,  controls  the  management  and  business  of  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  and  derives  the
economic benefits of ownership of such Restricted Subsidiary to substantially the same extent as if such Subsidiary were
a wholly owned subsidiary.
Table of Contents
198
DESCRIPTION OF NEW CONVERTIBLE NOTES
Comstock  will  issue  (i)  the  new  7  3⁄4%  Convertible  Secured  PIK  Notes  due  2019  (the  “New  2019  Convertible  Notes”)
pursuant to an Indenture (the “2019 Convertible Notes Indenture”) by and among Comstock, as issuer, the Subsidiary
Guarantors and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (the “2019 Convertible Notes Trustee”) and
(ii) the new 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020 (the “New 2020 Convertible Notes”) pursuant to an Indenture
(the “2020 Convertible Notes Indenture”) by and among Comstock, as issuer, the Subsidiary Guarantors and The Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (the “2020 Convertible Notes Trustee”). The terms of the Convertible
Notes Indentures include those stated in the Convertible Notes Indentures and those made part of the Convertible Notes
Indentures by reference to the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 (the “TIA”).
Unless the context requires otherwise, (i) all references to “New 2019 Convertible Notes” herein shall include all Additional
New 2019 Convertible Notes (as defined below) and (ii) all references to “New 2020 Convertible Notes” herein shall include
all Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes (as defined below).
The  following  description  is  a  summary  of  the  material  provisions  of  the  Convertible  Notes  Indentures,  the  New
Convertible Notes, the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and the Collateral Trust
Agreement. It does not restate those agreements and instruments in their entirety. We urge you to read those agreements
and instruments because they, and not this description, will define your rights as Holders of the New Convertible Notes.
Anyone who receives this prospectus may obtain a copy of the Convertible Notes Indentures, the form of New Convertible
Notes,  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  the  Collateral  Trust  Agreement  and  the  other  Junior  Lien  Collateral
Agreements as set forth below under “—Available Information.”
Furthermore, Appendix 2: Comparison of Terms of the New Convertible Notes to Old 2020 Notes, contains a summary of
“Certain  Covenants,”  “Events  of  Default”  and  “Certain  Definitions”  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  as  compared  to  a
summary of “Certain Covenants,” “Events of Default” and “Certain Definitions” of the 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020 (the
“Old 2020 Notes”), showing provisions that will be deleted or changed or provisions that will be added. Such summary
does not restate the terms of the New Convertible Notes or the Old 2020 Notes and we urge you to read the documents
governing the New Convertible Notes and the Old 2020 Notes, including the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture, the 2020
Convertible  Notes  Indenture  and  the  indenture  governing  the  Old  2020  Notes,  because  they,  and  not  that  description,
define your rights as a holder of New Convertible Notes or Old 2020 Notes.
You  can  find  the  definitions  of  certain  terms  used  in  this  “Description  of  New  Convertible  Notes”  under  “—Certain
Definitions.”  The  registered  Holder  of  a  New  Convertible  Note  will  be  treated  as  the  owner  of  it  for  all  purposes.  Only
registered  Holders  will  have  rights  under  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture.  In  this  “Description  of  New
Convertible Notes,” the words “Comstock,” “we,” “the Company,” “us,” or “our” refer only to Comstock Resources, Inc.
and not to any of its subsidiaries.
General Terms
The New 2019 Convertible Notes
Up  to  $288,516,000  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  will  be  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  in
connection with this Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation. Except for the issuance of Additional New 2019 Convertible
Notes in connection with the payment of interest, the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture will provide that Comstock may
not issue more than $288,516,000 aggregate principal amount of New 2019 Convertible Notes. The New 2019 Convertible
Notes will mature on April 1, 2019.
Interest on the New 2019 Convertible Notes will accrue at the rate of 7 3⁄4% per annum and will be payable in kind semi-
annually in arrears on April 1 and October 1, commencing on April 1, 2017. Interest on the New 2019
Table of Contents
199
Convertible Notes will accrue from the most recent interest date to which interest has been paid in kind by the issuance of
Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes or, if no interest has been paid in kind, from date of original issuance. Comstock
will  make  each  interest  payment  to  Persons  whose  name  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  are  registered  in  the  note
register at the close of business on the immediately preceding March 15 and September 15. Interest will be computed on
the basis of a 360-day year comprised of twelve 30-day months.
Interest  on  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  will  be  payable  by  issuing  additional  securities  (the  “Additional  New  2019
Convertible Notes”) in an amount equal to the applicable amount of interest for the interest period (rounded down to the
nearest whole dollar). Not later than ten business days prior to the relevant interest payment date, Comstock shall deliver
to the 2019 Convertible Notes Trustee and the paying agent (if other than the 2019 Convertible Notes Trustee), (i) with
respect to New 2019 Convertible Notes represented by Certificated Notes, the required amount of Additional New 2019
Convertible Notes represented by Certificated Notes (rounded down to the nearest whole dollar) and a company order to
authenticate and deliver such Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes or (ii) with respect to New 2019 Convertible Notes
represented by one or more Global Notes, a company order to increase the outstanding principal amount of such Global
Notes by the required amount (rounded down to the nearest whole dollar) (or, if necessary, pursuant to the requirements
of  the  depositary  or  otherwise,  the  required  amount  of  Additional  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  represented  by  Global
Notes  (rounded  down  to  the  nearest  whole  dollar)  and  a  company  order  to  authenticate  and  deliver  such  new  Global
Notes).
Any  Additional  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  shall,  after  being  executed  and  authenticated  pursuant  to  the  2019
Convertible Notes Indenture, be (i) if such Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes are Certificated Notes, mailed to the
Person entitled thereto as shown on the register maintained by the Note Registrar for the Certificated Notes as of the
relevant record date or (ii) if such Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes are Global Notes, deposited into the account
specified by the Holder or Holders thereof as of the relevant record date. Alternatively, in connection with any payment of
interest, Comstock may direct the paying agent to make appropriate amendments to the schedule of principal amounts of
the relevant Global Notes outstanding for which Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes will be issued and arrange for
deposit into the account specified by the Holder or Holders thereof as of the relevant record date. All Additional New 2019
Convertible Notes issued pursuant to an interest payment as described above will mature on April 1, 2019 and will be
governed by, and subject to the terms, provisions and conditions of, the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture. The Additional
New 2019 Convertible Notes shall have the same rights and benefits as the New 2019 Convertible Notes issued on the
Issue Date, and shall be treated together with the New 2019 Convertible Notes as a single class for all purposes under the
2019 Convertible Notes Indenture.
Payment shall be made in such form and terms as specified in the preceding two paragraphs and Comstock shall and the
paying agent may take additional steps as is necessary to effect such payment. Comstock may not issue Additional New
2019 Convertible Notes in lieu of paying interest in cash if such interest is payable with respect to any principal amount
that is due and payable pursuant to the terms hereof, including upon redemption or repurchase. Payment of accrued and
unpaid  interest  on  the  Old  2019  Notes  will  be  made  in  cash  on  the  date  on  which  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation is completed.
If an interest payment date falls on a day that is not a business day, the interest payment to be made on such interest
payment  date  will  be  made  on  the  next  succeeding  business  day  with  the  same  force  and  effect  as  if  made  on  such
interest payment date, and no additional interest will accrue as a result of such delayed payment.
Principal of, and premium, if any, on the New 2019 Convertible Notes will be payable at the office or agency of Comstock in
New  York  City  maintained  for  such  purpose,  and  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  may  be  surrendered  for  transfer  or
exchange  at  the  corporate  trust  office  of  the  2019  Convertible  Notes  Trustee.  No  service  charge  will  be  made  for  any
transfer,  exchange  or  redemption  of  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes,  but  Comstock  may  require  payment  of  a  sum
sufficient  to  cover  any  tax  or  other  governmental  charge  that  may  be  payable  in  connection  therewith.  The  New  2019
Convertible Notes will be issued only in registered form, without coupons, in denominations of integral multiples of $1.00.
Table of Contents
200
The  obligations  of  Comstock  under  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  will  be  jointly  and  severally  guaranteed  by  the
Subsidiary Guarantors. See “—Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees of New Convertible Notes.”
The New 2020 Convertible Notes
Up  to  $174,607,000  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  in
connection with this Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation. Except for the issuance of Additional New 2020 Convertible
Notes in connection with the payment of interest, the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture will provide that Comstock may
not issue more than $174,607,000 aggregate principal amount of New 2020 Convertible Notes. The New 2020 Convertible
Notes will mature on June 15, 2020.
Interest on the New 2020 Convertible Notes will accrue at the rate of 9 1⁄2% per annum and will be payable in kind semi-
annually  in  arrears  on  June  15  and  December  15,  commencing  on  December  15,  2016.  Interest  on  the  New  2020
Convertible Notes will accrue from the most recent interest date to which interest has been paid in kind by the issuance of
Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes or, if no interest has been paid in kind, from date of original issuance. Comstock
will  make  each  interest  payment  to  Persons  whose  name  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  are  registered  in  the  note
register at the close of business on the immediately preceding June 1 and December 1. Interest will be computed on the
basis of a 360-day year comprised of twelve 30-day months.
Interest  on  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  payable  by  issuing  additional  securities  (the  “Additional  New  2020
Convertible Notes”) in an amount equal to the applicable amount of interest for the interest period (rounded down to the
nearest whole dollar). Not later than ten business days prior to the relevant interest payment date, Comstock shall deliver
to the 2020 Convertible Notes Trustee and the paying agent (if other than the 2020 Convertible Notes Trustee), (i) with
respect to New 2020 Convertible Notes represented by Certificated Notes, the required amount of Additional New 2020
Convertible Notes represented by Certificated Notes (rounded down to the nearest whole dollar) and a company order to
authenticate and deliver such Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes or (ii) with respect to New 2020 Convertible Notes
represented by one or more Global Notes, a company order to increase the outstanding principal amount of such Global
Notes by the required amount (rounded down to the nearest whole dollar) (or, if necessary, pursuant to the requirements
of the depositary or otherwise, the required amount of Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes Note represented by Global
Notes  (rounded  down  to  the  nearest  whole  dollar)  and  a  company  order  to  authenticate  and  deliver  such  new  Global
Notes). All Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes issued pursuant to an interest payment as described above will mature
on June 15, 2020 and will be governed by, and subject to the terms, provisions and conditions of, the 2020 Convertible
Notes Indenture. The Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes shall have the same rights and benefits as the New 2020
Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date, and shall be treated together with the New 2020 Convertible Notes as a single
class for all purposes under the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture.
Any  Additional  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  shall,  after  being  executed  and  authenticated  pursuant  to  the  2020
Convertible Notes Indenture, be (i) if such Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes are Certificated Notes, mailed to the
Person entitled thereto as shown on the register maintained by the Note Registrar for the Certificated Notes as of the
relevant record date or (ii) if such Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes are Global Notes, deposited into the account
specified by the Holder or Holders thereof as of the relevant record date. Alternatively, in connection with any payment of
interest, Comstock may direct the paying agent to make appropriate amendments to the schedule of principal amounts of
the relevant Global Notes outstanding for which Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes will be issued and arrange for
deposit into the account specified by the Holder or Holders thereof as of the relevant record date.
Payment shall be made in such form and terms as specified in preceding two paragraphs and Comstock shall and the
paying agent may take additional steps as is necessary to effect such payment. Comstock may not issue Additional New
2020 Convertible Notes in lieu of paying interest in cash if such interest is payable with respect to any principal amount
that is due and payable pursuant to the terms hereof, including upon redemption or repurchase. Payment of accrued and
unpaid  interest  on  the  Old  2020  Notes  will  be  made  in  cash  on  the  date  on  which  the  Exchange  Offer  and  Consent
Solicitation is completed
Table of Contents
201
If an interest payment date falls on a day that is not a business day, the interest payment to be made on such interest
payment  date  will  be  made  on  the  next  succeeding  business  day  with  the  same  force  and  effect  as  if  made  on  such
interest payment date, and no additional interest will accrue as a result of such delayed payment.
Principal of, and premium, if any, on the New 2020 Convertible Notes will be payable at the office or agency of Comstock in
New  York  City  maintained  for  such  purpose,  and  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  may  be  surrendered  for  transfer  or
exchange  at  the  corporate  trust  office  of  the  2020  Convertible  Notes  Trustee.  No  service  charge  will  be  made  for  any
transfer,  exchange  or  redemption  of  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes,  but  Comstock  may  require  payment  of  a  sum
sufficient  to  cover  any  tax  or  other  governmental  charge  that  may  be  payable  in  connection  therewith.  The  New  2020
Convertible Notes will be issued only in registered form, without coupons, in denominations of integral multiples of $1.00.
The  obligations  of  Comstock  under  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  will  be  jointly  and  severally  guaranteed  by  the
Subsidiary Guarantors. See “—Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees of New Convertible Notes.”
Redemption
Optional Redemption of the New 2019 Convertible Notes
The New 2019 Convertible Notes will be redeemable, at our option, in whole or in part, at any time, upon not less than 30 or
more than 60 days’ notice, at the redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth below, plus
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption (subject to the right of Holders of record of the New 2019
Convertible Notes on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the
date of redemption), if redeemed during the 12-month period beginning on April 1 of the years indicated below (or the
Issue Date for New Convertible Notes redeemed prior to April 1, 2017):
Year
2016
2017 and thereafter
Redemption
Price
101.938% 
    100.000%
For the avoidance of doubt, any redemption pursuant to the provisions under “—Optional Redemption of the New 2019
Convertible Notes” shall be paid in cash.
In the event that less than all of the New 2019 Convertible Notes are to be redeemed, the particular New 2019 Convertible
Notes to be redeemed shall be selected not less than 30 nor more than 60 days prior to the date of redemption by the 2019
Convertible Notes Trustee, from the outstanding notes not previously called for redemption, pro rata, by lot or by any
other method the 2019 Convertible Notes Trustee shall deem fair and appropriate (or in the case of New 2019 Convertible
Notes in global form, the 2019 Convertible Notes Trustee will select the New 2019 Convertible Notes for redemption based
on DTC’s method that most nearly approximates a pro rata selection).
Offers to Purchase the New 2019 Convertible Notes
As described below, (i) upon the occurrence of a Change of Control, we will be obligated to make an offer to purchase all
of  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  at  a  purchase  price  equal  to  101%  of  the  principal  amount  thereof,  together  with
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of purchase and (ii) upon certain sales or other dispositions of assets,
Comstock may be obligated to make offers to purchase the New 2019 Convertible Notes with a portion of the Net Available
Cash of such sales or other dispositions at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, together with
accrued  and  unpaid  interest,  if  any,  to  the  date  of  purchase.  See  “—Certain  Covenants—Change  of  Control”  and  “—
Limitation on Asset Sales.” For the avoidance of doubt, offers to purchase as set forth in clauses (i) and (ii) above shall
only be made in cash.
Table of Contents
202
Optional Redemption of the New 2020 Convertible Notes
The New 2020 Convertible Notes will be redeemable, at our option, in whole or in part, at any time, upon not less than 30 or
more than 60 days’ notice, at the redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth below, plus
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption (subject to the right of Holders of record of the New 2020
Convertible Notes on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the
date of redemption), if redeemed during the 12-month period beginning on June 15 of the years indicated below (or the
Issue Date for New Convertible Notes redeemed prior to June 15, 2017):
Redemption
Year
2016
2017
2018 and thereafter
Redemption
Price
104.750% 
    102.375% 
    100.000%
For the avoidance of doubt, any redemption pursuant to the provisions under “—Optional Redemption of the New 2020
Convertible Notes” shall be paid in cash.
In the event that less than all of the New 2020 Convertible Notes are to be redeemed, the particular New 2020 Convertible
Notes to be redeemed shall be selected not less than 30 nor more than 60 days prior to the date of redemption by the 2020
Convertible Notes Trustee, from the outstanding notes not previously called for redemption, pro rata, by lot or by any
other method the 2020 Convertible Notes Trustee shall deem fair and appropriate (or in the case of New 2020 Convertible
Notes in global form, the 2020 Convertible Notes Trustee will select the New 2020 Convertible Notes for redemption based
on DTC’s method that most nearly approximates a pro rata selection).
Offers to Purchase the New 2020 Convertible Notes
As described below, (i) upon the occurrence of a Change of Control, we will be obligated to make an offer to purchase all
of  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  at  a  purchase  price  equal  to  101%  of  the  principal  amount  thereof,  together  with
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of purchase and (ii) upon certain sales or other dispositions of assets,
Comstock may be obligated to make offers to purchase the New 2020 Convertible Notes with a portion of the Net Available
Cash of such sales or other dispositions at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, together with
accrued  and  unpaid  interest,  if  any,  to  the  date  of  purchase.  See  “—Certain  Covenants—Change  of  Control”  and  “—
Limitation on Asset Sales.” For the avoidance of doubt, offers to purchase as set forth in clauses (i) and (ii) above shall
only be made in cash.
Sinking Fund
There will be no sinking fund payments for the New Convertible Notes.
Ranking
The New Convertible Notes
The New Convertible Notes will be:
•
•
•
Table of Contents
•
•
senior obligations of Comstock;
equal in right of payment to all existing and future senior Indebtedness of Comstock;
secured, on a second priority basis, subject to the Priority Liens securing the Priority Lien Obligations and the
Permitted Collateral Liens, by Junior Liens on the same collateral that secures such Priority Lien Obligations
(other than Excluded Collateral);
203
senior in right of payment to all subordinated Indebtedness of Comstock;
effectively senior to all existing and future unsecured senior Indebtedness of Comstock, including Comstock’s
Old Unsecured Notes and Old Senior Secured  Notes  (which  will  become  unsecured  upon  completion  of  this
Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation), to the extent of the value of the Collateral;
•
effectively  subordinated,  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  to  all  Priority  Lien
•
•
effectively  subordinated,  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  to  all  Priority  Lien
Obligations, including Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement and the New Senior Secured Notes,
to the extent of the value of the Collateral;
structurally  subordinated  to  the  Indebtedness  and  other  liabilities  of  Subsidiaries  of  Comstock  that  do  not
guarantee the New Convertible Notes; and
unconditionally guaranteed by the Subsidiary Guarantors.
The Guarantees
Initially, the New Convertible Notes will be guaranteed by all of our current Subsidiaries. Each Subsidiary Guarantee will
be:
•
•
•
•
•
•
a senior obligation of the Subsidiary Guarantor;
equal in right of payment to all existing and future senior Indebtedness of that Subsidiary Guarantor;
secured,  on  a  second  priority  basis,  subject  to  the  Priority  Liens  securing  the  Priority  Lien  Obligations  and
Permitted Collateral Liens, by Junior Liens on the same collateral that secures such Priority Lien Obligations
(other than Excluded Collateral);
senior in right of payment to all subordinated Indebtedness of that Subsidiary Guarantor;
effectively senior to all existing and future unsecured senior Indebtedness of the Subsidiary Guarantors, including
the Subsidiary Guarantor’s guarantees of Comstock’s Old Unsecured Notes and the Old Senior Secured Notes
(which  will  become  unsecured  upon  completion  of  the  Exchange  Offer),  to  the  extent  of  the  value  of  the
Collateral; and
effectively  subordinated,  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  to  all  Priority  Lien
Obligations, including Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement and the New Senior Secured Notes,
to the extent of the value of the Collateral.
As  of  the  date  of  each  of  the  Convertible  Notes  Indentures,  all  of  Comstock’s  Subsidiaries  will  be  “Restricted
Subsidiaries.” However, under the circumstances described below under the subheading “—Certain Covenants—Future
Designation  of  Restricted  and  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries,”  Comstock  will  be  permitted  to  designate  certain  of  its
Subsidiaries  as  “Unrestricted  Subsidiaries.”  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries  will  not  be  subject  to  many  of  the  restrictive
covenants in the Convertible Notes Indentures and will not guarantee the New Convertible Notes.
Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees of New Convertible Notes
Each  Subsidiary  Guarantor  will  unconditionally  guarantee,  jointly  and  severally,  to  each  Holder  and  each  Convertible
Notes Trustee, the full and prompt performance of Comstock’s obligations under the Convertible Notes Indentures and
the New Convertible Notes, including the payment of principal of, premium, if any, and
Table of Contents
204
interest on the New Convertible Notes pursuant to its Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee. The initial Subsidiary Guarantors
are currently all of Comstock’s subsidiaries. In addition to the initial Subsidiary Guarantors, Comstock is obligated under
the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture to cause each Restricted Subsidiary that guarantees the payment of, assumes
or in any other manner becomes liable (whether directly or indirectly) with respect to any Indebtedness of Comstock or
any  other  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  including,  without  limitation,  Indebtedness  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement,  to
execute  and  deliver  a  supplement  to  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  pursuant  to  which  such  Restricted
Subsidiary  will  guarantee  the  payment  of  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  on  the  same  terms  and
conditions as the Subsidiary Guarantees by the initial Subsidiary Guarantors. See “—Certain Covenants—Future Junior
Lien Subsidiary Guarantees.”
The obligations of each Subsidiary Guarantor will be limited to the maximum amount as will result in the obligations of
such  Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  its  Junior  Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantee  not  constituting  a  fraudulent  conveyance  or
fraudulent transfer under applicable law. Each Subsidiary Guarantor that makes a payment or distribution under a Junior
Lien Subsidiary Guarantee shall be entitled to a contribution from each other Subsidiary Guarantor in a pro rata amount
based on the Adjusted Net Assets of each Subsidiary Guarantor.
Each Subsidiary Guarantor may consolidate with or merge into or sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of its
properties  and  assets  to  Comstock  or  another  Subsidiary  Guarantor  without  limitation,  except  to  the  extent  any  such
transaction is subject to the “Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets” covenant of the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture. Each Subsidiary Guarantor may consolidate with or merge into or sell all or substantially all of its properties and
assets to a Person other than Comstock or another Subsidiary Guarantor (whether or not affiliated with the Subsidiary
Guarantor); provided  that  (i)  if  the  surviving  Person  is  not  the  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  the  surviving  Person  agrees  to
assume such Subsidiary Guarantor’s Subsidiary Guarantee and all its obligations pursuant to the applicable Convertible
Notes Indenture (except to the extent the following paragraph would result in the release of such Subsidiary Guarantee)
and  (ii)  such  transaction  does  not  (a)  violate  any  of  the  covenants  described  below  under  “—Certain  Covenants”  or
(b) result in a Default or Event of Default immediately thereafter that is continuing.
Upon  the  sale  or  other  disposition  (by  merger  or  otherwise)  of  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  (or  all  or  substantially  all  of  its
properties and assets) to a Person other than Comstock or another Subsidiary Guarantor and pursuant to a transaction
that is otherwise in compliance with the Indenture (including as described in the foregoing paragraph), such Subsidiary
Guarantor shall be deemed released from its Subsidiary Guarantee and the related obligations set forth in the applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture; provided, however, that any such release shall occur only to the extent that all obligations of
such Subsidiary Guarantor under all of its guarantees of, and under all of its pledges of assets or other security interests
which secure, other Indebtedness of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary shall also be released upon such sale or
other disposition.
In addition, in the event that any Subsidiary Guarantor ceases to guarantee payment of, or in any other manner to remain
liable (whether directly or indirectly) with respect to any and all other Indebtedness of Comstock or any other Restricted
Subsidiary  of  Comstock,  including,  without  limitation,  Indebtedness  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement,  such
Subsidiary  Guarantor  shall  also  be  released  from  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee  and  the  related  obligations  set  forth  in  the
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture for so long as it remains not liable with respect to all such other Indebtedness.
Each Subsidiary Guarantor that is designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in accordance with the applicable Convertible
Notes  Indenture  shall  be  released  from  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee  and  related  obligations  set  forth  in  such  Convertible
Notes Indenture for so long as it remains an Unrestricted Subsidiary.
Security for the New Convertible Notes
The Convertible Note Obligations will be secured by second-priority perfected Liens in the same Collateral granted to the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the Priority Lien Obligations.
Table of Contents
205
The  Collateral  will  consist  of  at  least  80%  of  the  present  value  of  the  Collateral  Grantors’  Oil  and  Gas  Properties  that
constitute Proved Reserves and substantially all other assets of the Collateral Grantors. The Convertible Notes Indentures
will provide for a 60-day period following the Issue Date for Comstock to deliver the Junior Lien Mortgages establishing
the second-priority perfected Liens on the Oil and Gas Properties owned by the Collateral Grantors on the Issue Date that
are required to become Mortgaged Properties. Prior to the recording of the Junior Lien Mortgages, the New Convertible
Notes and the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees will not be secured by Liens on such Oil and Gas Properties. Except as
otherwise  provided  in  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  the  Convertible  Notes  Indentures  will  provide  that  the
Collateral  shall  include  (x)  prior  to  a  default  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (or  any  agreements  refinancing,
replacing,  refunding  or  restating  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  date  of  the  Convertible  Notes
Indenture) or, if no Revolving Credit Agreement is then in effect, a default under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, at
least 80% of the present value of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and Gas Properties that constitute Proved Reserves evaluated
in  the  most  recently  completed  Engineering  Report  delivered  pursuant  to  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (or  any
agreements refinancing, replacing, refunding or restating the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the date of the
applicable Indenture) and (y) after the occurrence of a default under the Revolving Credit Agreement or, if no Revolving
Credit Agreement is then in effect, a default under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, at least 95% of the present value of
the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and Gas Properties.
If no such Engineering Report is delivered pursuant to the Revolving Credit Agreement (or any agreements refinancing,
replacing, refunding or restating the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the date of the applicable Convertible
Notes Indentures), Comstock shall deliver to the Priority Collateral Agent semi-annually on or before April 1 and October 1
in each calendar year an officers’ certificate certifying that as of the date of such certificate, (i) no Default has occurred and
is continuing and (ii) the Mortgaged Properties include at least 80% of the present value of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and
Gas  Properties  that  constitute  Proved  Reserves.  In  the  event  that  the  Mortgaged  Properties  do  not  meet  such  80%
requirement, then the Collateral Grantors will be required to grant to the Junior Lien Collateral Agent as security for the
Convertible Note Obligations a second-priority Lien on additional Oil and Gas Properties not already subject to a Lien
such  that  after  giving  effect  thereto,  the  Mortgaged  Properties  will  represent  at  least  80%  of  the  present  value  of  the
Collateral Grantors’ Oil and Gas Properties that constitute Proved Reserves. To the extent that any Oil and Gas Properties
constituting Collateral are disposed of after the date of any applicable Engineering Report or certificate delivered pursuant
to this paragraph, any Proved Reserves attributable to such Oil and Gas Properties shall be deemed excluded from such
Engineering Report or certificate for the purpose of determining whether such minimum Junior Lien Mortgage requirement
is met after giving effect to such release.
No Collateral Grantor will be permitted to enter into any agreement that requires the proceeds received from any sale of
Collateral to be applied to repay, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire any Indebtedness of any Person, other
than the New Convertible Notes or otherwise as may be permitted or required by the Convertible Notes Indenture, the
Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  the  Collateral  Trust  Agreement  and  the  other  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements,
including  with  respect  to  any  Priority  Liens  and  Permitted  Collateral  Liens; provided  that  subject  to  the  covenant  “—
Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock,” any such agreement may be entered into
to the extent that it permits such proceeds to be applied to all Priority Lien Obligations prior to or instead of such other
Indebtedness.
Junior Lien Collateral Agent
On the Issue Date, Comstock and the Subsidiary Guarantors will enter into a collateral trust agreement (the “Collateral
Trust  Agreement”)  with  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  Convertible  Notes  Trustees.  The  Collateral  Trust
Agreement  will  set  forth  the  terms  on  which  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  will  receive,  hold,  administer,  maintain,
enforce and distribute the proceeds of all Liens upon any property of any Collateral Grantor at any time held by it, in trust
for the benefit of the current and future holders of the Convertible Note Obligations.
Table of Contents
206
The  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  will  hold  (directly  or  through  co-trustees  or  agents),  and,  subject  to  the  terms  of  the
Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  will  be  entitled  to  enforce,  all  Liens  on  the  Collateral  created  by  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agreements.
Except as provided in the Collateral Trust Agreement or as directed by an Act of Junior Lien Debtholders in accordance
with the Collateral Trust Agreement, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent will not be obligated:
(1) to act upon directions purported to be delivered to it by any Person;
(2) to foreclose upon or otherwise enforce any Junior Lien; or
(3) to take any other action whatsoever with regard to any or all of the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements, the Liens created
thereby or the Collateral.
Comstock will deliver to each Convertible Notes Trustee copies of all Junior Lien Collateral Agreements delivered to the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent.
The  Collateral  Trust  Agreement  and/or  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  will  provide  that  the  Convertible  Notes
Trustees and each holder of Convertible Note Obligations will waive any claim that may be had against the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent, any of its officers, directors, employees and agents, as the case may be, arising out of any actions which
the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  takes  or  omits  to  take  (including  actions  with  respect  to  the  creation,  perfection  or
continuation of Junior Liens on any Collateral, actions with respect to the foreclosure upon, sale, release or depreciation
of, or failure to realize upon, any Collateral, and actions with respect to the collection of any claim for all or any part of the
Convertible Note Obligations from any account debtor, guarantor or any other party) in accordance with the Collateral
Trust Agreement, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements or the valuation, use,
protection or release of any security for such Convertible Note Obligations.
The  Collateral  Trust  Agreement  and/or  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  will  additionally  provide  that,  without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent:
(1) shall not be subject to any fiduciary or other implied duties of any kind or nature to any Person, regardless of whether
an  event  of  default  under  any  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  or  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreement  has  occurred  and  is
continuing;
(2) shall not have any duty to take any discretionary action or exercise any discretionary powers, except discretionary
rights and powers expressly contemplated thereby or by the other Junior Lien Collateral Agreements; provided that the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent shall not be required to take any action that, in its opinion or the opinion of its counsel, may
expose it to liability or that is contrary to any Convertible Note Document or applicable law;
(3) shall not, except as expressly set forth therein and in the Convertible Note Documents, have any duty to disclose, and
shall  not  be  liable  for  the  failure  to  disclose,  any  information  relating  to  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Affiliates  that  is
communicated  to  or  obtained  by  the  Person  serving  as  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  any  of  its  Affiliates  in  any
capacity;
(4) shall not be liable for any action taken or not taken by it (A) with the consent or at the request of an Act of Junior Lien
Debtholders or (B) in the absence of its own gross negligence or willful misconduct, which may include reliance in good
faith on a certificate of an authorized officer of Comstock stating that such action is permitted by the terms of the Collateral
Trust Agreement and/or the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, and shall be deemed not to have knowledge of any event
of default under any Convertible Note Document unless and until written notice describing such event of default is given
by Comstock to the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or by a Convertible Notes Trustee;
Table of Contents
207
(5) shall not be responsible for or have any duty to ascertain or inquire into (A) any statement, warranty or representation
made  in  or  in  connection  with  the  Collateral  Trust  Agreement,  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  or  any  other
Convertible  Note  Document,  (B)  the  contents  of  any  certificate,  report  or  other  document  delivered  thereunder  or  in
connection  therewith,  (C)  the  performance  or  observance  of  any  of  the  covenants,  agreements  or  other  terms  or
conditions  set  forth  therein  or  the  occurrence  of  any  event  of  default  or  other  default,  (D)  the  validity,  enforceability,
effectiveness  or  genuineness  of  the  Collateral  Trust  Agreement,  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  any  other
Convertible Note Document or any other agreement, instrument or document, or the creation, perfection or priority of any
Lien purported to be created by any Junior Lien Collateral Agreement, (E) the value or the sufficiency of the Collateral,
(F)  the  satisfaction  of  any  condition  set  forth  in  any  Convertible  Note  Document,  (G)  the  state  of  title  to  any  property
purportedly owned by Comstock or any other Person, or (H) the percentage or other measurement of Comstock or any
other Person’s property which is subject to any Lien or security interests, other than to confirm receipt of items expressly
required to be delivered to Junior Lien Collateral Agent;
(6) the Junior Lien Collateral Agent shall not have any fiduciary duties or contractual obligations of any kind or nature
under  any  Convertible  Note  Document  (but  shall  be  entitled  to  all  protection  provided  to  the  applicable  agent  in  the
Collateral Trust Agreement and the other Junior Lien Collateral Agreements);
(7)  with  respect  to  any  Convertible  Note  Document  may  conclusively  assume  that  Comstock  and  the  Subsidiary
Guarantors have complied with all of their obligations thereunder unless advised in writing by a Convertible Notes Trustee
to the contrary specifically setting forth the alleged violation;
(8) may conclusively rely on any certificate of an officer of Comstock provided pursuant to the Collateral Trust Agreement
and/or the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement;
(9) whenever reference is made in any Convertible Note Document to any action by, consent, designation, specification,
requirement  or  approval  of,  notice,  request  or  other  communication  from,  or  other  direction  given  or  action  to  be
undertaken or to be (or not to be) suffered or omitted by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or to any election, decision,
opinion, acceptance, use of judgment, expression of satisfaction or other exercise of discretion, rights or remedies to be
made (or not to be made) by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent, it is understood that in all cases the Junior Lien Collateral
Agent shall be acting, giving, withholding, suffering, omitting, making or otherwise undertaking and exercising the same
(or shall not be undertaking and exercising the same) solely as directed in writing in accordance with the Collateral Trust
Agreement and/or the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, as applicable; this provision is intended solely for the benefit
of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and its successors and permitted assigns and is not intended to and will not entitle the
other  parties  hereto  to  any  defense,  claim  or  counterclaim  under  or  in  relation  to  any  Convertible  Note  Document,  or
confer any rights or benefits on any party;
(10) notwithstanding any other provision of the Collateral Trust Agreement and/or the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement,
as applicable, or any other Convertible Note Document to the contrary, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent shall not be liable
for any indirect, incidental, consequential, punitive or special losses or damages, regardless of the form of action and
whether or not any such losses or damages were foreseeable or contemplated;
(11) the Junior Lien Collateral Agent shall not be required to expand or risk any of its own funds or otherwise incur any
financial or other liability in the performance of any of its duties under the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, and shall
not be obligated to take any legal or other action hereunder, which might in its judgment involve or cause it to incur any
expense or liability, unless it shall have been furnished with acceptable indemnification; and
Table of Contents
208
(12) may (and any of its Affiliates may) accept deposits from, lend money to, act as the financial advisor or in any other
advisory  capacity  for  and  generally  engage  in  any  kind  of  business  with  any  of  Comstock  or  any  other  Subsidiary
Guarantor or any Subsidiary or Affiliate thereof as if such Person were not the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and without
any duty to any other holder of Convertible Note Obligations, including any duty to account therefor.
The Collateral Trust Agreement and/or the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that the Company
and the Subsidiary Guarantors agree that they shall defend and be jointly and severally liable to reimburse and indemnify
the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  for  reasonable  expenses  actually  incurred  by  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  in
connection with the execution, delivery, administration and enforcement of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and
from and against any and all liabilities, obligations, losses, damages, penalties, actions, judgments, suits, costs, actual
reasonable  expenses  or  disbursements  of  any  kind  and  nature  whatsoever  that  may  be  imposed  on,  incurred  by  or
asserted  against  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent,  in  any  way  relating  to  or  arising  out  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement  or  any  other  document  delivered  in  connection  therewith  or  the  transactions  contemplated  thereby,  or  the
enforcement  of  any  of  the  terms  thereof,  in  each  case,  except  to  the  extent  caused  by  its  gross  negligence  or  willful
misconduct.
The Collateral Trust Agreement and/or the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that each holder of
the Convertible Note Obligations (i) acknowledge that, in addition to acting as the initial Junior Lien Collateral Agent, and
the initial Priority Lien Collateral Agent, Bank of Montreal also serves as the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and that
Bank of Montreal or on or more of its Affiliates may have jointly arranged, syndicated, placed or otherwise participated in
the facilities and indebtedness contemplated by the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Convertible Note Obligations,
and (ii) waive any right to make any objection or claim against Bank of Montreal, and of its Affiliates or its counsel (or any
successor Priority Lien Collateral Agent or Junior Lien Collateral Agent or its counsel) based on any alleged conflict of
interest or breach of duties arising from the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or Priority Lien Collateral Agent, and the Bank of
Montreal or its Affiliates, also serving in such other capacities.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement
On the Issue Date, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent will enter into the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement with the Priority
Lien Collateral Agent, to provide for, among other things, the junior nature of the Junior Liens with respect to Priority
Liens.  Although  the  Holders  of  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  will  not  be  parties  to  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement, by their acceptance of such New Convertible Notes, they will agree to be bound thereby. The
Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will permit the Priority Lien Obligations and the Convertible Note Obligations to be
refunded,  refinanced  or  replaced  by  certain  permitted  refinancing  indebtedness  without  affecting  the  lien  priorities  set
forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, in each case without the consent of any holder of Priority Lien Obligations
or Convertible Note Obligations (including Holders of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes).
Lien Priorities
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that, notwithstanding:
(1) anything to the contrary contained in any of the Convertible Note Documents;
(2) how a Lien was acquired (whether by grant, possession, statute, operation of law, subrogation, or otherwise);
(3) the time, manner, order of the grant attachment or perfection of a Lien;
(4) any conflicting provision of the New York Uniform Commercial Code or other applicable law;
Table of Contents
209
(5)  any  defect  in,  or  non-perfection,  setting  aside,  or  avoidance  of,  a  Junior  Lien  or  a  Priority  Lien  Document  or  a
Convertible Note Document;
(6) the modification of a Priority Lien Obligation or a Convertible Note Obligation; or
(7) the subordination of a Lien on Collateral securing a Priority Lien Obligation to a Lien securing another obligation of
Comstock or other Person that is permitted under the Priority Lien Documents as in effect on the Issue Date or securing a
DIP  Financing  or  the  subordination  of  a  Lien  on  Collateral  securing  a  Convertible  Note  Obligation  to  a  Lien  securing
another  obligation  of  Comstock  or  other  Persons  (other  than  a  Priority  Lien  Obligation)  that  is  permitted  under  the
Convertible Note Documents as in effect on the Issue Date;
all Junior Liens at any time granted by any Collateral Grantor will be subject and subordinate to all Priority Liens securing
Priority Lien Obligations, subject to the Priority Lien Cap.
The provisions described under “—Lien Priorities” are intended for the benefit of, and will be enforceable as a third party
beneficiary  by,  each  present  and  future  holder  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations,  and  each  present  and  future  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent as holder of Priority Liens. No other Person will be entitled to rely on, have the benefit of or enforce those
provisions.
In addition, the provisions under “—Lien Priorities” are intended solely to set forth the relative ranking, as Liens, of the
Liens  securing  the  Convertible  Note  Obligations  as  against  the  Priority  Liens,  and  the  Liens  securing  Priority  Lien
Obligations as against the Junior Liens.
Limitation on Enforcement of Remedies
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that, except as provided below, prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien
Obligations, none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations may commence any
judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure proceedings with respect to, seek to have a trustee, receiver, liquidator or similar official
appointed for or over, attempt any action to take possession of, exercise any right, remedy or power with respect to, or
otherwise take any action to enforce its interest in or realize upon, or take any other action available to it in respect of, the
Collateral under any Convertible Note Document, applicable law or otherwise (including but not limited to right of set off).
Only the Priority Lien Collateral Agent will be entitled to take any such actions or exercise any such remedies with respect
to the Collateral prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations. The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide
that, notwithstanding the foregoing, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent may, but will have no obligation to, on behalf of the
holders of Convertible Note Obligations, take all such actions (not adverse to the Priority Liens or the rights of the Priority
Lien Collateral Agent and holders of the Priority Lien Obligations) it deems necessary to perfect or continue the perfection
of their Junior Liens in the Collateral or to create, preserve or protect (but not enforce) the Junior Liens in the Collateral.
Nothing shall limit the right or ability of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or the holders of Convertible Note Obligations to
(i) purchase (by credit bid or otherwise) all or any portion of the Collateral in connection with any enforcement of remedies
by  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  so  long  as  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  the  Priority  Lien
Obligations receive payment in full in cash of all Priority Lien Obligations after giving effect thereto or (ii) file a proof of
claim with respect to the Convertible Note Obligations. Until the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, the Priority Lien
Collateral Agent will have the exclusive right to deal with that portion of the Collateral consisting of deposit accounts and
securities  accounts,  including  exercising  rights  under  control  agreements  with  respect  to  such  accounts.  In  addition,
whether  before  or  after  the  Discharge  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations,  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of
Convertible Note Obligations may take any actions and exercise any and all rights that would be available to a holder of
unsecured claims; provided that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and such holders of Convertible Note Obligations may
not take any of the actions described below under clauses (1) through (9) of the first paragraph under “—No Interference;
Payment Over,” as applicable, or prohibited by the provisions
Table of Contents
210
described  in  the  first  four  paragraphs  below  under  “—Agreements  With  Respect  to  Insolvency  or  Liquidation
Proceedings,”  as  applicable; provided, further,  that  in  the  event  that  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  any  holder  of
Convertible Note Obligations becomes a judgment lien creditor in respect of any Collateral as a result of its enforcement of
its rights as an unsecured creditor with respect to the Convertible Note Obligations, such judgment lien shall be subject to
the terms of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement for all purposes (including in relation to the Priority Lien Obligations),
as the other liens securing the Convertible Note Obligations, are subject to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, both before and during an Insolvency or
Liquidation Proceeding, after a period of 180 days has elapsed (which period will be tolled during any period in which the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent is not entitled, on behalf of holders of Priority Lien Obligations, to enforce or exercise any
rights or remedies with respect to any Collateral as a result of (x) any injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction
or (y) the automatic stay or any other stay in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding) since the date on which the Junior
Lien Collateral Agent has delivered to the Priority Lien Collateral Agent written notice of the acceleration of either series of
New Convertible Notes (the “Accelerated Series of New Convertible Notes” and such period, the “Junior Lien Standstill
Period”), the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations in respect of the Accelerated
Series of New Convertible Notes may enforce or exercise any rights or remedies with respect to any Collateral; provided
that notwithstanding the expiration of the Junior Lien Standstill Period, in no event may the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or
any other holder of Convertible Note Obligations enforce or exercise any rights or remedies with respect to any Collateral,
or commence, join with any Person at any time in commencing, or petition for or vote in favor of any resolution for, any
such action or proceeding, if the Priority Lien Collateral Agent on behalf of the holders of Priority Lien Obligations or any
other holder of Priority Lien Obligations shall have commenced, and shall be diligently pursuing (or shall have sought or
requested  relief  from,  or  modification  of,  the  automatic  stay  or  any  other  stay  or  prohibition  in  any  Insolvency  or
Liquidation Proceeding to enable the commencement and pursuit thereof), the enforcement or exercise of any rights or
remedies with respect to any material portion of the Collateral or any such action or proceeding (prompt written notice
thereof to be given to the Junior Lien Collateral Agent by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent); provided, further, that at any
time after the expiration of the Junior Lien Standstill Period, if neither the Priority Lien Collateral Agent nor any holder of
Priority Lien Obligations shall have commenced and be diligently pursuing (or shall have sought or requested relief from,
or modification of, the automatic stay or any other stay or other prohibition in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding to
enable the commencement and pursuit thereof) the enforcement or exercise of any rights or remedies with respect to any
material  portion  of  the  Collateral  or  any  such  action  or  proceeding,  and  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  shall  have
commenced the enforcement or exercise of any rights or remedies with respect to any material portion of the Collateral or
any such action or proceeding, then for so long as the Junior Lien Collateral Agent is diligently pursuing such rights or
remedies, neither of any holder of Priority Lien Obligations nor the Priority Lien Collateral Agent shall take any action of a
similar nature with respect to such Collateral, or commence, join with any Person at any time in commencing, or petition
for or vote in favor of any resolution for, any such action or proceeding.
Priority Lien Collateral Agent
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that neither the Priority Lien Collateral Agent nor any holder of any
Priority  Lien  Obligations  will  have  any  duties  or  other  obligations  to  any  holder  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  with
respect  to  the  Collateral,  other  than  to  transfer  to  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  any  remaining  Collateral  and  the
proceeds of the sale or other disposition of any Collateral remaining in its possession following the Discharge of Priority
Lien Obligations, in each case, without representation or warranty on the part of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any
holder of Priority Lien Obligations.
In addition, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will further provide that, until the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations
(but  subject  to  the  rights  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  and  the
following expiration of any of the Junior Lien Standstill Period, as provided in the paragraph
Table of Contents
211
defining “Junior Lien Standstill Period”), the Priority Lien Collateral Agent will be entitled, for the benefit of the holders of
the  Priority  Lien  Obligations,  to  sell,  transfer  or  otherwise  dispose  of  or  deal  with  the  Collateral  without  regard  to  any
Junior Lien therein granted to the holders of Convertible Note Obligations or any rights to which the Junior Priority Lien
Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations would otherwise be entitled as a result of such Junior Lien.
Without limiting the foregoing, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that neither the Priority Lien Collateral
Agent nor any holder of any Priority Lien Obligations will have any duty or obligation first to marshal or realize upon the
Collateral,  or  to  sell,  dispose  of  or  otherwise  liquidate  all  or  any  portion  of  the  Collateral,  in  any  manner  that  would
maximize the return to the holders of Convertible Note Obligations, notwithstanding that the order and timing of any such
realization,  sale,  disposition  or  liquidation  may  affect  the  amount  of  proceeds  actually  received  by  the  holders  of
Convertible Note Obligations, from such realization, sale, disposition or liquidation.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of
Convertible Note Obligations will waive any claim that may be had against the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, any of its
officers, directors, employees and agents, as the case may be, or any holder of any Priority Lien Obligations, or any of its
officers, directors, employees and agents, as the case may be, arising out of any actions which the Priority Lien Collateral
Agent or such holder of Priority Lien Obligations takes or omits to take (including actions with respect to the creation,
perfection  or  continuation  of  Liens  on  any  Collateral,  actions  with  respect  to  the  foreclosure  upon,  sale,  release  or
depreciation of, or failure to realize upon, any Collateral, and actions with respect to the collection of any claim for all or
any part of the Priority Lien Obligations from any account debtor, Collateral Grantor or any other party) in accordance with
the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and the Priority Lien Documents or the valuation, use, protection or release of any
security for such Priority Lien Obligations.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent:
(i) shall not be subject to any fiduciary or other implied duties of any kind or nature to any Person, regardless of whether
an event of default under any Secured Debt Document has occured and is continuing;
(ii) shall not have any duty to take any discretionary action or exercise any discretionary powers, except discretionary
rights  and  powers  expressly  contemplated  hereby  or  by  the  other  Security  Documents; provided  that  the  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent shall not be required to take any action that, in its opinion or the opinion of its counsel, may expose it to
liability or that is contrary to any Priority Lien Document or applicable law;
(iii) shall not, except as expressly set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and in the Priority Lien Documents,
have any duty to disclose, and shall not be liable for the failure to disclose, any information relating to Comstock or any of
its Affiliates that is communicated to or obtained by the Person serving as the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any of its
Affiliates in any capacity;
(iv) shall not be liable for any action taken or not taken by it (A) with the consent or at the request of the Controlling Party
(as  defined  in  the  Priority  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement)  or  (B)  in  the  absence  of  its  own  gross  negligence  or  willful
misconduct, which may include reliance in good faith on a certificate of an authorized officer of Comstock stating that
such  action  is  permitted  by  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement;  and  shall  be  deemed  not  to  have
knowledge of any event of default under any series of Secured Debt unless and until written notice describing such event
of default is given by Comstock to the Priority Lien Collateral Agent by the Authorized Representative of such Secured
Debt;
(v) shall not be responsible for or have any duty to ascertain or inquire into (A) any statement, warranty or representation
made in or in connection with the Junior Lien Intercreditor
Table of Contents
212
Agreement, any Priority Lien Document or any Convertible Note Document, (B) the contents of any certificate, report or
other  document  delivered  hereunder  or  thereunder  or  in  connection  herewith  or  therewith,  (C)  the  performance  or
observance of any of the covenants, agreements or other terms or conditions set forth herein or therein or the occurrence
of any event of default or other default, (D) the validity, enforceability, effectiveness or genuineness of the Junior Lien
Intercreditor Agreement, the Collateral Trust Agreement any Priority Lien Document, any Convertible Note Document or
any other agreement, instrument or document, or the creation, perfection or priority of any Lien purported to be created by
any  Priority  Lien  Document  or  Convertible  Note  Document,  (E)  the  value  or  the  sufficiency  of  the  Collateral,  (F)  the
satisfaction of any condition set forth in any Priority Lien Document or Convertible Note Document, (G) the state of title to
any  property  purportedly  owned  by  Comstock  or  any  other  Person,  or  (H)  the  percentage  or  other  measurement  of
Comstock’s or any other Person’s property which is subject to any Lien or security interests, other than to confirm receipt
of items expressly required to be delivered to Priority Lien Collateral Agent;
(vi) the Priority Lien Collateral Agent shall not have any fiduciary duties or contractual obligations of any kind or nature
under any Priority Lien Document or Convertible Note Document (but shall be entitled to all protection provided to the
Priority Lien Agent herein);
(vii) with respect to any Priority Lien Document or Convertible Note Document may conclusively assume that the Collateral
Grantors have complied with all of their obligations thereunder unless advised in writing by the Authorized Representative
thereunder to the contrary specifically setting forth the alleged violation;
(viii) may conclusively rely on any certificate of an officer of Comstock provided pursuant to the Junior Lien Intercreditor
Agreement;
(ix) whenever reference is made in any Priority Lien Document or Convertible Note Document to any action by, consent,
designation,  specification,  requirement  or  approval  of,  notice,  request  or  other  communication  from,  or  other  direction
given or action to be undertaken or to be (or not to be) suffered or omitted by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or to any
election, decision, opinion, acceptance, use of judgment, expression of satisfaction or other exercise of discretion, rights
or remedies to be made (or not to be made) by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, it is understood that in all cases the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent shall be acting, giving, withholding, suffering, omitting, making or otherwise undertaking and
exercising the same (or shall not be undertaking and exercising the same) solely as directed in writing in accordance with
the  Priority  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement;  this  provision  is  intended  solely  for  the  benefit  of  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral
Agent and its successors and permitted assigns and is not intended to and will not entitle the other parties hereto to any
defense, claim or counterclaim under or in relation to any Priority Lien Document or Convertible Note Document, or confer
any rights or benefits on any party;
(x) notwithstanding any other provision of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement the Collateral Trust Agreement, any
Priority Lien Document or any Convertible Document to the contrary, the Priority Lien Collateral Agent shall not be liable
for any indirect, incidental, consequential, punitive or special losses or damages, regardless of the form of action and
whether or not any such losses or damages were foreseeable or contemplated;
(xi) the Priority Lien Collateral Agent shall not be required to expand or risk any of its own funds or otherwise incur any
financial or other liability in the performance of any of its duties under the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, and shall
not be obligated to take any legal or other action thereunder, which might in its judgment involve or cause it to incur any
expense or liability, unless it shall have been furnished with acceptable indemnification; and
Table of Contents
213
(xii) may (and any of its Affiliates may) accept deposits from, lend money to, act as the financial advisor or in any other
advisory capacity for and generally engage in any kind of business with any of Comstock or any other Collateral Grantor
or any Subsidiary or Affiliate thereof as if such Person were not the Priority Lien Collateral Agent and without any duty to
any other holder of the Priority Lien Obligations or Convertible Note Obligations, including any duty to account therefor.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that the Collateral Grantors agree that they shall defend
and be jointly and severally liable to reimburse and indemnify the Priority Lien Collateral Agent for reasonable expenses
actually  incurred  by  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  in  connection  with  the  execution,  delivery,  administration  and
enforcement of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and from and against any and all liabilities, obligations, losses,
damages,  penalties,  actions,  judgments,  suits,  costs,  actual  reasonable  expenses  or  disbursements  of  any  kind  and
nature whatsoever that may be imposed on, incurred by or asserted against the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, in any way
relating  to  or  arising  out  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  or  any  other  document  delivered  in  connection
therewith or the transactions contemplated thereby, or the enforcement of any of the terms thereof, in each case, except to
the extent caused by its gross negligence or willful misconduct.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that each holder of the Priority Lien Obligations and the
Convertible Note Obligations (i) acknowledge that, in addition to acting as the initial Priority Lien Collateral Agent, and the
initial Junior Lien Collateral Agent, Bank of Montreal also serves as the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and that Bank
of Montreal or on or more of its Affiliates may have jointly arranged, syndicated, placed or otherwise participated in the
facilities and indebtedness contemplated by the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Convertible Note Documents, and
(ii) waive any right to make any objection or claim against Bank of Montreal, and of its Affiliates or its counsel (or any
successor Priority Lien Collateral Agent or Junior Lien Collateral Agent or its counsel) based on any alleged conflict of
interest or breach of duties arising from the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or Junior Lien Collateral Agent, and the initial
Bank of Montreal or its Affiliates also serving in such other capacities.
No Interference; Payment Over
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of Convertible
Note Obligations:
(1) will not take or cause to be taken any action the purpose or effect of which is, or could be, to make any Lien that the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent or the holders of Convertible Note Obligations have on the Collateral pari passu with, or to
give the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations any preference or priority relative to,
any Lien that the Priority Lien Collateral Agent holds on behalf of the holders of any Priority Lien Obligations secured by
any Collateral or any part thereof;
(2) will not challenge or question in any proceeding the validity or enforceability of any Priority Lien Obligations or Priority
Lien Documents or the validity, attachment, perfection or priority of any Lien held by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent on
behalf  of  the  holders  of  any  Priority  Lien  Obligations,  or  the  validity  or  enforceability  of  the  priorities,  rights  or  duties
established by the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement;
(3) will not take or cause to be taken any action the purpose or effect of which is, or could be, to interfere, hinder or delay,
in any manner, whether by judicial proceedings or otherwise, any sale, transfer or other disposition of the Collateral by the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent or the holders of any Priority Lien Obligations in an enforcement action;
Table of Contents
214
(4) will have no right to (A) direct the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of any Priority Lien Obligations to exercise
any  right,  remedy  or  power  with  respect  to  any  Collateral  or  (B)  consent  to  the  exercise  by  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral
Agent or any holder of any Priority Lien Obligations of any right, remedy or power with respect to any Collateral;
(5) will not institute any suit or assert in any suit or in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding, any claim against the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of any Priority Lien Obligations seeking damages from or other relief by way of
specific  performance,  instructions  or  otherwise  with  respect  to,  and  neither  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  nor  any
holders  of  any  Priority  Lien  Obligations  will  be  liable  for,  any  action  taken  or  omitted  to  be  taken  by  the  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent or such holders of Priority Lien Obligations with respect to any Collateral securing such Priority Lien
Obligations;
(6) prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, will not seek, and will waive any right, to have any Collateral or any
part thereof marshaled upon any foreclosure or other disposition of such Collateral;
(7) prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, will not attempt, directly or indirectly, whether by judicial proceedings
or otherwise, to challenge the enforceability of any provision of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement;
(8) will not object to forbearance by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Priority Lien Obligations; and
(9) prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, will not assert, and thereby waive, to the fullest extent permitted by
law, any right to demand, request, plead or otherwise assert or claim the benefit of any marshalling, appraisal, valuation or
other similar right that may be available under applicable law with respect to the Collateral or any similar rights a junior
secured creditor may have under applicable law.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that if the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and any holder of Convertible
Note Obligations obtains possession of any Collateral or realizes any proceeds or payment in respect of any Collateral,
pursuant to the exercise of any rights or remedies with respect to any of the Collateral under any Security Document, or by
the exercise of any rights available to it under applicable law or in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding at any time
prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, then it will hold such Collateral, proceeds or payment in trust for the
Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  and  transfer  such  Collateral,  proceeds  or
payment, as the case may be, to the Priority Lien Collateral Agent as promptly as practicable. Each of the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations will further agree that if, at any time, any of them obtains
written  notice  that  all  or  part  of  any  payment  with  respect  to  any  Priority  Lien  Obligations  previously  made  shall  be
rescinded  for  any  reason  whatsoever,  they  will  promptly  pay  over  to  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  any  payment
received by them and then in their possession or under their direct control in respect of any such Collateral subject to a
Priority Lien and shall promptly turn any such Collateral then held by them over to the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, and
the provisions set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will be reinstated as if such payment had not been
made, until the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations. All Junior Liens will remain attached to and enforceable against all
proceeds so held or remitted, subject to the priorities set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement. The Junior Lien
Intercreditor  Agreement  will  provide  that  the  provisions  described  in  this  paragraph  will  not  apply  to  any  proceeds  of
Collateral  realized  in  a  transaction  not  prohibited  by  the  Priority  Lien  Documents  and  as  to  which  the  possession  or
receipt thereof by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations is otherwise permitted by
the Priority Lien Documents.
Table of Contents
Automatic Release of Junior Liens
215
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that, prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, the Junior
Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of Convertible Note Obligations will agree that, if the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or
the holders of Priority Lien Obligations release their Lien on any Collateral, the Junior Lien on such Collateral will terminate
and  be  released  automatically  and  without  further  action  if  (i)  such  release  is  permitted  under  the  Convertible  Note
Documents  (it  being  agreed  that  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  may  conclusively  rely  upon  a  written  request  of
Comstock stating that the release of such Lien is permitted under the Convertible Note Documents), (ii) such release is
effected in connection with the Priority Lien Collateral Agent’s foreclosure upon, or other exercise of rights or remedies
with  respect  to,  such  Collateral,  or  (iii)  such  release  is  effected  in  connection  with  a  sale  or  other  disposition  of  any
Collateral (or any portion thereof) under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code or any other provision of the Bankruptcy
Code if the Priority Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Priority Lien Obligations shall have consented to such sale or
disposition of such Collateral; provided that in the case of each of clauses (i), (ii), and (iii), (A) the net proceeds of such
Collateral are applied pursuant to the provisions described in “—Application of Proceeds” and (B) the Junior Liens on
such Collateral securing the Convertible Note Obligations shall remain in place (and shall remain subject and subordinate
to all Priority Liens securing Priority Lien Obligations, subject to the Priority Lien Cap) with respect to any proceeds of a
sale, transfer or other disposition of Collateral not paid to the holders of Priority Lien Obligations or that remain after the
Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations.
Agreements With Respect to Insolvency or Liquidation Proceedings
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement is a “subordination agreement” under Section 510(a) of the Bankruptcy Code. If
either  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  becomes  subject  to  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding  and,  as
debtor(s)-in-possession, or if any receiver or trustee for such Person or Persons, moves for approval of financing (“DIP
Financing”) to be provided by one or more lenders (the “DIP Lenders”) under Section 364 of the Bankruptcy Code or the
use of cash collateral under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that
none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and any holder of Convertible Note Obligations will raise any objection, contest or
oppose (or join or support any third party in objecting, contesting or opposing), and will waive any claim such Person may
now or hereafter have, to any such financing or to the Liens on the Collateral securing the same (“DIP Financing Liens”),
or to any use, sale or lease of cash collateral that constitutes Collateral or to any grant of administrative expense priority
under Section 364 of the Bankruptcy Code, unless (1) the Priority Lien Collateral Agent opposes or objects to such DIP
Financing, such DIP Financing Liens or such use of cash collateral or (2) the terms of such DIP Financing provide for the
sale of a substantial part of the Collateral (other than a sale or disposition pursuant to Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code
with  respect  to  which  the  holders  of  the  Convertible  Note  Obligations  are  deemed  to  have  consented  pursuant  to  the
provisions  described  in  “—Agreements  With  Respect  to  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceedings”)  or  require  the
confirmation of a plan of reorganization containing specific terms or provisions (other than repayment in cash of such DIP
Financing on the effective date thereof). To the extent such DIP Financing Liens are senior to, or rank pari passu with, the
Liens on Collateral securing Priority Lien Obligations, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent will, for themselves and on behalf of
holders of the Convertible Note Obligations, subordinate the Junior Liens on the Collateral that secure the Convertible
Note Obligations to the Liens on the Collateral that secure Priority Lien Obligations and to such DIP Financing Liens, so
long as the Junior Lien Collateral Agent, on behalf of holders of the Convertible Note Obligations, retains Junior Liens on
all  the  Collateral,  including  proceeds  thereof  arising  after  the  commencement  of  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation
Proceeding, with the same priority relative to the Liens on the Collateral as existed prior to the commencement of the case
under the Bankruptcy Code. Furthermore, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that prior to the Discharge
of Priority Lien Obligations, without the written consent of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent in its sole discretion, none of
the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and any holder of Convertible Note Obligations will propose, support or enter into any DIP
Financing.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of Convertible
Note Obligations will be deemed to have consented to and will not object to, oppose or contest (or
Table of Contents
216
join with or support any third party objecting to, opposing or contesting) a sale or other disposition, a motion to sell or
dispose or the bidding procedure for such sale or disposition of any Collateral (or any portion thereof) under Section 363
of  the  Bankruptcy  Code  or  any  other  provision  of  the  Bankruptcy  Code  if  (1)  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  the
requisite holders of Priority Lien Obligations shall have consented to such sale or disposition of such Collateral, (2) all
Priority  Liens  on  the  Collateral  securing  the  Priority  Lien  Obligations  and  Junior  Liens  on  the  Collateral  securing  the
Convertible Note Obligations, shall attach to the proceeds of such sale in the same respective priorities as set forth in the
Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  with  respect  to  the  Collateral,  (3)  the  waterfall  described  in  “—Application  of
Proceeds” is complied with in connection with such credit bid and (4) each of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the
holders of Convertible Note Obligations shall have the right to credit bid all or any portion of the Collateral so long as the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of the Priority Lien Obligations receive payment in full in cash of all Priority
Lien Obligations after giving effect thereto. The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will further provide that the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations will waive any claim that may be had against the Priority
Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Priority Lien Obligations arising out of any DIP Financing Liens (granted in a manner
that is consistent with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement) or administrative expense priority under Section 364 of the
Bankruptcy Code. The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will further provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and
the  holders  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  will  not  file  or  prosecute  in  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding  any
motion for adequate protection (or any comparable request for relief) based upon their interest in the Collateral, and will
not  object  to,  oppose  or  contest  (or  join  with  or  support  any  third  party  objecting  to,  opposing  or  contesting)  (a)  any
request by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Priority Lien Obligations for adequate protection or (b) any
objection by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Priority Lien Obligations to any motion, relief, action or
proceeding  based  on  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  any  holder  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  claiming  a  lack  of
adequate protection, except that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations:
(1) may freely seek and obtain relief granting adequate protection only in the form of a replacement lien co-extensive in all
respects  with,  but  subordinated  to,  and  with  the  same  relative  priority  to  the  Priority  Liens  as  existed  prior  to  the
commencement  of  the  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding,  all  Liens  granted  in  the  Insolvency  or  Liquidation
Proceeding to, or for the benefit of, the holders of the Priority Lien Obligations; and
(2) may freely seek and obtain any relief upon a motion for adequate protection (or any comparable relief), without any
condition or restriction whatsoever, at any time after the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations.
In any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding, none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and any holder of Convertible Note
Obligations  shall  support  or  vote  for  any  plan  of  reorganization  or  disclosure  statement  of  Comstock  or  any  other
Collateral Grantor unless such plan is accepted by the class of holders of the Priority Lien Obligations in accordance with
Section 1126(c) of the Bankruptcy Code or otherwise provides for the payment in full in cash of all Priority Lien Obligations
(including all post-petition interest approved by the bankruptcy court, fees and expenses and cash collateral of all letters
of  credit)  on  the  effective  date  of  such  plan  of  reorganization  or  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement, the holders of the Convertible Note Obligations shall remain entitled to vote their claims in any
such Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will additionally provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each holder of
Convertible Note Obligations will waive any claim that may be had against the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder
of any Priority Lien Obligations arising out of any election by the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Priority
Lien  Obligations  in  any  proceeding  instituted  under  the  Bankruptcy  Code,  of  the  application  of  Section  1111(b)  of  the
Bankruptcy Code.
Until the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations has occurred, none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of
Convertible Note Obligations shall seek relief, pursuant to Section 362(d) of the Bankruptcy Code or
Table of Contents
217
otherwise, from the automatic stay of Section 362(a) of the Bankruptcy Code or from any other stay in any Insolvency or
Liquidation  Proceeding  in  respect  of  the  Collateral  if  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  has  not  received  relief  from  the
automatic stay (or it has not been lifted for the Priority Lien Collateral Agent’s benefit), without the prior written consent of
the Priority Lien Collateral Agent.
Neither the Junior Lien Collateral Agent nor any holder of Convertible Note Obligations shall oppose or seek to challenge
any  claim  by  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  any  other  holder  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  for  allowance  (but  not
payment until the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations has occurred) in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding of
Priority  Lien  Obligations  consisting  of  post-petition  interest,  fees  or  expenses  to  the  extent  of  the  value  of  the  Priority
Liens (it being understood that such value will be determined without regard to the existence of the Junior Liens). Neither
the Priority Lien Collateral Agent nor any holder of Priority Lien Obligations shall oppose or seek to challenge any claim by
the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations for allowance (but not payment until the
Discharge  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  has  occurred)  in  any  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding  of  Convertible  Note
Obligations  consisting  of  post-petition  interest,  fees  or  expenses  to  the  extent  of  the  value  of  the  Junior  Liens,  as
applicable, on the Collateral; provided that if the Priority Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Priority Lien Obligations
shall have made any such claim, such claim (i) shall have been approved or (ii) will be approved contemporaneously with
the approval of any such claim by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations.
Without the express written consent of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, none of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any
holder  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  shall  (or  shall  join  with  or  support  any  third  party  in  opposing,  objecting  to  or
contesting, as the case may be), in any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding involving any Collateral Grantor, (i) oppose,
object to or contest the determination of the extent of any Liens held by any of holder of Priority Lien Obligations or the
value of any claims of any such holder under Section 506(a) of the Bankruptcy Code or (ii) oppose, object to or contest the
payment to the holder of Priority Lien Obligations of interest, fees or expenses, or to the cash collateralization of letters of
credit, under Section 506(b) of the Bankruptcy Code.
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  if  in  any  Insolvency  or
Liquidation  Proceeding  a  determination  is  made  that  any  Lien  encumbering  any  Collateral  is  not  enforceable  for  any
reason, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations agree that any distribution or
recovery they may receive in respect of any Collateral shall be segregated and held in trust and forthwith paid over to the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of Priority Lien Obligations in the same form as received without
recourse,  representation  or  warranty  (other  than  a  representation  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  that  it  has  not
otherwise sold, assigned, transferred or pledged any right, title or interest in and to such distribution or recovery) but with
any  necessary  endorsements  or  as  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  may  otherwise  direct.  The  Junior  Lien  Collateral
Agent appoints the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, and any officer or agent of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, with full
power of substitution, the attorney-in-fact of each the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note
Obligations  for  the  limited  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  provisions  related  to  this  paragraph  and  taking  any  action  and
executing  any  instrument  that  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  may  deem  necessary  or  advisable  to  accomplish  the
purposes of this paragraph, which appointment is irrevocable and coupled with an interest.
The Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations will agree that the Priority Lien Collateral
Agent shall have the exclusive right to credit bid the Priority Lien Obligations and further that none of the Junior Lien
Collateral  Agent  or  any  holder  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  shall  (or  shall  join  with  or  support  any  third  party  in
opposing, objecting to or contesting, as the case may be) oppose, object to or contest such credit bid by the Priority Lien
Collateral Agent; provided that (A) the waterfall described in “—Application of Proceeds” is complied with in connection
with such credit bid and (B) each of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations shall
have the right to credit bid all or any portion of the Collateral so long as the Priority Lien Collateral Agent and the holders
of the Priority Lien Obligations receive payment in full in cash of all Priority Lien Obligations after giving effect thereto.
Table of Contents
218
Until the expiry of the Junior Lien Standstill Period, in the case of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of
Convertible Note Obligations, without the prior written consent of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent in its sole discretion,
the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  agrees  it  will  not  file  an  involuntary  bankruptcy  claim  or  seek  the  appointment  of  an
examiner or a trustee.
The  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  waives  any  right  to  assert  or  enforce  any  claim  under  Section  506(c)  or  552  of  the
Bankruptcy  Code  as  against  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent,  the  holders  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  or  any  of  the
Collateral.
Notice Requirements and Procedural Provisions
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will also provide for various advance notice requirements and other procedural
provisions  typical  for  agreements  of  this  type,  including  procedural  provisions  to  allow  any  successor  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent to become a party to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement (without the consent of any holder of Priority
Lien Obligations or Convertible Note Obligations) upon the refinancing or replacement of the Priority Lien Obligations or
Convertible  Note  Obligations  as  permitted  by  the  applicable  Priority  Lien  Documents  and  the  Convertible  Note
Documents.
No New Liens; Similar Documents
So long as the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations has not occurred, neither Comstock nor any of its Subsidiaries shall
grant or permit any additional Liens, or take any action to perfect any additional Liens, on any property to secure:
(1) any Convertible Note Obligation unless it has also granted or substantially contemporaneously grants (or offers to
grant) a Lien on such property to secure the Priority Lien Obligations and has taken all actions required to perfect such
Liens; provided that the refusal or inability of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent to accept such Lien will not prevent the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent from taking the Lien; or
(2) any Priority Lien Obligation unless it has also granted or substantially contemporaneously grants (or offers to grant) a
Lien on such property to secure the Convertible Note Obligations and has taken all actions required to perfect such Liens;
provided that the refusal, inability or delay of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent to accept such Lien will not prevent the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent from taking the Lien,
with each such Lien to be subject to the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will include an acknowledgement that it is the intention of the parties to the Junior
Lien Intercreditor Agreement that the Collateral subject to a Priority Lien and the Collateral subject to a Junior Lien be
identical; provided that in no event shall any Collateral include any Priority Lien Excluded Collateral. To the extent that the
foregoing provisions are not complied with for any reason, without limiting any other rights and remedies available to the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent and/or the other holders of Priority Lien Obligations, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or the
holders of Convertible Note Obligations, each of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the holders of the Convertible Note
Obligations  will  agree  that  any  amounts  received  by  or  distributed  to  any  of  them  pursuant  to  or  as  a  result  of  Liens
granted in contravention of this paragraph shall be subject to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement. The Junior Lien
Intercreditor Agreement shall also provide for further undertakings by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and the Priority
Lien Collateral Agent and agreements that all Security Documents providing for the Junior Liens shall be in all material
respects  the  same  forms  of  documents  providing  for  the  Priority  Liens  other  than  as  to  the  priority  nature,  other
modifications that make the Security Documents with respect to the Junior Liens less restrictive than the corresponding
documents with respect to the Priority Liens, provisions in the Security Documents for the Junior Liens which relate solely
Table of Contents
219
to  rights  and  duties  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  the  Convertible  Note  Obligations  and  such
deletions  or  modifications  of  representations,  warranties  and  covenants  as  are  customary  with  respect  to  security
documents establishing Liens securing publicly traded debt securities.
Insurance
Unless  and  until  the  Discharge  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  has  occurred  (but  subject  to  the  rights  of  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agent and the holders of Convertible Note Obligations following expiration of any of the Junior Lien Standstill
Period as provided in the paragraph defining “Junior Lien Standstill Period”), the Priority Lien Collateral Agent shall have
the sole and exclusive right, subject to the rights of the obligors under the Priority Lien Documents, to adjust and settle
claims in respect of Collateral under any insurance policy in the event of any loss thereunder and to approve any award
granted in any condemnation or similar proceeding (or any deed in lieu of condemnation) affecting the Collateral. Unless
and  until  the  Discharge  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  has  occurred,  and  subject  to  the  rights  of  the  obligors  under  the
Priority Lien Documents, all proceeds of any such policy and any such award (or any payments with respect to a deed in
lieu of condemnation) in respect of the Collateral shall be paid to the Priority Lien Collateral Agent pursuant to the terms of
the  Priority  Lien  Documents  (including  for  purposes  of  cash  collateralization  of  letters  of  credit).  If  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral  Agent  or  any  holder  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  shall,  at  any  time,  receive  any  proceeds  of  any  such
insurance policy or any such award or payment in contravention of the foregoing, it shall pay such proceeds over to the
Priority Lien Collateral Agent in accordance with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement. In addition, if by virtue of being
named as an additional insured or loss payee of any insurance policy of any obligor covering any of the Collateral, the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations shall have the right to adjust or settle any claim
under any such insurance policy, then unless and until the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations has occurred, the Junior
Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  any  holder  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  shall  follow  the  instructions  of  the  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent, or of the obligors under the Priority Lien Documents to the extent the Priority Lien Documents grant such
obligors the right to adjust or settle such claims, with respect to such adjustment or settlement (subject to the rights of the
holders  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations  following  expiration  of  the  Junior  Lien  Standstill  Period,  the  Junior  Lien  First
Standstill Period.
Amendment to Convertible Note Documents
Prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, without the prior written consent of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, no
Convertible Note Document may be amended, supplemented, restated or otherwise modified and/or refinanced or entered
into to the extent such amendment, supplement, restatement or modification and/or refinancing, or the terms of any new
Convertible Note Document, would (i) adversely affect the lien priority rights of the Priority Lien Collateral Agent and the
holders  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations  or  the  rights  of  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  the  holders  of  Priority  Lien
Obligations to receive payments owing pursuant to the Priority Lien Documents, (ii) except as otherwise provided for in
the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  add  any  Liens  securing  the  Collateral  granted  under  the  Convertible  Note
Documents,  (iii)  confer  any  additional  rights  on  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  any  holder  of  Convertible  Note
Obligations  in  a  manner  adverse  to  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  the  holders  of  Priority  Lien  Obligations,
(iv) contravene the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the Priority Lien Documents or (v) modify any
Convertible Note Document in any manner that would not have been permitted under the Priority Lien Documents to have
been included in such Convertible Note Document if such Convertible Note Document, was entered into as of the date of
such amendment, supplement, restatement or modification.
Application of Proceeds
Prior to the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, and regardless of whether an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding has
been  commenced,  Collateral  or  proceeds  received  in  connection  with  the  enforcement  or  exercise  of  any  rights  or
remedies with respect to any portion of the Collateral will be applied:
first,  to  the  payment  in  full  in  cash  of  all  Priority  Lien  Obligations  that  are  not  Excess  Priority  Lien  Obligations  in
accordance with the Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement,
Table of Contents
220
second, to the payment in full in cash of all Convertible Note Obligations as follows:
(x) first, to the payment in full in cash of all unpaid fees, expenses, reimbursements and indemnification amounts incurred
by  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  and  all  fees  owed  to  it  in  connection  with  such  collection  or  sale  or  otherwise  in
connection with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the Convertible Note Documents; and
(y)  second,  to  the  payment  in  full  in  cash  of  the  Convertible  Note  Obligations  in  accordance  with  the  Collateral  Trust
Agreement,  including  any  interest,  fees,  costs,  expenses,  charges  or  other  amounts,  pro  rata  in  accordance  with  the
relative amounts thereof on the date of any payment or distribution;
third, to the payment in full in cash of all Excess Priority Lien Obligations, and
fourth, to Comstock or as otherwise required by applicable law.
Postponement of Subrogation
The  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  will  provide  that  no  payment  or  distribution  to  any  holder  of  Priority  Lien
Obligations  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  shall  entitle  the  Junior  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent or any holder of Convertible Note Obligations to exercise any rights of subrogation in respect thereof
until,  in  the  case  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  the  holders  of  Convertible  Note  Obligations,  the  Discharge  of
Priority Lien Obligations. Following the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations, each holder of Priority Lien Obligations will
execute such documents, agreements, and instruments as any holder of Convertible Note Obligations may reasonably
request to evidence the transfer by subrogation to any such Person of an interest in the Priority Lien Obligations resulting
from  payments  or  distributions  to  such  holder  by  such  Person,  so  long  as  all  costs  and  expenses  (including  all
reasonable legal fees and disbursements) incurred in connection therewith by such holder of Priority Lien Obligations are
paid by such Person upon request for payment thereof.
Collateral Trust Agreement
Enforcement of Liens
If the Junior Lien Collateral Agent at any time receives written notice from any Convertible Notes Trustee stating that any
event has occurred that constitutes a default under any Convertible Note Document entitling the Junior Lien Collateral
Agent  to  foreclose  upon,  collect  or  otherwise  enforce  its  Liens  under  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements,  it  will
promptly deliver written notice thereof to the other Convertible Notes Trustee. Thereafter, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent
may  await  direction  by  an  Act  of  Junior  Lien  Debtholders  and,  subject  to  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement, will act, or decline to act, as directed by an Act of Junior Lien Debtholders, in the exercise and enforcement of
the Junior Lien Collateral Agent’s interests, rights, powers and remedies in respect of the Collateral or under the Junior
Lien Collateral Agreements or applicable law and, following the initiation of such exercise of remedies, the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent will act, or decline to act, with respect to the manner of such exercise of remedies as directed by an Act of
Junior Lien Debtholders. Unless it has been directed to the contrary by an Act of Junior Lien Debtholders, the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent in any event may (but will not be obligated to) take or refrain from taking such action with respect to any
default under any Convertible Note Document as it may deem advisable and in the interest of the holders of Convertible
Note Obligations.
Order of Application
The Collateral Trust Agreement will provide that if any Collateral is sold or otherwise realized upon by the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent in connection with any foreclosure, collection or other enforcement of Liens granted
Table of Contents
221
to  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  in  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements,  subject  to  the  terms  of  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement, the proceeds received by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent from such foreclosure, collection or
other enforcement and the proceeds of any title or other insurance policy received by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent in
connection with the exercise of remedies will be distributed by the Junior Lien Collateral Agent in the following order of
application:
First, to the payment of all amounts payable under the Collateral Trust Agreement on account of the Junior Lien Collateral
Agent’s fees and any reasonable legal fees, costs and expenses or other liabilities of any kind incurred by the Junior Lien
Collateral  Agent  or  any  co-trustee  or  agent  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  in  connection  with  any  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agreement (including, but not limited to, indemnification obligations);
Second, to the respective Convertible Notes Trustees equally and ratably for application to the payment of all outstanding
Convertible  Note  Obligations  that  are  then  due  and  payable  in  such  order  as  may  be  provided  in  the  applicable
Convertible Note Documents in an amount sufficient to pay in full in cash all outstanding Convertible Note Obligations that
are then due and payable (including, to the extent legally permitted, all interest accrued thereon after the commencement
of any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding at the rate specified in the Convertible Note Documents, even if such interest
is not enforceable, allowable or allowed as a claim in such proceeding but excluding contingent indemnity obligations for
which no claim has been made);
Third, any surplus remaining after the payment in full in cash of the amounts described in the preceding clauses will be
paid to the applicable Collateral Grantor, its successors or assigns, or as a court of competent jurisdiction may direct.
The  provisions  set  forth  above  under  this  caption  “—Order  of  Application”  are  intended  for  the  benefit  of,  and  will  be
enforceable as a third party beneficiary by, each present and future holder of Convertible Note Obligations, each present
and future Convertible Notes Trustee and the Junior Lien Collateral Agent as holder of Junior Liens.
Release of Junior Liens Securing New Convertible Notes
The Collateral Trust Agreement will provide that the Junior Lien Collateral Agent’s Liens on the Collateral will be released:
(1) in whole, upon the full and final payment in cash and performance of all Convertible Note Obligations of the Company
and the Subsidiary Guarantors;
(2) with respect to any asset constituting Collateral, if such Collateral is sold or otherwise disposed of to a Person that is
not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary in accordance with the
terms  of  the  covenant  set  forth  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Asset  Sales”  (other  than  the  provisions
thereof  relating  to  the  future  use  of  proceeds  of  such  sale  or  other  disposition); provided  that  to  the  extent  that  any
Collateral  is  sold  or  otherwise  disposed  of  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  covenant  set  forth  under  “—Certain
Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sale”, the non-cash consideration received is pledged as Collateral under the Junior Lien
Collateral  Agreements  contemporaneously  with  such  sale,  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  set  forth  in  the
Convertible Notes Indentures and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements; provided, further, that the Liens securing the
Convertible  Note  Obligations  will  not  be  released  if  the  sale  or  disposition  is  subject  to  the  covenant  described  below
under the caption “—Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets”;
(3) in whole, upon Legal Defeasance, Covenant Defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of the New Convertible Notes as
provided below under “—Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance of
Table of Contents
222
Convertible  Notes  Indenture”  and  “—Satisfaction  and  Discharge”; provided that  if  such  legal  defeasance,  covenant
defeasance or satisfaction and discharge only applies to one series of the New Convertible Notes, such release shall only
apply to that series;
(4) if any Subsidiary Guarantor is released from its Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee in accordance with the terms of each
Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  that  Subsidiary  Guarantor’s  assets  and  property  included  in  the  Collateral  will  also  be
released from the Junior Liens securing the Convertible Note Obligations;
(5)  with  the  requisite  consent  of  Holders  of  New  Convertible  Notes  given  in  accordance  with  each  Convertible  Notes
Indenture;
(6)  as  provided  in  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  or  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements,  including  as
described under the caption “—The Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement—Automatic Release of Junior Liens”; or
(7) upon the conversion of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes in accordance with “—Conversion Rights.”
In  each  such  case,  upon  request  of  the  Company,  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  will  execute  (with  such
acknowledgements and/or notarizations as are required) and deliver evidence of such release to Comstock provided, that
to the extent the Company requests the Junior Lien Collateral Agent to deliver evidence of the release of Collateral in
accordance with this paragraph, the Comstock will deliver to the Junior Lien Collateral Agent an officers’ certificate to the
effect that such release of Collateral pursuant to the provisions described in this paragraph did not violate the terms of
any applicable Convertible Note Document.
The Junior Lien Collateral Agreements will provide that the Liens securing the Convertible Note Obligations will extend to
the proceeds of any sale of Collateral. As a result, subject to the provisions of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent’s Liens will apply to the proceeds of any such Collateral received in connection with any sale
or other disposition of Collateral.
Amendment of Junior Lien Collateral Agreements
The  Collateral  Trust  Agreement  will  provide  that,  except  as  provided  in  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  no
amendment or supplement to the provisions of any Junior Lien Collateral Agreement that secures the Convertible Note
Obligations will be effective without the approval of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent acting as directed by an Act of Junior
Lien Debtholders, except that:
(1) any amendment or supplement that has the effect solely of:
(a) adding or maintaining Collateral, or preserving, perfecting or establishing the Junior Liens thereon or the rights of the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent therein; or
(b) providing for the assumption of a Collateral Grantor’s obligations under any Convertible Note Document in the case of
a merger or consolidation or sale of all or substantially all of the properties or assets of a Collateral Grantor to the extent
permitted by the terms of the Convertible Notes Indentures and the other Convertible Note Documents, as applicable,
will  become  effective  when  executed  and  delivered  by  the  Company  or  any  other  applicable  Collateral  Grantor  party
thereto and the Junior Lien Collateral Agent;
Table of Contents
223
(2) no amendment or supplement that reduces, impairs or adversely affects the right of any holder of Convertible Note
Obligations:
(a) to vote its outstanding Convertible Note Obligations as to any matter described as subject to an Act of Junior Lien
Debtholders  or  direction  by  the  Required  Junior  Lien  Debtholders  (or  amends  the  provisions  of  this  clause  (2)  or  the
definition of “Act of Junior Lien Debtholders” or “Required Junior Lien Debtholders”);
(b) to share in the order of application described above under “—Order of Application” in the proceeds of enforcement of
or realization on any Collateral; or
(c) to require that Liens securing Convertible Note Obligations be released only as set forth in the provisions described
above under the caption “—Release of Junior Liens Securing New Convertible Notes”,
will  become  effective  without  the  consent  of  Holders  of  New  Convertible  Notes  adversely  affected  thereby  under  the
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture; and
(3) no amendment or supplement that imposes any obligation upon the Junior Lien Collateral Agent or any Convertible
Notes  Trustee  or  adversely  affects  the  rights  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  any  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,
respectively, in its individual capacity as such will become effective without the consent of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent
or such Convertible Notes Trustee, respectively.
Any amendment or supplement to the provisions of the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements securing the Convertible Note
Obligations that releases Collateral will be effective only in accordance with the requirements set forth in the applicable
Convertible Note Document referenced above under the caption “—Release of Junior Liens Securing New Convertible
Notes.”
The Collateral Trust Agreement and the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement will provide that, notwithstanding anything to
the  contrary  under  this  section  “—Amendment  of  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements,”  but  subject  to  clauses  (2)  and
(3) above:
(1) any Junior Lien Collateral Agreement that secures Convertible Note Obligations may be amended or supplemented
with the approval of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent acting as directed in writing by the Required Junior Lien Debtholders,
unless such amendment or supplement would not be permitted under the terms of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement
or the Priority Lien Documents;
(2) any amendment or waiver of, or any consent under, any provision of any Priority Lien Collateral Agreement will apply
automatically to any comparable provision of any comparable Junior Lien Collateral Agreement without the consent of or
notice to any holder of Convertible Note Obligations and without any action by Comstock or any other Collateral Grantor,
or any Holder; and
(3) any Junior Lien Collateral Agreement, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and the Collateral Trust Agreement may
be amended or supplemented with the approval of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent (but without the consent of or notice to
any  Holder),  in  reliance  on  an  officer’s  certificate  and  an  opinion  of  counsel  (i)  to  cure  any  ambiguity,  defect  or
inconsistency, or (ii) solely with respect to a Junior Lien Collateral Agreement that secures Convertible Note Obligations,
to make other changes that do not have an adverse effect on the validity of the Lien created thereby.
Voting
In  connection  with  any  matter  under  the  Collateral  Trust  Agreement  requiring  a  vote  of  holders  of  Convertible  Note
Obligations, each series of New Convertible Notes will cast its votes in accordance with the Convertible
Table of Contents
224
Notes Indenture governing such series of New Convertible Notes. The amount of Convertible Note Obligations to be voted
by  a  series  of  Convertible  New  Notes  will  equal  the  aggregate  outstanding  principal  amount  of  Convertible  Note
Obligations  held  by  such  series  of  Convertible  New  Notes.  Following  and  in  accordance  with  the  outcome  of  the
applicable vote under its Convertible Notes Indenture, the Convertible Notes Trustee of each series of New Convertible
Notes will vote the total amount of Convertible Note Obligations under that series as a block in respect of any vote under
the Collateral Trust Agreement.
Provisions of the Indenture Relating to Security
Release of Liens Securing New Convertible Notes
Each Convertible Notes Indenture will provide that the Collateral Grantors will be entitled to releases of assets included in
the Collateral from the Liens securing the applicable Convertible Note Obligations under any one or more of the following
circumstances:
(1) upon the full and final payment in cash and performance of all related Convertible Note Obligations of Comstock and
the Subsidiary Guarantors;
(2) with respect to any asset constituting Collateral, if such Collateral is sold or otherwise disposed of to a Person that is
not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary in accordance with the
terms  of  the  covenant  set  forth  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Asset  Sales”  (other  than  the  provisions
thereof  relating  to  the  future  use  of  proceeds  of  such  sale  or  other  disposition); provided  that  to  the  extent  that  any
Collateral  is  sold  or  otherwise  disposed  of  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  covenant  set  forth  under  “—Certain
Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales”, the non-cash consideration received is pledged as Collateral under the Junior
Lien  Collateral  Agreements  contemporaneously  with  such  sale,  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  set  forth  in  the
Convertible  Notes  Indenture  and  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements; provided, further,  that  the  Liens  securing  the
applicable Convertible Note Obligations will not be released if the sale or disposition is subject to the covenant described
below under the caption “—Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets”;
(3)  upon  Legal  Defeasance,  Covenant  Defeasance  or  satisfaction  and  discharge  of  the  applicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes as provided below under the captions “—Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance of Convertible
Notes Indentures” and “—Satisfaction and Discharge”;
(4) if any Subsidiary Guarantor is released from its Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee in accordance with the terms of the
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, that Subsidiary Guarantor’s assets and property included in the Collateral will also
be released from the Liens securing the applicable Junior Lien Note Obligations;
(5)  with  the  requisite  consent  of  Holders  of  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  given  in  accordance  with  the
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture;
(6) as provided in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements; or
(7) upon the conversion of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes in accordance with “—Conversion Rights.”
No Impairment of the Security Interests
Under each Convertible Notes Indenture, no Collateral Grantor will be permitted to take any action, or knowingly omit to
take any action, which action or omission would have the result of materially impairing the
Table of Contents
225
validity, perfection or priority of the security interests in the Collateral created by the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements
(except  as  permitted  in  such  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  or  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agreements, including any action that would result in a Permitted Collateral Lien).
Further Assurances
Comstock shall, and shall cause each other Collateral Grantor to, at Comstock’s sole cost and expense:
(1) at the request of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent, acting at the direction of the applicable holders of the Junior Lien
Note  Obligations,  execute  and  deliver  all  such  agreements  and  instruments  and  take  all  further  action  as  may  be
reasonably necessary or desirable (a) to describe more fully or accurately the property intended to be Collateral or the
obligations intended to be secured by any Junior Lien Collateral Agreement and/or (b) to continue and maintain the Junior
Lien Collateral Agent’s second-priority perfected security interest in the Collateral (subject to the Priority Liens securing
the Priority Lien Obligations set forth in the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens);
and
(2) at the request of the Junior Collateral Agent, acting at the direction of the applicable holders of the Junior Lien Note
Obligations, file any such notice filings or other agreements or instruments as may be reasonably necessary or desirable
under applicable law to perfect the Liens created by the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
Additionally, if (a) a Collateral Grantor acquires any asset or property of a type that is required to constitute Collateral
pursuant to the terms of the Convertible Notes Indentures and such asset or property is not automatically subject to a
second-priority perfected Lien in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent, (b) a Subsidiary of Comstock that is not already
a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  required  to  become  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  pursuant  to  the  covenant  described  under  “—
Certain Covenants—Future Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees” or (c) any Collateral Grantor creates any additional Lien
upon any Oil and Gas Properties or any other assets or properties to secure any Priority Lien Obligations or Indebtedness
that ranks pari passu in right of security with the New Convertible Notes (or takes additional actions to perfect any existing
Lien on Collateral), then such Collateral Grantor or such other Subsidiary shall, as soon as practicable after the acquisition
of  the  applicable  asset  or  property,  the  occurrence  of  the  event  requiring  such  Subsidiary  to  become  a  Subsidiary
Guarantor or the creation of any such additional Lien or taking of any such additional perfection action (and, in any event,
within 10 Business Days after such acquisition, event or creation), (i) grant to the Junior Lien Collateral Agent a second-
priority perfected Lien in all assets and property of such Collateral Grantor or such other Subsidiary that are required to,
but do not already, constitute Collateral, (ii) deliver any certificates to the Junior Lien Collateral Agent in respect thereof
(subject to the terms of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement) and (iii) take all other appropriate actions as necessary to
ensure the Junior Lien Collateral Agent has a second-priority perfected Lien therein. All references to a “second-priority
perfected Lien” in this paragraph shall be understood to be subject to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and subject
to Permitted Collateral Liens, if any.
Authorization of Actions to Be Taken
Each Holder of the New Convertible Notes, by its acceptance thereof, will be deemed to have consented and agreed to the
terms of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and each other Junior Lien Collateral Agreement, as originally in effect
and as amended, restated, replaced, supplemented or modified from time to time in accordance with its terms or the terms
of  the  Convertible  Notes  Indentures  or  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  to  have  authorized  and  directed  the
applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustees  and  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  to  enter  into  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement  and  the  other  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements  to  which  they  are  a  party,  and  to  have  authorized  and
empowered the Junior Lien Collateral Agent to bind the Holders of the New Convertible Notes as set forth in the Junior
Intercreditor Agreement and the other
226
Table of Contents
Junior Lien Collateral Agreements to which they are a party and to perform its obligations and exercise its rights and
powers thereunder, including entering into amendments permitted by the terms of the Convertible Notes Indentures, the
Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the other Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
Conversion Rights
General
At any time following the receipt of the Required Stockholder Approval and the effectiveness of the Charter Amendment,
Holders of the New Convertible Notes may convert (the “Optional Conversion”) their outstanding New Convertible Notes
into the Common Stock, at a conversion rate (the “Conversion Rate”) of 81.2 shares per $1,000 principal amount of the
New Convertible Notes (equal to a conversion price of $12.32 per share of Common Stock). The conversion rate is subject
to adjustment as described below. Comstock will not issue fractional shares of Common Stock upon conversion of the
New Convertible Notes. Instead, Comstock will pay the cash value of such fractional shares based upon the sale price of
Comstock’s Common Stock on the business day immediately preceding the conversion date.
If a Holder exercises its right to require Comstock to repurchase the New Convertible Notes as described under “—Certain
Covenants—Change of Control” or “—Limitation on Asset Sales,” such Holder may convert its New Convertible Notes
into  Common  Stock  only  if  it  withdraws  its  change  of  control  repurchase  notice  or  asset  sale  repurchase  notice  and
converts  its  New  Convertible  Notes  prior  to  the  close  of  business  on  the  business  day  immediately  preceding  the
applicable repurchase date.
Following the receipt of the Required Stockholder Approval and the effectiveness of the Charter Amendment, Comstock
shall convert (the “Mandatory Conversion”) any outstanding New Convertible Notes into a number of shares of Common
Stock per $1,000 principal amount of New Convertible Notes equal to the Conversion Rate then in effect (plus cash in lieu
of fractional shares) if the Daily VWAP of the Common Stock exceeds or is equal to the Threshold Price in effect on each
applicable  Trading  Day  for  a  least  10  consecutive  Trading  Days  (the  “Mandatory  Conversion  Event”).  Upon  the
occurrence  of  the  Mandatory  Conversion  Event,  Comstock  shall  deliver  notice  to  the  Holders,  the  Convertible  Notes
Trustees and the conversion agent (if other than the Convertible Notes Trustees) not later than the open of business on
the  second  business  day  following  such  Mandatory  Conversion  Event,  which  notice  shall  specify  that  the  Mandatory
Conversion shall occur not later than the third business day following the notice of the Mandatory Conversion Event.
Interest shall cease to accrue on any New Convertible Notes on the date of occurrence of the Optional Conversion or the
Mandatory Conversion (such date, the “Conversion Date”).
Until the Required Stockholder Approval is obtained and the Charter Amendment becomes effective, the New Convertible
Notes will not be convertible into Common Stock. The failure to obtain the Required Stockholder Approval and have the
Charter Amendment will result in a default. See “—Events of Default.”
Conversion Procedures
In  connection  with  an  Optional  Conversion  or  Mandatory  Conversion,  Comstock  shall  deliver  to  the  Holder  of  the
applicable series of New Convertible Notes, through the conversion agent, a number of shares of Common Stock per
$1,000  of  principal  amount  of  New  Convertible  Notes  being  converted  equal  to  the  Conversion  Rate  in  effect  on  the
applicable Conversion Date (plus cash in lieu of fractional shares in accordance with the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture). Interest with respect to the New Convertible Notes converted will be payable on such interest payment date to
the applicable Holders in whose names the New Convertible Notes are registered at the close of business on the business
day immediately prior to the interest payment date. Settlement shall occur on the third business day immediately following
the applicable Conversion Date.
Table of Contents
227
Comstock  shall  pay  any  documentary,  stamp  or  similar  issue  or  transfer  tax  or  duty  due  on  the  issue,  if  any,  of  the
Common Stock upon the conversion of a New Convertible Note. However, such Holder shall pay any such tax or duty that
is due because such shares are issued in a name other than such Holder’s name. The conversion agent may refuse to
deliver  a  certificate  representing  the  Common  Stock  to  be  issued  in  a  name  other  than  such  Holder’s  name  until  the
conversion agent receives a sum sufficient to pay any tax or duty which will be due because such shares are to be issued
in a name other than such Holder’s name.
Adjustments to Conversion Rate
If  Comstock  issues  shares  of  Common  Stock  as  a  dividend  or  distribution  on  all  shares  of  the  Common  Stock,  or  if
Comstock effects a share split or share combination (including a “reverse split”), the Conversion Rate shall be adjusted
based on the following formula:
where,
CR’   =    CR0
x
OS’    
  OS0
CR’ =    the Conversion Rate in effect immediately after the close of business on the record date for such dividend or
distribution, or immediately after the open of business on the effective date of such share split or share combination, as
the case may be;
CR0 =    the Conversion Rate in effect immediately prior to the close of business on the record date for such dividend or
distribution, or immediately prior to open of business on the effective date of such share split or share combination, as the
case may be;
OS’ =    the number of shares of Common Stock outstanding immediately after such dividend or distribution, or such share
split or share combination, as the case may be; and
OS0 =    the number of shares of Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the close of business on the record date
for such dividend or distribution, or immediately prior to the open of business on the effective date of such share split or
share combination, as the case may be.
Any adjustment made to the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture shall become effective immediately after the close of
business on the record date for such dividend or distribution, or immediately after the open of business on the effective
date for such share split or share combination, as the case may be. If any dividend or distribution of the type described in
this  section  “—Conversion  Rights—Adjustments  to  Conversion  Rate”  is  declared  but  not  so  paid  or  made,  then  the
Conversion Rate shall be immediately readjusted, effective as of the date the Board of Directors of Comstock determines
not  to  pay  such  dividend  or  distribution,  to  the  Conversion  Rate  that  would  then  be  in  effect  if  such  dividend  or
distribution had not been declared.
Effect of Reclassifications, Consolidations, Mergers, Binding Share Exchanges or Sales of Assets
In the event of:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Table of Contents
any reclassification of the Common Stock;
a consolidation, merger, binding share exchange or combination involving Comstock; or
a sale or conveyance to another person or entity of all or substantially all of Comstock’s property or assets;
228
in which holders of Common Stock would be entitled to receive stock, other securities, other property, assets or cash for
their Common Stock (any such event, a “Merger Event”), each $1,000 original principal amount of the applicable series of
New  Convertible  Notes  will,  from  and  after  the  effective  time  of  such  Merger  Event,  in  lieu  of  being  convertible  into
Common Stock, be convertible into the same kind, type and proportions of consideration that a holder of a number of
shares  of  Common  Stock  equal  to  the  Conversion  Rate  in  effect  immediately  prior  to  such  Merger  Event  would  have
received  in  such  Merger  Event  (“Reference  Property”)  and,  prior  to  or  at  the  effective  time  of  such  Merger  Event,
Comstock  or  the  successor  or  purchasing  Person,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  execute  with  the  applicable  Convertible
Notes Trustee a supplemental indenture providing for such change in the right to convert the applicable series of New
Convertible Notes.
If the Merger Event causes the Common Stock to be converted into, or exchanged for, the right to receive more than a
single type of consideration (determined based in part upon any form of stockholder election), then:
(a)        the Reference Property into which the applicable series of New Convertible Notes will be convertible shall be
deemed to be the weighted average of the types and amounts of consideration received by the holders of Common Stock
that affirmatively make such an election; and
(b)        the unit of Reference Property for purposes of the immediately preceding paragraph shall refer to the consideration
referred to in clause (i) attributable to one share of Common Stock.
Comstock  shall  notify  applicable  Holders,  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  and  the  conversion  agent  (if  other
than a Convertible Notes Trustee) of such weighted average as soon as practicable after such determination is made.
The supplemental indenture referred above shall, in the good faith judgment of Comstock as evidenced by an officers’
certificate, (i) provide for adjustments to the Conversion Rate that shall be as nearly equivalent as may be practicable to
the adjustments of the Conversion Rate provided for in the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and for the delivery of
cash by Comstock in lieu of fractional securities or property that would otherwise be deliverable to applicable Holders
upon conversion as part of the Reference Property, with such amount of cash determined by Comstock in a manner as
nearly equivalent as may be practicable to that used by Comstock to determine the Daily VWAP of the Common Stock and
(ii) provide that after the Merger Event, the Mandatory Conversion Event (and related calculations) shall be determined with
reference to the trading value of the Reference Property as determined in good faith by Comstock in a manner as nearly
equivalent as may be practicable to that used by Comstock to determine the Daily VWAP of the Common Stock.
Comstock  shall  not  become  a  party  to  any  Merger  Event  unless  its  terms  are  consistent  with  this  section  “—Effect  of
Reclassifications, Consolidations, Mergers, Binding Share Exchanges or Sales of Assets.”
Notice of Certain Transactions
In the event that:
(a) Comstock takes any action that would require an adjustment in the Conversion Rate,
(b)  Comstock  takes  any  action  that  would  require  a  supplemental  indenture  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  “—Effect  of
Reclassifications, Consolidations, Mergers, Binding Share Exchanges or Sales of Assets,” or
(c) there is a dissolution or liquidation of Comstock,
Comstock shall promptly mail to the Holders of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes at the addresses appearing
on the registrar’s books and the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee a written notice stating the proposed record date
and effective date of the transaction referred to in clause (a), (b) or (c) above.
Table of Contents
Covenant Suspension
229
During any period that the New Convertible Notes have a rating equal to or higher than BBB- (or the equivalent) by S&P
and Baa3 (or the equivalent) by Moody’s (“Investment Grade Ratings”) and no Default or Event of Default has occurred
and is continuing, Comstock and the Restricted Subsidiaries will not be subject to the following covenants (collectively,
the “Suspended Covenants”):
•
•
•
•
•
“—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock;”
“—Limitation on Restricted Payments;”
“—Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries;”
“—Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates;”
“—Limitation on Asset Sales;”
•
•
“—Limitation on Asset Sales;”
“—Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries;” and
clause (3) of “—Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets”
In the event that Comstock and the Restricted Subsidiaries are not subject to the Suspended Covenants for any period of
time as a result of the preceding paragraph and either S&P or Moody’s subsequently withdraws its rating or downgrades
its rating of the New Convertible Notes below the applicable Investment Grade Rating, or a Default or Event of Default
occurs and is continuing, then Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries will thereafter again be subject to the Suspended
Covenants, and compliance with the Suspended Covenants with respect to Restricted Payments made after the time of
such withdrawal, downgrade, Default or Event of Default will be calculated in accordance with the covenant described
under “Certain Covenants—Limitation on Restricted Payments” as though such covenant had been in effect during the
entire period of time from the Issue Date.
During  any  period  when  the  Suspended  Covenants  are  suspended,  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  may  not
designate any of Comstock’s Subsidiaries as Unrestricted Subsidiaries pursuant to the Convertible Notes Indentures.
Certain Covenants
Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock
Comstock will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, issue, assume, guarantee or in
any manner become directly or indirectly liable for the payment of (collectively, “incur”) any Indebtedness (including any
Acquired  Indebtedness),  and  Comstock  will  not,  and  will  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  issue  any
Disqualified Capital Stock (except for the issuance by Comstock of Disqualified Capital Stock (A) which is redeemable at
Comstock’s option in cash or Qualified Capital Stock and (B) the dividends on which are payable at Comstock’s option in
cash  or  Qualified  Capital  Stock); provided, however, that  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  that  are  Subsidiary
Guarantors may incur Indebtedness or issue shares of Disqualified Capital Stock if (i) at the time of such event and after
giving  effect  thereto  on  a  pro  forma  basis  the  Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  for  the  four  full  quarters
immediately preceding such event, taken as one period, would have been equal to or greater than 2.25 to 1.0 and (ii) no
Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time such additional Indebtedness is incurred or
such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  is  issued  or  would  occur  as  a  consequence  of  the  incurrence  of  the  additional
Indebtedness or the issuance of the Disqualified Capital Stock.
Table of Contents
230
The  first  paragraph  of  this  covenant  will  not  prohibit  the  incurrence  of  any  of  the  following  items  of  Indebtedness
(collectively, “Permitted Indebtedness”):
(1)
(2)
Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of $50.0
million at any one time outstanding and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor;
Indebtedness under (a) the New 2019 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in the Exchange Offer and
Consent Solicitation and the Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the payment of
interest thereon and (b) the New 2020 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in the Exchange Offer and
Consent Solicitation and the Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the payment of
interest thereon;
(3)
Indebtedness outstanding or in effect on the Issue Date (and not exchanged in connection with this Exchange
Offer and Consent Solicitation);
(4)
obligations  pursuant  to  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations,  but  only  to  the  extent  such  obligations  do  not
exceed 105% of the aggregate principal amount of the Indebtedness covered by such Interest Rate Protection
Obligations; obligations under currency exchange contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business;
hedging arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting production,
purchases  and  resales  against  fluctuations  in  oil  or  natural  gas  prices,  and  any  guarantee  of  any  of  the
foregoing;
(5)
the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees of (a) the New 2019 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in this
Exchange  and  Consent  Solicitation  (and  any  assumption  of  the  obligations  guaranteed  thereby)  and  the
Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the payment of interest thereon and (b) the
New 2020 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in this Exchange and Consent Solicitation (and any
assumption  of  obligations  guaranteed  thereby)  and  the  Additional  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  issued  in
connection with the payment of interest thereon;
(6)
the incurrence by Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of intercompany Indebtedness between or
among Comstock and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; provided, however, that:
(a)
(b)
if the Company is the obligor on such Indebtedness and a Subsidiary Guarantor is not the obligee, such
Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash of all Obligations with
respect to the New Convertible Notes, or if a Subsidiary Guarantor is the obligor on such Indebtedness
and  neither  Comstock  nor  another  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  the  obligee,  such  Indebtedness  must  be
expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash of all Obligations with respect to the Junior
Lien Subsidiary Guarantee of such Subsidiary Guarantor; and
any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such Indebtedness being held
by  a  Person  other  than  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  Comstock  and  (ii)  any  sale  or  other
transfer of any such Indebtedness to a Person that is neither Comstock nor a Restricted Subsidiary of
Comstock will be deemed, in each case, to constitute an incurrence of such Indebtedness by Comstock
or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, that was not permitted by this clause (6);
(7)
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness and any guarantee thereof;
Table of Contents
231
(8)
Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
(9)
in-kind obligations relating to net oil or gas balancing positions arising in the ordinary course of business;
(10)
(11)
Indebtedness  in  respect  of  bid,  performance  or  surety  bonds  issued  for  the  account  of  Comstock  or  any
Restricted Subsidiary in the ordinary course of business, including guaranties and letters of credit supporting
such bid, performance or surety obligations (in each case other than for an obligation for money borrowed);
any  additional  Indebtedness  in  an  aggregate  principal  amount  not  in  excess  of  $75.0  million  (including
additional Indebtedness incurred in connection with the Additional New Senior Secured Notes) at any one
time outstanding and any guarantee thereof; and
(12)
Indebtedness  under  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  in  an  aggregate  principal
amount not to exceed $700.0 million and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor.
For purposes of determining compliance with this covenant, in the event that an item of Indebtedness meets the criteria of
one  or  more  of  the  categories  of  Permitted  Indebtedness  described  in  clauses  (1)  through  (12)  described  above  or  is
entitled to be incurred pursuant to the first paragraph of this covenant, Comstock may, in its sole discretion, classify such
item of Indebtedness in any manner that complies with this covenant and such item of Indebtedness will be treated as
having been incurred pursuant to only one of such clauses of the definition of Permitted Indebtedness or the proviso of
the  foregoing  sentence  and  an  item  of  Indebtedness  may  be  divided  and  classified  in  more  than  one  of  the  types  of
Indebtedness  permitted  hereunder; provided that all Indebtedness outstanding on the Issue Date under the Revolving
Credit Agreement shall be deemed incurred under clause (1) of the second paragraph of this covenant and not under the
first  paragraph  or  clause  (3)  of  the  second  paragraph  and  may  not  be  later  reclassified; provided,  further,  that  all
Indebtedness under the New Senior Secured Notes incurred on the Issue Date shall be deemed incurred under clause (12)
of the second paragraph of this covenant and may not be later reclassified.
The amount of any Indebtedness outstanding as of any date shall be (i) the accreted value thereof in the case of any
Indebtedness issued with original issue discount and (ii) the principal amount or liquidation preference thereof, together
with any interest thereon that is more than 30 days past due, in the case of any other Indebtedness.
For purposes of determining compliance with any U.S. dollar-denominated restriction on the incurrence of Indebtedness,
the U.S. dollar-equivalent principal amount of Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency shall be calculated based
on  the  relevant  currency  exchange  rate  in  effect  on  the  date  such  Indebtedness  was  incurred,  in  the  case  of  term
Indebtedness,  or  first  committed,  in  the  case  of  revolving  credit  Indebtedness; provided  that  if  such  Indebtedness  is
incurred  to  refinance  other  Indebtedness  denominated  in  a  foreign  currency,  and  such  refinancing  would  cause  the
applicable U.S. dollar-denominated restriction to be exceeded if calculated at the relevant currency exchange rate in effect
on the date of such refinancing, such U.S. dollar-denominated restriction shall be deemed not to have been exceeded so
long  as  the  principal  amount  of  such  refinancing  Indebtedness  does  not  exceed  the  principal  amount  of  such
Indebtedness  being  refinanced  (plus  all  accrued  interest  on  the  Indebtedness  being  refinanced  and  the  amount  of  all
expenses and premiums incurred in connection therewith).
Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  covenant,  the  maximum  amount  of  Indebtedness  that  Comstock  or  any
Restricted  Subsidiary  may  incur  pursuant  to  this  covenant  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  exceeded  solely  as  a  result  of
fluctuations in the exchange rate of currencies. The principal amount of any Indebtedness incurred to
Table of Contents
232
refinance  other  Indebtedness,  if  incurred  in  a  different  currency  from  the  Indebtedness  being  refinanced,  shall  be
calculated  based  on  the  currency  exchange  rate  applicable  to  the  currencies  in  which  such  Permitted  Refinancing
Indebtedness is denominated that is in effect on the date of such refinancing.
Limitation on Restricted Payments
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly:
(1)
(2)
(3)
declare or pay any dividend on, or make any other distribution to holders of, any shares of Capital Stock of
Comstock  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  (other  than  dividends  or  distributions  payable  solely  in  shares  of
Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock or in options, warrants or other rights to purchase Qualified Capital Stock
of Comstock);
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire or retire for value any Capital Stock of Comstock or any Affiliate thereof
(other than any Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock) or any options, warrants or other rights to
acquire such Capital Stock (other than the purchase, redemption, acquisition or retirement of any Disqualified
Capital Stock of Comstock solely in shares of Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock);
make any principal payment on or repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value, prior to
any  scheduled  principal  payment,  scheduled  sinking  fund  payment  or  maturity,  any  Subordinated
Indebtedness  (excluding  any  intercompany  Indebtedness  between  or  among  Comstock  and  any  of  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries),  except  in  any  case  out  of  the  net  cash  proceeds  of  Permitted  Refinancing
Indebtedness; or
(4)
make any Restricted Investment;
(such payments or other actions described in clauses (1) through (4) above being collectively referred to as “Restricted
Payments”), unless at the time of and after giving effect to the proposed Restricted Payment:
(1)
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
(2)
(3)
Comstock could incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio
test set forth in the first paragraph of the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” covenant;
and
the aggregate amount of all Restricted Payments declared or made after January 1, 2004 shall not exceed the
sum (without duplication) of the following (the “Restricted Payments Basket”):
Table of Contents
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
50%  of  the  Consolidated  Net  Income  of  Comstock  accrued  on  a  cumulative  basis  during  the  period
beginning on January 1, 2004 and ending on the last day of Comstock’s last fiscal quarter ending prior
to the date of such proposed Restricted Payment (or, if such Consolidated Net Income is a loss, minus
100% of such loss); plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than cash,
received after January 1, 2004 by Comstock from the issuance or sale (other than to any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries)  of  shares  of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  Comstock  or  any  options,  warrants  or  rights  to
purchase such shares of Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than cash,
received after January 1, 2004 by Comstock (other than from any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) upon
the  exercise  of  any  options,  warrants  or  rights  to  purchase  shares  of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of
Comstock; plus
233
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds received after January 1, 2004 by Comstock from the issuance or
sale (other than to any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) of Indebtedness or shares of Disqualified Capital
Stock that have been converted into or exchanged for Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock, together
with the aggregate cash received by Comstock at the time of such conversion or exchange; plus
to the extent not otherwise included in Consolidated Net Income, the net reduction in Investments in
Unrestricted Subsidiaries resulting from dividends, repayments of loans or advances, or other transfers
of  assets,  in  each  case  to  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  after  January  1,  2004  from  any
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  from  the  redesignation  of  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  as  a  Restricted
Subsidiary (valued in each case as provided in the definition of “Investment”), not to exceed in the case
of  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  the  total  amount  of  Investments  (other  than  Permitted  Investments)  in
such Unrestricted Subsidiary made by Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries in such Unrestricted
Subsidiary after January 1, 2004.
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions, Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries may take the following actions so
long  as  (in  the  case  of  clauses  (3),  (4),  (5)  and  (7)  below)  no  Default  or  Event  of  Default  shall  have  occurred  and  be
continuing:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
the payment of any dividend on any Capital Stock of Comstock within 60 days after the date of declaration
thereof, if at such declaration date such declaration complied with the provisions of the preceding paragraph
(and  such  payment  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  paid  on  such  date  of  declaration  for  purposes  of  any
calculation required by the provisions of the preceding paragraph);
the  payment  of  any  dividend  payable  from  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  Comstock  or  any  other  Restricted
Subsidiary of Comstock;
the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement of any shares of any class of Capital Stock of
Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary, in exchange for, or out of the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds from, a
substantially  concurrent  issuance  and  sale  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of  shares  of  Qualified
Capital Stock of Comstock;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of  any
Subordinated Indebtedness in exchange for, or out of the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds from, a substantially
concurrent issuance and sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary) of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of
Comstock;
the purchase, redemption, repayment, defeasance or other acquisition or retirement for value of Subordinated
Indebtedness  (other  than  Disqualified  Capital  Stock)  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the  aggregate  net  cash
proceeds  of,  a  substantially  concurrent  incurrence  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of  Subordinated
Indebtedness of Comstock so long as (a) the principal amount of such new Indebtedness does not exceed the
principal amount (or, if such Subordinated Indebtedness being refinanced provides for an amount less than the
principal amount thereof to be due and payable upon a declaration of acceleration thereof, such lesser amount
as  of  the  date  of  determination)  of  the  Subordinated  Indebtedness  being  so  purchased,  redeemed,  repaid,
defeased, acquired or retired, plus the amount of any premium required to be paid in connection with such
refinancing pursuant to the terms of the Indebtedness refinanced or the amount of any premium reasonably
determined  by  Comstock  as  necessary  to  accomplish  such  refinancing,  plus  the  amount  of  expenses  of
Comstock incurred in connection with such refinancing, (b) such new Indebtedness is subordinated to the New
Convertible Notes at least
Table of Contents
234
to the same extent as such Subordinated Indebtedness so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired
or  retired  and  (c)  such  new  Indebtedness  has  an  Average  Life  to  Stated  Maturity  that  is  longer  than  the
Average  Life  to  Stated  Maturity  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  and  such  new  Indebtedness  has  a  Stated
Maturity for its final scheduled principal payment that is at least 91 days later than the Stated Maturity for the
final scheduled principal payment of the New Convertible Notes;
(6)
loans  made  to  officers,  directors  or  employees  of  Comstock  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  approved  by  the
Board  of  Directors  in  an  aggregate  amount  not  to  exceed  $1.0  million  outstanding  at  any  one  time,  the
proceeds of which are used solely (a) to purchase common stock of Comstock in connection with a restricted
stock  or  employee  stock  purchase  plan,  or  to  exercise  stock  options  received  pursuant  to  an  employee  or
director stock option plan or other incentive plan, in a principal amount not to exceed the exercise price of such
stock options, or (b) to refinance loans, together with accrued interest thereon, made pursuant to item (a) of this
clause (6); and
(7)
other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $10.0 million.
The actions described in clauses (1), (3), (4) and (6) above shall be Restricted Payments that shall be permitted to be made
in accordance with the preceding paragraph but shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available for Restricted
Payments under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph (provided that any dividend paid pursuant to clause (1)
above shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph
when declared, but not also when subsequently paid pursuant to such clause (1)), and the actions described in clauses
(2), (5) and (7) above shall be permitted to be taken in accordance with this paragraph and shall not reduce the amount that
would otherwise be available for Restricted Payments under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph.
The  amount  of  all  Restricted  Payments  (other  than  cash)  will  be  the  Fair  Market  Value  on  the  date  of  the  Restricted
Payment of the asset(s) or securities proposed to be transferred or issued by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary,
as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted Payment.
Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries
Comstock  (1)  will  not  permit  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  issue  or  sell  any  Preferred  Stock  to  any  Person  other  than
Comstock or one of its Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiaries and (2) will not permit any Person other than Comstock or
one of its Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiaries to own any Preferred Stock of any Restricted Subsidiary, except, in each
case, for (a) the Preferred Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary owned by a Person at the time such Restricted Subsidiary
became a Restricted Subsidiary, or (b) a sale of Preferred Stock in connection with the sale of all the Capital Stock of a
Restricted Subsidiary owned by Comstock or its Subsidiaries effected in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture described under “—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, enter into or suffer to exist any
transaction or series of related transactions (including, without limitation, the sale, purchase, exchange or lease of assets
or property or the rendering of any services) with, or for the benefit of, any Affiliate of Comstock (other than Comstock or a
Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) (each, an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless
(1)
such transaction or series of related transactions is on terms that are no less favorable to Comstock or such
Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, than those that would be available in a comparable arm’s length
transaction with unrelated third parties; and
Table of Contents
235
(2)
Comstock delivers to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee:
(a)
(b)
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving aggregate
consideration  in  excess  of  $10.0  million  but  no  greater  than  $25.0  million,  an  officers’  certificate
certifying that such Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions complies with this covenant;
and
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving aggregate
consideration in excess of $25.0 million, an officers’ certificate certifying that such Affiliate Transaction
or  series  of  Affiliate  Transactions  complies  with  this  covenant  and  that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or
series  of  Affiliate  Transactions  has  been  approved  by  a  majority  of  the  Disinterested  Directors  of
Comstock.
The following items will not be deemed to be Affiliate Transactions and, therefore, will not be subject to the provisions of
the prior paragraph:
(1)
loans or advances to officers, directors and employees of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary made in the
ordinary course of business in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.0 million outstanding at any one time;
(2)
indemnities  of  officers,  directors,  employees  and  other  agents  of  Comstock  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary
permitted by corporate charter or other organizational document, bylaw or statutory provisions;
(3)
the payment of reasonable and customary fees to directors of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries
who are not employees of Comstock or any Affiliate;
(4)
Comstock’s employee compensation and other benefit arrangements;
(5)
(6)
transactions exclusively between or among Comstock and any of the Restricted Subsidiaries or exclusively
between or among such Restricted Subsidiaries, provided such transactions are not otherwise prohibited by
the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture; and
any  Restricted  Payment  permitted  to  be  paid  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes
Indenture described under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments.”
Limitation on Liens
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create, incur, assume, affirm or
suffer to exist or become effective any Lien of any kind, except for Permitted Liens, upon any of their respective property
or assets, whether now owned or acquired after the Issue Date, or any income, profits or proceeds therefrom, or assign or
convey any right to receive income thereon, unless (1) in the case of any Lien securing Subordinated Indebtedness, the
New Convertible Notes are secured by a lien on such property, assets or proceeds that is senior in priority to such Lien
and (2) in the case of any other Lien, the New Convertible Notes are directly secured equally and ratably with the obligation
or  liability  secured  by  such  Lien.  The  incurrence  of  additional  secured  Indebtedness  by  Comstock  and  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries  is  subject  to  further  limitations  on  the  incurrence  of  Indebtedness  as  described  under  “—Limitation  on
Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock.”
Limitation on Asset Sales
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, consummate any Asset Sale unless (i) Comstock or
such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, receives consideration at the time of such Asset
Table of Contents
236
Sale  at  least  equal  to  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  the  assets  and  property  subject  to  such  Asset  Sale  and  (ii)  all  of  the
consideration paid to Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary in connection with such Asset Sale is in the form of cash,
Cash Equivalents, Liquid Securities, Exchanged Properties or the assumption by the purchaser of liabilities of Comstock
(other than liabilities of Comstock that are by their terms subordinated to the New Convertible Notes) or liabilities of any
Subsidiary Guarantor that made such Asset Sale (other than liabilities of a Subsidiary Guarantor that are by their terms
subordinated  to  such  Subsidiary  Guarantor’s  Junior  Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantee),  in  each  case  as  a  result  of  which
Comstock and its remaining Restricted Subsidiaries are no longer liable for such liabilities (“Permitted Consideration”);
provided, however, that Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries shall be permitted to receive assets and property other
than  Permitted  Consideration,  so  long  as  the  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value  of  all  such  assets  and  property  other  than
Permitted  Consideration  received  from  Asset  Sales  since  the  2009  Notes  Issue  Date  and  held  by  Comstock  or  any
Restricted Subsidiary at any one time shall not exceed 10% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
The Net Available Cash from Asset Sales by Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary may be applied by Comstock or such
Restricted Subsidiary, to the extent Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary elects (or is required by the terms of any
Senior Indebtedness of Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary), to
•
•
prepay, repay, redeem or purchase Senior Indebtedness of Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary; or
reinvest  in  Additional  Assets  (including  by  means  of  an  Investment  in  Additional  Assets  by  a  Restricted
Subsidiary with Net Available Cash received by Comstock or another Restricted Subsidiary).
Any Net Available Cash from an Asset Sale not applied in accordance with the preceding paragraph within 365 days from
the  date  of  such  Asset  Sale  shall  constitute  “Excess  Proceeds.”  When  the  aggregate  amount  of  Excess  Proceeds
exceeds $10.0 million, Comstock will be required to make an offer (the “Prepayment Offer”) to all Holders of the applicable
series  New  Convertible  Notes  and  all  Holders  of  other  Indebtedness  that  is  pari  passu  with  such  series  of  the  New
Convertible  Notes  containing  provisions  similar  to  those  set  forth  in  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  with
respect to offers to purchase or redeem with the proceeds of sales of assets to purchase the maximum principal amount
of  such  New  Convertible  Notes  and  such  other  pari  passu  Indebtedness  that  may  be  purchased  out  of  the  Excess
Proceeds. The offer price in any Prepayment Offer will be equal to 100% of principal amount plus accrued and unpaid
interest,  if  any,  to  the  Purchase  Date  (subject  to  the  right  of  the  Holders  of  record  of  the  applicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the
Purchase  Date),  and  will  be  payable  in  cash.  If  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  New  Convertible  Notes  tendered  by
Holders thereof exceeds the amount of available Excess Proceeds allocated for repurchases of New Convertible Notes
pursuant to the Prepayment Offer for the applicable series of New Convertible Notes, then such Excess Proceeds will be
allocated pro rata according to the principal amount of the New Convertible Notes tendered and the applicable Convertible
Notes Trustee will select the New Convertible Notes to be purchased in accordance with the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture. To the extent that any portion of the amount of Excess Proceeds remains after compliance with the second
sentence of this paragraph and provided that all Holders of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes have been
given  the  opportunity  to  tender  their  New  Convertible  Notes  for  purchase  as  described  in  the  following  paragraph  in
accordance  with  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  may  use  such
remaining  amount  for  purposes  permitted  by  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  and  the  amount  of  Excess
Proceeds will be reset to zero.
Within 30 days after the 365th day following the date of an Asset Sale, Comstock shall, if it is obligated to make an offer to
purchase the applicable series New Convertible Notes pursuant to the preceding paragraph, deliver a written Prepayment
Offer notice, by first-class mail, to the Holders of the applicable series New Convertible Notes, with a copy to the applicable
Convertible Notes Trustee (the “Prepayment Offer Notice”), accompanied by
Table of Contents
237
such information regarding Comstock and its Subsidiaries as Comstock believes will enable such Holders of such New
Convertible Notes to make an informed decision with respect to the Prepayment Offer. The Prepayment Offer Notice will
state, among other things:
•
•
•
•
•
•
that Comstock is offering to purchase New Convertible Notes pursuant to the provisions of the Convertible Notes
Indenture;
that any New Convertible Note (or any portion thereof) accepted for payment (and duly paid on the Purchase
Date) pursuant to the Prepayment Offer shall cease to accrue interest on the Purchase Date;
that any New Convertible Note (or portions thereof) not properly tendered will continue to accrue interest;
the purchase price and purchase date, which shall be, subject to any contrary requirements of applicable law, no
less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the date the Prepayment Offer Notice is mailed (the “Purchase
Date”);
the aggregate principal amount of New Convertible Notes to be purchased;
a description of the procedure which Holders of New Convertible Notes must follow in order to tender their New
Convertible Notes and the procedures that Holders of New Convertible Notes must follow in order to withdraw an
election to tender their New Convertible Notes for payment; and
•
all other instructions and materials necessary to enable Holders to tender New Convertible Notes pursuant to the
Prepayment Offer.
Comstock will comply, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any other
securities laws or regulations thereunder to the extent such laws and regulations are applicable in connection with the
purchase  of  New  Convertible  Notes  as  described  above.  To  the  extent  that  the  provisions  of  any  securities  laws  or
regulations  conflict  with  the  provisions  relating  to  the  Prepayment  Offer,  Comstock  will  comply  with  the  applicable
securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations described above by virtue thereof.
Future Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees
If  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  is  not  already  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  has  outstanding  or  guarantees  any  other
Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  then  in  either  case  that  Subsidiary  will  become  a  Subsidiary
Guarantor by executing (x) a supplemental indenture and delivering it to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee within
20  business  days  of  the  date  on  which  it  incurred  or  guaranteed  such  Indebtedness,  as  the  case  may  be; provided,
however,  that  the  foregoing  shall  not  apply  to  Subsidiaries  of  Comstock  that  have  properly  been  designated  as
Unrestricted Subsidiaries in accordance with the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture for so long as they continue to
constitute Unrestricted Subsidiaries, (y) amendments to the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements pursuant to which it will
grant a Junior Lien on any Collateral held by it in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of
the New Convertible Notes and the other Convertible Note Obligations, and become a Collateral Grantor thereunder, and
cause such Liens to be perfected as required thereby and (z) deliver to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee one or
more opinions of counsel in connection with the foregoing as specified in the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture.
Table of Contents
238
Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create or suffer to exist or allow to
become effective any consensual encumbrance or restriction of any kind on the ability of any Restricted Subsidiary:
•
•
•
to pay dividends, in cash or otherwise, or make any other distributions on its Capital Stock, or make payments on
any Indebtedness owed, to Comstock or any other Restricted Subsidiary;
to make loans or advances to Comstock or any other Restricted Subsidiary; or
to transfer any of its property or assets to Comstock or any other Restricted Subsidiary
(any  such  restrictions  being  collectively  referred  to  herein  as  a  “Payment  Restriction”).  However,  the  preceding
restrictions will not apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of:
(1)
(2)
(3)
customary  provisions  restricting  subletting  or  assignment  of  any  lease  governing  a  leasehold  interest  of
Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary, or customary restrictions in licenses relating to the property covered
thereby and entered into in the ordinary course of business;
any instrument governing Indebtedness of a Person acquired by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary at the
time of such acquisition, which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any other Person, other than the
Person, or the property or assets of the Person, so acquired, provided that such Indebtedness was not incurred
in anticipation of such acquisition;
any instrument governing Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that is not a
Subsidiary Guarantor; provided that (a) such Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock is permitted under the
covenant described in “—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” and (b) the terms and
conditions  of  any  Payment  Restrictions  thereunder  are  not  materially  more  restrictive  than  the  Payment
Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Convertible Notes Indentures as in effect on
the Issue Date;
(4)
the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date  or  any  agreement  that  amends,  modifies,
supplements, restates, extends, renews, refinances or replaces the Revolving Credit Agreement; provided that
the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions thereunder are not materially more restrictive than the
Payment Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the Issue Date;
(5)
the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the New Senior Secured Notes and the subsidiary guarantees thereof; or
(6)
the Convertible Notes Indentures, the New Convertible Notes and any Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees, in
each case as in effect on the Issue Date.
Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions
Comstock will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, enter into any Sale/ Leaseback Transaction
unless (1) Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, would be able to incur Indebtedness in an amount
equal  to  the  Attributable  Indebtedness  with  respect  to  such  Sale/  Leaseback  Transaction  or  (2)  Comstock  or  such
Restricted Subsidiary receives proceeds from such Sale/ Leaseback Transaction at least equal to the Fair Market Value
thereof and such proceeds are applied in the same manner and to the same extent as Net Available Cash and Excess
Proceeds from an Asset Sale.
Table of Contents
Change of Control
239
Each  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  will  provide  that  upon  the  occurrence  of  a  Change  of  Control,  Comstock  shall  be
obligated to make an offer to purchase all of the then outstanding New Convertible Notes under the applicable series (a
“Change of Control Offer”), and shall purchase, on a business day (the “Change of Control Purchase Date”)  not  more
than 60 nor less than 30 days following such Change of Control, all of the then outstanding New Convertible Notes under
the  applicable  series  validly  tendered  pursuant  to  such  Change  of  Control  Offer,  at  a  purchase  price  (the  “Change  of
Control Purchase Price”) equal to 101% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest to the Change of
Control Purchase Date (subject to the right of Holders of record on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an
interest payment date that is on or prior to the Change of Control Purchase Date). The Change of Control Offer is required
to remain open for at least 20 business days and until the close of business on the fifth business day prior to the Change
of Control Purchase Date.
In order to effect a Change of Control Offer, Comstock shall, not later than the 30th day after the occurrence of a Change of
Control, give to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee and each applicable Holder a notice of the Change of Control
Offer,  which  notice  shall  govern  the  terms  of  the  Change  of  Control  Offer  and  shall  state,  among  other  things,  the
procedures that Holders must follow to accept the Change of Control Offer.
Comstock will not be required to make a Change of Control Offer upon a Change of Control if another Person makes the
Change of Control Offer at the same purchase price, at the same times and otherwise in substantial compliance with the
requirements set forth in the Convertible Notes Indenture applicable to a Change of Control Offer to be made by Comstock
and purchases all related New Convertible Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn under such Change of Control Offer.
If  Holders  of  not  less  than  90%  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  outstanding  New  Convertible  Notes  under  the
applicable  series  validly  tender  and  do  not  withdraw  such  New  Convertible  Notes  in  a  Change  of  Control  Offer  and
Comstock, or any third party making a Change of Control Offer in lieu of Comstock as described above, purchases all of
the New Convertible Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn by such Holders, Comstock will have the right, upon not
less than 30 nor more than 60 days’ prior notice, given not more than 30 days following such purchase pursuant to the
Change of Control Offer described above, to redeem all New Convertible Notes that remain outstanding following such
purchase at a redemption price in cash equal to the applicable Change of Control Purchase Price plus, to the extent not
included in the Change of Control Purchase Price, accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.
The  definition  of  Change  of  Control  includes  a  phrase  relating  to  the  disposition  of  “all  or  substantially  all”  of  the
properties and assets of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, taken as a whole. Although there is a limited body of
case  law  interpreting  the  phrase  “substantially  all,”  there  is  no  precise  established  definition  of  the  phrase  under
applicable law. Accordingly, the ability of a Holder of New Convertible Notes to require Comstock to repurchase its New
Convertible Notes as a result of a disposition of less than all of the properties and assets of Comstock and its Restricted
Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, to another Person may be uncertain.
Comstock  intends  to  comply  with  Rule  14e-1  under  the  Exchange  Act  and  any  other  securities  laws  and  regulations
thereunder, if applicable, in the event that a Change of Control occurs and Comstock is required to purchase notes as
described above. The Change of Control provisions of the New Convertible Notes may, in certain circumstances, make
more difficult or discourage a sale or takeover of Comstock and, thus, the removal of incumbent management. Subject to
the  limitations  discussed  below,  Comstock  could,  in  the  future,  enter  into  certain  transactions,  including  acquisitions,
refinancings or other recapitalizations, that would not constitute a Change of Control under the applicable Convertible
Notes  Indenture,  but  that  could  increase  the  amount  of  Indebtedness  outstanding  at  such  time  or  otherwise  affect
Comstock’s  capital  structure  or  credit  ratings.  Restrictions  on  Comstock’s  ability  to  Incur  additional  Indebtedness  are
contained in the covenants described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital
Stock” and “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Restricted Payments.” Such restrictions in the applicable Convertible
Notes Indenture
Table of Contents
240
can  be  waived  only  with  the  consent  of  Holders  of  a  majority  in  principal  amount  of  the  applicable  series  of  New
Convertible  Notes  then  outstanding.  Except  for  the  limitations  contained  in  such  covenants,  however,  the  Convertible
Notes  Indentures  will  not  contain  any  covenants  or  provisions  that  may  afford  Holders  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes
protection in the event of a highly leveraged transaction.
Comstock’s ability to repurchase the New Convertible Notes pursuant to the Change of Control Offer may be limited by a
number  of  factors.  The  ability  of  Comstock  to  pay  cash  to  the  Holders  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  following  the
occurrence of a Change of Control may be limited by Comstock’s and the Restricted Subsidiaries’ then existing financial
resources,  and  sufficient  funds  may  not  be  available  when  necessary  to  make  any  required  repurchases.  See  “Risk
Factors—Risks Related to the Exchange Offer and Holding the New Notes—Risks Related to Holding the New Notes—We
may not have the ability to purchase the new notes upon a change of control or upon certain sales or other dispositions of
assets, or to make the cash payment due upon conversion or at maturity.”
The  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  and  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  contain,  and  future  agreements  governing
Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  its  Subsidiaries  may  contain  prohibitions  of  certain  events,  including  events  that  would
constitute a Change of Control and including repurchases or other prepayments in respect of the New Convertible Notes.
The  exercise  by  the  Holders  of  New  Convertible  Notes  of  their  right  to  require  Comstock  to  repurchase  the  New
Convertible Notes upon a Change of Control could cause a default under these other agreements, even if the Change of
Control itself does not, due to the financial effect of such repurchases on Comstock or its Subsidiaries. In the event a
Change of Control occurs at a time when Comstock is prohibited from purchasing or redeeming New Convertible Notes,
Comstock could seek the consent of its other applicable debt holders or lenders to purchase the New Convertible Notes
or  could  attempt  to  refinance  the  borrowings  that  contain  such  prohibition.  If  Comstock  does  not  obtain  a  consent  or
repay  those  borrowings,  Comstock  will  remain  prohibited  from  purchasing  New  Convertible  Notes.  In  that  case,
Comstock’s  failure  to  purchase  tendered  New  Convertible  Notes  would  constitute  an  Event  of  Default  under  the
Convertible Notes Indentures, which could, in turn, constitute a default under other Indebtedness of Comstock.
Reports
Each Convertible Notes Indenture will provide that, whether or not Comstock is subject to the reporting requirements of
Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, to the extent not prohibited by the Exchange Act, Comstock will file with
the Commission, and make available to the Convertible Notes Trustees and the Holders of the New Convertible Notes
without  cost  to  any  Holder,  the  annual  reports  and  the  information,  documents  and  other  reports  (or  copies  of  such
portions  of  any  of  the  foregoing  as  the  Commission  may  by  rules  and  regulations  prescribe)  that  are  specified  in
Sections 13 and 15(d) of the Exchange Act and applicable to a U.S. corporation within the time periods specified therein
with  respect  to  an  accelerated  filer.  In  the  event  that  Comstock  is  not  permitted  to  file  such  reports,  documents  and
information  with  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Act,  Comstock  will  nevertheless  make  available  such
Exchange Act information to the Convertible Notes Trustees and the Holders of the New Convertible Notes without cost to
any Holder as if Comstock were subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act within
the time periods specified therein with respect to a non-accelerated filer.
If Comstock has designated any of its Subsidiaries as Unrestricted Subsidiaries, then, to the extent material, the quarterly
and  annual  financial  information  required  by  the  preceding  paragraph  will  include  a  reasonably  detailed  presentation,
either on the face of the financial statements or in the footnotes thereto, and in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the financial condition and results of operations of Comstock and its
Restricted Subsidiaries separate from the financial condition and results of operations of the Unrestricted Subsidiaries of
Comstock.
The availability of the foregoing materials on the Commission’s website or on Comstock’s website shall be deemed to
satisfy the foregoing delivery obligations.
Table of Contents
241
Each  New  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  will  also  provide  that  Comstock  will  deliver  all  reports  and  other  information
required to be delivered under the TIA within the time periods set forth in the TIA.
Future Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries
The foregoing covenants (including calculation of financial ratios and the determination of limitations on the incurrence of
Indebtedness  and  Liens)  may  be  affected  by  the  designation  by  Comstock  of  any  existing  or  future  Subsidiary  of
Comstock  as  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary.  The  definition  of  “Unrestricted  Subsidiary”  set  forth  under  “—Certain
Definitions” describes the circumstances under which a Subsidiary of Comstock may be designated as an Unrestricted
Subsidiary by the Board of Directors of Comstock.
Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets
Comstock will not, in any single transaction or series of related transactions, merge or consolidate with or into any other
Person, or sell, assign, convey, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the properties and assets
of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any Person or group of Affiliated Persons, and
Comstock  will  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  enter  into  any  such  transaction  or  series  of  related
transactions  if  such  transaction  or  series  of  transactions,  in  the  aggregate,  would  result  in  the  sale,  assignment,
conveyance, transfer, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of the properties and assets of Comstock and its
Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any other Person or group of Affiliated Persons, unless at the time and
after giving effect thereto:
(1)
either  (a)  if  the  transaction  is  a  merger  or  consolidation,  Comstock  shall  be  the  surviving  Person  of  such
merger or consolidation, or (b) the Person (if other than Comstock) formed by such consolidation or into which
Comstock is merged or to which the properties and assets of Comstock or its Restricted Subsidiaries, as the
case may be, are sold, assigned, conveyed, transferred, leased or otherwise disposed of (any such surviving
Person or transferee Person being the “Surviving Entity”) shall be a corporation organized and existing under
the laws of the United States of America, any state thereof or the District of Columbia and shall, in either case,
expressly assume by a supplemental indenture to the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture executed and
delivered to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee, in form satisfactory to such Convertible Notes Trustee,
and pursuant to agreements reasonably satisfactory to such Convertible Notes Trustee and the Junior Lien
Collateral  Agent,  as  applicable,  all  the  obligations  of  Comstock  under  the  applicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes, the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and the other Convertible Note Documents to
which Comstock is a party, and, in each case, such Convertible Note Documents shall remain in full force and
effect;
(2)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of related transactions on a pro forma basis (and
treating any Indebtedness not previously an obligation of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries which
becomes an obligation of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in connection with or as a result of
such transaction as having been incurred at the time of such transaction), no Default or Event of Default shall
have occurred and be continuing;
(3)
except in the case of the consolidation or merger of any Restricted Subsidiary with or into Comstock or another
Restricted Subsidiary, either:
(a)
immediately before and immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a pro forma
basis (assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the period of four fiscal
Table of Contents
quarters  ending  immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or  transactions,  with  the
appropriate adjustments with
242
respect to the transaction or transactions being included in such pro forma calculation), Comstock (or
the Surviving Entity if Comstock is not the continuing obligor under the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture) could incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage
Ratio test set forth in the first paragraph of the “—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital
Stock” covenant; or
(b)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a pro forma basis (assuming that
the  transaction  or  transactions  occurred  on  the  first  day  of  the  period  of  four  fiscal  quarters  ending
immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or  transactions,  with  the  appropriate
adjustments  with  respect  to  the  transaction  or  transactions  being  included  in  such  pro  forma
calculation), the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of Comstock (or the Surviving Entity if Comstock is not
the continuing obligor under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture) will be equal to or greater than
the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of Comstock immediately before such transaction or transactions;
if  Comstock  is  not  the  continuing  obligor  under  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  then  each
Subsidiary Guarantor, unless it is the Surviving Entity, shall have by supplemental indenture to the applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture confirmed that its Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee of the applicable series of
New  Convertible  Notes  shall  apply  to  the  Surviving  Entity’s  obligations  under  such  Convertible  Notes
Indenture and such New Convertible Notes;
any Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity shall (a) continue to constitute Collateral under
the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements and (b) be subject to a
Junior Lien in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the Junior Lien Note
Obligations;
the Surviving Entity shall take such action (or agree to take such action) as may be reasonably necessary to
cause any property or assets that constitute Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity to be
subject  to  the  Junior  Liens  in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent  required  under  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral
Agreements and shall deliver an opinion of counsel as to the enforceability of any amendments, supplements
or other instruments with respect to the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements to be executed, delivered, filed and
recorded, as applicable, and such other matters as the Convertible Notes Trustees or Junior Lien Collateral
Agent, as applicable, may reasonably request; and
Comstock (or the Surviving Entity if Comstock is not the continuing obligor under the applicable Convertible
Notes  Indenture)  shall  have  delivered  to  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  in  form  and  substance
reasonably satisfactory to such Convertible Notes Trustee, an (a) officers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel
each  stating  that  such  consolidation,  merger,  transfer,  lease  or  other  disposition  and  any  supplemental
indenture in respect thereto comply with the requirements under such Convertible Notes Indenture and (b) an
opinion of counsel that the requirements of clause (1) of this paragraph have been complied with.
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Upon  any  consolidation  or  merger  or  any  sale,  assignment,  lease,  conveyance,  transfer  or  other  disposition  of  all  or
substantially  all  of  the  properties  and  assets  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  on  a  consolidated  basis  in
accordance with the foregoing, in which Comstock is not the continuing corporation, the Surviving Entity shall succeed
to, and be substituted for, and may exercise every right and power of, Comstock under the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture and the other Convertible Note Documents with the same effect as if the Surviving Entity had been named as
Comstock therein, and thereafter Comstock, except in the case of a lease,
Table of Contents
243
will be discharged from all obligations and covenants under the applicable series of New Convertible Notes, the related
Convertible Notes Indenture and the other Convertible Note Documents and may be liquidated and dissolved.
Events of Default
The following are “Events of Default” under each of the Convertible Notes Indentures:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
default in the payment of the principal of or premium, if any, on any of the applicable series of New Convertible
Notes,  whether  such  payment  is  due  at  Stated  Maturity,  upon  redemption,  upon  repurchase  pursuant  to  a
Change of Control Offer or a Prepayment Offer, upon acceleration or otherwise;
default in the payment of any installment of interest on any of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes,
when due, and the continuance of such default for a period of 30 days;
default  in  the  performance  or  breach  of  the  provisions  of  the  “Merger,  Consolidation  and  Sale  of  Assets”
section of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, the failure to make or consummate a Change of Control
Offer  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  “Change  of  Control”  covenant  or  the  failure  to  make  or
consummate  a  Prepayment  Offer  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  “Limitation  on  Asset  Sales”
covenant;
Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  shall  fail  to  comply  with  the  provisions  described  under  “—Certain
Covenants—Reports” for a period of 90 days after written notice of such failure stating that it is a “notice of
default”  under  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  shall  have  been  given  (a)  to  Comstock  by  the
applicable Convertible Notes Trustee or (y) to Comstock and the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee by the
Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes then
outstanding);
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor shall fail to perform or observe any other term, covenant or agreement
contained  in  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes,  any  Subsidiary  Guarantee  or  the  applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture (other than a default specified in (1), (2), (3) or (4) above) for a period of 60 days
after written notice of such failure stating that it is a “notice of default” under the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture  shall  have  been  given  (a)  to  Comstock  by  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  or  (b)  to
Comstock and the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee by the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal
amount of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes then outstanding);
the  occurrence  and  continuation  beyond  any  applicable  grace  period  of  any  default  in  the  payment  of  the
principal of, premium, if any, or interest on any Indebtedness of Comstock (other than the applicable series
New Convertible Notes) or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary for money borrowed
when due, or any other default resulting in acceleration of any Indebtedness of Comstock or any Subsidiary
Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  for  money  borrowed; provided  that  the  aggregate  principal
amount of such Indebtedness, together with the aggregate principal amount of any other such Indebtedness
under which there has been a payment default or the maturity of which has been so accelerated, shall exceed
$50.0  million  and provided,  further,  that  if  any  such  default  is  cured  or  waived  or  any  such  acceleration
rescinded, or such Indebtedness is repaid, within a period of 10 days from the continuation of such default
beyond the applicable grace period or the occurrence of such acceleration, as the case may be, such Event of
Default under the
244
Table of Contents
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and any consequential acceleration of the notes shall be automatically
rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any judgment or decree;
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
any Subsidiary Guarantee shall for any reason cease to be, or be asserted by Comstock or any Subsidiary
Guarantor,  as  applicable,  not  to  be  in  full  force  and  effect  (except  pursuant  to  the  release  of  any  such
Subsidiary Guarantee in accordance with the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture);
failure by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary to pay final judgments or
orders  rendered  against  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary
aggregating  in  excess  of  $50.0  million  (net  of  any  amounts  covered  by  insurance  with  a  reputable  and
creditworthy insurance company that has not disclaimed liability) and either (a) commencement by any creditor
of  an  enforcement  proceeding  upon  such  judgment  (other  than  a  judgment  that  is  stayed  by  reason  of  a
pending appeal or otherwise) or (b) the occurrence of a 60-day period during which a stay of such judgment or
order, by reason of pending appeal or otherwise, was not in effect;
the entry of a decree or order by a court having jurisdiction in the premises (a) for relief in respect of Comstock
or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary in an involuntary case or proceeding under
any  applicable  federal  or  state  bankruptcy,  insolvency,  reorganization  or  other  similar  law  or  (b)  adjudging
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary bankrupt or insolvent, or approving
a  petition  seeking  reorganization,  arrangement,  adjustment  or  composition  of  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary under any applicable federal or state law, or appointing under
any  such  law  a  custodian,  receiver,  liquidator,  assignee,  trustee,  sequestrator  or  other  similar  official  of
Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  of  a  substantial  part  of  its
consolidated assets, or ordering the winding up or liquidation of its affairs, and the continuance of any such
decree or order for relief or any such other decree or order unstayed and in effect for a period of 60 consecutive
days;
the  commencement  by  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  a
voluntary case or proceeding under any applicable federal or state bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or
other similar law or any other case or proceeding to be adjudicated bankrupt or insolvent, or the consent by
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary to the entry of a decree or order for
relief in respect thereof in an involuntary case or proceeding under any applicable federal or state bankruptcy,
insolvency, reorganization or other similar law or to the commencement of any bankruptcy or insolvency case
or  proceeding  against  it,  or  the  filing  by  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted
Subsidiary of a petition or consent seeking reorganization or relief under any applicable federal or state law, or
the  consent  by  it  under  any  such  law  to  the  filing  of  any  such  petition  or  to  the  appointment  of  or  taking
possession by a custodian, receiver, liquidator, assignee, trustee or sequestrator (or other similar official) of
Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  of  any  substantial  part  of  its
consolidated assets, or the making by it of an assignment for the benefit of creditors under any such law, or the
admission by it in writing of its inability to pay its debts generally as they become due or taking of corporate
action by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary in furtherance of any such
action;
(11)
the occurrence of the following:
(a) except as permitted by the applicable Convertible Note Documents, any Junior Lien Collateral Agreement establishing
the Junior Liens ceases for any reason to be enforceable;
Table of Contents
245
provided that it will not be an Event of Default under this clause (11)(a) if the sole result of the failure of one or more Junior
Lien Collateral Agreements to be fully enforceable is that any Junior Lien purported to be granted under such Junior Lien
Collateral Agreements on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value of not more than $10.0
million, ceases to be an enforceable and perfected second-priority Lien, subject only to the Priority Liens securing the
Priority Lien Obligations and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided, further, that if such failure is susceptible to
cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after any officer of Comstock or any Restricted
Subsidiary becomes aware of such failure, which failure has not been cured during such time period;
(b) except as permitted by the applicable Convertible Note Documents, any Junior Lien purported to be granted under any
Junior Lien Collateral Agreement on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value in excess of
$10.0 million, ceases to be an enforceable and perfected second-priority Lien, subject only to the Priority Liens securing
the Priority Lien Obligations and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided that if such failure is susceptible to cure,
no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after any officer of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary
becomes aware of such failure, which failure has not been cured during such time period; and
(c)  Comstock  or  any  other  Collateral  Grantor,  or  any  Person  acting  on  behalf  of  any  of  them,  denies  or  disaffirms,  in
writing, any obligation of Comstock or any other Collateral Grantor set forth in or arising under any Junior Lien Collateral
Agreement establishing Junior Liens; and
(12)
the Required Stockholder Approval is not obtained and the Charter Amendment has not become effective, in
each case by December 31, 2016, and such failure shall continue for a period of 90 days.
If an Event of Default (other than as specified in clause (9) or (10) above) shall occur and be continuing, the applicable
Convertible Notes Trustee, by written notice to Comstock, or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of
the applicable New Convertible Notes then outstanding, by written notice to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee and
Comstock, may declare the principal of, premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest on all of such New Convertible
Notes  due  and  payable  immediately,  upon  which  declaration  all  amounts  payable  in  respect  of  such  New  Convertible
Notes shall be immediately due and payable. If an Event of Default specified in clause (9) or (10) above occurs and is
continuing, then the principal of, premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest on all of such New Convertible Notes
shall become and be immediately due and payable without any declaration, notice or other act on the part of the applicable
Convertible Notes Trustee or any Holder of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes.
After a declaration of acceleration under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, but before a judgment or decree for
payment of the money due has been obtained by the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee, the Holders of a majority in
aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  then  outstanding,  by  written  notice  to
Comstock,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  and  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  may  rescind  and  annul  such
declaration  if  (1)  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  has  paid  or  deposited  with  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes
Trustee a sum sufficient to pay (a) all sums paid or advanced by such Convertible Notes Trustee under the applicable
Convertible  Notes  Indenture  and  the  reasonable  compensation,  expenses,  disbursements  and  advances  of  such
Convertible Notes Trustee, its agents and counsel, (b) all overdue interest on the applicable series of New Convertible
Notes,  (c)  the  principal  of  and  premium,  if  any,  on  any  New  Convertible  Notes  under  the  applicable  series  that  have
become  due  otherwise  than  by  such  declaration  of  acceleration  and  interest  thereon  at  the  rate  borne  by  such  New
Convertible Notes, and (d) to the extent that payment of such interest is lawful, interest upon overdue interest and overdue
principal at the rate borne by such New Convertible Notes (without duplication of any amount paid or deposited pursuant
to clause (b) or (c)); (2) the rescission would not conflict with any judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction;
and (3) all Events of
Table of Contents
246
Default, other than the non-payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the New Convertible Notes under the
applicable series that has become due solely by such declaration of acceleration, have been cured or waived.
No Holder will have any right to institute any proceeding under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture or any remedy
thereunder, unless (i) such Holder has notified the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee of a continuing Event of Default
and  the  Holders  of  at  least  25%  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  outstanding  New  Convertible  Notes  under  the
applicable series have made written request, and offered such indemnity satisfactory to the applicable Convertible Notes
Trustee,  to  such  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  to  institute  such  proceeding  under  such  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the
related New Convertible Notes Indenture, (ii) such Convertible Notes Trustee has failed to institute such proceeding within
60 days after receipt of such notice and (iii) such Convertible Notes Trustee, within such 60-day period, has not received
directions  inconsistent  with  such  written  request  by  Holders  of  a  majority  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the
outstanding  New  Convertible  Notes  under  the  applicable  series.  Such  limitations  will  not  apply,  however,  to  a  suit
instituted by the Holder of any New Convertible Note for the enforcement of the payment of the principal of, premium, if
any, or interest on such New Convertible Note on or after the respective due dates expressed in such New Convertible
Note.
During the existence of an Event of Default, the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee will be required to exercise such
rights and powers vested in it under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and use the same degree of care and skill
in its exercise thereof as a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in the conduct of such person’s own
affairs.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  relating  to  the  duties  of  the  trustee
thereunder, in case an Event of Default shall occur and be continuing, the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee will not be
under  any  obligation  to  exercise  any  of  its  rights  or  powers  under  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  at  the
request or direction of any of the applicable Holders unless such Holders shall have offered to such Convertible Notes
Trustee such security or indemnity satisfactory to the Convertible Notes Trustee. Subject to certain provisions concerning
the rights of such Convertible Notes Trustee, the Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding
New Convertible Notes under the applicable series will have the right to direct the time, method and place of conducting
any proceeding for any remedy available to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee, or exercising any trust or power
conferred on such Convertible Notes Trustee under the related Convertible Notes Indenture.
If a Default or an Event of Default occurs and is continuing and is known to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee, such
trustee shall mail to each applicable Holder notice of the Default or Event of Default within 60 days after the occurrence
thereof. Except in the case of a Default or an Event of Default in payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on any
New Convertible Notes, the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee may withhold the notice to the applicable Holders if such
trustee determines in good faith that withholding the notice is in the interest of such Holders.
Each  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  will  provide  that  Comstock  will  be  required  to  furnish  to  the  applicable  Convertible
Notes Trustee annual statements as to the performance by Comstock of its obligations under the applicable Convertible
Notes Indenture and as to any default in such performance. Comstock is also required to notify such Convertible Notes
Trustee within 10 days of any Default or Event of Default.
Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance of Convertible Notes Indentures
Comstock may, at its option and at any time, terminate the obligations of Comstock and the Subsidiary Guarantors with
respect to the outstanding New Convertible Notes under the applicable series (such action being a “legal defeasance”).
Such legal defeasance means that Comstock and the Subsidiary Guarantors shall be
Table of Contents
247
deemed  to  have  paid  and  discharged  the  entire  Indebtedness  represented  by  the  outstanding  New  Convertible  Notes
under the applicable series and to have been discharged from all their other obligations with respect to such series of New
Convertible Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees, except for, among other things:
(1)
(2)
the  rights  of  the  Holders  of  the  outstanding  New  Convertible  Notes  under  the  applicable  series  to  receive
payment in respect of, the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on such New Convertible Notes when
such payments are due;
Comstock’s obligations to replace any temporary notes, register the transfer or exchange of any notes, replace
mutilated, destroyed, lost or stolen notes and maintain an office or agency for payments in respect of the notes;
(3)
the rights, powers, trusts, duties, indemnities and immunities of the applicable Agents; and
(4)
the defeasance provisions of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture.
In  addition,  each  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  will  provide  that  Comstock  may,  at  its  option  and  at  any  time,  elect  to
terminate the obligations of Comstock and each Subsidiary Guarantor with respect to certain covenants that are set forth
in the a Convertible Notes Indenture, some of which are described under “—Certain Covenants” above, and any omission
to comply with such obligations shall not constitute a Default or an Event of Default with respect to the notes (such action
being a “covenant defeasance”).
In order to exercise either legal defeasance or covenant defeasance, each Convertible Notes Indenture will provide that:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(5)
(6)
Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  must  irrevocably  deposit  with  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes
Trustee,  in  trust,  for  the  benefit  of  the  Holders  of  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes,  cash  in
United  States  dollars,  U.S.  Government  Obligations  (as  defined  in  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes
Indenture),  or  a  combination  thereof,  in  such  amounts  as  will  be  sufficient  without  consideration  of  any
reinvestment  of  interest,  in  the  opinion  of  a  nationally  recognized  firm  of  independent  public  accountants
expressed in a written certification thereof delivered to the Trustee, to pay the principal of, premium, if any, and
interest on the New Convertible Notes under the applicable series to redemption or maturity;
Comstock shall have delivered to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee an Opinion of Counsel to the effect
that the Holders of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes then outstanding will not recognize income,
gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a result of such legal defeasance or covenant defeasance and
will be subject to federal income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as
would have been the case if such legal defeasance or covenant defeasance had not occurred (in the case of
legal defeasance, such opinion must refer to and be based upon a published ruling of the Internal Revenue
Service or a change in applicable federal income tax laws);
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing on the date of such deposit or insofar as
clauses (8) and (9) under the first paragraph of “Events of Default” are concerned, at any time during the period
ending on the 91st day after the date of deposit;
such legal defeasance or covenant defeasance shall not cause the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee to
have  a  conflicting  interest  under  the  related  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  or  the  TIA  with  respect  to  any
securities of Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor;
such  legal  defeasance  or  covenant  defeasance  shall  not  result  in  a  breach  or  violation  of,  or  constitute  a
default under, any material agreement or instrument to which Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor is a party
or by which it is bound; and
Table of Contents
248
(7)
Comstock  shall  have  delivered  to  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  an  officers’  certificate  and  an
opinion  of  counsel  satisfactory  to  such  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  which,  taken  together,  state  that  all
conditions precedent under the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee to either legal defeasance or covenant
defeasance, as the case may be, have been complied with.
Satisfaction and Discharge
Each Convertible Notes Indenture and the other related Convertible Note Documents will be discharged and cease to be
of further effect (except as to surviving rights of registration of transfer or exchange of such New Convertible Notes, as
expressly provided for in such Convertible Notes Indenture) as to all New Convertible Notes issued thereunder when:
(1)
either:
(a)
all New Convertible Notes issued thereunder that have been authenticated and delivered (except lost,
stolen,  mutilated  or  destroyed  New  Convertible  Notes  that  have  been  replaced  or  paid  and  New
Convertible  Notes  for  whose  payment  money  or  certain  United  States  government  obligations  have
theretofore been deposited in trust or segregated and held in trust by Comstock and thereafter repaid to
Comstock  or  discharged  from  such  trust)  have  been  delivered  to  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes
Trustee for cancellation; or
(b)
all New Convertible Notes issued thereunder that have not been delivered to the applicable Convertible
Notes Trustee for cancellation have become due and payable or will become due and payable at their
Stated Maturity within one year, or are to be called for redemption within one year under arrangements
satisfactory to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee for the serving of notice of redemption by such
trustee  in  the  name,  and  at  the  expense,  of  Comstock,  and  Comstock  has  irrevocably  deposited  or
caused to be deposited with the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee funds in an amount sufficient to
pay and discharge the entire Indebtedness on the New Convertible Notes under the applicable series
not theretofore delivered to such trustee for cancellation, for principal of, premium, if any, and interest on
such New Convertible Notes to the date of deposit (in the case of notes which have become due and
payable) or to the Stated Maturity or Redemption Date, as the case may be, together with instructions
from Comstock irrevocably directing the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee to apply such funds to the
payment thereof at maturity or redemption, as the case may be;
(2)
(3)
Comstock has paid all other sums payable under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture by Comstock;
and
Comstock has delivered to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee an officers’ certificate and an opinion of
counsel  which,  taken  together,  state  that  all  conditions  precedent  under  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes
Indenture relating to the satisfaction and discharge of such indenture have been complied with.
Amendments and Waivers
From time to time, Comstock, the Subsidiary Guarantors, the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee and the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent may, without the consent of the Holders of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes, amend or
supplement  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  the  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the  other  Convertible  Note
Documents for certain specified purposes, including, among other things, curing ambiguities, defects or inconsistencies,
qualifying, or maintaining the qualification of, such Convertible Notes
Table of Contents
249
Indenture under the TIA, complying with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and/or the Collateral Trust Agreement,
adding  or  releasing  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  Lien  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  such  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  the
Junior  Lien  Collateral  Documents,  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  or  the  Collateral  Trust  Agreement,  making,
completing or confirming any grant of Collateral permitted or required by the Convertible Notes Indentures or any of the
Convertible Note Documents related thereto, or making any change that does not adversely affect the rights of any Holder
of  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes.  Other  amendments  and  modifications  of  the  applicable  Convertible
Notes  Indenture  or  New  Convertible  Notes  may  be  made  by  Comstock,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  and  the  applicable
Convertible Notes Trustee with the consent of the Holders of not less than a majority of the aggregate principal amount of
the  outstanding  New  Convertible  Notes  under  the  applicable  series; provided,  however,  that  no  such  modification  or
amendment may, without the consent of the applicable Holder of each outstanding New Convertible Note affected thereby:
(1)
change the Stated Maturity of the principal of, or any installment of interest on, any New Convertible Note;
(2)
reduce the principal amount of, premium, if any, or interest on any New Convertible Note;
(3)
change the coin or currency of payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on, any New Convertible
Note;
impair  the  right  of  any  Holder  of  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  to  institute  suit  for  the
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
impair  the  right  of  any  Holder  of  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  to  institute  suit  for  the
enforcement of any payment on or with respect to any New Convertible Note;
reduce the above-stated percentage of aggregate principal amount of outstanding New Convertible Notes with
respect to any series necessary to modify or amend the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture;
reduce the percentage of aggregate principal amount of outstanding New Convertible Notes with respect to
any  series  necessary  for  waiver  of  compliance  with  certain  provisions  of  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes
Indenture or for waiver of certain defaults;
modify  any  provisions  of  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  relating  to  the  modification  and
amendment of such indenture or the waiver of past defaults or covenants, except as otherwise specified;
modify any provisions of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture relating to the Subsidiary Guarantees in a
manner adverse to the applicable Holders;
amend, change or modify the obligation of Comstock to make and consummate a Change of Control Offer in
the event of a Change of Control or make and consummate a Prepayment Offer with respect to any Asset Sale
or modify any of the provisions or definitions with respect thereto; or
(10)
release any Subsidiary Guarantor of such New Convertible Notes from any of its obligations under its Junior
Lien Subsidiary Guarantee or the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, except in accordance with the terms
of  such  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  and/or  the  Collateral  Trust
Agreement.
The Holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding New Convertible Notes under an
applicable  series  may,  on  behalf  of  the  Holders  of  all  such  New  Convertible  Notes,  waive  any  past  default  under  the
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, except a default in the payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on such
New Convertible Notes, or in respect of a covenant or provision that under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture
cannot be modified or amended without the consent of the Holder of each New Convertible Note outstanding.
Table of Contents
250
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the consent of Holders representing at least two-thirds of outstanding
New Convertible Notes under the applicable series will be required to release the Liens for the benefit of the Holders of
such New Convertible Notes on all or substantially all of the Collateral, other than in accordance with the Convertible Note
Documents applicable to such series of New Convertible Notes.
In addition to the foregoing, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and the Collateral Trust Agreement may be amended
in accordance with its terms and without the consent of any Holder of a series of New Convertible Notes, the Convertible
Notes  Trustees,  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  or  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent  to  add  other  parties  (or  any
authorized agent thereof or trustee therefor) holding Indebtedness subject thereto and to establish that the Liens on any
Collateral securing such Indebtedness shall rank equally with the Junior Liens on such Collateral securing the Convertible
Note Obligations then outstanding.
No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees and Stockholders
No  director,  officer,  employee,  incorporator,  stockholder,  member,  partner  or  trustee  of  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor,  as  such,  shall  have  any  liability  for  any  obligations  of  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  the
Convertible Note Documents for each series of New Convertible Notes or for any claim based on, in respect of, or by
reason of, such obligations or their creation. Each Holder by accepting a New Convertible Note waives and releases all
such liability. The waiver and release are part of the consideration for issuance of each series of New Convertible Notes.
The Convertible Notes Trustees
The  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  Trust  Company,  N.A.  will  serve  as  trustee  under  each  of  the  Convertible  Notes
Indentures. Each Convertible Notes Indenture (including provisions of the TIA incorporated by reference therein) contains
limitations on the rights of the Convertible Notes Trustee thereunder, should it become a creditor of Comstock, to obtain
payment of claims in certain cases or to realize on certain property received by it in respect of any such claims, as security
or  otherwise.  Each  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  permits  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  to  engage  in  other
transactions; provided that if it acquires any conflicting interest (as defined in the TIA), it must eliminate such conflict or
resign. The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. also serves as trustee under the Old Indentures and the Senior
Secured Notes Indenture.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the Convertible Notes Trustees shall have no responsibility for
(i)  preparing,  recording,  filing,  re-recording,  or  re-filing  any  financing  statement,  perfection  statement,  continuation
statement or other instrument in any public office or for otherwise ensuring the perfection or maintenance of any security
interest granted pursuant to, or contemplated by, any document; (ii) taking any necessary steps to preserve rights against
any  parties  with  respect  to  the  Collateral;  or  (iii)  taking  any  action  to  protect  against  any  diminution  in  value  of  the
Collateral.
Governing Law
The  Convertible  Notes  Indentures,  the  New  Convertible  Notes,  the  Junior  Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantees  related  to  each
series of New Convertible Notes, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and the Collateral Trust Agreement are governed
by, and construed and enforced in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
Available Information
Anyone who receives this prospectus may obtain a copy of the Convertible Notes Indentures, the form of New Convertible
Notes, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, the Collateral Trust Agreement and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements
without charge by writing to Comstock Resources, Inc., 5300 Town and Country Blvd., Suite 500, Frisco, Texas 75034,
Attention: Roland O. Burns.
Table of Contents
Book Entry, Delivery and Form
251
The New Convertible Notes will be issued in registered, global form in denominations of integral multiples of $1.00 (the
“Global Notes”). New Convertible Notes will be issued at the closing of this offering only against payment in immediately
available funds. The Global Notes will be deposited upon issuance with the trustee as custodian for DTC, and registered in
the name of DTC or its nominee, for credit to an account of a direct or indirect participant in DTC as described below.
Except as set forth below, the Global Notes may be transferred, in whole and not in part, only to another nominee of DTC
or to a successor of DTC or its nominee. Beneficial interests in the Global Notes may not be exchanged for definitive New
Convertible  Notes  in  registered  certificated  form,  or  Certificated  Notes,  except  in  the  limited  circumstances  described
below. See “—Exchange of Global Notes for Certificated Notes.” Except in the limited circumstances described below,
owners of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will not be entitled to receive physical delivery of New Convertible Notes
in certificated form. In addition, transfers of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will be subject to the applicable rules
and procedures of DTC and its direct or indirect participants (including, if applicable, those of Euroclear and Clearstream),
which may change from time to time.
Depository Procedures
The following description of the operations and procedures of DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream are provided solely as a
matter  of  convenience.  These  operations  and  procedures  are  solely  within  the  control  of  the  respective  settlement
systems and are subject to changes by them. Comstock takes no responsibility for these operations and procedures and
urges investors to contact the system or their participants directly to discuss these matters.
DTC has advised Comstock that DTC is a limited-purpose trust company created to hold securities for its participating
organizations, or collectively, the “Participants”,  and  to  facilitate  the  clearance  and  settlement  of  transactions  in  those
securities  between  the  Participants  through  electronic  book-entry  changes  in  accounts  of  its  Participants.  The
Participants  include  securities  brokers  and  dealers  (including  the  initial  purchasers),  banks,  trust  companies,  clearing
corporations and certain other organizations. Access to DTC’s system is also available to other entities such as banks,
brokers,  dealers  and  trust  companies  that  clear  through  or  maintain  a  custodial  relationship  with  a  Participant,  either
directly or indirectly, or collectively, the “Indirect Participants.”  Persons  who  are  not  Participants  may  beneficially  own
securities held by or on behalf of DTC only through the Participants or the Indirect Participants. The ownership interests
in, and transfers of ownership interests in, each security held by or on behalf of DTC are recorded on the records of the
Participants and Indirect Participants.
DTC has also advised Comstock that, pursuant to procedures established by it:
(1) upon deposit of the Global Notes, DTC will credit the accounts of the Participants designated by the initial purchasers
with portions of the principal amount of the Global Notes; and
(2) ownership of these interests in the Global Notes will be shown on, and the transfer of ownership of these interests will
be  effected  only  through,  records  maintained  by  DTC  (with  respect  to  the  Participants)  or  by  the  Participants  and  the
Indirect Participants (with respect to other owners of beneficial interest in the Global Notes).
Investors in the Global Notes who are Participants may hold their interests therein directly through DTC. Investors in the
Global  Notes  who  are  not  Participants  may  hold  their  interests  therein  indirectly  through  organizations  (including
Euroclear and Clearstream) which are Participants.
All interests in a Global Note, including those held through Euroclear or Clearstream, may be subject to the procedures
and requirements of DTC. Those interests held through Euroclear or Clearstream may also be subject to the procedures
and requirements of such systems. The laws of some jurisdictions require that certain Persons
Table of Contents
252
take physical delivery in definitive form of securities that they own. Consequently, the ability to transfer beneficial interests
in a Global Note to such Persons will be limited to that extent. Because DTC can act only on behalf of the Participants,
which in turn act on behalf of the Indirect Participants, the ability of a Person having beneficial interests in a Global Note to
pledge such interests to Persons that do not participate in the DTC system, or otherwise take actions in respect of such
interests, may be affected by the lack of a physical certificate evidencing such interests.
Except as described below, owners of interests in the Global Notes will not have New Convertible Notes registered in their
names,  will  not  receive  physical  delivery  of  New  Convertible  Notes  in  certificated  form  and  will  not  be  considered  the
registered owners or “holders” thereof under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture for any purpose.
Payments in respect of the principal of, and interest and premium, if any, on a Global Note registered in the name of DTC
or its nominee will be payable to DTC in its capacity as the registered holder under the Convertible Notes Indenture. Under
the terms of the Convertible Notes Indenture, Comstock and the Convertible Notes Trustee, registrar and paying agent will
treat the Persons in whose names the New Convertible Notes, including the Global Notes, are registered as the owners of
the  New  Convertible  Notes  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  payments  and  for  all  other  purposes.  Consequently,  neither
Comstock, the Convertible Notes Trustee nor any Agent of Comstock or the Convertible Notes Trustee has or will have
any responsibility or liability for:
(1) any aspect of DTC’s records or any Participant’s or Indirect Participant’s records relating to, or payments made on
account of, beneficial ownership interest in the Global Notes or for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any of DTC’s
records or any Participant’s or Indirect Participant’s records relating to the beneficial ownership interests in the Global
Notes; or
(2) any other matter relating to the actions and practices of DTC or any of its Participants, or Indirect Participants.
DTC has advised Comstock that its current practice, at the due date of any payment in respect of securities such as the
New Convertible Notes, is to credit the accounts of the relevant Participants with the payment on the payment date unless
DTC has reason to believe that it will not receive payment on such payment date. Each relevant Participant is credited with
an amount proportionate to its beneficial ownership of an interest in the principal amount of the New Convertible Notes as
shown on the records of DTC. Payments by the Participants and the Indirect Participants to the beneficial owners of New
Convertible Notes will be governed by standing instructions and customary practices and will be the responsibility of the
Participants or the Indirect Participants and will not be the responsibility of DTC, the Convertible Notes Trustee, any Agent
or Comstock. Neither Comstock nor the Convertible Notes Trustee or any other Agent will be liable for any delay by DTC
or any of the Participants or the Indirect Participants in identifying the beneficial owners of the New Convertible Notes, and
Comstock  and  the  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  and  any  other  Agent  may  conclusively  rely  on  and  will  be  protected  in
relying on instructions from DTC or its nominee for all purposes.
Transfers between the Participants will be effected in accordance with DTC’s procedures, and will be settled in same-day
funds, and transfers between participants in Euroclear and Clearstream will be effected in accordance with their respective
rules and operating procedures.
Subject  to  compliance  with  the  transfer  restrictions  applicable  to  the  New  Convertible  Notes  described  herein,  cross-
market transfers between the Participants, on the one hand, and Euroclear or Clearstream participants, on the other hand,
will be effected through DTC in accordance with DTC’s rules on behalf of Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, by
their respective depositaries; however, such cross-market transactions will require delivery of instructions to Euroclear or
Clearstream, as the case may be, by the counterparty in such system in accordance with the rules and procedures and
within the established deadlines (Brussels time) of such system. Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, will, if the
transaction meets its settlement requirements,
Table of Contents
253
deliver  instructions  to  its  respective  depositary  to  take  action  to  effect  final  settlement  on  its  behalf  by  delivering  or
receiving  interests  in  the  relevant  Global  Note  in  DTC,  and  making  or  receiving  payment  in  accordance  with  normal
procedures for same-day funds settlement applicable to DTC. Euroclear participants and Clearstream participants may not
deliver instructions directly to the depositories for Euroclear or Clearstream.
DTC has advised Comstock that it will take any action permitted to be taken by a Holder of New Convertible Notes only at
the direction of one or more Participants to whose account DTC has credited the interests in the Global Notes and only in
respect of such portion of the aggregate principal amount of the New Convertible Notes as to which such Participant or
Participants has or have given such direction. However, if there is an Event of Default under the applicable series of New
Convertible Notes, DTC reserves the right to exchange the Global Notes for Certificated Notes, and to distribute such New
Convertible Notes to its Participants.
Exchange of Global Notes for Certificated Notes
A Global Note is exchangeable for Certificated Notes in denominations of integral multiples of $1.00 if:
(1) DTC notifies Comstock that it is unwilling or unable to continue as depositary for the Global Notes or DTC has ceased
to be a clearing agency registered under the Exchange Act at a time when DTC is required to be so registered in order to
act as depositary and, in either case, Comstock fails to appoint a successor depositary within 90 days of such notice;
(2)  Comstock,  at  its  option,  but  subject  to  DTC’s  requirements,  notifies  the  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  in  writing  that  it
elects to cause the issuance of the Certificated Notes; or
(3)  there  has  occurred  and  is  continuing  a  Default  or  Event  of  Default  with  respect  to  the  applicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes and DTC notifies the trustee of its decision to exchange such Global Notes for Certificated Notes.
In all cases, Certificated Notes delivered in exchange for any Global Note or beneficial interests in Global Notes will be
registered  in  the  names,  and  issued  in  any  approved  denominations,  requested  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  depositary  (in
accordance  with  its  customary  procedures)  and  will  bear  the  applicable  restrictive  legend  referred  to  in  “Notice  to
Investors,” unless that legend is not required by applicable law.
Exchange of Certificated Notes for Global Notes
Certificated Notes may not be exchanged for beneficial interests in any Global Note, except in the limited circumstances
provided in the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture.
Same Day Settlement and Payment
Comstock  will  make  payments  in  respect  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  represented  by  the  Global  Notes  (including
principal, premium, if any, and interest) by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the accounts specified by DTC or
its nominee. Comstock will make all payments of principal, interest and premium, if any, with respect to Certificated Notes
by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the accounts specified by the Holders of the Certificated Notes or, if no
such  account  is  specified,  by  mailing  a  check  to  each  such  Holder’s  registered  address.  The  New  Convertible  Notes
represented by the Global Notes are expected to be eligible to trade in DTC’s Same-Day Funds Settlement System, and
any permitted secondary market trading activity in such New Convertible Notes will, therefore, be required by DTC to be
settled  in  immediately  available  funds.  Comstock  expects  that  secondary  trading  in  any  Certificated  Notes  will  also  be
settled in immediately available funds.
Because of time zone differences, the securities account of a Euroclear or Clearstream participant purchasing an interest
in a Global Note from a participant will be credited, and any such crediting will be reported to the
254
Table of Contents
relevant Euroclear or Clearstream participant, during the securities settlement processing day (which must be a business
day for Euroclear and Clearstream) immediately following the settlement date of DTC. DTC has advised Comstock that
cash received in Euroclear or Clearstream as a result of sales of interests in a Global Note by or through a Euroclear or
Clearstream participant to a participant will be received with value on the settlement date of DTC but will be available in the
relevant Euroclear or Clearstream cash account only as of the business day for Euroclear or Clearstream following DTC’s
settlement date.
Certain Definitions
“Act of Junior Lien Debtholders” means, as to any matter at any time, a direction in writing delivered to the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent by or with the written consent of the holders of Convertible Note Obligations representing the Required
Junior Lien Debtholders.
“Acquired Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of a Person (1) existing at the time such Person becomes a Restricted
Subsidiary  or  (2)  assumed  in  connection  with  acquisitions  of  properties  or  assets  from  such  Person  (other  than  any
Indebtedness incurred in connection with, or in contemplation of, such Person becoming a Restricted Subsidiary or such
acquisition).  Acquired  Indebtedness  shall  be  deemed  to  be  incurred  on  the  date  the  acquired  Person  becomes  a
Restricted Subsidiary or the date of the related acquisition of properties or assets from such Person.
“Additional Assets” means:
(1)
(2)
any assets or property (other than cash, Cash Equivalents or securities) used in the Oil and Gas Business or
any business ancillary thereto;
Investments  in  any  other  Person  engaged  in  the  Oil  and  Gas  Business  or  any  business  ancillary  thereto
(including the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of such Person) as a result of which such other
Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary;
(3)
the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary; or
(4)
capital expenditures by Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary in the Oil and Gas Business.
“Additional New Senior Secured Notes” means the additional securities issued under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture
solely in connection with the payment of interest in kind on the New Senior Secured Notes.
“Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets” means (without duplication), as of the date of determination, the remainder
of:
(1)
the sum of:
(a)
discounted  future  net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines before any state, federal or foreign
income taxes, as estimated by Comstock and confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent
petroleum engineers in a reserve report prepared as of the end of Comstock’s most recently completed
fiscal  year  for  which  audited  financial  statements  are  available,  as  increased  by,  as  of  the  date  of
determination, the estimated discounted future net revenues from:
(i)
estimated proved oil and gas reserves acquired since such year-end, which reserves were not
reflected in such year-end reserve report, and
255
Table of Contents
(ii)
estimated oil and gas reserves attributable to upward revisions of estimates of proved oil and
gas reserves since such year-end due to exploration, development or exploitation activities, in
each case calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in
such year-end reserve report),
and decreased by, as of the date of determination, the estimated discounted future net revenues from:
(iii)
estimated proved oil and gas reserves produced or disposed of since such year-end, and
(iv)
estimated oil and gas reserves attributable to downward revisions of estimates of proved oil
and gas reserves since such year-end due to changes in geological conditions or other factors
which  would,  in  accordance  with  standard  industry  practice,  cause  such  revisions,  in  each
case calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in such
year-end reserve report);
provided that, in the case of each of the determinations made pursuant to clauses (i) through (iv), such increases and
decreases shall be as estimated by Comstock’s petroleum engineers, unless there is a Material Change as a result of such
acquisitions, dispositions or revisions, in which event the discounted future net revenues utilized for purposes of this
clause (1)(a) shall be confirmed in writing by a nationally recognized firm of independent petroleum engineers;
(b)
(c)
(d)
the  capitalized  costs  that  are  attributable  to  oil  and  gas  properties  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries to which no proved oil and gas reserves are attributable, based on Comstock’s books and
records  as  of  a  date  no  earlier  than  the  date  of  Comstock’s  latest  annual  or  quarterly  financial
statements;
the  Net  Working  Capital  on  a  date  no  earlier  than  the  date  of  Comstock’s  latest  annual  or  quarterly
financial statements; and
the greater of (i) the net book value on a date no earlier than the date of Comstock’s latest annual or
quarterly financial statements and (ii) the appraised value, as estimated by independent appraisers, of
other  tangible  assets  (including,  without  duplication,  Investments  in  unconsolidated  Restricted
Subsidiaries) of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, as of the date no earlier than the date of
Comstock’s latest audited financial statements, minus
(2)
the sum of:
(a)
Minority Interests;
(b)
(c)
any net gas balancing liabilities of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries reflected in Comstock’s
latest audited financial statements;
to the extent included in (1)(a) above, the discounted future net revenues, calculated in accordance with
Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in Comstock’s year-end reserve report), attributable
to reserves which are required to be delivered to third parties to fully satisfy the obligations of Comstock
and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  with  respect  to  Volumetric  Production  Payments  (determined,  if
applicable, using the schedules specified with respect thereto); and
256
Table of Contents
(d)
the discounted future net revenues, calculated in accordance with Commission guidelines, attributable
to  reserves  subject  to  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  which,  based  on  the  estimates  of
production and price assumptions included in determining the discounted future net revenues specified
in  (1)(a)  above,  would  be  necessary  to  fully  satisfy  the  payment  obligations  of  Comstock  and  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries  with  respect  to  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  (determined,  if
applicable, using the schedules specified with respect thereto).
“Adjusted  Net  Assets”  of  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  at  any  date  shall  mean  the  amount  by  which  the  fair  value  of  the
properties and assets of such Subsidiary Guarantor exceeds the total amount of liabilities, including, without limitation,
contingent liabilities (after giving effect to all other fixed and contingent liabilities incurred or assumed on such date), but
excluding liabilities under its Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee, of such Subsidiary Guarantor at such date.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to any specified Person, any other Person directly or indirectly controlling or controlled by
or under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person. For the purposes of this definition, “control,” when
used with respect to any Person, means the power to direct the management and policies of such Person, directly or
indirectly, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise; and the terms “controlling” and
“controlled” have meanings correlative to the foregoing. For purposes of this definition, beneficial ownership of 10% or
more of the voting common equity (on a fully diluted basis) or options or warrants to purchase such equity (but only if
exercisable at the date of determination or within 60 days thereof) of a Person shall be deemed to constitute control of
such Person.
“Agents” means, collectively, the Priority Collateral Agent, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each Convertible Notes
Trustee, and “Agent” means any one of them.
“Asset  Sale”  means  any  sale,  issuance,  conveyance,  transfer,  lease  or  other  disposition  to  any  Person  other  than
Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  (including,  without  limitation,  by  means  of  a  merger  or  consolidation)
(collectively, for purposes of this definition, a “transfer”), directly or indirectly, in one or a series of related transactions, of
(i) any Capital Stock of any Restricted Subsidiary, (ii) all or substantially all of the properties and assets of any division or
line of business of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries or (iii) any other properties or assets of Comstock or
any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  other  than  (a)  a  transfer  of  cash,  Cash  Equivalents,  hydrocarbons  or  other  mineral
products in the ordinary course of business or (b) any lease, abandonment, disposition, relinquishment or farm-out of any
oil and gas properties in the ordinary course of business. For the purposes of this definition, the term “Asset Sale” also
shall  not  include  (A)  any  transfer  of  properties  or  assets  (including  Capital  Stock)  that  is  governed  by,  and  made  in
accordance  with,  the  provisions  described  under  “—Merger,  Consolidation  and  Sale  of  Assets;”  (B)  any  transfer  of
properties or assets to an Unrestricted Subsidiary, if permitted under the “Limitation on Restricted Payments” covenant;
or (C) any transfer (in a single transaction or a series of related transactions) of properties or assets (including Capital
Stock) having a Fair Market Value of less than $25.0 million.
“Attributable Indebtedness” means, with respect to any particular lease under which any Person is at the time liable and at
any date as of which the amount thereof is to be determined, the present value of the total net amount of rent required to
be paid by such Person under the lease during the primary term thereof, without giving effect to any renewals at the option
of the lessee, discounted from the respective due dates thereof to such date at the rate of interest per annum implicit in the
terms of the lease. As used in the preceding sentence, the net amount of rent under any lease for any such period shall
mean the sum of rental and other payments required to be paid with respect to such period by the lessee thereunder
excluding  any  amounts  required  to  be  paid  by  such  lessee  on  account  of  maintenance  and  repairs,  insurance,  taxes,
assessments, water rates or similar charges. In the case of any lease which is terminable by the lessee upon payment of a
penalty,  such  net  amount  of  rent  shall  also  include  the  amount  of  such  penalty,  but  no  rent  shall  be  considered  as
required to be paid under such lease subsequent to the first date upon which it may be so terminated.
Table of Contents
257
“Authorized Representative” means (a) in the case of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations or the Revolving Credit
Agreement Secured Parties, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, (b) in the case of the Senior Secured Note Obligations
or the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the holders of the New Senior Secured Notes, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee
and (c) in the case of the Convertible Note Obligations and the Holders of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes,
the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee.
“Average Life” means, with respect to any Indebtedness, as at any date of determination, the quotient obtained by dividing
(i) the sum of the products of (a) the number of years (and any portion thereof) from the date of determination to the date or
dates  of  each  successive  scheduled  principal  payment  (including,  without  limitation,  any  sinking  fund  or  mandatory
redemption payment requirements) of such Indebtedness multiplied by (b) the amount of each such principal payment by
(ii) the sum of all such principal payments.
“Bankruptcy Code” means Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.
“Capital Stock” means, with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests, participations, rights or other equivalents
in the equity interests (however designated) in such Person, and any rights (other than debt securities convertible into an
equity interest), warrants or options exercisable for, exchangeable for or convertible into such an equity interest in such
Person.
“Capitalized Lease Obligation” means any obligation to pay rent or other amounts under a lease of (or other agreement
conveying the right to use) any property (whether real, personal or mixed) that is required to be classified and accounted
for  as  a  capital  lease  obligation  under  GAAP,  and,  for  the  purpose  of  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  the
amount of such obligation at any date shall be the capitalized amount thereof at such date, determined in accordance with
GAAP.
“Cash Equivalents” means:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
any evidence of Indebtedness with a maturity of 180 days or less issued or directly and fully guaranteed or
insured by the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof (provided that the full faith
and credit of the United States of America is pledged in support thereof);
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit or acceptances with a maturity of 180 days or less of any
financial institution that is a member of the Federal Reserve System having combined capital and surplus and
undivided profits of not less than $500 million;
commercial  paper  with  a  maturity  of  180  days  or  less  issued  by  a  corporation  that  is  not  an  Affiliate  of
Comstock and is organized under the laws of any state of the United States or the District of Columbia and
rated at least A-1 by S&P or at least P-1 by Moody’s;
repurchase obligations with a term of not more than seven days for underlying securities of the types described
in clause (1) above entered into with any commercial bank meeting the specifications of clause (2) above;
overnight  bank  deposits  and  bankers  acceptances  at  any  commercial  bank  meeting  the  qualifications
specified in clause (2) above;
deposits  available  for  withdrawal  on  demand  with  any  commercial  bank  not  meeting  the  qualifications
specified in clause (2) above but which is a lending bank under the Revolving Credit Agreement, provided all
such deposits do not exceed $5.0 million in the aggregate at any one time;
258
Table of Contents
(7)
(8)
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit with any commercial bank organized in the United States
not  meeting  the  qualifications  specified  in  clause  (2)  above,  provided  that  such  deposits  and  certificates
support bond, letter of credit and other similar types of obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business;
and
investments in money market or other mutual funds substantially all of whose assets comprise securities of the
investments in money market or other mutual funds substantially all of whose assets comprise securities of the
types described in clauses (1) through (5) above.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any event or series of events by which:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
any  “person”  or  “group”  (as  such  terms  are  used  in  Sections  13(d)  and  14(d)  of  the  Exchange  Act)  is  or
becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act), directly or indirectly, of
more than 50% of the total Voting Stock of Comstock;
Comstock consolidates with or merges into another Person or any Person consolidates with, or merges into,
Comstock, in any such event pursuant to a transaction in which the outstanding Voting Stock of Comstock is
changed into or exchanged for cash, securities or other property, other than any such transaction where (a) the
outstanding  Voting  Stock  of  Comstock  is  changed  into  or  exchanged  for  Voting  Stock  of  the  surviving  or
resulting  Person  that  is  Qualified  Capital  Stock  and  (b)  the  holders  of  the  Voting  Stock  of  Comstock
immediately prior to such transaction own, directly or indirectly, not less than a majority of the Voting Stock of
the surviving or resulting Person immediately after such transaction;
Comstock,  either  individually  or  in  conjunction  with  one  or  more  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  sells,  assigns,
conveys,  transfers,  leases  or  otherwise  disposes  of,  or  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  sell,  assign,  convey,
transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of, all or substantially all of the properties and assets of Comstock and
such Restricted Subsidiaries, taken as a whole (either in one transaction or a series of related transactions),
including Capital Stock of the Restricted Subsidiaries, to any Person (other than Comstock or a Wholly Owned
Restricted Subsidiary);
during any consecutive two-year period, individuals who at the beginning of such period constituted the Board
of Directors of Comstock (together with any new directors whose election by such Board of Directors or whose
nomination for election by the stockholders of Comstock was approved by a vote of 66 2/3% of the directors
then still in office who were either directors at the beginning of such period or whose election or nomination for
election was previously so approved) cease for any reason to constitute a majority of the Board of Directors of
Comstock then in office; or
(5)
Comstock is liquidated or dissolved.
“Charter Amendment” means the amendment of Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of
shares of Comstock’s common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized
shares  of  the  Comstock’s  common  stock  for  the  issuance  of  shares  upon  conversion  of  all  of  the  outstanding  New
Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary, exercise of all of the warrants.
“Collateral” means all property wherever located and whether now owned or at any time acquired after the date of the
applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  by  any  Collateral  Grantor  as  to  which  a  Lien  is  granted  under  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agreements to secure the New Convertible Notes or any Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee.
“Collateral Grantors” means Comstock and each Subsidiary Guarantor that is party to a Junior Lien Collateral Agreement.
Table of Contents
259
“Commodity Exchange Act” means the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and
any successor statute.
“Common Stock” means the common stock, par value $0.50 per share, of Comstock.
“Consolidated  Exploration  Expenses”  means,  for  any  period,  exploration  expenses  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio”  means,  for  any  period,  the  ratio  on  a  pro  forma  basis  of  (1)  the  sum  of
Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated Interest Expense, Consolidated Income Tax Expense and Consolidated Non-cash
Charges each to the extent deducted in computing Consolidated Net Income, in each case, for such period, of Comstock
and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, all determined in accordance with GAAP, decreased (to the extent
included in determining Consolidated Net Income) by the sum of (a) the amount of deferred revenues that are amortized
during such period and are attributable to reserves that are subject to Volumetric Production Payments and (b) amounts
recorded in accordance with GAAP as repayments of principal and interest pursuant to Dollar- Denominated Production
Payments, to (2) Consolidated Interest Expense for such period; provided, however, that (i) the Consolidated Fixed Charge
Coverage Ratio shall be calculated on a pro forma basis assuming that (A) the Indebtedness to be incurred (and all other
Indebtedness incurred after the first day of such period of four full fiscal quarters referred to in the covenant described
under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” through and including the date
of  determination),  and  (if  applicable)  the  application  of  the  net  proceeds  therefrom  (and  from  any  other  such
Indebtedness), including to refinance other Indebtedness, had been incurred on the first day of such four-quarter period
and, in the case of Acquired Indebtedness, on the assumption that the related transaction (whether by means of purchase,
merger or otherwise) also had occurred on such date with the appropriate adjustments with respect to such acquisition
being  included  in  such  pro  forma  calculation  and  (B)  any  acquisition  or  disposition  by  Comstock  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary of any properties or assets outside the ordinary course of business, or any repayment of any principal amount
of any Indebtedness of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary prior to the Stated Maturity thereof, in either case since the
first  day  of  such  period  of  four  full  fiscal  quarters  through  and  including  the  date  of  determination,  had  been
consummated on such first day of such four-quarter period, (ii) in making such computation, the Consolidated Interest
Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness required to be computed on a pro forma basis in accordance with
the  covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”  and
(A)  bearing  a  floating  interest  rate  shall  be  computed  as  if  the  rate  in  effect  on  the  date  of  computation  had  been  the
applicable rate for the entire period and (B) which was not outstanding during the period for which the computation is
being made but which bears, at the option of Comstock, a fixed or floating rate of interest, shall be computed by applying,
at  the  option  of  Comstock,  either  the  fixed  or  floating  rate,  (iii)  in  making  such  computation,  the  Consolidated  Interest
Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness under a revolving credit facility required to be computed on a pro
forma basis in accordance with the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and
Disqualified Capital Stock” shall be computed based upon the average daily balance of such Indebtedness during the
applicable  period,  provided  that  such  average  daily  balance  shall  be  reduced  by  the  amount  of  any  repayment  of
Indebtedness  under  a  revolving  credit  facility  during  the  applicable  period,  which  repayment  permanently  reduced  the
commitments or amounts available to be reborrowed under such facility, (iv) notwithstanding clauses (ii) and (iii) of this
provision,  interest  on  Indebtedness  determined  on  a  fluctuating  basis,  to  the  extent  such  interest  is  covered  by
agreements  relating  to  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  accrued  at  the  rate  per  annum
resulting  after  giving  effect  to  the  operation  of  such  agreements,  (v)  in  making  such  calculation,  Consolidated  Interest
Expense shall exclude interest attributable to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments, and (vi) if after the first day of the
period referred to in clause (1) of this definition Comstock has permanently retired any Indebtedness out of the Net Cash
Proceeds of the issuance and sale of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock within 30 days of such issuance and
sale, Consolidated Interest Expense shall be calculated on a pro forma basis as if such Indebtedness had been retired on
the first day of such period.
Table of Contents
260
“Consolidated Income Tax Expense” means, for any period, the provision for federal, state, local and foreign income taxes
(including state franchise taxes accounted for as income taxes in accordance with GAAP) of Comstock and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated  Interest  Expense”  means,  for  any  period,  without  duplication,  the  sum  of  (1)  the  interest  expense  of
Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  for  such  period  as  determined  on  a  consolidated  basis  in  accordance  with
GAAP, including, without limitation, (a) any amortization of debt discount, (b) the net cost under Interest Rate Protection
Obligations  (including  any  amortization  of  discounts),  (c)  the  interest  portion  of  any  deferred  payment  obligation
constituting  Indebtedness,  (d)  all  commissions,  discounts  and  other  fees  and  charges  owed  with  respect  to  letters  of
credit  and  bankers’  acceptance  financing  and  (e)  all  accrued  interest,  in  each  case  to  the  extent  attributable  to  such
period, (2) to the extent any Indebtedness of any Person (other than Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary) is guaranteed
by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary, the aggregate amount of interest paid (to the extent not accrued in a prior
period) or accrued by such other Person during such period attributable to any such Indebtedness, in each case to the
extent attributable to that period, (3) the aggregate amount of the interest component of Capitalized Lease Obligations paid
(to the extent not accrued in a prior period), accrued or scheduled to be paid or accrued by Comstock and its Restricted
Subsidiaries during such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP and (4) the aggregate
amount of dividends paid (to the extent such dividends are not accrued in a prior period and excluding dividends paid in
Qualified Capital Stock) or accrued on Disqualified Capital Stock of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, to the extent
such Disqualified Capital Stock is owned by Persons other than Restricted Subsidiaries, less, to the extent included in any
of clauses (1) through (4), amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries
during such period.
“Consolidated Net Income” means, for any period, the consolidated net income (or loss) of Comstock and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined in accordance with GAAP, adjusted by excluding:
(1)
net after-tax extraordinary gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto);
(2)
net after-tax gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto) attributable to Asset Sales;
(3)
(4)
the net income (or net loss) of any Person (other than Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries), in which
Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries has an ownership interest, except to the extent of the amount of
dividends or other distributions actually paid to Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in cash by such
other Person during such period (regardless of whether such cash dividends or distributions are attributable to
net income (or net loss) of such Person during such period or during any prior period);
the net income of any Restricted Subsidiary to the extent that the declaration or payment of dividends or similar
distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary is not at the date of determination permitted, directly or indirectly, by
operation  of  the  terms  of  its  charter  or  any  agreement,  instrument,  judgment,  decree,  order,  statute,  rule  or
governmental regulation applicable to that Restricted Subsidiary or its stockholders;
(5)
dividends paid in Qualified Capital Stock;
(6)
income  resulting  from  transfers  of  assets  received  by  Comstock  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  from  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary;
(7)
Consolidated Exploration Expenses and any write-downs or impairments of non-current assets; and
261
Table of Contents
(8)
the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles.
“Consolidated  Non-cash  Charges”  means,  for  any  period,  the  aggregate  depreciation,  depletion,  amortization  and
exploration expense and other non-cash expenses of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries reducing Consolidated
Net Income for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP (excluding any such non-cash
charge for which an accrual of or reserve for cash charges for any future period is required).
“Convertible Note Documents” means the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture or the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture, as
the  context  may  require,  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements  and  any  agreement  instrument  or  other  document
evidencing or governing any Convertible Note Obligations related to the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture or the 2020
Convertible Notes Indenture, as the context may require.
“Convertible  Note  Obligations”  means  all  advances  to,  and  debts,  liabilities,  obligations,  covenants  and  duties  of,
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor arising under the Convertible Notes Indentures, the New Convertible Notes, the
Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements (including all principal, premium, interest,
penalties,  fees,  charges,  charges,  expenses,  indemnifications,  reimbursement  obligations,  damages,  guarantees,  and
other  liabilities  or  amounts  payable  or  arising  thereunder),  whether  direct  or  indirect  (including  those  acquired  by
assumption), absolute or contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and including interest and
fees  that  accrue  after  the  commencement  by  or  against  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  of  any  proceeding  in
bankruptcy or insolvency law naming such Person as the debtor in such proceeding, regardless of whether such interest
and fees are allowed claims in such proceeding.
“Convertible Notes Indentures” means, individually or collectively, as the context may require, the 2019 Convertible Notes
Indenture and the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture.
“Convertible Notes Trustees” means, individually or collectively, as the context may require, the 2019 Convertible Notes
Trustee and the 2020 Convertible Notes Trustee.
“Daily VWAP” means for any Trading Day, the per share volume-weighted average price as displayed under the heading
“Bloomberg VWAP” on Bloomberg page “WLL<equity>VWAP” (or its equivalent successor if such page is not available)
in respect of the period from the scheduled open of trading until the scheduled close of trading of the primary trading
session on such Trading Day, up to and including the final closing print (which is indicated by Condition Code “6” in
Bloomberg) (or if such volume-weighted average price is unavailable, the market value of one share of Common Stock on
such  Trading  Day,  determined,  using  a  volume-weighted  average  method,  by  a  nationally  recognized  independent
investment banking firm retained for this purpose by Comstock).
“Default” means any event, act or condition that is, or after notice or passage of time or both would become, an Event of
Default.
“Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations” means the occurrence of all of the following:
(1)
termination or expiration of all commitments to extend credit that would constitute Priority Lien Obligations;
(2)
(3)
payment in full in cash of the principal of and interest, premium (if any) and fees on all Priority Lien Obligations
(other than any undrawn letters of credit);
discharge or cash collateralization (at 105% of the aggregate undrawn amount) of all outstanding letters of
credit constituting Priority Lien Obligations;
262
Table of Contents
(4)
(5)
payment in full in cash of obligations in respect of Secured Swap Obligations that are secured by Priority Liens
(and, with respect to any particular Secured Swap Obligation, termination of such agreement and payment in
full in cash of all obligations thereunder or such other arrangements as have been made by the counterparty
thereto (and communicated to the Priority Lien Collateral Agent)); and
payment in full in cash of all other Priority Lien Obligations that are outstanding and unpaid at the time the
Priority Lien Obligations are paid in full in cash (other than any obligations for taxes, costs, indemnifications,
reimbursements, damages and other liabilities in respect of which no claim or demand for payment has been
made at or prior to such time);
provided that, if, at any time after the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations has occurred, any Collateral Grantor enters
into any Priority Lien Document evidencing a Priority Lien Obligation which incurrence is not prohibited by the applicable
Secured Debt Documents, then such Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations shall automatically be deemed not to have
occurred for all purposes of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement with respect to such new Priority Lien Obligation
(other  than  with  respect  to  any  actions  taken  as  a  result  of  the  occurrence  of  such  first  Discharge  of  Priority  Lien
Obligations), and, from and after the date on which Comstock designates such Indebtedness as a Priority Lien Obligation
in  accordance  with  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  the  obligations  under  such  Priority  Lien  Document  shall
automatically  and  without  any  further  action  be  treated  as  Priority  Lien  Obligations  for  all  purposes  of  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement, including for purposes of the Lien priorities and rights in respect of Collateral set forth in the
Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  and  any  Convertible  Note  Obligations  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  at  all  times
Convertible Note Obligations and at no time Priority Lien Obligations.
“Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations” means, except to the extent otherwise provided in the Pari Passu
Intercreditor  Agreement,  payment  in  full,  in  cash  (except  for  contingent  indemnities  and  cost  and  reimbursement
obligations  to  the  extent  no  claim  has  been  made)  of  all  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  and,  with  respect  to
letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, delivery of cash collateral or backstop
letters of credit in respect thereof in a manner consistent with the Revolving Credit Agreement and otherwise reasonably
satisfactory to the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and termination of and payment in full in cash of, all Secured Swap
Obligations, in each case after or concurrently with the termination of all commitments to extend credit thereunder and the
termination of all commitments of the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents; provided that  the  Discharge  of  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  shall  not  be  deemed  to  have
occurred if such payments are made with the proceeds of other Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations that constitute an
exchange or replacement for or a refinancing of such Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations.
“Disinterested Director” means, with respect to any transaction or series of transactions in respect of which the Board of
Directors of Comstock is required to deliver a resolution of the Board of Directors under the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture, a member of the Board of Directors of Comstock who does not have any material direct or indirect financial
interest (other than an interest arising solely from the beneficial ownership of Capital Stock of Comstock) in or with respect
to such transaction or series of transactions.
“Disqualified Capital Stock” means any Capital Stock that, either by its terms, by the terms of any security into which it is
convertible or exchangeable or by contract or otherwise, is, or upon the happening of an event or passage of time would
be, required to be redeemed or repurchased prior to the final Stated Maturity of the applicable series of New Convertible
Notes or is redeemable at the option of the Holder thereof at any time prior to such final Stated Maturity of such New
Convertible Notes, or is convertible into or exchangeable for debt securities at any time prior to such final Stated Maturity
of  such  New  Convertible  Notes.  For  purposes  of  the  covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on
Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock,” Disqualified Capital Stock shall be valued at the greater of its voluntary or
involuntary maximum fixed redemption or repurchase price plus accrued and unpaid dividends. For such purposes, the
“maximum fixed
Table of Contents
263
redemption or repurchase price” of any Disqualified Capital Stock which does not have a fixed redemption or repurchase
price shall be calculated in accordance with the terms of such Disqualified Capital Stock as if such Disqualified Capital
Stock were redeemed or repurchased on the date of determination, and if such price is based upon, or measured by, the
fair market value of such Disqualified Capital Stock, such fair market value shall be determined in good faith by the board
of directors of the issuer of such Disqualified Capital Stock; provided, however, that if such Disqualified Capital Stock is
not at the date of determination permitted or required to be redeemed or repurchased, the “maximum fixed redemption or
repurchase price” shall be the book value of such Disqualified Capital Stock.
“Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments”  means  production  payment  obligations  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted
Subsidiary recorded as liabilities in accordance with GAAP, together with all undertakings and obligations in connection
therewith.
“Engineering Report”  means  a  reserve  report  as  of  each  December  31  and  June  30,  as  applicable,  with  respect  to  all
Hydrocarbons  attributable  to  the  Oil  and  Gas  Properties  of  Comstock  and  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  prepared  by  an
independent  engineering  firm  of  recognized  standing  in  accordance  with  accepted  industry  practice  and  all  updates
thereto.
“Equity Interests” means Capital Stock and all warrants, options or other rights to acquire Capital Stock (but excluding
any debt security that is convertible into, or exchangeable for, Capital Stock).
“Event of Default” has the meaning set forth above under the caption “Events of Default.”
“Excess Priority Lien Obligations”  means  Obligations  constituting  Priority  Lien  Obligations  for  the  principal  amount  of
loans, letters of credit, reimbursement Obligations under the Priority Lien Documents to the extent that such Obligations
are in excess of the Priority Lien Cap.
“Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation” means a series of transactions in which Comstock will (i) exchange the New
Senior Secured Notes and warrants for the Old Senior Secured Notes, (ii) exchange the New Convertible Notes for the Old
Unsecured Notes and (iii) solicit the consent of the holders of the Old Senior Secured Notes and Old Unsecured Notes for
certain  amendments  to  the  Old  Indentures,  including  amendments  to  eliminate  or  amend  certain  of  the  restrictive
covenants contained in the Old Indentures and release the collateral securing the Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Exchanged Properties” means properties or assets used or useful in the Oil and Gas Business received by Comstock or
a Restricted Subsidiary in trade or as a portion of the total consideration for other such properties or assets.
“Excluded Collateral” means any cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets to the extent that such cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets are on deposit or maintained with the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or any other Revolving Credit Agreement
Secured Party (other than the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, in its capacity as such) to cash collateralize letters of credit
constituting  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  or  Secured  Swap  Obligations  constituting  Revolving  Credit
Agreement Obligations.
“Fair Market Value” means with respect to any asset or property, the sale value that would be obtained in an arm’s-length
free market transaction between an informed and willing seller under no compulsion to sell and an informed and willing
buyer under no compulsion to buy. Fair Market Value of an asset or property equal to or in excess of $10.0 million shall be
determined  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  acting  in  good  faith,  whose  determination  shall  be  conclusive  and
evidenced  by  a  resolution  of  such  Board  of  Directors  delivered  to  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  and  any
lesser Fair Market Value may be determined by an officer of Comstock acting in good faith.
Table of Contents
264
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America as in effect from time to time. All
ratios and computations based on GAAP contained in the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture will be computed in
conformity with GAAP.
The  term  “guarantee”  means,  as  applied  to  any  obligation,  (i)  a  guarantee  (other  than  by  endorsement  of  negotiable
instruments for collection in the ordinary course of business), direct or indirect, in any manner, of any part or all of such
obligation and (ii) an agreement, direct or indirect, contingent or otherwise, the practical effect of which is to assure in any
way  the  payment  or  performance  (or  payment  of  damages  in  the  event  of  non-performance)  of  all  or  any  part  of  such
obligation, including, without limiting the foregoing, the payment of amounts drawn down under letters of credit. When
used as a verb, “guarantee” has a corresponding meaning.
“Hedging Agreement” means (a) any and all rate swap transactions, basis swaps, credit derivative transactions, forward
rate transactions, commodity swaps, commodity options, forward commodity contracts, equity or equity index swaps or
options, bond or bond price or bond index swaps or options or forward bond or forward bond price or forward bond index
transactions,  interest  rate  options,  forward  foreign  exchange  transactions,  cap  transactions,  floor  transactions,  collar
transactions, currency swap transactions, cross-currency rate swap transactions, currency options, spot contracts or any
similar transactions or any combination of any of the foregoing (including any options to enter into any of the foregoing
and  any  agreement,  contract  or  transaction  that  constitutes  a  “swap”  within  the  meaning  of  section  1a(47)  of  the
Commodity Exchange Act), whether or not any such transaction is governed by or subject to any master agreement, and
(b) any and all transactions of any kind, and the related confirmations, which are subject to the terms and conditions of, or
governed by, any form of master agreement published by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc., any
International Foreign Exchange Master Agreement, or any other master agreement (any such master agreement, together
with  any  related  schedules,  a  “Master  Agreement”),  including  any  such  obligations  or  liabilities  under  any  Master
Agreement.
“Holder” means a Person in whose name a New Convertible Note is registered in the Note Register.
“Hydrocarbon Interest” means all rights, titles, interests and estates now or hereafter acquired in and to oil and gas leases,
oil, gas and mineral leases or other liquid or gaseous hydrocarbon leases, mineral fee interests, overriding royalty and
royalty interests, operating rights, net profit interests, production payment interests and other similar types of interests,
including any reserved or residual interest of whatever nature.
“Hydrocarbons”  means  oil,  gas,  casinghead  gas,  drip  gasoline,  natural  gasoline,  condensate,  distillate,  liquid
hydrocarbons, gaseous hydrocarbons and all products refined or separated therefrom.
“Indebtedness” means, with respect to any Person, without duplication:
(1)
(2)
all liabilities of such Person, contingent or otherwise, for borrowed money or for the deferred purchase price of
property or services (excluding any trade accounts payable and other accrued current liabilities incurred and
reserves  established  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business)  and  all  liabilities  of  such  Person  incurred  in
connection with any agreement to purchase, redeem, exchange, convert or otherwise acquire for value any
Capital Stock of such Person, or any warrants, rights or options to acquire such Capital Stock, outstanding on
the  Issue  Date  or  thereafter,  if,  and  to  the  extent,  any  of  the  foregoing  would  appear  as  a  liability  upon  a
balance sheet of such Person prepared in accordance with GAAP;
all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, notes, debentures or other similar instruments, if, and to
all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, notes, debentures or other similar instruments, if, and to
the extent, any of the foregoing would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of such Person prepared in
accordance with GAAP;
(3)
all obligations of such Person with respect to letters of credit;
Table of Contents
265
(4)
all indebtedness of such Person created or arising under any conditional sale or other title retention agreement
with respect to property acquired by such Person (even if the rights and remedies of the seller or lender under
such agreement in the event of default are limited to repossession or sale of such property), but excluding
trade accounts payable arising and reserves established in the ordinary course of business;
(5)
all Capitalized Lease Obligations of such Person;
(6)
(7)
(8)
the  Attributable  Indebtedness  (in  excess  of  any  related  Capitalized  Lease  Obligations)  related  to  any
Sale/Leaseback Transaction of such Person;
all Indebtedness referred to in the preceding clauses of other Persons and all dividends of other Persons, the
payment of which is secured by (or for which the holder of such Indebtedness has an existing right, contingent
or otherwise, to be secured by) any Lien upon property (including, without limitation, accounts and contract
rights) owned by such Person, even though such Person has not assumed or become liable for the payment of
such Indebtedness (the amount of such obligation being deemed to be the lesser of the value of such property
or the amount of the obligation so secured);
all  guarantees  by  such  Person  of  Indebtedness  referred  to  in  this  definition  (including,  with  respect  to  any
Production Payment, any warranties or guaranties of production or payment by such Person with respect to
such  Production  Payment  but  excluding  other  contractual  obligations  of  such  Person  with  respect  to  such
Production Payment); and
(9)
all obligations of such Person under or in respect of currency exchange contracts, oil and natural gas price
hedging arrangements and Interest Rate Protection Obligations.
Subject  to  clause  (8)  of  the  first  sentence  of  this  definition,  neither  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  nor
Volumetric Production Payments shall be deemed to be Indebtedness. In addition, Disqualified Capital Stock shall not be
deemed to be Indebtedness.
The  accrual  of  interest,  the  accretion  or  amortization  of  original  issue  discount,  the  payment  of  interest  on  any
Indebtedness in the form of additional Indebtedness with the same terms, and the payment of dividends on Disqualified
Capital  Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  in  the  form  of  additional  shares  of  the  same  class  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred  Stock  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  incurrence  of  Indebtedness  or  an  issuance  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred Stock for purposes of this definition.
“Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding” means (a) any voluntary or involuntary case or proceeding under any bankruptcy
law with respect to any Collateral Grantor, (b) any other voluntary or involuntary insolvency, reorganization or bankruptcy
case or proceeding, or any receivership, liquidation, reorganization or other similar case or proceeding with respect to any
Collateral Grantor or with respect to any of its assets, (c) any liquidation, dissolution, reorganization or winding up of any
Collateral Grantor whether voluntary or involuntary and whether or not involving insolvency or bankruptcy (other than any
liquidation,  dissolution,  reorganization  or  winding  up  of  any  Subsidiary  of  the  Issuer  permitted  by  the  applicable
Convertible  Note  Documents),  (d)  any  assignment  for  the  benefit  of  creditors  or  any  other  marshalling  of  assets  and
liabilities of any Collateral Grantor or (e) any other proceeding of any type or nature in which substantially all claims of
creditors of any Collateral Grantor are determined and any payment or distribution is or may be made on account of such
claims.
“Interest Rate Protection Obligations” means the obligations of any Person pursuant to any arrangement with any other
Person whereby, directly or indirectly, such Person is entitled to receive from time to time periodic payments calculated by
applying either a floating or a fixed rate of interest on a stated notional amount in exchange for periodic payments made
by such Person calculated by applying a fixed or a floating rate of interest
Table of Contents
266
on the same notional amount and shall include, without limitation, interest rate swaps, caps, floors, collars and similar
agreements or arrangements designed to protect against or manage such Person’s and any of its Subsidiaries exposure
to fluctuations in interest rates.
“Investment” means, with respect to any Person, any direct or indirect advance, loan, guarantee of Indebtedness or other
extension of credit or capital contribution by such Person to (by means of any transfer of cash or other property or assets
to others or any payment for property, assets or services for the account or use of others), or any purchase or acquisition
by such Person of any Capital Stock, bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (including derivatives) or evidences of
Indebtedness issued by, any other Person. In addition, the Fair Market Value of the net assets of any Restricted Subsidiary
at  the  time  that  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  designated  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an
“Investment” made by Comstock in such Unrestricted Subsidiary at such time. “Investments” shall exclude (1) extensions
of  trade  credit  or  other  advances  to  customers  on  commercially  reasonable  terms  in  accordance  with  normal  trade
practices  or  otherwise  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  (2)  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  entered  into  in  the
ordinary course of business or as required by any Permitted Indebtedness or any Indebtedness incurred in compliance
with  the  “Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”  covenant,  but  only  to  the  extent  that  the  stated
aggregate notional amounts of such Interest Rate Protection Obligations do not exceed 105% of the aggregate principal
amount  of  such  Indebtedness  to  which  such  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  relate  and  (3)  endorsements  of
negotiable instruments and documents in the ordinary course of business. If Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary sells
or otherwise disposes of any Capital Stock of any direct or indirect Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock such that, after
giving effect to such sale or disposition, such Person is no longer a Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock, Comstock will be
deemed  to  have  made  an  Investment  on  the  date  of  any  such  sale  or  disposition  equal  to  the  Fair  Market  Value  of
Comstock’s Investments in such Restricted Subsidiary that were not sold or disposed of.
“Issue Date” means the date of original issuance of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes.
“Junior Lien” means a Lien granted (or purported to be granted) by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor in favor of the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent, at any time, upon any assets or property of Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor to secure
any Convertible Note Obligations.
“Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent”  means  the  collateral  agent  for  all  holders  of  the  Convertible  Note  Obligations.  Bank  of
Montreal will initially serve as the Junior Lien Collateral Agent.
“Junior Lien Collateral Agreements” means, collectively, each Junior Lien Mortgage, the Junior Lien Pledge Agreement,
the Junior Lien Security Agreement, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, the Collateral Trust Agreement and each
other  instrument,  including  any  assignment,  security  agreement,  mortgage,  deed  of  trust,  pledge  agreement  or  other
security  instrument,  creating  Liens  in  favor  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  as  required  by  the  Convertible  Note
Documents the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the Collateral Trust Agreement, in each case, as the same may be
in effect from time to time.
“Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Intercreditor Agreement among the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent, Comstock, each other Collateral Grantor and the other parties from time to time party thereto,
to be entered into on the Issue Date, as it may be amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to
time  in  accordance  with  the  Convertible  Notes  Indentures  and  (ii)  any  replacement  thereof  that  contains  terms  not
materially less favorable to the Holders of the New Convertible Notes than the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement referred
to in clause (i).
“Junior Lien Mortgage” means all mortgages, deeds of trust and similar documents, instruments and agreements (and all
amendments, modifications and supplements thereof) creating, evidencing, perfecting or otherwise establishing the Liens
on Oil and Gas Properties and other related assets to secure payment of the New Convertible Notes and the Junior Lien
Subsidiary Guarantees or any part thereof.
267
Table of Contents
“Junior Lien Pledge Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy to be entered into on the Issue
Date in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Convertible Notes and the other
Convertible Note Obligations and each other pledge agreement in substantially the same form in favor of the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Convertible Notes and the other Convertible Note Obligations
delivered in accordance with the Convertible Notes Indentures and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
“Junior Lien Security Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy dated as of the Issue Date in
favor  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  for  the  benefit  of  the  Holders  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the  other
Convertible Note Obligations and each other security agreement in substantially the same form in favor of the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Convertible Notes and the other Convertible Note Obligations
delivered in accordance with the Convertible Notes Indentures and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
“Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee” means any guarantee of the New Convertible Notes by any Subsidiary Guarantor in
accordance with the provisions described under “—Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees of New Convertible Notes” and “—
Certain Covenants—Future Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees.”
“Lender Provided Hedging Agreement” means any Hedging Agreement between Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor
and a Secured Swap Counterparty.
“Lien”  means  any  mortgage,  charge,  pledge,  lien  (statutory  or  other),  security  interest,  hypothecation,  assignment  for
security, claim or similar type of encumbrance (including, without limitation, any agreement to give or grant any lease,
conditional sale or other title retention agreement having substantially the same economic effect as any of the foregoing)
upon or with respect to any property of any kind. A Person shall be deemed to own subject to a Lien any property which
such Person has acquired or holds subject to the interest of a vendor or lessor under any conditional sale agreement,
capital lease or other title retention agreement.
“Liquid Securities” means securities (1) of an issuer that is not an Affiliate of Comstock, (2) that are publicly traded on the
New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange or the Nasdaq Stock Market and (3) as to which Comstock is
not subject to any restrictions on sale or transfer (including any volume restrictions under Rule 144 under the Securities
Act or any other restrictions imposed by the Securities Act) or as to which a registration statement under the Securities
Act  covering  the  resale  thereof  is  in  effect  for  as  long  as  the  securities  are  held;  provided  that  securities  meeting  the
requirements of clauses (1), (2) and (3) above shall be treated as Liquid Securities from the date of receipt thereof until and
only until the earlier of (a) the date on which such securities are sold or exchanged for cash or Cash Equivalents and
(b) 150 days following the date of receipt of such securities. If such securities are not sold or exchanged for cash or Cash
Equivalents within 120 days of receipt thereof, for purposes of determining whether the transaction pursuant to which
Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  received  the  securities  was  in  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Convertible
Notes Indenture described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales,” such securities shall be deemed not
to have been Liquid Securities at any time.
“Material Change” means an increase or decrease (except to the extent resulting from changes in prices) of more than
30% during a fiscal quarter in the estimated discounted future net revenues from proved oil and gas reserves of Comstock
and its Restricted Subsidiaries, calculated in accordance with clause (1)(a) of the definition of Adjusted Consolidated Net
Tangible  Assets; provided, however, that the following will be excluded from the calculation of Material Change: (i) any
acquisitions during the quarter of oil and gas reserves with respect to which Comstock’s estimate of the discounted future
net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  has  been  confirmed  by  independent  petroleum  engineers  and  (ii)  any
dispositions of properties and assets during such quarter that were disposed of in compliance with the provisions of the
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
Table of Contents
268
“Minority Interest” means the percentage interest represented by any class of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that
are not owned by Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary.
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. or any successor to the rating agency business thereof.
“Mortgaged Properties” means any property owned by a Collateral Grantor that is subject to the Liens existing and to exist
under the terms of the Junior Lien Mortgages.
“Net  Available  Cash”  from  an  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction  means  cash  proceeds  received  therefrom
(including  (1)  any  cash  proceeds  received  by  way  of  deferred  payment  of  principal  pursuant  to  a  note  or  installment
receivable  or  otherwise,  but  only  as  and  when  received,  and  (2)  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  Liquid  Securities  and  Cash
Equivalents, and excluding (a) any other consideration received in the form of assumption by the acquiring Person of
Indebtedness  or  other  obligations  relating  to  the  assets  or  property  that  is  the  subject  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback  Transaction  and  (b)  except  to  the  extent  subsequently  converted  to  cash,  Cash  Equivalents  or  Liquid
Securities within 240 days after such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction, consideration constituting Exchanged
Properties or consideration other than as identified in the immediately preceding clauses (1) and (2)), in each case net of
(i) all legal, title and recording expenses, commissions and other fees and expenses incurred, and all federal, state, foreign
and  local  taxes  required  to  be  paid  or  accrued  as  a  liability  under  GAAP  as  a  consequence  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback  Transaction,  (ii)  all  payments  made  on  any  Indebtedness  (but  specifically  excluding  Indebtedness  of
Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  assumed  in  connection  with  or  in  anticipation  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback Transaction) which is secured by any assets subject to such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction,
in accordance with the terms of any Lien upon such assets, or which must by its terms, or in order to obtain a necessary
consent to such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction or by applicable law, be repaid out of the proceeds from such
Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction,  provided  that  such  payments  are  made  in  a  manner  that  results  in  the
permanent reduction in the balance of such Indebtedness and, if applicable, a permanent reduction in any outstanding
commitment for future incurrences of Indebtedness thereunder, (iii) all distributions and other payments required to be
made  to  minority  interest  holders  in  Subsidiaries  or  joint  ventures  as  a  result  of  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback
Transaction and (d) the deduction of appropriate amounts to be provided by the seller as a reserve, in accordance with
GAAP, against any liabilities associated with the assets disposed of in such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction
and retained by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary after such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction; provided,
however, that if any consideration for an Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction (which would otherwise constitute Net
Available Cash) is required to be held in escrow pending determination of whether a purchase price adjustment will be
made, such consideration (or any portion thereof) shall become Net Available Cash only at such time as it is released to
such Person or its Restricted Subsidiaries from escrow.
“Net Cash Proceeds” with respect to any issuance or sale of Qualified Capital Stock or other securities, means the cash
proceeds  of  such  issuance  or  sale  net  of  attorneys’  fees,  accountants’  fees,  underwriters’  or  placement  agents’  fees,
discounts or commissions and brokerage, consultant and other fees and expenses actually incurred in connection with
such issuance or sale and net of taxes paid or payable as a result thereof.
“Net  Working  Capital”  means  (1)  all  current  assets  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  less  (2)  all  current
liabilities of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, except current liabilities included in Indebtedness, in each case as
set forth in consolidated financial statements of Comstock prepared in accordance with GAAP.
“New Convertible Notes” means, individually or collectively, as the context may require, the New 2019 Convertible Notes
and the New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“New Senior Secured Notes” means Comstock’s 10.0% Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020.
“Non-Recourse  Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  or  that  portion  of  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary incurred in connection with the acquisition by Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary of any
Table of Contents
269
property or assets and as to which (i) the holders of such Indebtedness agree that they will look solely to the property or
assets  so  acquired  and  securing  such  Indebtedness  for  payment  on  or  in  respect  of  such  Indebtedness,  and  neither
Comstock  nor  any  Subsidiary  (other  than  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary)  (a)  provides  credit  support,  including  any
undertaking, agreement or instrument which would constitute Indebtedness, or (b) is directly or indirectly liable for such
Indebtedness, and (ii) no default with respect to such Indebtedness would permit (after notice or passage of time or both),
according  to  the  terms  thereof,  any  holder  of  any  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  declare  a
default on such Indebtedness or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated or payable prior to its Stated Maturity.
“Note Register” means the register maintained by or for Comstock in which Comstock shall provide for the registration of
the applicable series of New Convertible Notes and the transfer of such New Convertible Notes.
“Obligations”  means  all  obligations  for  principal,  premium,  interest,  penalties,  fees,  indemnifications,  payments  with
respect to any letters of credit, reimbursements, damages and other liabilities payable under the documentation governing
any Indebtedness.
“Oil and Gas Business” means (i) the acquisition, exploration, development, operation and disposition of interests in oil,
gas  and  other  hydrocarbon  properties,  (ii)  the  gathering,  marketing,  treating,  processing,  storage,  refining,  selling  and
transporting of any production from such interests or properties, (iii) any business relating to or arising from exploration
for or development, production, treatment, processing, storage, refining, transportation or marketing of oil, gas and other
minerals and products produced in association therewith, and (iv) any activity necessary, appropriate or incidental to the
activities described in the foregoing clauses (i) through (iii) of this definition.
“Oil  and  Gas  Properties”  means  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  the  properties  now  or  hereafter  pooled  or  unitized  with
Hydrocarbon Interests; all presently existing or future unitization, pooling agreements and declarations of pooled units
and  the  units  created  thereby  (including  without  limitation  all  units  created  under  orders,  regulations  and  rules  of  any
Governmental Authority have jurisdiction) that may affect all or any portion of the Hydrocarbon Interests; all operating
agreements,  contracts  and  other  agreements  that  relate  to  any  of  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests  or  the  production,  sale,
purchase, exchange or processing of Hydrocarbons from or attributable to such Hydrocarbon Interest; all Hydrocarbons
in  and  under  and  which  may  be  produced  and  saved  or  attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests,  the  lands  covered
thereby  and  all  oil  in  tanks  and  all  rents,  issues,  profits,  proceeds,  products,  revenues  and  other  income  from  or
attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  all  tenements,  hereditaments,  appurtenances  and  properties  in  any  manner
appertaining, belonging, affixed or incidental to the Hydrocarbon Interests, properties, rights, titles, interests and estates
described or referred to above, including any and all property, real or personal, now owned or hereinafter acquired and
situated  upon,  used,  held  for  use  or  useful  in  connection  with  the  operating,  working  or  development  of  any  of  such
Hydrocarbon Interests or property (excluding drilling rigs, automotive equipment or other personal property which may be
on such premises for the purpose of drilling a well or for other similar temporary uses) and including any and all oil wells,
gas wells, injection wells or other wells, buildings, structures, fuel separators, liquid extraction plants, plant compressors,
pumps, pumping units, field gathering systems, tanks and tank batteries, fixtures, valves, fittings, machinery and parts,
engines, boilers, meters, apparatus, equipment, appliances, tools, implements, cables, wires, towers, casing, tubing and
rods,  surface  leases,  rightsofway,  easements  and  servitudes  together  with  all  additions,  substitutions,  replacements,
accessions and attachments to any and all of the foregoing.
“Old  Indentures”  means  (i)  the  Indenture,  dated  as  of  October  9,  2009  (the  “Base  Indenture”),  among  Comstock,  the
subsidiary guarantors named therein, and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, as amended and
supplemented  by  the  Third  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  as  of  March  14,  2011,  among  Comstock,  the  subsidiary
guarantors  named  therein  and  The  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  Trust  Company,  N.A.,  as  trustee,  relating  to  Comstock’s
7  3⁄4%  Senior  Notes  due  2019,  (ii)  the  Base  Indenture,  as  amended  and  supplemented  by  the  Fourth  Supplemental
Indenture, dated as of June 5, 2012, among Comstock, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and The Bank of New
York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to Comstock’s 9 1⁄2%
Table of Contents
270
Senior Notes due 2020 and (iii) the Indenture, dated as of March 13, 2015, among Comstock, the subsidiary guarantors
named therein, and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., relating to Comstock’s Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Old Senior Secured Notes” means Comstock’s 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020.
“Old Unsecured Notes” means, collectively, Comstock’s 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019 and 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
“Permitted Collateral Liens” means Liens described in clauses (1), (2), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (13), (18), (19), (20), (21),
(22), (23) and (24) of the definition of “Permitted Liens” that, by operation of law, have priority over the Liens securing the
New Convertible Notes and the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees.
“Permitted Investments” means any of the following:
(1)
Investments in Cash Equivalents;
(2)
Investments in property, plant and equipment used in the ordinary course of business;
(3)
Investments in Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(4)
Investments by Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in another Person, if (a) as a result of such
Investment  (i)  such  other  Person  becomes  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  (ii)  such  other  Person  is  merged  or
consolidated  with  or  into,  or  transfers  or  conveys  all  or  substantially  all  of  its  properties  and  assets  to,
Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  and  (b)  such  other  Person  is  primarily  engaged  in  the  Oil  and  Gas
Business;
(5)
entry into operating agreements, joint ventures, partnership agreements, working interests, royalty interests,
mineral  leases,  processing  agreements,  farm-out  agreements,  contracts  for  the  sale,  transportation  or
exchange  of  oil  and  natural  gas,  unitization  agreements,  pooling  arrangements,  area  of  mutual  interest
agreements or other similar or customary agreements, transactions, properties, interests or arrangements, and
Investments and expenditures in connection therewith or pursuant thereto, in each case made or entered into
in the ordinary course of the Oil and Gas Business;
(6)
entry  into  any  hedging  arrangements  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the  purpose  of  protecting
Comstock’s  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary’s  production,  purchases  and  resales  against  fluctuations  in  oil  or
natural gas prices;
(7)
entry into any currency exchange contract in the ordinary course of business;
(8)
Investments  in  stock,  obligations  or  securities  received  in  settlement  of  debts  owing  to  Comstock  or  any
Restricted Subsidiary as a result of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings or upon the foreclosure, perfection
or enforcement of any Lien in favor of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary, in each case as to debt owing to
Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary that arose in the ordinary course of business of Comstock or any such
Restricted Subsidiary;
(9)
guarantees of Indebtedness permitted under the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock”
covenant; and
(10)
other Investments, in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any one time outstanding the greater of (a) $25.0
million and (b) 5% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
271
Table of Contents
“Permitted Liens” means the following types of Liens:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Liens  securing  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  and  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $50.0 million at any time outstanding; provided that
such Liens are subject to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement
Liens existing as of the Issue Date (excluding Liens securing Indebtedness of Comstock and any Subsidiary
Guarantor under the Revolving Credit Agreement);
Liens on any property or assets of Comstock and any Subsidiary Guarantor (a) the New 2019 Convertible
Notes issued on the Issue Date in this Exchange and Consent Solicitation (and any assumption of obligations
guaranteed thereby), the Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the payment of
interest  thereon,  and  the  Junior  Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantees  in  respect  thereof  and  (b)  the  New  2020
Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in this Exchange and Consent Solicitation (and any assumption of
obligations guaranteed thereby), the Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the
payment of interest thereon, and the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees in respect thereof;
(4)
Liens in favor of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Liens for taxes, assessments and governmental charges or claims either (a) not delinquent or (b) contested in
good faith by appropriate proceedings and as to which Comstock or its Restricted Subsidiaries shall have set
aside on its books such reserves as may be required pursuant to GAAP;
statutory  Liens  of  landlords  and  Liens  of  carriers,  warehousemen,  mechanics,  suppliers,  materialmen,
repairmen and other Liens imposed by law incurred in the ordinary course of business for sums not delinquent
or being contested in good faith, if such reserve or other appropriate provision, if any, as shall be required by
GAAP shall have been made in respect thereof;
Liens incurred or deposits made in the ordinary course of business in connection with workers’ compensation,
unemployment  insurance  and  other  types  of  social  security,  or  to  secure  the  payment  or  performance  of
tenders, statutory or regulatory obligations, surety and appeal bonds, bids, government contracts and leases,
performance and return of money bonds and other similar obligations (exclusive of obligations for the payment
of borrowed money but including lessee or operator obligations under statutes, governmental regulations or
instruments related to the ownership, exploration and production of oil, gas and minerals on state, Federal or
foreign lands or waters);
judgment  and  attachment  Liens  not  giving  rise  to  an  Event  of  Default  so  long  as  any  appropriate  legal
proceedings which may have been duly initiated for the review of such judgment shall not have been finally
terminated or the period within which such proceeding may be initiated shall not have expired;
easements,  rights-of-way,  restrictions  and  other  similar  charges  or  encumbrances  not  interfering  in  any
material respect with the ordinary conduct of the business of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(10)
any interest or title of a lessor under any capitalized lease or operating lease;
(11)
purchase  money  Liens; provided that (a) the related purchase money Indebtedness shall not be secured by
any property or assets of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary other than the
Table of Contents
272
property or assets so acquired (including, without limitation, those acquired indirectly through the acquisition of
stock  or  other  ownership  interests)  and  any  proceeds  therefrom,  (b)  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of
Indebtedness secured by such Liens it otherwise permitted to be incurred under the applicable Convertible
Notes Indenture and does not exceed the cost of the property or assets so acquired and (c) the Liens securing
such Indebtedness shall be created within 90 days of such acquisition;
(12)
Liens securing obligations under hedging agreements that Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary enters into
in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting its production, purchases and resales against
fluctuations in oil or natural gas prices;
(13)
Liens upon specific items of inventory or other goods of any Person securing such Person’s obligations in
respect of bankers’ acceptances issued or created for the account of such Person to facilitate the purchase,
shipment or storage of such inventory or other goods;
(14)
Liens  securing  reimbursement  obligations  with  respect  to  commercial  letters  of  credit  which  encumber
documents and other property or assets relating to such letters of credit and products and proceeds thereof;
(15)
Liens  encumbering  property  or  assets  under  construction  arising  from  progress  or  partial  payments  by  a
customer of Comstock or its Restricted Subsidiaries relating to such property or assets;
(16)
Liens  encumbering  deposits  made  to  secure  obligations  arising  from  statutory,  regulatory,  contractual  or
warranty requirements of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, including rights of offset and set-off;
(17)
Liens  securing  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  which  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  relate  to
Indebtedness that is secured by Liens otherwise permitted under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture;
(18)
Liens (other than Liens securing Indebtedness) on, or related to, properties or assets to secure all or part of the
costs incurred in the ordinary course of business for the exploration, drilling, development or operation thereof;
(19)
Liens on pipeline or pipeline facilities which arise by operation of law;
(20)
Liens  arising  under  operating  agreements,  joint  venture  agreements,  partnership  agreements,  oil  and  gas
leases,  farm-out  agreements,  division  orders,  contracts  for  the  sale,  transportation  or  exchange  of  oil  and
natural  gas,  unitization  and  pooling  declarations  and  agreements,  area  of  mutual  interest  agreements  and
other agreements which are customary in the Oil and Gas Business;
(21)
Liens reserved in oil and gas mineral leases for bonus or rental payments or for compliance with the terms of
such leases;
(22)
Liens  constituting  survey  exceptions,  encumbrances,  easements,  or  reservations  of,  or  rights  to  others  for,
rights-of-way, zoning or other restrictions as to the use of real properties, and minor defects of title which, in the
case of any of the foregoing, were not incurred or created to secure the payment of borrowed money or the
deferred purchase price of property, assets or services, and in the aggregate do not materially adversely affect
the  value  of  properties  and  assets  of  Comstock  and  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  taken  as  a  whole,  or
materially impair the use of such properties and assets for the purposes for which such properties and assets
are held by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiaries;
273
Table of Contents
(23)
Liens securing Non-Recourse Indebtedness; provided, however, that the related Non-Recourse Indebtedness
shall  not  be  secured  by  any  property  or  assets  of  Comstock  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  other  than  the
property and assets acquired (including, without limitation, those acquired indirectly through the acquisition of
stock or other ownership interests) by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary with the proceeds of such Non-
Recourse Indebtedness;
(24)
Liens on property existing at the time of acquisition thereof by Comstock or any Subsidiary of Comstock and
Liens on property or assets of a Subsidiary existing at the time it became a Subsidiary; provided  that  such
Liens were in existence prior to the contemplation of the acquisition and do not extend to any assets other than
the acquired property;
(25)
Liens resulting from the deposit of funds or evidences of Indebtedness in trust for the purpose of defeasing
Indebtedness of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries so long as such deposit and such defeasance
are permitted under the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Restricted Payments;”
(26)
Priority  Liens  to  secure  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  (and  the  subsidiary
guarantees in respect thereof) and incurred under clause (12) of the definition of “Permitted Indebtedness”;
(27)
Liens to secure any Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to renew, refinance, refund, replace, amend,
defease or discharge, as a whole or in part, Indebtedness that was previously so secured; provided that (a) the
new  Lien  shall  be  limited  to  all  or  part  of  the  same  property  and  assets  (plus  improvements,  accessions,
proceeds  or  dividends  or  distributions  in  respect  thereof)  that  secured  (or,  under  the  written  arrangements
under which the original Lien arose, could secure) the Indebtedness being refinanced and (b) the new Lien
has  no  greater  priority  relative  to  the  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the  Junior  Lien
Subsidiary  Guarantees,  and  the  holders  of  the  Indebtedness  secured  by  such  Lien  have  no  greater
intercreditor rights relative to the applicable series of New Convertible Notes and the Junior Lien Subsidiary
Guarantees and the Holders thereof, than the original Liens and the related Indebtedness; and
(28)
additional Liens (including Liens securing Indebtedness incurred in connection with the issuance of Additional
New Senior Secured Notes) of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock with respect to obligations
that do not exceed at any one time outstanding $75.0 million.
Notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) through (28) of this definition, the term “Permitted Liens” does not include any
Liens resulting from the creation, incurrence, issuance, assumption or guarantee of any Production Payments other than
Production Payments that are created, incurred, issued, assumed or guaranteed in connection with the financing of, and
within 30 days after, the acquisition of the properties or assets that are subject thereto.
“Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary, the net proceeds of
which are used to renew, extend, refinance, refund or repurchase (including, without limitation, pursuant to a Change of
Control Offer or Prepayment Offer) outstanding Indebtedness of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary; provided  that
(1)  if  the  Indebtedness  (including  the  New  Convertible  Notes)  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or
repurchased is pari passu with or subordinated in right of payment to either the New Convertible Notes or the Junior Lien
Subsidiary  Guarantees,  then  such  Indebtedness  is pari  passu  with  or  subordinated  in  right  of  payment  to  the  New
Convertible  Notes  or  the  Junior  Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantees,  as  the  case  may  be,  at  least  to  the  same  extent  as  the
Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased,  (2)  such  Indebtedness  has  a  Stated
Maturity for its final scheduled principal payment that is no earlier than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled principal
payment of the Indebtedness being renewed,
Table of Contents
274
extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased, (3) such Indebtedness has an Average Life at the time such Indebtedness
is incurred that is equal to or greater than the Average Life of the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced,
refunded or repurchased and (4) if the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased by its
terms provides that interest is payable only in kind, then such Indebtedness may not permit the payment of scheduled
interest in cash; provided, further, that such Indebtedness is in an aggregate principal amount (or, if such Indebtedness is
issued at a price less than the principal amount thereof, the aggregate amount of gross proceeds therefrom is) not in
excess of the aggregate principal amount then outstanding of  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,
refunded  or  repurchased  (or  if  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased  was
issued at a price less than the principal amount thereof, then not in excess of the amount of liability in respect thereof
determined  in  accordance  with  GAAP)  plus  the  amount  of  any  premium  required  to  be  paid  in  connection  with  such
renewal,  extension  or  refinancing,  refunding  or  repurchase  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,
extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased or the amount of any premium reasonably determined by Comstock as
necessary to accomplish such renewal, extension, refinancing, refunding or repurchase, plus the amount of reasonable
fees and expenses incurred by Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary in connection therewith.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock
company, trust, unincorporated organization or government or any agency or political subdivision thereof.
“Preferred Stock,” means, with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests, participations or other equivalents
(however designated) of such Person’s preferred or preference stock, whether now outstanding or issued after the Issue
Date, including, without limitation, all classes and series of preferred or preference stock of such Person.
“Priority Lien” means a Lien granted (or purported to be granted) by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor in favor of the
Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent,  at  any  time,  upon  any  assets  or  property  of  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  to
secure any Priority Lien Obligations.
“Priority Lien Cap” means, as of any date, (a) the principal amount of Priority Lien Obligations (including any interest paid-
in-kind)  that  may  be  incurred  as  “Permitted  Indebtedness”  as  of  such  date,  plus  (b)  the  amount  of  all  Secured  Swap
Obligations, to the extent such Secured Swap Obligations are secured by the Priority Liens, plus (c) the amount of accrued
and unpaid interest (excluding any interest paid-in-kind) and outstanding fees, to the extent such Obligations are secured
by the Priority Liens. For purposes of this definition, all letters of credit will be valued at the face amount thereof, whether
or not drawn.
“Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent”  means  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent,  or  if  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
ceases to exist, on the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement the collateral agent or other representative of the holders of the
New  Senior  Secured  Notes  designated  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Priority  Lien  Documents  and  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement.
“Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agreements”  means,  collectively,  each  mortgage,  pledge  agreement,  security  agreement,
instrument,  assignment,  deed  of  trust  or  other  security  instrument  creating  Priority  Liens  in  favor  of  the  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent as required by the Revolving Credit Agreement, the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Priority Lien
Intercreditor Agreements, in each case, as the same may be in effect from time to time.
“Priority Lien Documents” means, collectively, the Revolving Credit Agreement Documents and the Senior Secured Note
Documents.
“Priority Lien Excluded Collateral” has the meaning set forth in the Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
Table of Contents
275
“Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Amended and Restated Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement, among
the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, Senior Secured Notes Trustee, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, Comstock, each
other  Collateral  Grantor,  the  other  parties  from  time  to  time  party  thereto,  and  The  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  Trust
Company in its capacity as the trustee under the Old Senior Secured Notes to be entered into on the Issue Date, as it may
be  amended,  restated,  supplemented  or  otherwise  modified  from  time  to  time  in  accordance  with  the  Priority  Lien
Documents and (ii) any replacement thereof.
“Priority Lien Obligations” means, collectively, (a) the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations and (b) the Senior Secured
Note  Obligations,  in  each  case  whether  accrued  or  incurred  before  or  after  the  commencement  of  an  Insolvency  or
Liquidation Proceeding, and whether or not allowed or allowable in an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
“Priority  Lien  Security  Documents”  means,  collectively,  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Documents  and  the  Senior
Secured Note Documents.
“Production  Payments”  means,  collectively,  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  and  Volumetric  Production
Payments.
“Proved Reserves” means those Hydrocarbons that have been estimated with reasonable certainty, as demonstrated by
geological and engineering data, to be economically recoverable from the Oil and Gas Properties by existing producing
methods under existing economic conditions.
“Qualified Capital Stock” of any Person means any and all Capital Stock of such Person other than Disqualified Capital
Stock.
“Relevant Stock Exchange” means The New York Stock Exchange or, if the Common Stock (or other security for which a
Daily VWAP must be determined) is not then listed on The New York Stock Exchange, the principal other U.S. national or
regional securities exchange on which the Common Stock (or such other security) is then listed.
“Required Junior Lien Debtholders”  means,  at  any  time,  the  holders  of  a  majority  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  all
Convertible Note Obligations then outstanding, calculated in accordance with the provisions described above under the
caption “—Collateral Trust Agreement—Voting”. For purposes of this definition, Convertible Note Obligations registered
in the name of, or beneficially owned by, Comstock or any Affiliate of Comstock will be deemed not to be outstanding.
“Required Stockholder Approval” means the approval by (1) a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of common
stock of the amendment to Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of shares of Comstock’s
common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized shares of Comstock’s
common stock for the issuance of shares upon conversion of the New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary,
exercise of the warrants and (2) a majority of the shares of common stock represented at the special meeting and entitled
to vote on the issuance of the maximum number of shares of Common Stock that would be issued upon conversion of all
of the outstanding New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary, exercise of all of the warrants.
“Restricted Investment” means (without duplication) (i) the designation of a Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in
the  manner  described  in  the  definition  of  “Unrestricted  Subsidiary”  and  (ii)  any  Investment  other  than  a  Permitted
Investment.
“Restricted Subsidiary”  means  any  Subsidiary  of  Comstock,  whether  existing  on  or  after  the  Issue  Date,  unless  such
Subsidiary  of  Comstock  is  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  is  designated  as  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  pursuant  to  the
terms of the Convertible Notes Indenture.
Table of Contents
276
“Revolving Credit Agreement” means that certain Credit Agreement, dated as of March 4, 2015, among Comstock, the
lenders  from  time  to  time  party  thereto  and  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent,  as  amended,  restated,  modified,
renewed, refunded, replaced or refinanced, from time to time.
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent”  means  Bank  of  Montreal  (or  other  agent  designated  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), together with its successors and permitted assigns in such capacity.
“Revolving Credit Agreement Documents” means the Revolving Credit Agreement and any other Loan Documents (as
defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement).
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations”  means,  collectively,  (a)  the  Obligations  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement)  of  Comstock  and  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Documents,  in  an
aggregate principal amount for all such Obligations not to exceed $50,000,000, plus interest and all fees, costs, charges,
penalties and expenses, including legal fees and expenses to the extent authorized under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents, in each case whether accrued or incurred before or after the commencement of an Insolvency or Liquidation
Proceeding,  and  whether  or  not  allowed  or  allowable  in  an  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding,  and  (b)  the  Secured
Swap Obligations.
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Secured  Parties”  means,  collectively,  the  Lenders  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), the Secured Swap Counterparties and the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent.
“S&P” means S&P Global Ratings, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., or any successor to the rating agency
business thereof.
“Sale/Leaseback Transaction” means, with respect to Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, any arrangement
with any Person providing for the leasing by Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of any principal property,
whereby such property has been or is to be sold or transferred by Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to such
Person.
“Secured Debt” means, collectively, the Priority Lien Obligations and the Convertible Note Obligations.
“Secured Debt Documents” means, collectively, the Priority Lien Documents and the Convertible Note Documents.
“Secured Swap Counterparty” means, with respect to a Lender Provided Hedging Agreement, a counterparty that at the
time such Hedging Agreement is entered into is a Lender (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement) or an Affiliate of a
Lender  (including  a  Hedging  Agreement  in  existence  prior  to  the  date  hereof  or  prior  to  such  Person  or  its  Affiliate
becoming a Lender); provided that, for the avoidance of doubt, the term “Lender Provided Hedging Agreement” shall not
include  any  Hedging  Agreement  or  transactions  under  any  Hedging  Agreement  entered  into  after  the  time  that  such
counterparty ceases to be a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender.
“Secured Swap Obligations” means all obligations of Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor under any Lender Provided
Hedging Agreement.
“Security  Documents”  means,  collectively  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agreements  and  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral
Agreements.
“Senior Indebtedness”  means  any  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  (whether  outstanding  on  the
date hereof or hereinafter incurred), unless such Indebtedness is Subordinated Indebtedness.
Table of Contents
277
“Senior Secured Note Documents” means the Senior Secured Note Indenture, the Priority Lien Collateral Agreements and
any agreement, instrument or other document evidencing or governing the Senior Secured Note Obligations.
“Senior  Secured  Note  Obligations”  means  all  advances  to,  and  debts,  liabilities,  obligations,  covenants  and  duties  of,
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor arising under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the New Senior Secured Notes,
the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  the  subsidiary  guarantees  thereof  and  the  other  Senior  Secured  Note  Documents  (as
defined  in  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture)  (including  all  principal,  premium,  interest,  penalties,  fees,  charges,
charges, expenses, indemnifications, reimbursement obligations, damages, guarantees, and other liabilities or amounts
payable  or  arising  thereunder),  whether  direct  or  indirect  (including  those  acquired  by  assumption),  absolute  or
contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and including interest and fees that accrue after the
commencement by or against Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor of any proceeding in bankruptcy or insolvency law
naming such Person as the debtor in such proceeding, regardless of whether such interest and fees are allowed claims in
such proceeding.
“Senior Secured Notes Indenture” means the Indenture, dated as of                 , 2016, by and among Comstock, as issuer,
the Subsidiary Guarantors and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the New Senior
Secured Notes.
“Stated Maturity”  means,  when  used  with  respect  to  any  Indebtedness  or  any  installment  of  interest  thereon,  the  date
specified in the instrument evidencing or governing such Indebtedness as the fixed date on which the principal of such
Indebtedness or such installment of interest is due and payable.
“Subordinated  Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  which  is  expressly
subordinated in right of payment to the New Junior Secured Notes or the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees, as the case
may be.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person, (1) a corporation a majority of whose Voting Stock is at the time owned,
directly or indirectly, by such Person, by one or more Subsidiaries of such Person or by such Person and one or more
Subsidiaries  of  such  Person,  or  (2)  any  other  Person  (other  than  a  corporation),  including,  without  limitation,  a  joint
venture, in which such Person, one or more Subsidiaries of such Person or such Person and one or more Subsidiaries of
such Person have, directly or indirectly, at the date of determination thereof, at least majority ownership interest entitled to
vote in the election of directors, managers or trustees thereof (or other Person performing similar functions).
“Subsidiary Guarantor” means (1) Comstock Oil & Gas, LP, (2) Comstock Oil & Gas—Louisiana, LLC, (3) Comstock Oil &
Gas GP, LLC, (4) Comstock Oil & Gas Investments, LLC, (5) Comstock Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., (6) each of Comstock’s
other Restricted Subsidiaries, if any, executing a supplemental indenture in which such Subsidiary agrees to be bound by
the terms of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and (7) any Person that becomes a successor guarantor of the
applicable series of New Convertible Notes in compliance with the provisions described under “—Junior Lien Subsidiary
Guarantees of New Convertible Notes” and “Certain Covenants—Future Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees.”
“Swap  Obligation”  means,  with  respect  to  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  any  obligation  to  pay  or  perform  under  any
agreement,  contract  or  transaction  that  constitutes  a  “swap”  within  the  meaning  of  Section  1(a)(47)  of  the  Commodity
Exchange Act.
“Threshold  Price”  means,  initially,  $9.24.  The  Threshold  Price  is  subject  to  adjustment  in  inverse  proportion  to  the
adjustments to the Conversion Rate pursuant to the terms of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture.
Table of Contents
278
“Trading Day” means a day on which:
(i) trading in the Common Stock (or other security for which a Daily VWAP must be determined) generally occurs on the
Relevant  Stock  Exchange  or,  if  the  Common  Stock  (or  such  other  security)  is  not  then  listed  on  the  Relevant  Stock
Exchange, on the principal other market on which the Common Stock (or such other security) is then traded; and
(ii) a Daily VWAP for the Common Stock (or other security for which a Daily VWAP must be determined) is available on
such securities exchange or market;
provided that if the Common Stock (or other security for which a Daily  VWAP  must  be  determined)  is  not  so  listed  or
traded, “Trading Day” means a business day.
“Unrestricted Subsidiary” means (1) any Subsidiary of Comstock that at the time of determination will be designated an
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  as  provided  below  and  (2)  any  Subsidiary  of  an
Unrestricted  Subsidiary.  The  Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  may  designate  any  Subsidiary  of  Comstock  as  an
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  so  long  as  (a)  neither  Comstock  nor  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  directly  or  indirectly  liable
pursuant to the terms of any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary; (b) no default with respect to any Indebtedness of such
Subsidiary would permit (upon notice, lapse of time or otherwise) any holder of any other Indebtedness of Comstock or
any Restricted Subsidiary to declare a default on such other Indebtedness or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated
or payable prior to its Stated Maturity; (c) such designation as an Unrestricted Subsidiary would be permitted under the
“Limitation on Restricted Payments” covenant; and (d) such designation shall not result in the creation or imposition of
any Lien on any of the properties or assets of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary (other than any Permitted Lien or
any  Lien  the  creation  or  imposition  of  which  shall  have  been  in  compliance  with  the  “Limitation  on  Liens”  covenant);
provided, however, that with respect to clause (a), Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary may be liable for Indebtedness of
an Unrestricted Subsidiary if (i) such liability constituted a Permitted Investment or a Restricted Payment permitted by the
“Limitation  on  Restricted  Payments”  covenant,  in  each  case  at  the  time  of  incurrence,  or  (ii)  the  liability  would  be  a
Permitted Investment at the time of designation of such Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary. Any such designation
by the Board of Directors of Comstock shall be evidenced to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee by filing a board
resolution with such trustee giving effect to such designation. If, at any time any Unrestricted Subsidiary would fail to meet
the foregoing requirements as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, it shall thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary for
purposes of the Indenture and any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary shall be deemed to be Incurred as of such date. The
Board of Directors of Comstock may designate any Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary if, immediately after
giving  effect  to  such  designation  on  a  pro  forma  basis,  (i)  no  Default  or  Event  of  Default  shall  have  occurred  and  be
continuing,  (ii)  Comstock  could  incur  $1.00  of  additional  Indebtedness  under  the  first  paragraph  of  the  “Limitation  on
Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” covenant and (iii) if any of the properties and assets of Comstock or any of
its Restricted Subsidiaries would upon such designation become subject to any Lien (other than a Permitted Lien), the
creation or imposition of such Lien shall have been in compliance with the “Limitation on Liens” covenant.
“Volumetric  Production  Payments”  means  production  payment  obligations  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary
recorded  as  deferred  revenue  in  accordance  with  GAAP,  together  with  all  undertakings  and  obligations  in  connection
therewith.
“Voting Stock” means any class or classes of Capital Stock pursuant to which the holders thereof have the general voting
power under ordinary circumstances to elect at least a majority of the board of directors, managers or trustees of any
Person (irrespective of whether or not, at the time, stock of any other class or classes shall have, or might have, voting
power by reason of the happening of any contingency).
“Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary” means any Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock to the extent (1) all of the Capital
Stock or other ownership interests in such Restricted Subsidiary, other than directors’ qualifying shares
Table of Contents
279
mandated  by  applicable  law,  is  owned  directly  or  indirectly  by  Comstock  or  (2)  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  does
substantially all of its business in one or more foreign jurisdictions and is required by the applicable laws and regulations
of  any  such  foreign  jurisdiction  to  be  partially  owned  by  the  government  of  such  foreign  jurisdiction  or  individual  or
corporate citizens of such foreign jurisdiction in order for such Restricted Subsidiary to transact business in such foreign
jurisdiction, provided that Comstock, directly or indirectly, owns the remaining Capital Stock or ownership interest in such
Restricted  Subsidiary  and,  by  contract  or  otherwise,  controls  the  management  and  business  of  such  Restricted
Subsidiary and derives the economic benefits of ownership of such Restricted Subsidiary to substantially the same extent
as if such Subsidiary were a wholly owned subsidiary.
Table of Contents
280
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING INDENTURES AND OLD NOTES
The description of the terms of the Existing Indentures and the Proposed Amendments set forth below is only a summary
and is qualified in its entirety by reference to (i) the terms and conditions of the Existing Indentures and the old notes as
currently in effect and (ii) the relevant terms of the Existing Indentures and the old notes as proposed to be modified by the
Proposed Amendments, which will be substantially in the form of the Supplemental Indentures included as exhibits to the
registration statement to which this prospectus relates, which you may examine and copy as set forth under “Where You
Can  Find  Additional  Information.”  Each  holder  should  carefully  review  this  entire  prospectus,  the  form  of  the
Supplemental  Indentures  and  the  Existing  Indentures  before  granting  a  consent.  We  are  seeking  consents  to  all  the
Proposed Amendments with respect to each series of old notes as a single proposal. Accordingly, a consent purporting
to consent to only a portion of the Proposed Amendments with respect to any series of the old notes will not be valid.
Each holder shall only be entitled to deliver a consent on the Proposed Amendments applicable to the series of old notes
it holds.
Concurrently  with  the  Exchange  Offer  and  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  contained  in  this  prospectus,  we  are
conducting the Consent Solicitation for the Proposed Amendments to the Existing Indentures and old notes to eliminate
or amend certain of the restrictive covenants contained in the Existing Indentures, release the collateral securing the Old
Senior Secured Notes in accordance with Section 9.02(b) of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture and modify various
other provisions contained in the Existing Indentures.
The  Proposed  Amendments,  if  adopted  and  effected,  will  eliminate  certain  of  the  covenants  in  each  of  the  Existing
Indentures  governing  our  actions  and  will  release  the  collateral  securing  the  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes.  For  more
complete information regarding the effects of the Proposed Amendments, reference is made to the Existing Indentures,
which  are  incorporated  herein  by  reference  and  a  copy  of  each  of  which  may  be  obtained  from  the  SEC’s  website
(http://www.sec.gov). See “Where You Can Find Additional Information.”
The Proposed Amendments will be effected by a supplemental indenture to each Existing Indenture, which are collectively
referred  to  herein  as  the  “Supplemental  Indentures,”  and  will  be  substantially  in  the  forms  filed  as  exhibits  to  the
registration statement relating to this prospectus, each of which will be executed by the Company, the guarantors thereof,
and  The  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  Trust  Company,  N.A.,  as  trustee,  promptly  following  the  receipt  of  the  Required
Consents (as defined below) from the applicable holders of old notes and which will become effective and binding on the
applicable non-tendering holders upon the consummation of the Exchange Offer. If the Exchange Offer is terminated or
withdrawn,  the  old  notes  are  not  accepted  for  exchange  hereunder,  or  the  Required  Consents  are  not  obtained  with
respect to the Proposed Amendments, the Proposed Amendments will not become effective.
The following is a summary of the Proposed Amendments. Additionally, Appendix 3: Terms of the Existing Indentures to
be Modified by the Proposed Amendments hereto sets forth the language in each of the Existing Indentures that will be
deleted  or  modified  by  the  Proposed  Amendments.  Appendix  3  and  the  following  summary  do  not  purport  to  be
comprehensive  or  definitive,  and  are  both  qualified  in  their  entirety  by  reference  to  the  forms  of  the  Supplemental
Indentures included as exhibits to the registration statement relating to this prospectus.
With respect to each exchanging holder, the Proposed Amendments relating to such holder’s old notes constitute a single
proposal and an exchanging holder must consent to the Proposed Amendments relating to such holder’s old notes as an
entirety  and  may  not  consent  selectively  with  respect  to  such  Proposed  Amendments.  A  holder  of  old  notes  may  not
tender such old notes in the Exchange Offer without consenting to the Proposed Amendments applicable to such holder’s
old notes, and the tender of old notes by a holder pursuant to the Exchange Offer will constitute the giving of consents by
such holder to the Proposed Amendments relating to such holder’s old notes. Pursuant to the terms of each Existing
Indenture, the consent of the holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the applicable series of old notes then
outstanding is required to approve the Proposed Amendments to
Table of Contents
281
the  corresponding  Existing  Indenture  (other  than  with  respect  to  the  release  of  the  collateral  securing  the  Old  Senior
Secured Notes, which requires the consent of the holders of at least 66 2⁄3% of the aggregate principal amount of the Old
Senior Secured Notes) (collectively, the “Required Consents”). Since not less than 95% in aggregate principal amount of
old notes must be tendered to consummate the Exchange Offer and because consents to the Proposed Amendments are
required if holders tender their old notes, the minimum threshold for the consents will automatically be achieved if the
Minimum Condition is satisfied.
As of the date of this prospectus, the outstanding principal amount of the old notes is approximately $1.2 billion in the
aggregate. If the Required Consents are received and the Proposed Amendments become effective with respect to each of
the  Existing  Indentures,  the  Proposed  Amendments  will  be  binding  on  all  non-exchanging  holders  of  old  notes  (as
applicable).
Release  of  Collateral  Securing  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes.  The  Proposed  Amendments  with  respect  to  the  Existing
Secured Notes Indenture would release the collateral securing the Old Senior Secured Notes in accordance with Section
9.02(b) of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture. Additionally, the effectiveness of all provisions of the Existing Secured
Notes Indenture requiring the Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors to grant security interests and mortgages on their
respective assets is terminated by the Proposed Amendments.
Deletion/Amendments of Covenants and Other Provisions. The Supplemental Indentures would, in substance, eliminate
the  following  covenants  and  provisions  from  the  respective  Existing  Indentures,  which  are  identified  below  by  their
respective section references in the Existing Indentures (all capitalized terms not otherwise defined have the meanings
assigned under the applicable Existing Indentures):
•
Existing Secured Notes Indenture
•
•
•
•
•
•
Section 4.04        Certificates and Other Information (subsection 4.04(b)), which requires the Company to deliver
certain schedules, certificates, reports, opinions, and other documents to the Trustee and the Collateral Agent.
Section 4.07        Limitation on Restricted Payments, which limits the ability of the Company and the Restricted
Subsidiaries  to  declare  and  pay  dividends,  purchase  or  otherwise  acquire  or  retire  the  Capital  Stock,  options,
warrants  or  other  similar  rights  of  the  Company  or  certain  Affiliates,  make  principal  payments  on  or  repurchase,
redeem  or  otherwise  acquire  and  retire  Subordinated  Indebtedness,  or  make  Restricted  Investments,  subject  to
certain exceptions.
Section 4.08        Limitation on Dividend and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Subsidiaries, under which the
Company  agrees  that  it  will  not,  and  will  not  allow  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  agree  to  any  consensual
encumbrance  or  restriction  on  the  ability  of  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  pay  dividends,  make  loans  or  other
distributions,  or  transfer  property  or  assets  to  the  Company  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary,  with  certain
exceptions.
Section 4.09        Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock, limits the ability of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries to incur liabilities for certain Indebtedness or issue Disqualified Capital Stock, with certain
exceptions.
Section 4.10        Limitation on Asset Sales (subsection 4.10(a)), which limits the ability of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries to consummate any Asset Sale, with certain exceptions.
Section 4.11        Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates, which limits the ability of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries to enter into certain transactions with, or for the benefit of, an Affiliate of the Company (other than the
Company or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary), unless certain conditions are met.
Table of Contents
282
•
Section 4.12        Limitation on Liens, which limits the ability of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries to create,
incur, assume or suffer to exist any Lien securing Indebtedness on any of its property or assets, except for Permitted
Liens.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Section  4.16                Future  Designation  of  Restricted  and  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries,  which  permits  the  Board  of
Directors  of  the  Company  to  designate  Restricted  Subsidiaries  as  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries,  and  Unrestricted
Subsidiaries  as  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  each  subject  to  certain  conditions.  This  provision  will  be  amended  to
provide that the Company cannot designate any Restricted Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary after the closing
of the Exchange Offer.
Section 4.17        Suspended Covenants, which provides that the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries need not
comply  with  Sections  4.07  (Limitation  on  Restricted  Payments),  4.08  (Limitation  on  Dividend  and  Other  Payment
Restrictions  Affecting  Subsidiaries),  4.09  (Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock),  4.10
(Limitation on Asset Sales), 4.11 (Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates), and 5.01(a)(2) of the Indenture so long
as the Old Senior Secured Notes have Investment Grade Ratings or better, and no Default or Event of Default has
occurred and is continuing.
Section  4.19                Limitation  on  Certain  Agreements,  whereby  the  Company  agrees  that  it  will  not  permit  any
Collateral Grantor to enter into any agreement that requires the proceeds received from any sale of Collateral to be
applied to repay or otherwise acquire or retire any Indebtedness of any person, with certain exceptions.
Section 4.20        Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions, whereby the Company agrees that it will not, and it
will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, to enter into any Sale/Leaseback Transaction, subject to certain
exceptions.
Section 5.01        Merger, Consolidation or Sale of Assets (subsection 5.01(a)(3)), which requires that immediately
after giving effect to a consolidation or merger of the Company with or into another person, or the sale, assignment,
conveyance, transfer, lease, or disposal of all of substantially all of its assets to another person either (i) the Company
(or the Surviving Entity) could Incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness under the conditions set forth under Section
4.09(a) of the Indenture or (ii) the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company will be equal to or greater than such
ratio immediately before such transaction or transactions, on a pro forma basis.
Section 6.01        Events of Default (clauses (c), (e), (f) and (g)), which classify the following as Events of Default: (i) (a
portion of clause (c)) - failure by the Company to comply with the provisions described under Section 4.10 (Limitation
on Asset Sales); (ii) (clause (e)) - certain defaults under the Revolving Credit Agreement; (iii) (clause (f)) - default
under certain other mortgages, indentures or instruments and judgments; and (iv) (clause (g)) - certain defaults under
the Collateral Agreements.
Section 11.01      Collateral Agreements; Additional Collateral, which generally provides that the Old Senior Secured
Note obligations will be secured by Collateral, and specifically provides the manner and process thereby.
Section  11.04            No  Impairment  of  Security  Interests,  whereby  the  Company  agrees  that  it  and  the  Collateral
Grantors  will  not  take  any  action  or  knowingly  omit  to  take  any  action  that  would  materially  impair  the  security
interests in the Collateral granted under the Collateral Agreements.
•
Existing 2020 Notes Indenture
•
Section 5.1        Events of Default (clauses (f), and (h)), which classify the following as Events of Default: (i) (clause
(f)) - the occurrence and continuation of any default in the payment of any
283
Table of Contents
Indebtedness of the Company (other than the Old 2020 Notes) or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted
Subsidiary for money borrowed when due, or any other default resulting in acceleration of any Indebtedness of the
Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  for  money  borrowed,  provided  that  the
aggregate principal amount of such Indebtedness, together with the aggregate principal amount of any other such
Indebtedness under which there has been a payment default or the maturity of which has been so accelerated, shall
exceed  $50,000,000;  and  (ii)  (clause  (h))  -  failure  by  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other
Restricted Subsidiary to pay final judgments or orders rendered against the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or
any other Restricted Subsidiary aggregating in excess of $50,000,000, subject to certain conditions.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Section 7.1        Company May Consolidate, Etc., Only on Certain Terms (subsection 7.1(c)), which requires that
immediately after giving effect to a consolidation or merger of the Company with or into another person, or the sale,
assignment, conveyance, transfer, lease, or disposal of all of substantially all of its assets to another person either (i)
the Company (or the Surviving Entity) could Incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness under the conditions set forth
under Section 4.09(a) of the Indenture or (ii) the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company will be equal to or
greater than such ratio immediately before such transaction or transactions, on a pro forma basis.
Section 9.10        Limitation on Restricted Payments, which limits the ability of the Company and the Restricted
Subsidiaries  to  declare  and  pay  dividends,  purchase  or  otherwise  acquire  or  retire  the  Capital  Stock,  options,
warrants  or  other  similar  rights  of  the  Company  or  certain  Affiliates,  make  principal  payments  on  or  repurchase,
redeem  or  otherwise  acquire  and  retire  Subordinated  Indebtedness,  or  make  Restricted  Investments,  subject  to
certain conditions.
Section 9.12        Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock, limits the ability of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries to incur liabilities for certain Indebtedness or issue Disqualified Capital Stock, with certain
exceptions.
Section 9.14        Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries, whereby the
Company agrees that it will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to issue or sell any Preferred Stock to any person
other than to the Company or one of its Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiaries, and will not permit any person other
than  the  Company  or  one  of  its  Wholly  Owned  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  own  any  Preferred  Stock  of  any  other
Restricted Subsidiary, subject to certain exceptions.
Section 9.15        Limitation on Liens, whereby the Company agrees that it will not, and will not permit any Restricted
Subsidiary to incur any Lien of any kind, except for Permitted Liens, upon any of their respective Properties, subject
to certain exceptions.
Section 9.18        Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates, which limits the ability of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries to enter into certain transactions, with or for the benefit of, an Affiliate of the Company (other than the
Company or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) unless certain conditions are met.
Section 9.19        Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries, under
which  the  Company  agrees  that  it  will  not,  and  will  not  allow  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  to  agree  to  any
consensual encumbrance or restriction on the ability of a Restricted Subsidiary to pay dividends, make loans or other
distributions,  or  transfer  property  or  assets  to  the  Company  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary,  with  certain
exceptions.
Section 9.20        Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions, whereby the Company agrees that it will not, and it
will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, to enter into any Sale/Leaseback Transaction, subject to certain
exceptions.
Table of Contents
284
•
Section 9.21        Covenant Suspension, which provides that the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries need not
comply  with  Sections  7.1(c),  9.10  (Limitation  on  Restricted  Payments),  9.12  (Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and
Disqualified Capital Stock), 9.14 (Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries),
9.18 (Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates), and 9.19 (Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions
Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries) of the Indenture so long as the Old 2020 Notes have Investment Grade Ratings or
better, and no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing. The portion of Section 9.21 that permits the
suspension of Section 9.17 (Limitation on Asset Sales) will not be deleted.
•
Existing 2019 Notes Indenture
•
•
•
•
•
•
Section 5.1        Events of Default (clauses (f), and (h)), which classify the following as Events of Default: (i) (clause
(f)) - the occurrence and continuation of any default in the payment of any Indebtedness of the Company (other than
the Old 2019 Notes) or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary for money borrowed when due,
or any other default resulting in acceleration of any Indebtedness of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any
other Restricted Subsidiary for money borrowed, provided that the aggregate principal amount of such Indebtedness,
together with the aggregate principal amount of any other such Indebtedness under which there has been a payment
default or the maturity of which has been so accelerated, shall exceed $50,000,000; and (ii) (clause (h)) - failure by
the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  pay  final  judgments  or  orders
rendered  against  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  aggregating  in
excess of $50,000,000, subject to certain conditions.
Section 7.1        Company May Consolidate, Etc., Only on Certain Terms (subsection 7.1(c)), which requires that
immediately after giving effect to a consolidation or merger of the Company with or into another person, or the sale,
assignment, conveyance, transfer, lease, or disposal of all of substantially all of its assets to another person either (i)
the Company (or the Surviving Entity) could Incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness under the conditions set forth
under Section 4.09(a) of the Indenture or (ii) the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company will be equal to or
greater than such ratio immediately before such transaction or transactions, on a pro forma basis.
Section 9.10        Limitation on Restricted Payments, which limits the ability of the Company and the Restricted
Subsidiaries  to  declare  and  pay  dividends,  purchase  or  otherwise  acquire  or  retire  the  Capital  Stock,  options,
warrants  or  other  similar  rights  of  the  Company  or  certain  Affiliates,  make  principal  payments  on  or  repurchase,
redeem  or  otherwise  acquire  and  retire  Subordinated  Indebtedness,  or  make  Restricted  Investments,  subject  to
certain conditions.
Section 9.12        Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock, limits the ability of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries to incur liabilities for certain Indebtedness or issue Disqualified Capital Stock, with certain
exceptions.
Section 9.14        Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries, whereby the
Company agrees that it will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to issue or sell any Preferred Stock to any person
other than to the Company or one of its Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiaries, and will not permit any person other
than  the  Company  or  one  of  its  Wholly  Owned  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  own  any  Preferred  Stock  of  any  other
Restricted Subsidiary, subject to certain exceptions.
Section 9.15        Limitation on Liens, whereby the Company agrees that it will not, and will not permit any Restricted
Subsidiary to incur any Lien of any kind, except for Permitted Liens, upon any of their respective Properties, subject
to certain exceptions.
Table of Contents
285
•
•
•
•
Section 9.18        Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates, which limits the ability of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries to enter into certain transactions with, or for the benefit of, an Affiliate of the Company (other than the
Company or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) unless certain conditions are met.
Section 9.19        Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries, under
which  the  Company  agrees  that  it  will  not,  and  will  not  allow  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  to  agree  to  any
consensual encumbrance or restriction on the ability of a Restricted Subsidiary to pay dividends, make loans or other
distributions,  or  transfer  property  or  assets  to  the  Company  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary,  with  certain
exceptions.
Section 9.20        Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions, whereby the Company agrees that it will not, and it
will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, to enter into any Sale/Leaseback Transaction, subject to certain
exceptions.
Section 9.21        Covenant Suspension, which provides that the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries need not
comply  with  Sections  7.1(c),  9.10  (Limitation  on  Restricted  Payments),  9.12  (Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and
Disqualified Capital Stock), 9.14 (Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries),
9.18 (Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates), and 9.19 (Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions
Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries) of the Indenture so long as the Old 2019 Notes have Investment Grade Ratings or
better, and no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing. The portion of Section 9.21 that permits the
suspension of Section 9.17 (Limitation on Asset Sales) will not be deleted.
Effect of Deleted Sections. Each of the Supplemental Indentures will provide that failure to comply with the terms of any of
the foregoing deleted sections or subsections of the Existing Indentures shall no longer constitute a Default or an Event
of Default under such Existing Indenture, and shall no longer have any other consequence under such Existing Indenture.
Each of the Supplemental Indentures will also amend the Existing Indentures to provide that provisions in such Existing
Indenture  that  authorize  action  by  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  when  permitted  by  a  deleted  section  or
which is to be done in accordance with a deleted section, shall be deemed to permit such action (unless prohibited by
such  deleted  section  or  performed  in  a  way  consistent  with  such  section),  and,  otherwise,  references  in  the  Existing
Indentures to deleted provisions shall also no longer have any effect or consequence under such Existing Indenture.
Deletion and Modification of Definitions. The Proposed Amendments would also delete or modify certain definitions from
each of the Existing Indentures and old notes when necessary as a result of the foregoing.
Table of Contents
286
CERTAIN UNITED STATES FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following is a summary of certain United States federal income tax consequences of the exchange of old notes for
new notes and warrants as well as the ownership of the new notes, warrants and shares of common stock of the Company
(the “Shares”). This summary is based on the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”),
Treasury regulations thereunder (“Treasury Regulations”) and administrative interpretations and judicial decisions, all as
in effect on the date of this prospectus and all of which are subject to change, with possible retroactive effect. Due to the
lack of definitive judicial and administrative authority in a number of areas, substantial uncertainty may exist with respect
to some of the tax consequences described below. No opinion of counsel has been obtained, and we do not intend to
seek a ruling from the United States Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”), as to any of the tax consequences discussed
below. There can be no assurance that the IRS will not challenge one or more of the tax consequences described below.
This summary only addresses beneficial owners of old notes (“Holders”) and does not apply to persons subject to special
treatment  under  United  States  federal  income  tax  law  (including,  without  limitation,  a  bank,  governmental  authority  or
agency,  financial  institution,  insurance  company,  pass-through  entity,  tax-exempt  organization,  broker  or  dealer  in
securities, mutual fund, small business investment company, employee, a person holding old notes, new notes, warrants
or Shares that are a hedge against, or that are hedged against, currency risk or that are part of a straddle, constructive
sale, or conversion transaction, a person that owns more than 10% of the Shares (actually or constructively), a person that
is  in  bankruptcy  or  a  regulated  investment  company  or  real  estate  investment  trust).  This  summary  assumes  that  the
Holders hold old notes, and will hold the new notes, warrants, if any, and Shares, as “capital assets” within the meaning of
Section 1221 of the Code (generally property held for investment). This summary does not purport to cover all aspects of
United  States  federal  income  taxation  that  may  apply  to  a  Holder  based  on  the  Holder’s  particular  circumstances.
Additionally,  this  summary  does  not  discuss  any  tax  consequences  that  may  arise  under  any  laws  other  than  United
States federal income tax law, including under federal estate and gift tax laws or state, local or foreign tax law.
The United States federal income tax consequences to a partner in an entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for
United States federal income tax purposes that holds an old note, new note, warrant or Share generally will depend on the
status of the partner and the activities of the partner and the partnership. If a Holder is a partnership, or a partner in a
partnership holding old notes, new notes, warrants or Shares, such Holder should consult its own tax advisor.
THIS  SUMMARY  IS  NOT  INTENDED  TO  CONSTITUTE  A  COMPLETE  ANALYSIS  OF  ALL  TAX  CONSIDERATIONS
RELEVANT TO A PARTICULAR HOLDER. ACCORDINGLY, THE FOLLOWING SUMMARY OF CERTAIN UNITED STATES
FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES IS FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY AND IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR
CAREFUL  TAX  PLANNING  AND  ADVICE  BASED  UPON  THE  INDIVIDUAL  CIRCUMSTANCES  PERTAINING  TO  A
HOLDER. YOU ARE URGED TO CONSULT YOUR OWN TAX ADVISOR FOR THE FEDERAL, STATE, LOCAL AND OTHER
TAX CONSEQUENCES APPLICABLE TO THE TRANSACTIONS DESCRIBED IN THIS REGISTRATION STATEMENT.
Characterization of the New Notes
The proper characterization of the new notes as debt or equity for United States federal income tax purposes is uncertain.
The determination of whether an instrument is properly characterized as debt or equity for United States federal income
tax  purposes  is  a  facts  and  circumstances  analysis  and  depends  on  many  factors,  including,  among  others:  (i)  the
intention of the parties, (ii) the seniority and security of the instrument in the issuer’s capital structure, (iii) the projected
ability of the issuer to make scheduled payments of interest and principal on the instrument, (iv) the overlap in ownership
of debt and equity holders, (v) the debt to equity ratio of the issuer and (vi) in the case of a convertible instrument like the
New Convertible Notes, the likelihood of conversion of the instrument (judged in part by whether, and, if so, by how much,
the conversion price of the instrument is less
Table of Contents
287
than the fair market value of the underlying stock at the time of issuance–that is, by whether, and the extent to which, the
conversion  feature  is  “in  the  money”  at  issuance).  The  new  notes  have  some  features  that  are  equity-like  (e.g.,  the
conversion feature on the New Convertible Notes), and other features that are debt-like, including the fact that the new
notes are senior secured obligations of the Company. We intend to characterize all of the new notes as debt for applicable
tax purposes and the remainder of the discussion below assumes that the new notes are so treated. However, there can
be no assurance that the IRS will not assert, and that a court will not determine, that certain of the new notes instead
should be treated as equity. Each Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the proper characterization of the
new notes for United States federal, state and local, and non-United States, tax purposes, and the consequences to it of
such treatment given its individual circumstances.
Additional Payments
In certain circumstances, we may be required to pay amounts in redemption of the new notes (for example, in the case of
an optional redemption or a change in control, as described in “Description of New Senior Secured Notes” under the
headings  “—Redemption—Optional  Redemption”  and  “—Redemption—Offers  to  Purchase”;  and  as  described  in
“Description  of  New  Convertible  Notes—Redemption”  under  the  headings  “—Optional  Redemption  of  the  New  2019
Convertible Notes,” “—Offers to Purchase the New 2019 Convertible Notes,” “—Optional Redemption of the New 2020
Convertible Notes,” and “—Offers to Purchase the New 2020 Convertible Notes”), that are in excess of the stated principal
amount and interest on the new notes. Although the issue is not free from doubt, we intend to take the position that the
possibility of payment of such additional amounts does not result in the new notes being treated as contingent payment
debt instruments under applicable Treasury Regulations. If we become obligated to pay additional amounts in redemption,
then we intend to take the position that such amounts will be treated as additional proceeds and taxed as described below
under the heading “—Consequences to United States Holders—Consequences of Disposing of New Notes—Sale or Other
Taxable  Disposition”  and  “—Consequences  to  Non-United  States  Holders—Sale  or  Other  Taxable  Disposition  of  New
Notes,” as applicable. These positions will be based on our determination that, as of the date of the issuance of the new
notes, the possibility that additional amounts in redemption of the new notes will have to be paid is a remote or incidental
contingency within the meaning of applicable Treasury Regulations.
Our determination that these contingencies are remote or incidental is binding on a Holder, unless the Holder explicitly
discloses  to  the  IRS  that  it  is  taking  a  different  position  in  the  manner  required  by  applicable  Treasury  Regulations.
However, our position is not binding on the IRS. If the IRS takes a contrary position to that described above, a Holder may
be  required  to  accrue  interest  income  on  the  new  notes  based  upon  a  comparable  yield,  regardless  of  its  method  of
accounting. The “comparable yield” is the yield at which we would issue a fixed rate debt instrument with no contingent
payments and no conversion feature, but with terms and conditions otherwise similar to those of the new notes; that yield
would be higher than the stated yield on the new notes. In addition, any gain on the sale, exchange, retirement or other
taxable disposition of the new notes would be recharacterized as ordinary income. Each Holder should consult its own tax
advisor regarding the tax consequences of the new notes being treated as contingent payment debt instruments. The
remainder of this discussion assumes that the new notes will not be treated as contingent payment debt instruments.
Consequences to United States Holders
This section applies only to United States Holders. For purposes of this summary, a Holder is a “United States Holder” if
the Holder is a beneficial owner of old notes, new notes, warrants or Shares that is, for United States federal income tax
purposes, (i) an individual citizen or resident of the United States, (ii) a corporation, or entity treated as a corporation,
organized in or under the laws of the United States or any state thereof or the District of Columbia, (iii) a trust if (a) a court
within the United States is able to exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more United
States  persons  have  the  authority  to  control  all  substantial  decisions  of  the  trust  or  (b)  such  trust  has  made  a  valid
election to be treated as a United States person for United States federal income tax purposes or (iv) an estate, the income
of which is includible in gross income for United States federal income tax purposes regardless of its source.
Table of Contents
Receipt of Warrants
288
The U.S. federal income tax treatment of the receipt of any warrants in the Exchange Offer is uncertain. The receipt of
warrants may be characterized as either (a) additional consideration received for the old notes in the Exchange Offer or (b)
separate consideration for consenting to the Proposed Amendments. Although not free from doubt, we intend to treat the
receipt  of  warrants  as  consideration  received  by  a  Holder  for  old  notes  surrendered  in  the  Exchange  Offer.  Unless
otherwise stated, the remainder of the discussion below assumes that the warrants are so treated. However, the IRS or a
court could take a different position with respect to warrants.
In the event that the warrants are not treated as additional consideration received for the old notes in the Exchange Offer,
such warrants likely would be treated as a separate payment in the nature of a fee paid for such Holder consenting to the
Proposed  Amendments,  and  the  fair  market  value  of  the  warrants  would  be  treated  as  ordinary  income  that  must  be
included in the Holder’s gross income when received or accrued in accordance with that Holders’ method of accounting.
Each Holder should consult its own tax advisor with respect to the proper treatment of warrants received by such Holder
as part of the Exchange Offer.
Exchange of Old Notes for New Notes and Warrants
The United States federal income tax consequences to a United States Holder of exchanging old notes for new notes and,
if applicable, warrants in the Exchange Offer will depend in part on whether the old notes and the new notes exchanged
therefor  are  treated  as  “securities”  for  purposes  of  the  reorganization  provisions  of  the  Code.  Whether  an  instrument
constitutes a “security” is determined based on all the facts and circumstances, but most authorities have held that the
term of a debt instrument at issuance is an important factor in determining whether the instrument is a security for United
States federal income tax purposes. These authorities have indicated that a term of less than five years is evidence that
the instrument is not a security, whereas a term of ten years or more is evidence that such debt instrument is a security.
There are numerous other factors that could be taken into account in determining whether a debt instrument is a security,
including, without limitation: (a) the security for payment; (b) the creditworthiness of the obligor; (c) the subordination or
lack  thereof  to  other  creditors;  (d)  the  right  to  vote  or  otherwise  participate  in  the  management  of  the  obligor;
(e)  convertibility  of  the  instrument  into  stock  of  the  obligor;  (f)  whether  payments  of  interest  are  fixed,  variable  or
contingent; and (g) whether such payments are made on a current basis or accrued. We intend to take the position, and
the  remainder  of  this  discussion  below  assumes,  that  the  old  notes  will  be  treated  as  securities  for  purposes  of  the
reorganization provisions of the Code. While not free from doubt, we intend to take the position that the new notes should
be  treated  as  securities  for  purposes  of  the  reorganization  provisions  of  the  Code.  The  discussion  below  summarizes
each alternative with respect to the treatment of the new notes.
Treatment if the New Notes are Securities
If  the  new  notes  are  treated  as  securities  of  the  Company,  then  the  exchange  of  the  old  notes  for  new  notes  and,  if
applicable,  warrants  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Offer  should  be  treated  as  a  recapitalization  within  the  meaning  of
Section 368(a)(1)(E) of the Code and a United States Holder should not recognize any gain or loss on the exchange. As a
result, the recognition of gain or loss, if any, with respect to the old notes will be deferred until the sale or other taxable
disposition  of  the  new  notes  or,  if  the  New  Convertible  Notes  are  converted  into  Shares,  upon  the  later  sale  or  other
taxable disposition of Shares. See “—Consequences of Disposing of New Notes—Sale or Other Taxable Disposition” and
“—Consequences  of  Holding  and  Disposing  of  Shares—Sale  or  Other  Taxable  Disposition”  below.  The  aggregate
adjusted tax basis of the new notes and warrants, if any, received should be equal to the aggregate tax basis of the old
notes surrendered and should be allocated among such new notes and warrants based on their relative fair market values.
The holding period for the new notes and warrants, if any, received should include the holding period for the old notes
exchanged therefor.
Treatment if Some New Notes are Securities or Warrants are Received
If either (1) some, but not all, of the new notes received are treated as securities of the Company or (2) none of the new
notes received are treated as securities of the Company, but some warrants are received, then the
Table of Contents
289
exchange  of  the  old  notes  for  new  notes  and,  if  applicable,  warrants  should  be  treated  as  a  recapitalization  within  the
meaning of Section 368(a)(1)(E) of the Code, with any new notes not treated as securities of the Company treated as boot.
In such case, each United States Holder should recognize gain on the exchange in an amount equal to the lesser of (A) the
sum of the issue price (as described below) of the new notes received and the fair market value of the warrants, if any,
received, minus the Holder’s adjusted basis in the old notes surrendered, and (B) the issue price (as described below) of
the new notes not treated as securities received in the exchange. Such gain should be (subject to the “market discount”
rules  described  below)  long-term  capital  gain  if  the  Holder  has  a  holding  period  for  old  notes  of  more  than  one  year.
Generally, no loss should be recognized on the exchange. The recognition of loss, if any, with respect to the old notes will
be deferred until the sale or other taxable disposition of the new notes or, if the New Convertible Notes are converted into
Shares, upon the later sale or other taxable disposition of Shares. See “—Consequences of Disposing of New Notes—
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition” and “—Consequences of Holding and Disposing of Shares—Sale or Other Taxable
Disposition” below. The aggregate adjusted tax basis of the new notes treated as securities and warrants, if any, received
should be equal to the United States Holder’s aggregate adjusted tax basis for the old notes exchanged therefor, plus the
aggregate amount of any gain recognized on the exchange and minus the issue price of the new notes not treated as
securities received. Such tax basis should be allocated between the new notes treated as securities and warrants, if any,
based on their relative fair market values. The tax basis of each new note not treated as a security of the Company should
be its issue price. The holding period of the new notes treated as securities and warrants, if any, should include the United
States Holder’s holding period in the old notes exchanged therefor. The holding period for each new note not treated as a
security of the Company should begin on the day following the Closing Date.
Treatment if Only New Notes Not Treated as Securities are Received
If only new notes that are not treated as securities are received in the Exchange Offer, then each United States Holder will
be treated as exchanging its old notes for new notes and, if applicable, warrants in a taxable exchange under Section 1001
of the Code. Accordingly, in such case, each United States Holder should recognize capital gain or loss equal to: (1) the
sum of the fair market value of the warrants, if any, and the issue price (as described below) of the new notes received,
minus (2) the United States Holder’s adjusted basis, if any, in the old notes surrendered in exchange therefor. Such gain or
loss should be (subject to the “market discount” rules described below) long-term capital gain or loss if the Holder has a
holding period for old notes of more than one year. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitations. A United
States Holder’s tax basis in any warrants received should equal their fair market value. A United States Holder’s tax basis
in the new notes should be the issue price thereof (as described below under the heading “—Consequences of Holding
New Notes—Issue Price”). A Holder’s holding period for new notes and warrants, if any, should begin on the day following
the Closing Date.
Accrued but Unpaid Interest
Holders will receive cash on the Closing Date in an amount equal to the accrued but unpaid interest on their old notes as
of such date. Such amount should be taxable to a United States Holder as interest income if such accrued interest has not
been previously included in its gross income for United States federal income tax purposes.
Market Discount
A United States Holder may be affected by the “market discount” provisions of Sections 1276 through 1278 of the Code.
Under these provisions, some or all of the gain realized by a United States Holder may be treated as ordinary income
(instead of capital gain), to the extent of the amount of accrued “market discount” on the surrendered old notes.
In general, a debt obligation with a fixed maturity of more than one year that is acquired by a holder on the secondary
market (or, in certain circumstances, upon original issuance) is considered to be acquired with “market
Table of Contents
290
discount” as to that holder if the debt obligation’s stated redemption price at maturity (or revised issue price as defined in
Section 1278 of the Code, in the case of a debt obligation that is issued with original issue discount) exceeds the tax basis
of the debt obligation in the holder’s hands immediately after its acquisition. However, a debt obligation does not have
“market discount” if the excess is less than a statutory de minimis amount (equal to 0.25% of the debt obligation’s stated
redemption  price  at  maturity  or  revised  issue  price,  in  the  case  of  a  debt  obligation  that  is  issued  with  original  issue
discount, multiplied by the number of complete years remaining until maturity at the time of the acquisition).
Any gain recognized by a United States Holder on the taxable disposition of old notes (determined as described above)
that were acquired with market discount should be treated as ordinary income to the extent of the market discount that
accrued thereon while the old notes were considered to be held by the United States Holder (unless the United States
Holder elected to include market discount in income as it accrued). To the extent that the old notes that were acquired with
market discount are exchanged and the transaction is treated as a tax-free recapitalization within the meaning of Section
368(a)(1)(E) of the Code as described above, any market discount that has accrued on the old notes to the time of the
exchange but that is not recognized by the United States Holder on the exchange will be carried over to the new notes
and,  if  applicable,  warrants  received  in  the  exchange,  and  any  gain  recognized  on  the  subsequent  sale,  exchange,
redemption or other disposition of the new notes and, if applicable, warrants will be treated as ordinary income to the
extent of such accrued but unrecognized market discount.
Consequences of Holding New Notes
Issue Price
The  issue  price  of  the  new  notes  will  depend  on  whether  either  the  new  notes  or  the  old  notes  are  traded  on  an
“established securities market” at any time during the 31 day period ending 15 days after the Closing Date. In general, a
debt instrument (or property exchanged therefor) will be treated as traded on an established market if there is (i) a sales
price for the property, (ii) one or more firm quotes for the property, or (iii) one or more indicative quotes for the property. A
sales price exists if the price for an executed purchase or sale of the property is reasonably available to issuers of debt
instruments, dealers, brokers, and traders. A firm quote exists if a price quote is available from at least one broker, dealer
or pricing service and the quoted price is substantially the same as the price for which the person receiving the quote
could purchase or sell the property. An indicative quote is considered to exist when a price quote is available from at least
one broker, dealer, or pricing service and the price quote is not a firm quote described in the preceding sentence. The
issue price of a debt instrument that is traded on an established securities market would be the fair market value of such
debt instrument on the issue date as determined by such trading. If the debt instrument is not traded on an established
securities market, but the property exchanged therefor is traded on an established securities market, then the issue price
of the debt instrument would be the fair market value of the traded property on the issue date as determined by such
trading.  The  issue  price  of  a  debt  instrument  that  is  neither  traded  on  an  established  securities  market  nor  issued  for
property so traded would be its stated principal amount (provided that the interest rate on the debt instrument exceeds the
so-called applicable federal rate).
Stated Interest; Original Issue Discount
Generally
The  new  notes  will  be  considered  to  be  issued  with  “original  issue  discount”  (“OID”).  Under  the  rules  governing  OID,
regardless of a United States Holder’s method of accounting, a United States Holder will be required to accrue its pro rata
share of OID on the new notes on a constant yield basis and include such accruals in gross income, whether or not such
United  States  Holder  receives  a  cash  payment  of  interest  on  the  notes  on  the  scheduled  interest  payment  dates.  The
amount  of  OID  on  the  new  notes  is  the  difference  between  their  “stated  redemption  price  at  maturity”  (the  sum  of  all
payments to be made on the new notes other than “qualified stated
Table of Contents
291
interest”) and their “issue price” (determined as described above under the heading “—Issue Price”). The term “qualified
stated interest” means stated interest that is unconditionally payable in cash or other property (other than the issuer’s
debt instruments) or will be constructively received at least annually at a single fixed rate. Because we will make interest
payments  on  the  New  Convertible  Notes,  and  have  the  option  to  make  interest  payments  on  the  New  Senior  Secured
Notes,  in  PIK  interest  instead  of  paying  cash,  none  of  the  stated  interest  payments  on  the  new  notes  will  constitute
qualified stated interest.
The amount of OID that a United States Holder generally is required to include in income is the sum of the “daily portions”
of  OID  with  respect  to  the  new  notes  for  each  day  during  the  taxable  year  in  which  the  United  States  Holder  is  the
beneficial owner of the new notes (reduced as described in “—Acquisition Premium” below in the case of a United States
Holder whose tax basis in the new note exceeds its adjusted issue price). The “daily portions” of OID in respect of the new
notes are determined by allocating to each day in an “accrual period” the ratable portion of interest on the new notes that
accrues in the “accrual period.” The “accrual period” for the new notes may be of any length and may vary in length over
the  term  of  the  new  notes,  provided  that  each  “accrual  period”  is  no  longer  than  one  year  and  that  each  scheduled
payment of interest or principal occurs on the first or final day of an “accrual period.”
The amount of OID on the new notes that accrues in an “accrual period” is the product of the “yield to maturity” on the
new notes (adjusted to reflect the length of the “accrual period”) and the “adjusted issue price” of the new notes at the
beginning  of  the  accrual  period.  The  “yield  to  maturity”  on  the  new  notes  is  the  discount  rate  that,  when  used  in
computing the present value of all payments to be made under the new notes, produces an amount equal to their issue
price. The “adjusted issue price” of the new notes at the beginning of the first “accrual period” will equal its “issue price”
(as described above under the heading “—Issue Price”) and for any “accrual periods” thereafter will be (x) the sum of the
“issue price” of the new notes and any OID previously accrued thereon (determined without regard to the amortization of
any acquisition premium or bond premium) minus (y) the amount of any payments (including payments of stated interest)
previously made on the new notes.
New Senior Secured Notes
For purposes of determining the “yield to maturity” with respect to the New Senior Secured Notes, a United States Holder
may assume that we will not exercise the option to pay PIK interest, except in respect of periods in which the Company
actually elects to pay PIK interest. If we in fact pay interest in cash on the New Senior Secured Notes, a United States
Holder will not be required to adjust its OID inclusions. Each payment made in cash under a New Senior Secured Note will
be treated first as a payment of any accrued OID that has not been allocated to prior payments and second as a payment
of principal. A United States Holder generally will not be required to include separately in income cash payments received
on the new notes to the extent such payments constitute payments of previously accrued OID. If for any interest payment
period we exercise our option to pay interest in the form of PIK interest, OID calculations for future periods will be adjusted
by treating the New Senior Secured Note as if it had been retired and then reissued for an amount equal to its adjusted
issue price on the date preceding the first date of such future interest payment period, and the “yield to maturity” of the
reissued note will be recomputed by treating the current and all prior PIK interest payments made as a single payment that
will be made on the maturity date of such reissued note.
Acquisition Premium
A United States Holder will be considered to have “acquisition premium” to the extent the United States Holder’s adjusted
tax basis in the new note immediately following the consummation of the Exchange Offer is (1) less than or equal to the
principal amount of the new note but (2) greater than the new note’s adjusted issue price. If a United States Holder has
“acquisition premium” with respect to a new note, the Holder would reduce the amount of OID that it is required to include
in  taxable  income  by  a  fraction  (i)  whose  numerator  equals  the  excess  of  (w)  the  adjusted  tax  basis  in  the  new  note
immediately following the consummation of the Exchange Offer over
Table of Contents
292
(x) the new note’s adjusted issue price and (ii) whose denominator equals the excess of (y) the sum of all amounts payable
on  the  new  note  following  the  consummation  of  the  Exchange  Offer  (including  stated  interest) over  (z)  the  new  note’s
adjusted issue price.
Subject to certain limitations, a United States Holder may elect to include in gross income all interest that accrues on its
new  notes  using  a  constant-yield  method.  For  this  purpose,  “interest”  includes  OID,  market  discount  and de  minimis
market discount as adjusted by any acquisition premium. Generally, this election will apply only to the new notes for which
the United States Holder makes it; however, this election can have implications for other notes. Any such election may be
terminated only with the consent of the IRS. Each Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the advisability and
additional consequences of making the election.
The rules regarding OID are complex and the rules described above may not apply in all cases. Accordingly, each Holder
should consult its own tax advisor regarding their application.
Constructive Distributions with Respect to New Convertible Notes
A United States Holder may, in certain circumstances, be deemed to have received distributions on the Shares for which
the  New  Convertible  Notes  are  convertible  if  the  conversion  price  of  the  instruments  is  adjusted.  Adjustments  to  the
conversion  price  made  pursuant  to  a  bona  fide reasonable  adjustment  formula  that  has  the  effect  of  preventing  the
dilution of the interest of the holders of the instruments generally will not be deemed to result in a constructive distribution
of stock. Certain possible adjustments provided in the instruments do not qualify as being made pursuant to a bona fide
reasonable  adjustment  formula.  If  such  adjustments  are  made,  then  a  United  States  Holder  may  be  deemed  to  have
received constructive distributions from the Company, even though the United States Holder has not received any cash or
property as a result of such adjustments. In certain circumstances, the failure to provide for such an adjustment also may
result in a constructive distribution to a United States Holder. If there is a deemed distribution, such distribution will be
taxable as a dividend to the extent paid out of our current or accumulated earnings and profits, and thereafter as a return
of capital or capital gain in accordance with tax rules applicable to corporate distributions, but may not be eligible for the
reduced  rates  of  tax  applicable  to  certain  dividends  paid  to  individual  holders  or  the  dividends-received  deduction
applicable to certain dividends paid to corporate holders. Each United States Holder should consult its own tax advisor
regarding the possibility and tax consequences of constructive distributions.
Consequences of Disposing of New Notes
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition
Upon the sale or other taxable disposition of new notes, a United States Holder will recognize capital gain or loss equal to
the difference between the amount realized on such sale or taxable disposition and the United States Holder’s tax basis in
the new notes sold. Other than with respect to any “market discount” carried over from the old notes (as described above),
such  gain  or  loss  generally  will  be  long-term  capital  gain  or  loss  if  the  United  States  Holder’s  holding  period  in  such
instrument is more than one year at the time of disposition. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitations.
Conversion of New Convertible Notes
If a New Convertible Note is converted and a United States Holder receives Shares from the Company and cash in lieu of a
fractional Share, then such Holder should not recognize any gain or loss in respect of the conversion, except that the
receipt  of  cash  in  lieu  of  a  fractional  Share  will  result  in  capital  gain  or  loss  (measured  by  the  difference  between  the
amount of cash received in lieu of the fractional Share and the United States Holder’s tax basis in the fractional Share).
Accordingly,  any  gain  or  loss  with  respect  to  the  New  Convertible  Notes  will  not  be  recognized  until  the  sale  or  other
taxable  disposition  of  the  Shares  received  upon  a  conversion  of  the  New  Convertible  Note.  See  “—Consequences  of
Holding and Disposing of Shares—Sale or Other Taxable Disposition” below.
Table of Contents
293
The United States Holder’s tax basis in the Shares received upon a conversion of a New Convertible Note will equal the tax
basis  of  the  New  Convertible  Note  that  was  converted,  less  any  basis  allocable  to  a  fractional  Share.  A  United  States
Holder’s  holding  period  for  the  Shares  received  will  include  the  United  States  Holder’s  holding  period  for  the  New
Convertible Note converted.
A portion of the Shares received upon a conversion of a New Convertible Note may be attributable to accrued but unpaid
interest on the New Convertible Note. The treatment of portion of the Shares attributable to accrued but unpaid interest will
be subject to the same treatment described under the heading “—Exchange of Old Notes for New Notes and Warrants—
Accrued but Unpaid Interest” above.
Consequences of Holding and Disposing of Shares
Upon the exercise of a warrant or the conversion of a New Convertible Note, a Holder will receive Shares.
Distributions
Distributions,  if  any,  made  on  Shares  (other  than  certain  pro  rata  distributions  of  Shares)  that  are  paid  out  of  the
Company’s current or accumulated earnings and profits (as determined for United States federal income tax purposes)
will  be  treated  as  dividends  for  United  States  federal  income  tax  purposes.  Under  current  law,  dividends  received  by
individual United States holders with respect to Shares generally should qualify for a 20% tax rate on “qualified dividend
income”, so long as certain holding period requirements are met. Dividends paid with respect to Shares will be eligible for
the dividends received deduction if the United States Holder is an otherwise qualifying corporate holder that meets the
holding  period  and  other  requirements  for  the  dividends  received  deduction.  If  a  distribution  exceeds  the  Company’s
current and accumulated earnings and profits, the excess will be treated as a tax-free return of the United States Holder’s
investment up to the United States Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the United States Holder’s Shares, and thereafter as
capital gain. Such capital gain generally will be long-term capital gain if the United States Holder’s holding period in such
Shares exceeds one year immediately prior to such distribution.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition
Upon the sale or other taxable disposition of Shares, a United States Holder will recognize capital gain or loss equal to the
difference between the amount realized on such sale, exchange or taxable disposition and the United States Holder’s tax
basis in the instrument sold. Other than with respect to any market discount carried over from the old notes (as described
above), such gain or loss generally will be capital gain or loss, and will be long-term capital gain or loss if the United States
Holder’s holding period in such instrument is more than one year at the time of disposition. The deductibility of capital
losses is subject to limitations.
Consequences of Holding and Disposing of Warrants
Characterization of Warrants
Because the exercise price of the warrants constitutes a nominal amount, we intend to treat the warrants as equity for all
U.S. federal income tax purposes. The remainder of this discussion assumes that the warrants will be so treated. Each
Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the proper characterization of the warrants for United States federal,
state and local, and non-United States, tax purposes, and the consequences to it of such treatment given its individual
circumstances.
Exercise of the Warrants
Upon the exercise or deemed exercise of a warrant, (1) a United States Holder will recognize no gain or loss upon either
such exercise or deemed exercise of the warrant; (2) the adjusted tax basis of the Shares underlying
Table of Contents
294
the warrants deemed received will be equal to the adjusted tax basis of the warrant until the warrant is actually exercised at
which time the adjusted tax basis of Shares underlying the warrants would be increased by the exercise price paid; and (3)
the  holding  period  of  the  Shares  underlying  the  warrants  deemed  received  will  begin  on  the  day  such  warrants  are
received.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of the Warrants
In general, a United States Holder will recognize gain or loss upon the sale or other taxable disposition of a warrant in an
amount equal to the difference, if any, between the amount realized and the United States Holder’s adjusted tax basis in
the warrant at the time of the sale or other taxable disposition. Assuming such warrant is held as a capital asset, any such
gain or loss will be long-term capital gain or loss if the holding period for the warrant disposed of is more than one year at
that time. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitation.
Lapse of the Warrants
If a warrant lapses unexercised, a United States Holder generally would recognize capital loss equal to such United States
Holder’s basis in the warrant. Adjustments to the warrants, including adjustments to the number of Shares for which the
warrant may be exercised or the exercise price of the warrant, may under certain circumstances result in a constructive
distribution that could be taxable as a dividend to the United States Holder to the extent of the current and accumulated
earnings and profits of the Company, if any. Unless a warrant is treated as constructively exercised as described above
under “—Characterization of Warrants,” it is possible a constructive distribution would not be eligible for the dividends
received deduction or reduced rates of taxation on dividends described above under “—Consequences of Holding and
Disposing of Shares—Distributions.”
Consequences of Not Participating in the Exchange Offer
A United States Holder of old notes that does not tender its old notes in the Exchange Offer will continue to hold old notes,
as  amended  pursuant  to  the  Proposed  Amendments  (assuming  the  Exchange  Offer  is  consummated).  Whether  the
amendment of the old notes will constitute a realization event for United States federal income tax purposes depends on
whether the amendment is considered to result in a “significant modification” (within of the meaning of Section 1.1001-3 of
the Treasury Regulations) of the old notes. If the amendment of the old notes results in a “significant modification,” then
the amendment should be treated as a deemed exchange of old notes for newly issued amended notes.
Old Senior Secured Notes
Although it is uncertain, we intend to take the position that the amendment of the Old Senior Secured Notes will result in a
significant modification and a deemed exchange of the Old Senior Secured Notes. If the amended Old Senior Secured
Notes are treated as “securities” of the Company, then a United States Holder that does not tender its Old Senior Secured
Notes will be subject to the same treatment with respect to such amended Old Senior Secured Notes as is described in “—
Exchange of Old Notes for New Notes and Warrants—Treatment if the New Notes are Securities” above. If the amended
Old Senior Secured Notes are not treated as “securities” of the Company, then a United States Holder that does not tender
its Old Senior Secured Notes will be subject to the same treatment with respect to such amended Old Senior Secured
Notes  as  is  described  in  “—Exchange  of  Old  Notes  for  New  Notes  and  Warrants—Treatment  if  Only  New  Notes  Not
Treated as Securities are Received” above.
Old 2019 Notes and Old 2020 Notes
While not free from doubt, we intend to take the position that the amendment of the Old 2019 Notes and Old 2020 Notes will
not  result  in  a  significant  modification  and  will  not  constitute  a  realization  event  for  United  States  federal  income  tax
purposes. As a result, a United States Holder should not recognize any gain or loss with respect to the amendment of the
Old 2019 Notes and the Old 2020 Notes.
Table of Contents
Medicare Tax
295
An additional 3.8% tax is imposed on the “net investment income” of certain U.S. citizens and resident aliens, and on the
undistributed  “net  investment  income”  of  certain  estates  and  trusts.  Among  other  things,  “net  investment  income”
generally  will  include  interest,  OID  accruals,  and  dividend  income,  and  certain  net  gains  from  the  sale,  redemption,
exchange, retirement or other taxable disposition of property, such as the new notes, warrants or Shares, less certain
deductions.  Each  United  States  Holder  that  is  an  individual,  estate  or  trust  is  urged  to  consult  its  own  tax  advisor
regarding the applicability of the Medicare tax to its income and gains in respect of its investment in the new notes and/or
warrants.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
In  general,  payments  of  interest  on  the  old  notes  and  new  notes,  payments  of  dividends  on  equity  interests  in  the
Company  and  payments  of  the  proceeds  of  a  disposition  (including  a  disposition  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Offer,  a
retirement or a redemption) of the old notes, new notes, warrants or Shares generally will be reported to the IRS, and such
payments may be subject to backup withholding tax (currently at a rate of 28%) unless the United States Holder: (a) comes
within certain exempt categories (which generally include corporations) and, when required, demonstrates that fact; or
(b)  timely  provides  (usually  on  IRS  Form  W-9)  a  correct  taxpayer  identification  number  and  certifies  under  penalty  of
perjury  that  the  taxpayer  identification  number  is  correct  and  that  the  Holder  is  not  subject  to  backup  withholding  tax
because  of  a  failure  to  report  all  dividend  and  interest  income.  Backup  withholding  tax  is  not  an  additional  tax  but  is,
instead, an advance payment of tax that may be refunded to the extent it results in an overpayment of tax provided that the
required information related to such refund is timely provided to the IRS. We will comply with all applicable reporting and
withholding requirements of the IRS.
Consequences to Non-United States Holders
The following is a summary of certain United States federal income tax considerations to a Non-United States Holder. For
purposes  of  this  summary,  the  term  “Non-United  States  Holder”  means  a  beneficial  owner  of  an  old  note,  new  note,
warrant or Share that is, for United States federal income tax purposes:
•
•
•
a nonresident alien individual;
a foreign corporation; or
a foreign estate or trust.
a foreign estate or trust.
The following discussion applies only to Non-United States Holders and assumes that no item of income, gain, deduction
or loss derived by a Non-United States Holder in respect of the old notes, new notes, warrants or Shares at any time is
effectively  connected  with  the  conduct  of  a  United  States  trade  or  business.  Special  rules,  not  discussed  herein,  may
apply to certain Non-United States Holders, such as:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
certain former citizens or residents of the United States;
controlled foreign corporations;
passive foreign investment companies;
corporations that accumulate earnings to avoid United States federal income tax;
investors in pass-through entities that are subject to special treatment under the Code;
a Non-United States Holder that is a “qualified foreign pension fund” (or is wholly-owned by one or more qualified foreign
pension funds) or a “qualified collective investment vehicle,” each as defined in the Code; and
Non-United States Holders that are engaged in the conduct of a United States trade or business.
296
Table of Contents
Exchange of Old Notes for New Notes and Warrants
Subject to the discussion under the headings “—Constructive Distributions with Respect to New Convertible Notes,” “—
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding,” “—Withholding on Dividend Equivalents” and “—Additional Withholding
Requirements”  below,  a  Non-United  States  Holder  generally  will  not  be  subject  to  United  States  federal  income  or
withholding taxes with respect to gain, if any, recognized on the exchange of old notes for new notes and, if applicable,
warrants in the Exchange Offer, unless the Non-United States Holder is an individual present in the United States for 183
days  or  more  during  the  taxable  year  of  the  exchange  and  certain  other  conditions  are  met,  in  which  case  the  gain
generally will be subject to tax at a rate of 30%. See “Consequences to United States Holders—Exchange of Old Notes for
New Notes and Warrants” for a discussion of the extent, if any, to which gain would be recognized by a Non-United States
Holder on the exchange of old notes for new notes.
Accrued but Unpaid Interest
A Non-United States Holder will receive cash on the Closing Date in an amount equal to the accrued but unpaid interest on
its old notes as of such date. The extent to which such amount is taxable to a Non-United States Holder will be determined
in a manner consistent with that described below under the heading “—Stated Interest; Original Issue Discount.”
Receipt of Warrants
As  discussed  above  under  “Consequences  to  United  States  Holders—Receipt  of  Warrants,”  we  intend  to  treat  the
warrants  as  received  in  connection  with  the  Exchange  Offer  as  part  of  the  consideration  for  the  old  notes,  and  this
disclosure assumes such treatment. The warrants, however, could be treated as a separate payment or fee that could be
subject to the 30% U.S. federal withholding tax and the applicable withholding agent may take such a position.
Stated Interest; Original Issue Discount
The new notes will be treated as issued with OID for U.S. federal income tax purposes. In general, a Non-United States
Holder will be subject to a 30% U.S. federal withholding tax on interest, including payments of accrued OID, subject to
certain exemptions described more fully below.
Subject  to  the  discussion  under  the  headings  “—Information  Reporting  and  Backup  Withholding”  and  “—Additional
Withholding  Requirements”  below,  interest  and  accrued  OID  paid  to  a  Non-United  States  Holder  will  be  exempt  from
United States income and withholding tax under the “portfolio interest exemption,” provided that:
•
•
•
the Non-United States Holder does not, actually or constructively, own 10% or more of the combined voting power of all
classes of voting stock of the Company and is not a controlled foreign corporation related to the Company, actually or
constructively;
the Non-United States Holder is not a bank that acquired the new notes in consideration for an extension of credit made
pursuant to a loan agreement entered into in the ordinary course of its trade or business; and
either (a) the Non-United States Holder provides to us or the paying agent an IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E  (or  a
suitable substitute form), signed under penalties of perjury, that includes its name and address and that certifies its non-
United States status in compliance with applicable law and regulations, (b) a securities clearing organization, bank or
other financial institution that holds customers’ securities in the ordinary course of its trade or business on behalf of the
Non-United States Holder provides a statement to us or our agent under penalties of perjury in which it certifies that an IRS
Form W-8BEN or
Table of Contents
297
W-8BEN-E (or a suitable substitute form) has been received by it from the Non-United States Holder or (c) the Non-United
States  Holder  holds  its  new  notes  through  a  “qualified  intermediary”  and  the  qualified  intermediary  provides  us  or  the
paying  agent  a  properly  executed  IRS  Form  W-8IMY  (or  other  applicable  form)  on  behalf  of  itself  together  with  any
applicable underlying IRS forms sufficient to establish that the Non-United States Holder is not a United States person.
This certification requirement may be satisfied with other documentary evidence in the case of a new note held in an
offshore account or through certain foreign intermediaries.
If  a  Non-United  States  Holder  cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  portfolio  interest  exemption  described  above,
payments of interest and accrued OID made to such Non-United States Holder generally will be subject to United States
withholding tax at the rate of 30%, unless the holder provides us or the paying agent with a properly executed IRS Form W-
8BEN or W-8BEN-E (or suitable substitute form) establishing an exemption from or reduction in the withholding tax under
the benefit of an applicable tax treaty.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of New Notes
A Non-United States Holder generally will not be subject to United States federal income or withholding taxes with respect
to gain, if any, recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition of new notes, unless the Non-United States Holder is an
individual present in the United States for 183 days or more during the taxable year of the sale or taxable disposition and
certain other conditions are met, in which case the gain generally will be subject to tax at a rate of 30%.
Conversion of New Convertible Notes
If a Non-United States Holder converts a New Convertible Note and receives Shares from the Company and cash in lieu of
a fractional Share, then such Holder should not recognize any gain or loss in respect of the conversion, except that the
receipt  of  cash  in  lieu  of  a  fractional  Share  will  result  in  capital  gain  or  loss  (measured  by  the  difference  between  the
amount of cash received in lieu of a fractional Share and the Non-United States Holder’s tax basis in the fractional Share).
Gain, if any, recognized on the conversion of a New Convertible Note will be subject to the same treatment described
under the heading “—Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Warrants or Shares.”
The Non-United States Holder’s tax basis in the Shares received upon a conversion of a New Convertible Note will equal
the tax basis of the New Convertible Note that was converted, less any basis allocable to a fractional Share. A United
States Holder’s holding period for the Shares received will include the Non-United States Holder’s holding period for the
New Convertible Note converted.
A portion of the Shares received upon a conversion of a New Convertible Note may be attributable to accrued but unpaid
interest on the New Convertible Note. The treatment of portion of the Shares attributable to accrued but unpaid interest will
be subject to the same treatment described under the heading “—Stated Interest; Original Issue Discount” above.
Distributions on Shares
Distributions on Shares (including, for this purpose, constructive distributions as described below) that are paid out of the
Company’s current or accumulated earnings and profits (as determined for United States federal income tax purposes)
will be treated as dividends for United States federal income tax purposes. Dividends paid (or deemed paid) to a Non-
United States Holder generally will be subject to withholding of United States federal income tax at a 30% rate unless an
applicable income tax treaty reduces or eliminates such tax, and the Non-United States Holder claiming the benefit of such
treaty timely provides to us or the paying agent proper IRS documentation. If a Non-United States Holder is eligible for a
reduced rate of United States federal withholding tax pursuant to an income tax treaty, such Non-United States Holder
may obtain a refund of any excess amount withheld by timely filing an appropriate claim for refund with the IRS.
Table of Contents
298
To the extent that the amount of any distribution paid with respect to any equity interest exceeds the Company’s current
and accumulated earnings and profits, such excess will be treated first as a tax-free return of capital, which will be applied
against  and  reduce  (but  not  below  zero)  such  Non-United  States  Holder’s  adjusted  tax  basis  in  such  interest  and
thereafter as capital gain from a sale or other disposition of such interest that is taxed to the Holder as described above
under the heading “—Exchange of Old Notes for New Notes and Warrants.”
Constructive Distributions with Respect to New Convertible Notes
As  described  above  under  the  heading  “—Constructive  Distributions  with  Respect  to  New  Convertible  Notes”  with
respect  to  United  States  Holders,  certain  possible  adjustments  provided  in  the  New  Convertible  Notes  may  result  in  a
constructive distribution with respect to their New Convertible Notes. Any such constructive distribution would be taxed
to Non-United States Holders as described above under the heading “—Distributions on Shares.”
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Warrants or Shares
A Non-United States Holder generally will be subject to United States federal income or withholding taxes with respect to
gain, if any, recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition of the warrants or Shares, if:
•
•
the Non-United States Holder is an individual present in the United States for 183 days or more during the taxable year of
the exchange and certain other conditions are met, in which case the gain generally will be subject to tax at a rate of 30%;
or
the  Company  is  or  has  been  a  United  States  real  property  holding  corporation  for  United  States  federal  income  tax
purposes at any time during the shorter of (a) the five-year period ending on the date of the disposition and (b) the period
during which the Non-United States Holder held the old notes.
We  believe  that  we  currently  are,  and  expect  to  be  for  the  foreseeable  future,  a  United  States  real  property  holding
corporation. However, as long as our Shares continues to be regularly traded on an established securities market (or, in
cases  where  the  Non-United  States  Holder  is  selling  warrants,  if  our  warrants  are  regularly  traded  on  an  established
securities market), only a Non-United States Holder that actually or constructively owns, or owned at any time during the
shorter of the five-year period ending on the date of the disposition or the Non-United States Holder’s holding period for
Shares or warrants, as the case may be, more than 5% of our outstanding Shares will be taxable on gain realized on the
disposition of Shares or warrants, as the case may be, as a result of our status as a United States real property holding
corporation.  If  our  Shares  or  warrants,  as  the  case  may  be,  were  not  considered  to  be  so  regularly  traded  during  the
calendar year in which the relevant disposition by a Non-United States Holder occurs (regardless of the percentage of our
Shares owned), or Non-United States Holder does not meet the 5% test described in the preceding sentence, such Holder
would be subject to U.S. federal income tax on a taxable disposition of Shares or warrants, as the case may be, and a 15%
withholding tax would apply to the gross proceeds from such disposition.
Non-United States Holders should consult their tax advisors with respect to the application of the foregoing rules to their
ownership and disposition of warrants or Shares.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
The amount of interest and dividends paid to a Non-United States Holder and the amount of tax, if any, withheld from such
payment generally must be reported annually to the Non-United States Holder and to the IRS. The IRS may make this
information available under the provisions of an applicable income tax treaty to the tax authorities in the country in which
the Non-United States Holder is resident.
Provided that a Non-United States Holder has complied with certain reporting procedures (usually satisfied by providing
an IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable) or otherwise establishes an exemption, the Non-
Table of Contents
299
United  States  Holder  generally  will  not  be  subject  to  backup  withholding  tax  with  respect  to  interest  and  dividend
payments on, and the proceeds from the disposition of, a new note, warrant or Share, unless we or our paying agent know
or  have  reason  to  know  that  the  holder  is  a  United  States  person.  Additional  rules  relating  to  information  reporting
requirements  and  backup  withholding  tax  with  respect  to  the  payment  of  proceeds  from  the  disposition  (including  a
redemption or retirement) of a new note, warrant or Share are as follows:
•
•
•
If the proceeds are paid to or through the United States office of a broker, a Non-United States Holder generally will be
subject to backup withholding tax and information reporting unless the Non-United States Holder certifies under penalties
of perjury that it is not a United States person (usually on an IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable) or otherwise
establishes an exemption.
If the proceeds are paid to or through a non-United States office of a broker that is a United States person or that has
certain specified United States connections, a Non-United States Holder generally will be subject to information reporting
(but generally not backup withholding tax) unless the Non United States Holder certifies under penalties of perjury that it is
not a United States person (usually on an IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable) or otherwise establishes an
exemption.
If the proceeds are paid to or through a non-United States office of a broker that is not a United States person and does not
have any of the specified United States connections, a Non-United States Holder generally will not be subject to backup
withholding tax or information reporting.
Backup  withholding  is  not  an  additional  tax.  Any  amounts  withheld  under  the  backup  withholding  tax  rules  from  a
payment to a Non-United States Holder will be allowed as a credit against the Non-United States Holder’s United States
federal income tax liability and may entitle the holder to a refund, provided that the required information is timely furnished
to the IRS.
Withholding on Dividend Equivalents
Section 871(m) of the Code imposes a 30% withholding tax on certain “dividend equivalents” paid or deemed paid with
respect  to  U.S.  equities  or  equity  indices  under  certain  circumstances.  Proposed  Treasury  regulations  under  Section
871(m) of the Code, when finalized, may require withholding with respect to the New Convertible Notes to the extent the
conversion price of the New Convertible Notes is adjusted as a result of a distribution paid with respect to the Shares, or
potentially in the absence of an adjustment. It is possible that the final regulations will be retroactively applied to dividend
equivalents previously deemed paid. The amount and timing of any withholding tax imposed under Section 871(m) of the
Code  may  differ  from  the  general  withholding  required  on  dividends  and  constructive  dividends,  as  described  above
under  the  headings  “—Distributions  on  Shares”  and  “—Constructive  Distributions  with  Respect  to  New  Convertible
Notes.”  It  is  possible  that  the  applicable  tax  imposed  under  Section  871(m)  of  the  Code  would  be  withheld  from  cash
payments of interest or from cash received upon conversion.
Additional Withholding Requirements
Under Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code and administrative guidance issued thereunder (referred to as “FATCA”) a
30% withholding tax is imposed on interest and dividend income on a debt obligation or stock paid to a “foreign financial
institution” or a “non-financial foreign entity” (each as defined in the Code), unless (i) in the case of a foreign financial
institution, such institution enters into an agreement with the United States government to withhold on certain payments
and to collect and provide to the United States tax authorities substantial information regarding United States account
holders  of  such  institution  (which  would  include  certain  equity  and  debt  holders  of  such  institution,  as  well  as  certain
account holders that are foreign entities with United States owners), (ii) in the case of a non-financial foreign entity, such
entity  certifies  that  it  does  not  have  any  “substantial  United  States  owners”  (as  defined  in  the  Code)  or  provides  the
withholding agent with a certification identifying its direct or indirect substantial United States owners, or (iii) the foreign
financial  institution  or  non-financial  foreign  entity  otherwise  qualifies  for  an  exemption  from  these  rules  and  provides
appropriate
Table of Contents
300
documentation (such as an IRS Form W-8BEN-E). The 30% withholding tax will also be imposed on payments of gross
proceeds from a sale or other taxable disposition of new notes, warrants or Shares occurring after December 31, 2018.
This legislation generally does not apply to a debt obligation outstanding on July 1, 2014, unless such debt obligation
undergoes a “significant modification” (within the meaning of Section 1.1001-3 of the Treasury Regulations promulgated
under  the  Code)  after  such  date.  Investors  are  encouraged  to  consult  with  their  own  tax  advisors  regarding  the
implications of this legislation on their investment in the new notes and, if applicable, warrants.
Consequences to the Company
Cancellation of Indebtedness Income
The  exchange  of  old  notes  for  new  notes  and,  if  applicable,  warrants  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Offer  may  result  in
cancellation  of  indebtedness  (“COD”)  income  to  the  Company  for  United  States  federal  income  tax  purposes,  in  an
amount equal to the excess, if any, of the “adjusted issue price” of the exchanged old notes over the sum of (i) the fair
market value of the warrants, if any, exchanged therefor, (ii) the issue price of the New Senior Secured Notes and (iii) the
issue price of the New Convertible Notes exchanged therefor. Certain statutory or judicial exceptions may apply to limit
the amount of COD income realized by a taxpayer in certain circumstances. In particular, COD income is excluded from
income if the taxpayer is insolvent immediately before the discharge (but only to the extent of the taxpayer’s insolvency) or
if the COD income is realized pursuant to a confirmed plan of reorganization or court order in a Chapter 11 bankruptcy
case. A taxpayer is generally considered “insolvent” for U.S. federal income tax purposes to the extent that the amount of
its  liabilities  exceeds  the  gross  fair  market  value  of  its  assets.  Whether  the  Company  will  be  treated  as  “insolvent”
immediately before the closing of the Exchange Offer is highly uncertain and will generally depend on the fair market value
of our assets and the amount of our liabilities. IN addition, the trading price of our Shares may be another factor that the
IRS considers relevant in determining whether the Company is insolvent.
If  COD  income  is  excluded  from  a  taxpayer’s  income  under  either  the  insolvency  or  bankruptcy  exception,  the  Code
generally requires the taxpayer to reduce certain of its tax attributes (such as net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards
and current year NOLs, capital loss carryforwards, certain tax credits, and the taxpayer’s tax basis in its assets) by the
amount of the excluded COD income. Any reduction in the taxpayer’s tax attributes resulting from COD income excluded
under either of these exceptions is generally made only after the determination of the taxpayer’s U.S. federal income tax
liability for the taxable year in which the excluded COD income is realized. In general, if the excluded COD income exceeds
the  amount  of  tax  attributes  that  are  available  for  reduction,  the  excess  is  permanently  excluded  from  the  taxpayer’s
income.  Where  the  taxpayer  joins  in  the  filing  of  a  consolidated  U.S.  federal  income  tax  return,  applicable  Treasury
Regulations  may  require  the  tax  attributes  of  the  taxpayer’s  consolidated  subsidiaries  to  be  reduced  in  certain
circumstances.
Based on current valuations for the old notes, all or substantially all of any COD income that we recognize in the Exchange
Offer would be offset by our existing NOLs, provided that valuations of the old notes do not materially decrease between
now and the Closing Date. However, because the amount of COD income to be recognized by the Company depends in
part on the fair market value and/or issue price of instruments to be issued on the Closing Date, the actual amount of COD
income, if any, resulting from the exchange of old notes and, thus, whether our existing NOLs will be sufficient to offset all
or substantially all of such COD income, cannot be determined prior to the Closing Date. To the extent that existing NOLs
and other tax attributes of the Company are not sufficient to offset fully any COD income, we may incur a cash tax liability
from such COD income.
Potential Limitations on Net Operating Loss Carryforwards and Other Tax Attributes
Under Section 382 of the Code, if a corporation or a consolidated group with NOLs, loss carryforwards or certain other tax
attributes (a “Loss Corporation”) undergoes an “ownership change,” the Loss Corporation’s use of its pre-change NOLs,
loss carryforwards and certain other tax attributes generally will be subject to an annual
301
Table of Contents
limitation in the post-change period. Generally, the conversion feature of the New Convertible Notes will not be taken into
account for purposes of determining whether an “ownership change” has occurred under Section 382 of the Code until
the conversion transaction(s) occur. Accordingly, the transactions contemplated by the Exchange Offer should not result
in an “ownership change” of the Company within the meaning of Section 382 of the Code as of the Closing Date. It is
possible, however, that the transactions contemplated by the Exchange Offer, together with the exercise of the warrants
and conversion of substantially all of the New Convertible Notes within the three years following the Closing Date, could
result  in  such  an  “ownership  change”  within  the  meaning  of  Section  382  of  the  Code.  In  such  event,  any  NOLs,  loss
carryforwards  and  certain  other  tax  attributes  existing  as  of  the  date  of  such  ownership  change  would  be  subject  the
limitations under Section 382 of the Code.
To  the  extent  our  NOLs,  loss  carryforwards  and  other  relevant  tax  attributes  are  not  used  to  offset  COD  income  as
described above, we expect such tax attributes will be subject to the annual limitation imposed by Section 382 of the Code
following the Closing Date. The amount of this annual limitation generally will equal the product of (i) the fair market value
of the Company’s stock immediately before the ownership change (with certain adjustments) and (ii) the “long term tax
exempt rate” in effect for the month in which the ownership change occurs. Any unused portion of the annual limitation
may be carried forward to increase the annual limitation for the subsequent taxable year. The Company’s annual limitation
in any year may also be adjusted as a result of gain recognized (or deemed recognized under applicable IRS authorities) in
the five years following the ownership change. Accordingly, the impact of the ownership change on the Company will
depend upon, among other things, the amount of its NOLs, loss carryforwards and other tax attributes remaining after
taking into any COD income, the value of its stock at the time of the ownership change and the amount and timing of its
future taxable income.
Potential Limitation on Our Deductions for Interest on the Notes
Under Section 163(l) of the Code, our deductions for interest on the New Convertible Notes would be disallowed if they are
found to be “disqualified debt instruments.” Disqualified debt instruments are debt instruments:
•
•
where a substantial amount of the principal or interest is required to be paid or converted, or at the option of the issuer or a
related party is payable in or convertible into, issuer equity; or
which are part of an arrangement that is reasonably expected to result in a transaction described in the preceding clause.
For these purposes, principal or interest on a debt instrument is treated as required to be paid in or converted into issuer
equity if the payment or conversion may be required at the option of the holder and that option is substantially certain to
be exercised. Furthermore, the legislative history of Section 163(l) of the Code indicates that the provision is not intended
to apply to debt instruments with a conversion feature where the conversion price is significantly higher than the market
price of the stock on the issue date of the debt. The conversion price of the New Convertible Notes is significantly higher
than the current market price of the Shares. If this continues to the be the case on the Closing Date, then we believe that
the New Convertible Notes would not be disqualified debt instruments under Section 163(l) of the Code. However, if the
trading price of the Shares were to increase between now and the Closing Date to a level that approximates or exceeds the
conversion  price  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes,  there  is  a  significant  risk  that  the  New  Convertible  Notes  would  be
disqualified debt instruments under Section 163(l) of the Code.
Alternative Minimum Tax
Notwithstanding the anticipated ability to utilize NOLs and other tax attributes of the Company to offset COD income for
regular  United  States  federal  income  tax  purposes,  the  alternative  minimum  tax  (“AMT”)  provisions  of  the  Code  may
nonetheless impose tax liability on the Company in the taxable year of the exchange.
Any AMT that a corporation pays generally is allowed as a nonrefundable credit against its regular United States federal
income tax liability in future taxable years when it is no longer subject to the AMT.
Table of Contents
302
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Each broker-dealer that receives new notes for its own account pursuant to the Exchange Offer must acknowledge that it
will deliver a prospectus in connection with any resale of new notes.
This prospectus, as it may be amended or supplemented from time to time, may be used by a broker-dealer in connection
with resales of new notes received in exchange for old notes if the old notes were acquired as a result of market-making
activities or other trading activities.
We  have  agreed  to  make  this  prospectus,  as  amended  or  supplemented,  available  to  any  broker-dealer  to  use  in
connection  with  any  such  resale  for  a  period  of  at  least  180  days  after  the  Expiration  Date  of  the  Exchange  Offer.  In
addition, until                     , 2016 (90 days after the date of this prospectus), all broker-dealers effecting transactions in the
new notes may be required to deliver a prospectus.
We will not receive any proceeds from any sale of new notes by broker-dealers. New notes received by broker-dealers for
their own account pursuant to the Exchange Offer may be sold from time to time in one or more transactions:
•
•
•
in the over-the-counter market;
in negotiated transactions; or
through the writing of options on the new notes or a combination of such methods of resale.
These resales may be made:
•
•
•
at market prices prevailing at the time of resale;
at prices related to such prevailing market prices; or
at negotiated prices.
Any such resale may be made directly to purchasers or to or through brokers or dealers. Brokers or dealers may receive
compensation in the form of commissions or concessions from any such broker-dealer or the purchasers of any such
new notes. An “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act includes:
•
•
any broker-dealer that resells new notes that were received by it for its own account pursuant to the Exchange Offer; or
any broker or dealer that participates in a distribution of such new notes.
Any profit on any resale of new notes and any commissions or concessions received by any persons may be deemed to
be underwriting compensation under the Securities Act. The Letter of Transmittal states that, by acknowledging that it will
deliver and by delivering a prospectus, a broker-dealer will not be deemed to admit that it is an “underwriter” within the
meaning of the Securities Act.
For a period of not less than 180 days after the expiration of the Exchange Offer, we will promptly send additional copies of
this  prospectus  and  any  amendment  or  supplement  to  this  prospectus  to  any  broker-dealer  that  requests  those
documents in the Letter of Transmittal. We have agreed to pay all expenses incident to performance of our obligations in
connection with the Exchange Offer, other than commissions or concessions of any brokers or dealers.
Table of Contents
303
LEGAL MATTERS
Certain legal matters in connection with the exchange of the old notes will be passed upon for us by Locke Lord LLP,
Dallas, Texas. Certain legal matters will be passed upon for the Dealer Manager by Baker Botts L.L.P., Dallas, Texas.
EXPERTS
Ernst & Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, has audited our consolidated financial statements at
December 31, 2015 and 2014, and each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2015, as set forth in their
report. Our financial statements are included in this prospectus and in the registration statement to which this prospectus
relates in reliance on Ernst & Young LLP’s reports, given on their authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
Certain  estimates  of  our  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves  and  related  information  included  in  this  prospectus  have  been
derived from engineering reports prepared by Lee Keeling & Associates as of December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, and all
such information has been so included on the authority of such firm as an expert regarding the matters contained in its
reports.
Table of Contents
304
DEFINITIONS
The following are abbreviations and definitions of terms commonly used in the oil and gas industry and this prospectus.
Natural gas equivalents and crude oil equivalents are determined using the ratio of six Mcf to one barrel. All references to
“us”, “our”, “we” or “Comstock” mean the registrant, Comstock Resources, Inc. and where applicable, its consolidated
subsidiaries.
“Bbl” means a barrel of U.S. 42 gallons of oil.
“Bcf” means one billion cubic feet of natural gas.
“Bcfe” means one billion cubic feet of natural gas equivalent.
“BOE” means one barrel of oil equivalent.
“Btu” means British thermal unit, which is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound of water
from 58.5 to 59.5 degrees Fahrenheit.
“Completion” means the installation of permanent equipment for the production of oil or gas.
“Condensate” means  a  hydrocarbon  mixture  that  becomes  liquid  and  separates  from  natural  gas  when  the  gas  is
produced and is similar to crude oil.
“Development well” means a well drilled within the proved area of an oil or gas reservoir to the depth of a stratigraphic
horizon known to be productive.
“Dry hole” means a well found to be incapable of producing hydrocarbons in sufficient quantities such that proceeds from
the sale of such production exceed production expenses and taxes.
“Exploratory well” means a well drilled to find and produce oil or natural gas reserves not classified as proved, to find a
new productive reservoir in a field previously found to be productive of oil or natural gas in another reservoir or to extend
a known reservoir.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America.
“Gross” when used with respect to acres or wells, production or reserves refers to the total acres or wells in which we or
another specified person has a working interest.
“MBbls” means one thousand barrels of oil.
“MBbls/d” means one thousand barrels of oil per day.
“Mcf” means one thousand cubic feet of natural gas.
“Mcfe” means one thousand cubic feet of natural gas equivalent.
“MMBbls” means one million barrels of oil.
“MMBOE” means one million barrels of oil equivalent.
“MMBtu” means one million British thermal units.
“MMcf” means one million cubic feet of natural gas.
Table of Contents
305
“MMcf/d” means one million cubic feet of natural gas per day.
“MMcfe/d” means one million cubic feet of natural gas equivalent per day.
“MMcfe” means one million cubic feet of natural gas equivalent.
“Net” when used with respect to acres or wells, refers to gross acres of wells multiplied, in each case, by the percentage
working interest owned by us.
“Net production” means production we own less royalties and production due others.
“Oil” means crude oil or condensate.
“Operator” means the individual or company responsible for the exploration, development, and production of an oil or gas
well or lease.
“Proved developed reserves” means reserves that can be expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing
equipment and operating methods.
“Proved  developed  non-producing” means reserves (i) expected to be recovered from zones capable of producing but
which  are  shut-in  because  no  market  outlet  exists  at  the  present  time  or  whose  date  of  connection  to  a  pipeline  is
uncertain or (ii) currently behind the pipe in existing wells, which are considered proved by virtue of successful testing or
production of offsetting wells.
“Proved  developed  producing” means  reserves  expected  to  be  recovered  from  currently  producing  zones  under
continuation of present operating methods. This category includes recently completed shut-in gas wells scheduled for
connection to a pipeline in the near future.
“Proved reserves” means the estimated quantities of crude oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids which geological and
engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under
existing  economic  and  operating  conditions,  i.e.,  prices  and  costs  as  of  the  date  the  estimate  is  made.  Prices  include
consideration of changes in existing prices provided by contractual arrangements.
“Proved undeveloped reserves” means reserves that are expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled acreage,
or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion. Reserves on undrilled acreage are
limited  to  those  drilling  locations  offsetting  productive  wells  that  are  reasonably  certain  of  production  when  drilled  or
where it can be demonstrated with certainty that there is continuity of production from the existing productive formation.
“Recompletion” means the completion for production of an existing well bore in another formation from which the well has
been previously completed.
“Reserve life” means the calculation derived by dividing year-end reserves by total production in that year.
“Reserve replacement”  means  the  calculation  derived  by  dividing  additions  to  reserves  from  acquisitions,  extensions,
discoveries and revisions of previous estimates in a year by total production in that year.
“Royalty” means an interest in an oil and gas lease that gives the owner of the interest the right to receive a portion of the
production from the leased acreage (or of the proceeds of the sale thereof), but generally does not require the owner to
pay any portion of the costs of drilling or operating the wells on the leased acreage. Royalties may be either landowner’s
royalties, which are reserved by the owner of the leased acreage at the time the lease is granted, or overriding royalties,
which are usually reserved by an owner of the leasehold in connection with a transfer to a subsequent owner.
Table of Contents
306
“3-D  seismic”  means  an  advanced  technology  method  of  detecting  accumulations  of  hydrocarbons  identified  by  the
collection and measurement of the intensity and timing of sound waves transmitted into the earth as they reflect back to
the surface.
“SEC” means the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Tcfe” means one trillion cubic feet of natural gas equivalent.
“Working interest” means an interest in an oil and gas lease that gives the owner of the interest the right to drill for and
produce oil and gas on the leased acreage and requires the owner to pay a share of the costs of drilling and production
operations. The share of production to which a working interest owner is entitled will always be smaller than the share of
costs that the working interest owner is required to bear, with the balance of the production accruing to the owners of
royalties. For example, the owner of a 100% working interest in a lease burdened only by a landowner’s royalty of 12.5%
would be required to pay 100% of the costs of a well but would be entitled to retain 87.5% of the production.
“Workover” means operations on a producing well to restore or increase production.
Table of Contents
307
WHERE YOU CAN FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
We have filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, under the Securities Act of
1933, as amended with regard to the Exchange Offer described in this prospectus. The registration statement, including
the filed exhibits, contains additional relevant information about us.
We file annual, quarterly, and other reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC under the Exchange Act.
You may read and copy any materials we file with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E.,
Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1–800–SEC–0330 for further information on the Public Reference Room.
Our  SEC  filings  are  also  available  to  the  public  through  the  SEC’s  website  at  http://www.sec.gov.  General  information
about us, including our annual reports on Form 10–K, quarterly reports on Form 10–Q and current reports on Form 8–K,
as  well  as  any  amendments  and  exhibits  to  those  reports,  are  available  free  of  charge  through  our  website  at
http://www.comstockresources.com as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish them to, the SEC.
Information on our website is not incorporated into this prospectus or our other securities filings and is not a part of this
prospectus.
Table of Contents
308
APPENDIX 1: COMPARISON OF TERMS OF THE NEW SENIOR SECURED NOTES TO OLD
SENIOR SECURED NOTES
The  following  is  a  summary  of  “Certain  Covenants”,  “Events  of  Default”  and  “Certain  Definitions”  of  the  New  Senior
Secured Notes (as set forth under “Description of New Senior Secured Notes”) as compared to a summary of “Certain
Covenants”, “Events of Default” and “Certain Definitions” of the Old Senior Secured Notes, showing provisions that will
be deleted or changed or provisions that will be added. The following summary does not restate the terms of the New
Senior Secured Notes or the Old Senior Secured Notes in their entirety. We urge you to read the documents governing the
New  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  the  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes,  including  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  and  the
indenture governing the Old Senior Secured Notes, because they, and not this description, define your rights as a holder
of the New Senior Secured Notes or the Old Senior Secured Notes.
Certain Covenants
Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, issue, assume, guarantee or in
any manner become directly or indirectly liable for the payment of (collectively, “incur”) any Indebtedness (including any
Acquired  Indebtedness),  and  the  Company  will  not  issue  any  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  and  will  not  permit  any  of  its
Restricted Subsidiaries to issue any Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock; provided however, that the Company
may  incur  Indebtedness  (including  Acquired  Indebtedness)  or  issue  Disqualified  Capital  Stock,  and  any  Restricted
Subsidiary that is a Subsidiary Guarantor may incur Indebtedness (including Acquired Indebtedness) or issue shares of
Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock if (i) at the time of such event and after giving effect thereto on a pro forma
basis the Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the four full quarters immediately preceding such event, taken as
one period, would have been equal to or greater than 2.25 to 1.0 and (ii) no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred
and be continuing at the time such additional Indebtedness is incurred or such Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred
Stock is issued or would occur as a consequence of the incurrence of the additional Indebtedness or the issuance of the
Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock.
The  first  paragraph  of  this  covenant  will  not  prohibit  the  incurrence  of  any  of  the  following  items  of  Indebtedness
(collectively, “Permitted Indebtedness”):
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Indebtedness  under  the notesNew Senior Secured Notes issued on the Issue Date in this offeringthe
Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation  and  up  to  $75,000,000  of  Additional  New  Senior  Secured
Notes issued in connection with the payment of interest thereon;
Indebtedness outstanding or in effect on the Issue Date (and not repaid or defeased with the proceeds
of the offering of the notesexchanged in connection with the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation);
obligations pursuant to Interest Rate Protection Obligations, but only to the extent such obligations do
not exceed 105% of the aggregate principal amount of the Indebtedness covered by such Interest Rate
Protection  Obligations;  obligations  under  currency  exchange  contracts  entered  into  in  the  ordinary
course  of  business;  hedging  arrangements  entered  into  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the
purpose of protecting production, purchases and resales against fluctuations in oil or natural gas prices,
and any guarantee of any of the foregoing;
the  Subsidiary  Guarantees  of  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  (and  any  assumption  of  the
obligations  guaranteed  thereby)  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  and  up  to  $75,000,000  of Additional  New
Senior Secured Notes issued in connection with the payment of interest thereon;
Table of Contents
A-1-1
(5)
the  incurrence  by  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  of  intercompany  Indebtedness
between or among the Company and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; provided, however, that:
(a)
(b)
if  the  Company  is  the  obligor  on  such  Indebtedness  and  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  not  the
obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash
of  all  Obligations  with  respect  to  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes,  or  if  a  Subsidiary
Guarantor  is  the  obligor  on  such  Indebtedness  and  neither  the  Company  nor  another
Subsidiary Guarantor is the obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the
prior payment in full in cash of all Obligations with respect to the Subsidiary Guarantee of such
Subsidiary Guarantor; and
any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such Indebtedness
being held by a Person other than the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company
and  (ii)  any  sale  or  other  transfer  of  any  such  Indebtedness  to  a  Person  that  is  neither  the
Company  nor  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  the  Company  will  be  deemed,  in  each  case,  to
constitute an incurrence of such Indebtedness by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary,
as the case may be, that was not permitted by this clause (5);
(6)
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness in exchange for, or the net proceeds of which are used to renew,
refund,  refinance,  replace,  defease  or  discharge,  in  whole  or  in  part,  any  Indebtedness  (other  than
intercompany Indebtedness) that was permitted by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture to be incurred
under the first paragraph of this covenant or clauses (1) or, (2) or (11) of this paragraph or this clause (6);
(7)
Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
(8)
(9)
in-kind  obligations  relating  to  net  oil  or  gas  balancing  positions  arising  in  the  ordinary  course  of
business;
Indebtedness in respect of bid, performance or surety bonds issued for the account of the Company or
any Restricted Subsidiary in the ordinary course of business, including guaranties and letters of credit
supporting such bid, performance or surety obligations (in each case other than for an obligation for
money borrowed);
(10)
Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of
$50.0 million at any one time outstanding and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor; and
(11)
any additional(a) Indebtedness under the New 2019 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in an
aggregate  principal  amount  not in  excess  of  $75.0  million  at  any  one  time  outstandingto  exceed
$288,516,000  and  any  guarantee  thereof  by  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor;  (b)  Indebtedness  under  any
Additional  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  and  any  guarantee  thereof  by  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor;
(c)  Indebtedness  under  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  in  an  aggregate
principal amount not to exceed $174,607,000 and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor,
and (d) Indebtedness under any Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes and any guarantee thereof by
a Subsidiary Guarantor.
For purposes of determining compliance with this covenant, in the event that an item of Indebtedness meets the criteria of
one or more of the categories of Permitted Indebtedness described in clauses (1) through
Table of Contents
A-1-2
(11) described above or is entitled to be incurred pursuant to the first paragraph of this covenant, the Company may, in its
sole  discretion,  classify  such  item  of  Indebtedness  in  any  manner  that  complies  with  this  covenant  and  such  item  of
Indebtedness will be treated as having been incurred pursuant to only one of such clauses of the definition of Permitted
Indebtedness or the proviso of the foregoing sentence and an item of Indebtedness may be divided and classified in more
than one of the types of Indebtedness permitted hereunder; provided that all Indebtedness outstanding on the Issue Date
under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  shall  be  deemed  incurred  under  clause  (10)  of  the  second  paragraph  of  this
covenant and not under the first paragraph or clause (2) of the second paragraph. The accrual of interest, the accretion or
amortization  of  original  issue  discount,  the  payment  of  interest  on  any  Indebtedness  in  the  form  of  additional
Indebtedness with the same terms, and the payment of dividends on Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock in the
form of additional shares of the same class of Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock will not be deemed to be an
incurrence of Indebtedness or an issuance of Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock for purposes of this covenant
and may not be later reclassified; provided, further, that all Indebtedness under the New Convertible Notes and Additional
New Convertible Notes shall be deemed incurred under clause (11) of the second paragraph of this covenant and may not
be later reclassified.
The amount of any Indebtedness outstanding as of any date shall be (i) the accreted value thereof in the case of any
Indebtedness issued with original issue discount and (ii) the principal amount or liquidation preference thereof, together
with any interest thereon that is more than 30 days past due, in the case of any other Indebtedness.
For purposes of determining compliance with any U.S. dollar-denominated restriction on the incurrence of Indebtedness,
the U.S. dollar-equivalent principal amount of Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency shall be calculated based
on  the  relevant  currency  exchange  rate  in  effect  on  the  date  such  Indebtedness  was  incurred,  in  the  case  of  term
Indebtedness,  or  first  committed,  in  the  case  of  revolving  credit  Indebtedness;  provided  that  if  such  Indebtedness  is
incurred  to  refinance  other  Indebtedness  denominated  in  a  foreign  currency,  and  such  refinancing  would  cause  the
applicable U.S. dollar-denominated restriction to be exceeded if calculated at the relevant currency exchange rate in effect
on the date of such refinancing, such U.S. dollar-denominated restriction shall be deemed not to have been exceeded so
long  as  the  principal  amount  of  such  refinancing  Indebtedness  does  not  exceed  the  principal  amount  of  such
Indebtedness  being  refinanced  (plus  all  accrued  interest  on  the  Indebtedness  being  refinanced  and  the  amount  of  all
expenses and premiums incurred in connection therewith).
Notwithstanding any other provision of this covenant, the maximum amount of Indebtedness that the Company or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  may  incur  pursuant  to  this  covenant  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  exceeded  solely  as  a  result  of
fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  of  currencies.  The  principal  amount  of  any  Indebtedness  incurred  to  refinance  other
Indebtedness, if incurred in a different currency from the Indebtedness being refinanced, shall be calculated based on the
currency exchange rate applicable to the currencies in which such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness is denominated
that is in effect on the date of such refinancing.
Limitation on Restricted Payments
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly:
Table of Contents
(1)
(2)
(3)
declare or pay any dividend on, or make any other distribution to holders of, any shares of Capital Stock
of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary (other than dividends or distributions payable solely in
shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company or in options, warrants or other rights to purchase
Qualified Capital Stock of the Company);
purchase,  redeem  or  otherwise  acquire  or  retire  for  value  any  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  or  any
Affiliate thereof (other than any Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary of the Company) or any options,
warrants or other rights to acquire such Capital Stock
A-1-3
(other than the purchase, redemption, acquisition or retirement of any Disqualified Capital Stock of the
Company solely in shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company);
make any principal payment on or repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value,
prior  to  any  scheduled  principal  payment,  scheduled  sinking  fund  payment  or  maturity,  any
Subordinated  Indebtedness  (excluding  any  intercompany  Indebtedness  between  or  among  the
Company and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries), except in any case out of the net cash proceeds of
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness; or
(4)
make any Restricted Investment;
(such payments or other actions described in clauses (1) through (4) above being collectively referred to as “Restricted
Payments”), unless at the time of and after giving effect to the proposed Restricted Payment:
(1)
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
(2)
(3)
the  Company  could  incur  $1.00  of  additional  Indebtedness  in  accordance  with  the  Fixed  Charge
Coverage Ratio test set forth in the first paragraph of the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified
Capital Stock” covenant; and
the  aggregate  amount  of  all  Restricted  Payments  declared  or  made  after  January  1,  2015  shall  not
exceed the sum (without duplication) of the following (the “Restricted Payments Basket”):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
50% of the Consolidated Net Income of the Company accrued on a cumulative basis during
the period beginning on January 1, 2015 and ending on the last day of the Company’s last
fiscal  quarter  ending  prior  to  the  date  of  such  proposed  Restricted  Payment  (or,  if  such
Consolidated Net Income is a loss, minus 100% of such loss); plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than
cash, received after January 1, 2015 by the Company from the issuance or sale (other than to
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company or any
options, warrants or rights to purchase such shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company;
plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than
cash, received after January 1, 2015 by the Company (other than from any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries)  upon  the  exercise  of  any  options,  warrants  or  rights  to  purchase  shares  of
Qualified Capital Stock of the Company; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds received after January 1, 2015 by the Company from the
issuance or sale (other than to any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) of Indebtedness or shares of
Disqualified Capital Stock that have been converted into or exchanged for Qualified Capital
Stock of the Company, together with the aggregate cash received by the Company at the time
of such conversion or exchange; plus
(e)
to  the  extent  not  otherwise  included  in  Consolidated  Net  Income,  the  net  reduction  in
Investments in Unrestricted Subsidiaries resulting from dividends,
A-1-4
Table of Contents
repayments of loans or advances, or other transfers of assets, in each case to the Company or
a  Restricted  Subsidiary  after  January  1,  2015  from  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  from  the
redesignation of an Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary (valued in each case
as  provided  in  the  definition  of  “Investment”),  not  to  exceed  in  the  case  of  any  Unrestricted
Subsidiary  the  total  amount  of  Investments  (other  than  Permitted  Investments)  in  such
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  made  by  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  such
Unrestricted Subsidiary after January 1, 2015.
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries may take the following actions so
long  as  (in  the  case  of  clauses  (3),  (4),  (5)  and  (8)  below)  no  Default  or  Event  of  Default  shall  have  occurred  and  be
continuing:
(1)
(2)
(3)
the  payment  of  any  dividend  on  any  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  within  60  days  after  the  date  of
declaration  thereof,  if  at  such  declaration  date  such  declaration  complied  with  the  provisions  of  the
preceding  paragraph  (and  such  payment  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  paid  on  such  date  of
declaration for purposes of any calculation required by the provisions of the preceding paragraph);
the  payment  of  any  dividend  payable  from  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  the  Company  or  any  other
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company;
the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement of any shares of any class of Capital Stock
of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary,  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the  aggregate  Net  Cash
Proceeds from, a substantially concurrent issuance and sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary) of
Table of Contents
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of  any
Subordinated  Indebtedness  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the  aggregate  Net  Cash  Proceeds  from,  a
substantially concurrent issuance and sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary) of shares of Qualified
Capital Stock of the Company;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of
Subordinated  Indebtedness  (other  than  Disqualified  Capital  Stock)  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the
aggregate  net  cash  proceeds  of,  a  substantially  concurrent  incurrence  (other  than  to  a  Restricted
Subsidiary) of Subordinated Indebtedness of the Company so long as (a) the principal amount of such
new Indebtedness does not exceed the principal amount (or, if such Subordinated Indebtedness being
refinanced provides for an amount less than the principal amount thereof to be due and payable upon a
declaration  of  acceleration  thereof,  such  lesser  amount  as  of  the  date  of  determination)  of  the
Subordinated Indebtedness being so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or retired, plus
the  amount  of  any  premium  required  to  be  paid  in  connection  with  such  refinancing  pursuant  to  the
terms  of  the  Indebtedness  refinanced  or  the  amount  of  any  premium  reasonably  determined  by  the
Company as necessary to accomplish such refinancing, plus the amount of expenses of the Company
incurred  in  connection  with  such  refinancing,  (b)  such  new  Indebtedness  is  subordinated  to  the
notesNew Senior Secured Notes at least to the same extent as such Subordinated Indebtedness so
purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or retired,  and  (c)  such  new  Indebtedness  has  an
Average Life to Stated Maturity that is longer than the Average Life to Stated Maturity of the notesNew
Senior Secured Notes and such new Indebtedness has a Stated Maturity for its final scheduled principal
payment that is at least 91 days later than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled principal payment
of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes;
A-1-5
loans made to officers, directors or employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary approved
by the Board of Directors in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.0 million outstanding at any one
time,  the  proceeds  of  which  are  used  solely  (a)  to  purchase  common  stock  of  the  Company  in
connection  with  a  restricted  stock  or  employee  stock  purchase  plan,  or  to  exercise  stock  options
received pursuant to an employee or director stock option plan or other incentive plan, in a principal
amount not to exceed the exercise price of such stock options, or (b) to refinance loans, together with
accrued interest thereon, made pursuant to item (a) of this clause (6);
the repurchase of Equity Interests deemed to occur upon the exercise of stock or other equity options to
the extent such Equity Interests represent a portion of the exercise price of those stock or other equity
options  and  any  repurchase  or  other  acquisition  of  Equity  Interests  is  made  in  lieu  of  or  to  satisfy
withholding taxes in connection with any exercise or exchange of stock options, warrants, incentives or
other rights to acquire Equity Interests; and
(8)
other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $35.0 million.
The actions described in clauses (1), (3), (4) and (6) above shall be Restricted Payments that shall be permitted to be made
in accordance with the preceding paragraph but shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available for Restricted
Payments  under  clause  (3)  of  the  second  preceding  paragraph  (provided  that  any  dividend  paid  pursuant  to  clause
(1) above shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph
when declared, but not also when subsequently paid pursuant to such clause (1)), and the actions described in clauses
(2), (5), (7) and (8) above shall be permitted to be taken in accordance with this paragraph and shall not reduce the amount
that would otherwise be available for Restricted Payments under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph.
The  amount  of  all  Restricted  Payments  (other  than  cash)  will  be  the  Fair  Market  Value  on  the  date  of  the  Restricted
Payment of the asset(s) or securities proposed to be transferred or issued by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary,
as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted Payment.
Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, enter into or suffer to exist
any transaction or series of related transactions (including, without limitation, the sale, purchase, exchange or lease of
assets or property or the rendering of any services) with, or for the benefit of, any Affiliate of the Company (other than the
Company or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) (each, an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless
(1)
such transaction or series of related transactions is on terms that are no less favorable to the Company
or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, than those that would be available in a comparable
arm’s length transaction with unrelated third parties; and
(2)
the Company delivers to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee:
(a)
with  respect  to  any  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  related  Affiliate  Transactions  involving
aggregate  consideration  in  excess  of  $10.0  million  but  no  greater  than  $25.0  million,  an
Officers’  Certificateofficers’  certificate  certifying  that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of
Affiliate Transactions complies with this covenant; and
(b)
with  respect  to  any  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  related  Affiliate  Transactions  involving
aggregate consideration in excess of $25.0 million, an
A-1-6
Table of Contents
Officers’  Certificateofficers’  certificate  certifying  that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of
Affiliate Transactions complies with this covenant and that such Affiliate Transaction or series
of Affiliate Transactions has been approved by a majority of the Disinterested Directors of the
Company.
The following items will not be deemed to be Affiliate Transactions and, therefore, will not be subject to the provisions of
the prior paragraph:
(1)
(2)
(3)
loans or advances to officers, directors and employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary
made in the ordinary course of business in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.0 million outstanding
at any one time;
indemnities  of  officers,  directors,  employees  and  other  agents  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary  permitted  by  corporate  charter  or  other  organizational  document,  bylaw  or  statutory
provisions;
the  payment  of  reasonable  and  customary  fees  to  directors  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries who are not employees of the Company or any Affiliate;
(4)
the Company’s employee compensation and other benefit arrangements;
(5)
transactions  exclusively  between  or  among  the  Company  and  any  of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  or
exclusively  between  or  among  such  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  provided  such  transactions  are  not
otherwise prohibited by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture; and
(6)
any  Restricted  Payment  permitted  to  be  paid  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the Senior  Secured  Notes
Indenture described under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments.”
Limitation on Liens
The Company will not, and will not permit any of the Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, create, incur, assume
or suffer to exist any Lien of any kind securing Indebtedness on any of its property or assets, except for Permitted Liens.
Limitation on Asset Sales
The  Company  will  not,  and  will  not  permit  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  to,  consummate  any  Asset  Sale  unless  (i)  the
Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, receives consideration at the time of such Asset Sale at least
equal to the Fair Market Value of the assets and property subject to such Asset Sale and (ii) all of the consideration paid to
the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary in connection with such Asset Sale is in the form of cash, Cash Equivalents,
Liquid  Securities,  Exchanged  Properties  or  the  assumption  by  the  purchaser  of  liabilities  of  the  Company  (other  than
liabilities of the Company that are by their terms subordinated to the notesNew Senior Secured Notes) or liabilities of any
Subsidiary Guarantor that made such Asset Sale (other than liabilities of a Subsidiary Guarantor that are by their terms
subordinated to such Subsidiary Guarantor’s Subsidiary Guarantee), in each case as a result of which the Company and
its  remaining  Restricted  Subsidiaries  are  no  longer  liable  for  such  liabilities  (“Permitted  Consideration” ) ; provided,
however, that the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries shall be permitted to receive assets and property other than
Permitted Consideration, so long as the aggregate Fair Market Value of all such assets and property other than Permitted
Consideration received from Asset Sales since the Issue Date and held by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary at
any one time shall not exceed 10% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
Table of Contents
A-1-7
The Net Available Cash from Asset Sales by the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary may be applied by the Company or
such Restricted Subsidiary, to the extent the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary elects (or is required by the terms of
any Senior Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary), to
•
•
purchase, repay or prepay Pari Passu Obligations or other Indebtedness of the Company or any Subsidiary
Guarantor secured by Permitted Collateral Liens (and, to the extent required pursuant to the terms of the
Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date)  in  the  case  of  revolving  obligations,  to
correspondingly reduce commitments with respect thereto); or
reinvest  in  Additional  Assets  (including  by  means  of  an  Investment  in  Additional  Assets  by  a  Restricted
Subsidiary with Net Available Cash received by the Company or another Restricted Subsidiary); provided,
however, that if such Asset Sale includes Oil and Gas Properties, after giving effect to such Asset Sale the
Company is in compliance with the Collateral requirements of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
Any Net Available Cash from an Asset Sale not applied in accordance with the preceding paragraph within 365 days from
the  date  of  such  Asset  Sale  shall  constitute  “Excess  Proceeds.”  When  the  aggregate  amount  of  Excess  Proceeds
exceeds $10.0 million, the Company will be required to make an offer (the “Asset Sale Offer”) to all Holders of notesNew
Senior Secured Notes and all Holders of other Indebtedness that is pari passu with the notesNew Senior Secured Notes
containing provisions similar to those set forth in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture with respect to offers to purchase or
redeem with the proceeds of sales of assets to  purchase  the  maximum  principal  amount  of notesNew  Senior  Secured
Notes and such other pari passu Indebtedness that may be purchased out of the Excess Proceeds; provided to the extent
such Excess Proceeds were received in respect of the sale or transfer of assets that constituted Collateral, an Asset Sale
Offer will be made solely to the holders of Pari Passu Obligations. The offer price in any Asset Sale Offer will be equal to
100% of principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the Purchase Date (subject to the right of Holders of
record on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the Purchase
Date),  and  will  be  payable  in  cash.  If  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  tendered  by
Holders thereof exceeds the amount of available Excess Proceeds allocated for repurchases of notesNew Senior Secured
Notes pursuant to the Asset Sale Offer for notesNew Senior Secured Notes, then such Excess Proceeds will be allocated
pro rata according to the principal amount of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes tendered and the Senior Secured Notes
Trustee  will  select  the notesNew Senior Secured Notes  to  be  purchased  in  accordance  with  the Senior  Secured  Notes
Indenture. To the extent that any portion of the amount of Excess Proceeds remains after compliance with the second
sentence  of  this  paragraph  and  provided  that  all  Holders  of notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  have  been  given  the
opportunity  to  tender  their notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  for  purchase  as  described  in  the  following  paragraph  in
accordance  with  the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture,  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  may  use  such
remaining amount for purposes permitted by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the amount of Excess Proceeds will
be reset to zero.
Within 30 days after the 365th day following the date of an Asset Sale, the Company shall, if it is obligated to make an offer
to purchase the notesNew Senior Secured Notes pursuant to the preceding paragraph, deliver a written Asset Sale Offer
notice, by first-class mail, to the Holders of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes, with a copy to the Senior Secured Notes
Trustee (the “Asset Sale Offer Notice”), accompanied by such information regarding the Company and its Subsidiaries as
the Company believes will enable such Holders of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes to make an informed decision with
respect to the Asset Sale Offer. The Asset Sale Offer Notice will state, among other things:
Table of Contents
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
that the Company is offering to purchase notesNew Senior Secured Notes pursuant to the provisions of the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture;
that any noteNew Senior Secured Note (or any portion thereof) accepted for payment (and duly paid on the
Purchase Date) pursuant to the Asset Sale Offer shall cease to accrue interest on the Purchase Date;
A-1-8
that any notesNew Senior Secured Note (or portions thereof) not properly tendered will continue to accrue
interest;
the purchase price and purchase date, which shall be, subject to any contrary requirements of applicable
law, no less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the date the Asset Sale Offer Notice is mailed (the
“Purchase Date”);
the aggregate principal amount of notesNew Senior Secured Notes to be purchased;
a description of the procedure which Holders of notesNew Senior Secured Notes must follow in order to
tender their notesNew Senior Secured Notes and the procedures that Holders of notesNew Senior Secured
Notes  must  follow  in  order  to  withdraw  an  election  to  tender  their notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  for
payment; and
all other instructions and materials necessary to enable Holders to tender notesNew Senior Secured Notes
pursuant to the Asset Sale Offer.
The Company will comply, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any
other securities laws or regulations thereunder to the extent such laws and regulations are applicable in connection with
the purchase of notesNew Senior Secured Notes as described above. To the extent that the provisions of any securities
laws  or  regulations  conflict  with  the  provisions  relating  to  the  Asset  Sale  Offer,  the  Company  will  comply  with  the
applicable securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations described above by
virtue thereof.
Future Subsidiary Guarantees
If the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries acquires or creates another Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary on
or after the Issue Date, or any Subsidiary of the Company that is not already a Subsidiary Guarantor has outstanding or
guarantees any Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement, then the Company will (1) (x) cause such Subsidiary
to execute and deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee a supplemental indenture pursuant to which such Subsidiary
will become a Subsidiary Guarantor and (y) execute amendments to the Collateral Agreements pursuant to which it will
grant a Pari Passu Lien on any Collateral held by it in favor of the Collateral Agent, for the benefit of the Secured Parties,
and become a Collateral Grantor thereunder, and cause such Liens to be perfected as required thereby and (2) deliver to
the Senior Secured Notes Trustee one or more opinions of counsel in connection with the foregoing as specified in the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create or suffer to exist or
allow  to  become  effective  any  consensual  encumbrance  or  restriction  of  any  kind  on  the  ability  of  any  Restricted
Subsidiary:
•
to  pay  dividends,  in  cash  or  otherwise,  or  make  any  other  distributions  on  its  Capital  Stock,  or  make
payments on any Indebtedness owed, to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary; provided that the
priority that any series of preferred stock of a Restricted Subsidiary has in receiving dividends or liquidating
distributions  before  dividends  or  liquidating  distributions  are  paid  in  respect  of  common  stock  of  such
Restricted Subsidiary shall not constitute a restriction on the ability to make dividends or distributions on
Capital Stock for purposes of this covenant;
•
to make loans or advances to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary; or
Table of Contents
A-1-9
•
to transfer any of its property or assets to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary
(any  such  restrictions  being  collectively  referred  to  herein  as  a  “Payment  Restriction”).  However,  the  preceding
restrictions will not apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
customary provisions restricting subletting or assignment of any lease governing a leasehold interest of
the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, or customary restrictions in licenses relating to the property
covered thereby and entered into in the ordinary course of business;
any  instrument  governing  Indebtedness  of  a  Person  acquired  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary at the time of such acquisition, which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any
other Person, other than the Person, or the property or assets of the Person, so acquired, provided that
such Indebtedness was not incurred in anticipation of such acquisition;
any instrument governing Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that is
not  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor,;  provided  that  (a)  such  Indebtedness  or  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  is
permitted  under  the  covenant  described  in  “—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital
Stock” and (b) the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions thereunder are not materially more
restrictive than the Payment Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Senior
Secured Notes Indenture as in effect on the Issue Date;
the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the Issue Date or any agreement that amends, modifies,
supplements,  restates,  extends,  renews,  refinances  or  replaces  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement,;
provided that the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions thereunder are not materially more
restrictive than the Payment Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on
the Issue Date;
(5)
t h e Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture, 
Guarantees; or
the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  the  Subsidiary
(6)
the ExistingConvertible Notes Indentures, the New Convertible Notes and any subsidiary guarantees
thereof, in each case as in effect on the Issue Date.
Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, enter into any Sale/ Leaseback Transaction
unless (1) the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, would be able to incur Indebtedness in an
amount equal to the Attributable Indebtedness with respect to such Sale/ Leaseback Transaction or (2) the Company or
such Restricted Subsidiary receives proceeds from such Sale/ Leaseback Transaction at least equal to the Fair Market
Value  thereof  and  such  proceeds  are  applied  in  the  same  manner  and  to  the  same  extent  as  Net  Available  Cash  and
Excess Proceeds from an Asset Sale.
Change of Control
If a Change of Control occurs, each Holder of notesNew Senior Secured Notes will have the right to require the Company
to  repurchase  all  or  any  part  (equal  to  a  minimum  amount  of  $2,000  andin  integral  multiples  of  $1,000  in  excess
thereof1.00) of that Holder’s notesNew Senior Secured Notes pursuant to a change of control offer (a “Change of Control
Offer”) on the terms set forth in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. In the Change of
Table of Contents
A-1-10
Control  Offer,  the  Company  will  offer  a  payment  (the  “Change  of  Control  Payment”)  in  cash  equal  to  101%  (or,  at  the
Company’s  election,  a  higher  percentage)  of  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes
repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the notesNew Senior Secured Notes repurchased to the date of
purchase (the “Change of Control Payment Date”), subject to the rights of Holders of notesNew Senior Secured Notes on
the relevant record date to receive interest due on the relevant interest payment date. No later than 30 days following any
Change of Control, the Company will deliver a notice to the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee and paying agent and each
Holder  of  the notesNew Senior Secured Notes describing the transaction or transactions that constitute the Change of
Control and offering to repurchase notesNew Senior Secured Notes on the Change of Control Payment Date specified in
the  notice,  which  date  will  be  no  earlier  than  30  days  and  no  later  than  60  days  from  the  date  such  notice  is  mailed,
pursuant to the procedures required by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and described in such notice. The Company
will comply with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any other securities laws and regulations to
the extent those requirements, laws and regulations are applicable in connection with the repurchase of the notesNew
Senior  Secured  Notes  as  a  result  of  a  Change  of  Control.  To  the  extent  that  the  provisions  of  any  securities  laws  or
regulations  conflict  with  the  Change  of  Control  provisions  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  the  Company  will
comply with the applicable securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations under
the Change of Control provisions of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture by virtue of such compliance.
On or before the Change of Control Payment Date, the Company will, to the extent lawful:
(1)  accept  for  payment  all notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  or  portions  of notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  properly
tendered and not withdrawn pursuant to the Change of Control Offer;
(2) deposit with the paying agent an amount equal to the Change of Control Payment in respect of all notesNew Senior
Secured Notes or portions of notesNew Senior Secured Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn; and
(3) deliver or cause to be delivered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and paying agent the notesNew Senior Secured
Notes properly accepted together with an Officers’ Certificateofficers’ certificate stating the aggregate principal amount of
notesNew Senior Secured Notes or portions of notesNew Senior Secured Notes being purchased by the Company.
The  paying  agent  will  promptly  deliver  to  each  Holder  of notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  properly  tendered  and  not
withdrawn the Change of Control Payment for such notesNew Senior Secured Notes (or if all notesNew Senior Secured
Notes are then in global form, make such payment through the facilities of DTC), and the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee
will  promptly  authenticate  and  mail  (or  cause  to  be  transferred  by  book  entry)  to  each  Holder  a new  noteNew  Senior
Secured Note equal in principal amount to any unpurchased portion of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes surrendered,
if any; provided, however, that each such new noteNew Senior Secured Note will be in a principal amount of $2,000 orthat
is in integral multiples of $1,000 in excess thereof.1.00. The Company will publicly announce the results of the Change of
Control Offer on or as soon as practicable after the Change of Control Payment Date.
The  provisions  described  above  that  require  the  Company  to  make  a  Change  of  Control  Offer  following  a  Change  of
Control  will  be  applicable  whether  or  not  any  other  provisions  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  are  applicable.
Except as described above with respect to a Change of Control, the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture does not contain
provisions  that  permit  the  Holders  of  the notesNew Senior Secured Notes  to  require  that  the  Company  repurchase  or
redeem the notesNew Senior Secured Notes in the event of a takeover, recapitalization or similar transaction.
The Company will not be required to make a Change of Control Offer upon a Change of Control if (1) a third party makes
the Change of Control Offer in the manner, at the times and otherwise in compliance with the
Table of Contents
A-1-11
requirements  set  forth  in  the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture  applicable  to  a  Change  of  Control  Offer  made  by  the
Company and purchases all notesNew Senior Secured Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn under the Change of
Control Offer, or (2) notice of redemption has been given pursuant to the Senior Secured Notes Indenture as described
above  under  “—Redemption—Optional  Redemption,”  unless  and  until  there  is  a  default  in  payment  of  the  applicable
redemption price.
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  herein,  a  Change  of  Control  Offer  may  be  made  in  advance  of  a
Change of Control, conditioned upon the consummation of such Change of Control, if a definitive agreement is in place
for the Change of Control at the time the Change of Control Offer is made.
If Holders of not less than 90% in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding notesNew Senior Secured Notes validly
tender and do not withdraw such notesNew Senior Secured Notes in a Change of Control Offer and the Company, or any
third party making a Change of Control Offer in lieu of the Company as described above, purchases all of the notesNew
Senior Secured Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn by such Holders, the Company will have the right, upon not less
than 30 nor more than 60 days’ prior notice, given not more than 30 days following such purchase pursuant to the Change
of Control Offer described above, to redeem all notesNew Senior Secured Notes that remain outstanding following such
purchase at a redemption price in cash equal to the applicable Change of Control Purchase Price plus, to the extent not
included in the Change of Control Purchase Price, accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.
The definition of Change of Control includes a phrase relating to the direct or indirect sale, lease, transfer, conveyance or
other disposition of “all or substantially all” of the properties or assets of the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries,
taken  as  a  whole.  Although  there  is  a  limited  body  of  case  law  interpreting  the  phrase  “substantially  all,”  there  is  no
precise established definition of the phrase under applicable law. Accordingly, the ability of a Holder of notesNew Senior
Secured Notes  to  require  the  Company  to  repurchase  its notesNew Senior Secured Notes as a result of  a  sale,  lease,
transfer, conveyance or other disposition of less than all of the assets of the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries,
taken as a whole, to another Person or group may be uncertain.
The  Change  of  Control  provisions  of  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  may,  in  certain  circumstances,  make  more
difficult or discourage a sale or takeover of the Company and, thus, the removal of incumbent management. Subject to the
limitations  discussed  below,  the  Company  could,  in  the  future,  enter  into  certain  transactions,  including  acquisitions,
refinancings or other recapitalizations, that would not constitute a Change of Control under the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture,  but  that  could  increase  the  amount  of  Indebtedness  outstanding  at  such  time  or  otherwise  affect  the
Company’s capital structure or credit ratings. Restrictions on the Company’s ability to Incur additional Indebtedness are
contained in the covenants described under “—Certain Covenants— Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital
Stock”  and  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Restricted  Payments.”  Such  restrictions  in  the Senior  Secured  Notes
Indenture  can  be  waived  only  with  the  consent  of  Holders  of  a  majority  in  principal  amount  of  the notesNew  Senior
Secured Notes then outstanding. Except for the limitations contained in such covenants, however, the Senior  Secured
Notes Indenture will not contain any covenants or provisions that may afford Holders of the notesNew Senior Secured
Notes protection in the event of a highly leveraged transaction.
The Company’s ability to repurchase the notesNew Senior Secured Notes pursuant to the Change of Control Offer may be
limited by a number of factors. The ability of the Company to pay cash to the Holders of the notesNew Senior Secured
Notes following the occurrence of a Change of Control may be limited by the Company’s and the Restricted Subsidiaries’
then  existing  financial  resources,  and  sufficient  funds  may  not  be  available  when  necessary  to  make  any  required
repurchases.  See  “Risk  Factors—Risks  Related  to  the Exchange  Offer  and  Holding  the  New  Notes—Risks  Related  to
Holding the New Notes—We may not be able to redeem or repurchasehave the ability to purchase the new notes with cash
upon a change of control as required by the indentureor upon certain sales or other dispositions of assets, or to make the
cash payment due upon conversion or at maturity.”
A-1-12
Table of Contents
Future  agreements  governing  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  its  Subsidiaries  may  contain  prohibitions  of  certain
events, including events that would constitute a Change of Control and including repurchases or other prepayments in
respect of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes. The exercise by the Holders of notesNew Senior Secured Notes of their
right to require the Company to repurchase the notesNew Senior Secured Notes upon a Change of Control could cause a
default under these other agreements, even if the Change of Control itself does not, due to the financial effect of such
repurchases on the Company or its Subsidiaries. In the event a Change of Control occurs at a time when the Company is
prohibited from purchasing or redeeming notesNew Senior Secured Notes, the Company could seek the consent of its
other applicable debt holders or lenders to purchase the notesNew Senior Secured Notes or could attempt to refinance
the borrowings that contain such prohibition. If the Company does not obtain a consent or repay those borrowings, the
Company will remain prohibited from purchasing notesNew Senior Secured Notes. In that case, the Company’s failure to
purchase tendered notesNew Senior Secured Notes would constitute an Event of Default under the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture, which could, in turn, constitute a default under other Indebtedness of the Company.
Reports
The Senior Secured Notes Indenture provides that, whether or not the Company is subject to the reporting requirements
of Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, to the extent not prohibited by the Exchange Act, the Company will file
with the Commission, and make available to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Holders of the notesNew Senior
Secured Notes without cost to any Holder, the annual reports and the information, documents and other reports (or copies
of such portions of any of the foregoing as the Commission may by rules and regulations prescribe) that are specified in
Sections 13 and 15(d) of the Exchange Act and applicable to a U.S. corporation within the time periods specified therein
with respect to an accelerated filer. In the event that the Company is not permitted to file such reports, documents and
information  with  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Act,  the  Company  will  nevertheless  make  available  such
Exchange Act information to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Holders of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes
without cost to any Holder as if the Company were subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Exchange Act within the time periods specified therein with respect to a non-accelerated filer.
If  the  Company  has  designated  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  as  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries,  then,  to  the  extent  material,  the
quarterly  and  annual  financial  information  required  by  the  preceding  paragraph  will  include  a  reasonably  detailed
presentation, either on the face of the financial statements or in the footnotes thereto, and in Management’s Discussion
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the financial condition and results of operations of the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  separate  from  the  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations  of  the
Unrestricted Subsidiaries of the Company.
The availability of the foregoing materials on the Commission’s website or on the Company’s website shall be deemed to
satisfy the foregoing delivery obligations.
In addition, the Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors have agreed that, for so long as any notes remain outstanding,
they will furnish to the Holders and to prospective investors, upon their request, the information required to be delivered
pursuant to Rule 144A(d)(4) under the Securities Act. Delivery of these reports, information and documents to the Trustee
is  for  informational  purposes  only,  and  the  Trustee’s  receipt  of  them  will  not  constitute  constructive  notice  of  any
information contained therein or determinable from information contained therein, including the Company’s compliance
with any of its covenants under the Indenture. The Senior Secured Notes Indenture also provides that the Company will
deliver all reports and other information required to be delivered under the TIA within the time periods set forth in the TIA.
Table of Contents
A-1-13
Future Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries
The Board of Directors of the Company may designate any Restricted Subsidiary to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary if:
(1)
(2)
the Company would be permitted to make (i) a Permitted Investment or (ii) an Investment pursuant to the
covenant described under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments” above, in either case, in an amount
equal to the Fair Market Value of all outstanding Investments owned by the Company and the Restricted
Subsidiaries in such Subsidiary at the time of such designation;
such Restricted Subsidiary meets the definition of an “Unrestricted Subsidiary”;
such Restricted Subsidiary meets the definition of an “Unrestricted Subsidiary”;
(3)
(4)
the designation would not constitute or cause (with or without the passage of time) a Default or Event of
Default and no Default or Event of Default would be in existence following such designation; and
the Company delivers to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee a certified copy of a resolution of the Board
of Directors of Company giving effect to such designation and an Officers’ Certificateofficers’ certificate
certifying that such designation complied with the preceding conditions and was permitted by the
covenant described under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments”.
If a Restricted Subsidiary is designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, the aggregate Fair Market Value of all outstanding
Investments  owned  by  the  Company  and  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  the  Subsidiary  designated  as  an  Unrestricted
Subsidiary will be deemed to be an Investment made as of the time of the designation and will reduce the amount available
for Restricted Payments under the covenant set forth under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments” or under one or more
clauses of the definition of Permitted Investments, as determined by the Company.
If,  at  any  time,  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  designated  as  such  would  fail  to  meet  the  preceding  requirements  as  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary, then such Subsidiary will thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary for purposes of the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture and any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary will be deemed to be Incurred by a Restricted
Subsidiary as of such date and, if such Indebtedness is not permitted to be Incurred as of such date under the covenant
set forth under “—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock,” the Company or the applicable Restricted
Subsidiary will be in default of such covenant.
The  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company  may  at  any  time  designate  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  to  be  a  Restricted
Subsidiary if:
(a)
the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries could Incur the Indebtedness which is deemed to be Incurred
upon  such  designation  under  the  “—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”  covenant,
equal to the total Indebtedness of such Subsidiary calculated on a pro forma basis as if such designation had
occurred on the first day of the four-quarter reference period;
(b)
the designation would not constitute or cause a Default or Event of Default; and
(c)
the  Company  delivers  to  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee a certified copy of a resolution of the Board of
Directors  of  the  Company  giving  effect  to  such  designation  and  an Officers’  Certificateofficers’  certificate
certifying  that  such  designation  complied  with  the  preceding  conditions,  including  the  Incurrence  of
Indebtedness  under  the  covenant  described  under  “—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital
Stock”.
A-1-14
Table of Contents
Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets
The Company will not, in any single transaction or series of related transactions, merge or consolidate with or into any
other Person, or sell, assign, convey, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the properties and
assets  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  on  a  consolidated  basis  to  any  Person  or  group  of  Affiliated
Persons, and the Company will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to enter into any such transaction or series of
related transactions if such transaction or series of transactions, in the aggregate, would result in the sale, assignment,
conveyance, transfer, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of the properties and assets of the Company and
its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any other Person or group of Affiliated Persons, unless at the time
and after giving effect thereto:
(1)
either (a) if the transaction is a merger or consolidation, the Company shall be the surviving Person of
either (a) if the transaction is a merger or consolidation, the Company shall be the surviving Person of
such  merger  or  consolidation,  or  (b)  the  Person  (if  other  than  the  Company)  formed  by  such
consolidation  or  into  which  the  Company  is  merged  or  to  which  the  properties  and  assets  of  the
Company or its Restricted Subsidiaries, as the case may be, are sold, assigned, conveyed, transferred,
leased or otherwise disposed of (any such surviving Person or transferee Person being the “Surviving
Entity”) shall be a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the United States of America,
any  state  thereof  or  the  District  of  Columbia  and  shall,  in  either  case,  expressly  assume  by  a
supplemental  indenture  to  the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture executed and  delivered  to  the Senior
Secured  Notes Trustee,  in  form  satisfactory  to  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee,  and  pursuant  to
agreements reasonably satisfactory to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Collateral Agent, as
applicable, all the obligations of the Company under the notesNew Senior Secured Notes,  the Senior
Secured  Notes Indenture and the other Senior Secured Note Documents to which the Company is a
party, and, in each case, such Senior Secured Note Documents shall remain in full force and effect;
(2)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of related transactions on a pro forma basis
(and  treating  any  Indebtedness  not  previously  an  obligation  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries  which  becomes  an  obligation  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in
connection  with  or  as  a  result  of  such  transaction  as  having  been  incurred  at  the  time  of  such
transaction), no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
(3)
except in the case of the consolidation or merger of any Restricted Subsidiary with or into the Company
or another Restricted Subsidiary, either:
(a)
(b)
immediately before and immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a
pro forma basis (assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the
period of four fiscal quarters ending immediately prior to the consummation of such transaction
or transactions, with the appropriate adjustments with respect to the transaction or transactions
being  included  in  such  pro  forma  calculation),  the  Company  (or  the  Surviving  Entity  if  the
Company is not the continuing obligor under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture) could incur
$1.00 of additional Indebtedness in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio test set
forth in the first paragraph of the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock”
covenant; or
immediately  after  giving  effect  to  such  transaction  or  transactions  on  a  pro  forma  basis
(assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the period of four
fiscal  quarters  ending  immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or
transactions, with the appropriate adjustments with respect
A-1-15
Table of Contents
to  the  transaction  or  transactions  being  included  in  such  pro  forma  calculation),  the  Fixed
Charge  Coverage  Ratio  of  the  Company  (or  the  Surviving  Entity  if  the  Company  is  not  the
continuing obligor under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture) will be equal to or greater than
the  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  of  the  Company  immediately  before  such  transaction  or
transactions;
(4)
if  the  Company  is  not  the  continuing  obligor  under  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  then  each
Subsidiary  Guarantor,  unless  it  is  the  Surviving  Entity,  shall  have  by  supplemental  indenture  to  the
Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture  confirmed  that  its  Subsidiary  Guarantee  of  the notesNew  Senior
Secured  Notes  shall  apply  to  the  Surviving  Entity’s  obligations  under  the Senior  Secured  Notes
Indenture and the notesNew Senior Secured Notes;
any Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity shall (a) continue to constitute Collateral
(5)
(6)
(7)
any Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity shall (a) continue to constitute Collateral
under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the Collateral Agreements and (b) be subject to a Pari
Passu Lien in favor of the Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations;
the  Surviving  Entity  shall  take  such  action  (or  agree  to  take  such  action)  as  may  be  reasonably
necessary  to  cause  any  property  or  assets  that  constitute  Collateral  owned  by  or  transferred  to  the
Surviving Entity to be subject to the Pari Passu Liens in the manner and to the extent required under the
Collateral  Agreements  and  shall  deliver  an  opinion  of  counsel  as  to  the  enforceability  of  any
amendments,  supplements  or  other  instruments  with  respect  to  the  Collateral  Agreements  to  be
executed, delivered, filed and recorded, as applicable, and such other matters as the Senior Secured
Notes Trustee or Collateral Agent, as applicable, may reasonably request; and
the  Company  (or  the  Surviving  Entity  if  the  Company  is  not  the  continuing  obligor  under  the Senior
Secured  Notes Indenture)  shall  have  delivered  to  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee,  in  form  and
substance reasonably satisfactory to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, an Officers’ Certificateofficers’
certificate  and  an Opinionopinion  of Counselcounsel  each  stating  that  such  consolidation,  merger,
transfer, lease or other disposition and any supplemental indenture in respect thereto comply with the
requirements  under  the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture  and  that  the  requirements  of  this  paragraph
have been satisfiedcomplied with.
Upon  any  consolidation  or  merger  or  any  sale,  assignment,  lease,  conveyance,  transfer  or  other  disposition  of  all  or
substantially all of the properties and assets of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis in
accordance  with  the  foregoing,  in  which  the  Company  is  not  the  continuing  corporation,  the  Surviving  Entity  shall
succeed to, and be substituted for, and may exercise every right and power of, the Company under the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture and the other Senior Secured Note Documents with the same effect as if the Surviving Entity had been
named as the Company therein, and thereafter the Company, except in the case of a lease, will be discharged from all
obligations and covenants under the notesNew Senior Secured Notes, the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the other
Senior Secured Note Documents and may be liquidated and dissolved.
Events of Default
The following are “Events of Default” under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture:
Table of Contents
(1)
default in any payment of interest with respect to the notesNew Senior Secured Notes when due, which
default continues for 30 days;
A-1-16
(2)
(3)
(4)
default  in  the  payment  when  due  (at  maturity,  upon  optional  redemption,  upon  declaration  of
acceleration  or  otherwise)  of  the  principal  of,  or  premium,  if  any,  on,  the notesNew  Senior  Secured
Notes;
failure  by  the  Company  to  comply  with  the  provisions  described  under  the  captions  “—Certain
Covenants—Limitation  on  Asset  Sales,”  “—Certain  Covenants—Change  of  Control,”  or  “—Merger,
Consolidation and Sale of Assets”;
(a) except with respect to the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Reports,” failure by the
Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries for 60 days after notice to the Company by the Senior
Secured Notes Trustee or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the notesNew
Senior  Secured  Notes  then  outstanding  voting  as  a  single  class  to  comply  with  any  covenant  or
agreement (other than a default referred to in clauses (1), (2) and (3) above) contained in the Senior
Secured  Notes Indenture,  the  Collateral  Agreements  or  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes,  or
(b)  failure  by  the  Company  for  120  days  after  notice  to  the  Company  by  the Senior  Secured  Notes
Trustee or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the notesNew Senior Secured
Notes then outstanding voting as a single class to comply with the covenant described under “—Certain
Covenants—Reports;”
(5)
default under the Revolving Credit Agreement, if that default:
(a)
(b)
is  caused  by  a  failure  to  pay  principal  of,  or  interest  or  premium,  if  any,  on,  any  Revolving
Credit Agreement Obligation prior to the expiration of the grace period, if any, provided in the
Revolving Credit Agreement on the date of such default; or
permits the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or any Revolving Credit Agreement Secured
Parties to accelerate all or any part of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations prior to their
Stated Maturity,
provided,  however,  that  if  any  such  default  is  cured  or  waived,  or  the  Discharge  of  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
Obligations  occurs,  within  a  period  of  30  days  from  the  occurrence  of  such  default,  such  Event  of  Default  and  any
consequential  acceleration  of  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  shall  be  automatically  rescinded,  so  long  as  such
rescission does not conflict with any judgment or decree;
(6)
default (other than a default referred to in clause (5) above) under any mortgage, indenture or instrument
under which there is issued or by which there is secured or evidenced any Indebtedness for money
borrowed by the Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries (or the payment of which is guaranteed
by the Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries), whether such Indebtedness or guarantee now
exists or is created after the Issue Date, if that default:
(a)
is caused by a failure to pay principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on, such Indebtedness
prior to the expiration of the grace period provided in such Indebtedness on the date of such
default (a “Payment Default”); or
(b)
results in the acceleration of such Indebtedness prior to its Stated Maturity,
and, in either case, the principal amount of any such Indebtedness, together with the principal amount of
any other such Indebtedness under which there has been a Payment
Table of Contents
A-1-17
(7)
(8)
Default or the maturity of which has been so accelerated, aggregates $25.0 million or more; provided,
however,  that  if  any  such  default  is  cured  or  waived  or  any  such  acceleration  rescinded,  or  such
Indebtedness  is  repaid,  within  a  period  of  60  days  from  the  continuation  of  such  default  beyond  the
applicable  grace  period  or  the  occurrence  of  such  acceleration,  as  the  case  may  be,  such  Event  of
Default  and  any  consequential  acceleration  of  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  shall  be
automatically rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any judgment or decree;
failure by the Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries to pay final judgments entered by a court or
courts of competent jurisdiction aggregating in excess of $25.0 million, which judgments are not paid,
discharged or stayed for a period of 60 days;
the occurrence of the following:
the occurrence of the following:
(a) except as permitted by the Senior Secured  Note  Documents,  any  Collateral  Agreement  establishing  the  Pari  Passu
Liens ceases for any reason to be enforceable; provided that it will not be an Event of Default under this clause (8)(a) if the
sole result of the failure of one or more Collateral Agreements to be fully enforceable is that any Pari Passu Lien purported
to be granted under such Collateral Agreements on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value
of not more than $10.0 million, ceases to be an enforceable and perfected first-priority Lien, subject only to the payment
priorities  in  favor  of  the  holders  of  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Pari  Passu
Intercreditor Agreement and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided, further, that if such failure is susceptible to
cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after any officer of the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary becomes aware of such failure, which failure has not been cured during such time period;
(b) except as permitted by the Senior Secured Note Documents, any Pari Passu Lien purported to be granted under any
Collateral Agreement on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value in excess of $10.0 million,
ceases to be an enforceable and perfected first-priority Lien, subject only to the payment priorities in favor of the holders
of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations pursuant to the terms of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and subject to
Permitted Collateral Liens; provided that if such failure is susceptible to cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect
thereto until 30 days after any officer of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary becomes aware of such failure, which
failure has not been cured during such time period; and
(c) the Company or any other Collateral Grantor, or any Person acting on behalf of any of them, denies or disaffirms, in
writing,  any  obligation  of  the  Company  or  any  other  Collateral  Grantor  set  forth  in  or  arising  under  any  Collateral
Agreement establishing Pari Passu Liens.
(9)
except as permitted by the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, any Subsidiary Guarantee is held in any
judicial proceeding to be unenforceable or invalid or ceases for any reason to be in full force and effect,
or any Subsidiary Guarantor, or any Person duly acting on behalf of any such Subsidiary Guarantor,
denies or disaffirms its obligations under its Subsidiary Guarantee; and
(10)
certain  events  of  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  described  in  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  with
respect to the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Significant Subsidiary, or any group of
Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken together, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary; and
Table of Contents
A-1-18
(11)
the  Required  Stockholder  Approval  is  not  obtained  and  the  Charter  Amendment  has  not  become
effective, in each case by December 31, 2016, and such failure shall continue for a period of 90 days.
The Senior Secured Notes Trustee shall not be charged with knowledge of any Default or Event of Default with respect to
the notesNew Senior Secured Notes unless a written notice of such Default or Event of Default shall have been given to an
officer of the Senior Secured Notes Trustee with direct responsibility for the administration of the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture and the notesNew Senior Secured Notes, by the Company or any Holder of notesNew Senior Secured Notes.
In the case of an Event of Default described in clause (10) above with respect to the Company or a Subsidiary Guarantor,
all outstanding notesNew Senior Secured Notes will become due and payable immediately without further action or notice.
If any other Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee or the Holders of at least 25% in
aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes may (and the Trustee will, if directed by Holders of at least 25%
in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes)New Senior Secured Notes may  declare  all  the notesNew
Senior Secured Notes to be due and payable immediately.
If the notesNew Senior Secured Notes are accelerated or otherwise become due prior to their maturity date, in each case,
as a result of an Event of Default on or after March 15, 2016, the amount of principal of, accrued and unpaid interest and
premium  on  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  that  becomes  due  and  payable  shall  equal  the  redemption  price
applicable with respect to an optional redemption of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes, in effect on the date of such
acceleration as if such acceleration were an optional redemption of the notes accelerated. If the notes are accelerated or
otherwise become due prior to their maturity date, in each case, as a result of an Event of Default prior to March 15, 2016,
the amount of principal of, accrued and unpaid interest and premium on the notes that becomes due and payable shall
equal  100%  of  the  principal  amount  of  the  notes  redeemed  plus  the  Applicable  Premium  in  effect  on  the  date  of  such
acceleration, as if such acceleration were an optional redemption of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes accelerated.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it is understood and agreed that if the notesNew Senior Secured Notes are
accelerated  or  otherwise  become  due  prior  to  their  maturity  date,  in  each  case,  in  respect  of  any  Event  of  Default
(including,  but  not  limited  to,  upon  the  occurrence  of  a  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  event  (including  the  acceleration  of
claims  by  operation  of  law)),  the  premium  applicable  with  respect  to  an  optional  redemption  of  the notesNew  Senior
Secured Notes  will  also  be  due  and  payable,  in  cash,  as  though  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  were  optionally
redeemed and shall constitute part of the Senior Secured Note Obligations, in view of the impracticability and extreme
difficulty of ascertaining actual damages and by mutual agreement of the parties as to a reasonable calculation of each
Holder’s  lost  profits  as  a  result  thereof.  Any  premium  payable  above  shall  be  presumed  to  be  the  liquidated  damages
sustained by each Holder as the result of the early redemption and the Company agrees that it is reasonable under the
circumstances currently existing. The premium shall also be payable in the event the notesNew Senior Secured Notes
(and/or  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture)  are  satisfied  or  released  by  foreclosure  (whether  by  power  of  judicial
proceeding), deed in lieu of foreclosure or by any other means. THE COMPANY EXPRESSLY WAIVES (TO THE FULLEST
EXTENT  IT  MAY  LAWFULLY  DO  SO)  THE  PROVISIONS  OF  ANY  PRESENT  OR  FUTURE  STATUTE  OR  LAW  THAT
PROHIBITS OR MAY PROHIBIT THE COLLECTION OF THE FOREGOING PREMIUM IN CONNECTION WITH ANY SUCH
ACCELERATION.  The  Company  expressly  agrees  (to  the  fullest  extent  it  may  lawfully  do  so)  that:  (A)  the  premium  is
reasonable and is the product of an arm’s length transaction between sophisticated business people, ably represented by
counsel; (B) the premium shall be payable notwithstanding the then prevailing market rates at the time payment is made;
(C)  there  has  been  a  course  of  conduct  between  Holders  and  the  Company  giving  specific  consideration  in  this
transaction  for  such  agreement  to  pay  the  premium;  and  (D)  the  Company  shall  be  estopped  hereafter  from  claiming
differently  than  as  agreed  to  in  this  paragraph.  The  Company  expressly  acknowledges  that  its  agreement  to  pay  the
premium to Holders as herein described is a material inducement to Holders to purchase the notes. New Senior Secured
Notes.
Table of Contents
A-1-19
Subject  to  certain  limitations,  Holders  of  a  majority  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  then  outstanding notesNew
Senior  Secured  Notes  may  direct  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee  in  its  exercise  of  any  trust  or  power.  The Senior
Secured  Notes Trustee  may  withhold  from  Holders  of  the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  notice  of  any  continuing
Default or Event of Default if it determines that withholding notice is in their interest, except a Default or Event of Default
relating to the payment of principal of, or premium or interest, if any, or interest on the notesNew Senior Secured Notes.
Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture  relating  to  the  duties  of  the  Senior  Secured  Notes
Trustee,  in  case  an  Event  of  Default  occurs  and  is  continuing,  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee  will  be  under  no
obligation to exercise any of the rights or powers under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture at the request or direction of
any Holders of notesNew Senior Secured Notes unless such Holders have offered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee,
and the Senior Secured Notes Trustee has received, indemnity or security (or both) satisfactory to it against any loss,
liability or expense. Except to enforce the right to receive payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest, if any, when
due, no Holder of a note may pursue any remedy with respect to the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture  or  the notesNew
Senior Secured Notes unless:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
such  Holder  has  previously  given  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee  written  notice  that  an  Event  of
Default is continuing;
Holders  of  at  least  25%  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  then  outstanding notesNew  Senior
Secured Notes have made a written request to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee to pursue the remedy;
such Holders have offered the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, and the Senior Secured Notes Trustee
has received (if requested), security or indemnity (or both) satisfactory to it against any loss, liability or
expense;
the Senior Secured Notes Trustee has not complied with such request within 60 days after its receipt of
the request and the offer of security or indemnity (or both) satisfactory to it; and
Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notesNew Senior Secured
(5)
Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notesNew Senior Secured
Notes  have  not  given  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee  a  direction  inconsistent  with  such  request
within such 60-day period.
The  Holders  of  a  majority  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  then  outstanding notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  by
notice to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee may, on behalf of the Holders of all of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes,
rescind an acceleration or waive any existing Default or Event of Default and its consequences under the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture except a continuing Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, or premium, if any, interest,
if any, on, the notesNew Senior Secured Notes (other than a payment Default or Event of Default that resulted from an
acceleration that has been rescinded).
The  Company  is  required  to  deliver  to  the Senior  Secured  Notes Trustee  annually  a  statement  in  writing  regarding
compliance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture. Within 10 business days of becoming aware of any Default or Event
of Default, the Company is required to deliver to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee a statement in writing specifying such
Default or Event of Default.
Certain Definitions
“2019 Convertible Notes Indenture” means the Indenture, dated as of                     , 2016, among the Company, the
subsidiary guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the
New 2019 Convertible Notes.
Table of Contents
A-1-20
“2020 Convertible Notes Indenture” means the Indenture, dated as of                     , 2016, among the Company, the
subsidiary guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the
New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“Acquired Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of a Person (1) existing at the time such Person becomes a Restricted
Subsidiary  or  (2)  assumed  in  connection  with  acquisitions  of  properties  or  assets  from  such  Person  (other  than  any
Indebtedness incurred in connection with, or in contemplation of, such Person becoming a Restricted Subsidiary or such
acquisition).  Acquired  Indebtedness  shall  be  deemed  to  be  incurred  on  the  date  the  acquired  Person  becomes  a
Restricted Subsidiary or the date of the related acquisition of properties or assets from such Person.
“Additional Assets” means:
(1)
(2)
any  assets  or  property  (other  than  cash,  Cash  Equivalents  or  securities)  used  in  the  Oil  and  Gas
Business or any business ancillary thereto;
Investments in any other Person engaged in the Oil and Gas Business or any business ancillary thereto
(including the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of such Person) as a result of which such
other Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary;
(3)
the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary; or
(4)
capital expenditures by the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary in the Oil and Gas Business.
“Additional  New  2019  Convertible  Notes”  means  the  additional  securities  issued  under  the  2019  Convertible  Notes
Indenture solely in connection with the payment of interest in kind on the New 2019 Convertible Notes.
“Additional  New  2020  Convertible  Notes”  means  the  additional  securities  issued  under  the  2020  Convertible  Notes
Indenture solely in connection with the payment of interest in kind on the New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“Additional New Convertible Notes” means, collectively, the Additional New 2019 Convertible Notes and the Additional
New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets” means (without duplication), as of the date of determination, the remainder
of:
(1)
the sum of:
(a)
discounted  future  net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries  calculated  in  accordance  with  Commission  guidelines  before  any
state,  federal  or  foreign  income  taxes,  as  estimated  by  the  Company  and  confirmed  by  a
nationally recognized firm of independent petroleum engineers in a reserve report prepared as
of the end of the Company’s most recently completed fiscal year for which audited financial
statements  are  available,  as  increased  by,  as  of  the  date  of  determination,  the  estimated
discounted future net revenues from:
(i)
(ii)
estimated  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  acquired  since  such  year-end,  which
reserves were not reflected in such year-end reserve report, and
estimated  oil  and  gas  reserves  attributable  to  upward  revisions  of  estimates  of
proved oil and gas reserves since such year-end due to
Table of Contents
A-1-21
exploration,  development  or  exploitation  activities,  in  each  case  calculated  in
accordance with Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in such year-
end reserve report),
and  decreased  by,  as  of  the  date  of  determination,  the  estimated  discounted  future  net
revenues from:
(iii)
(iv)
estimated proved oil and gas reserves produced or disposed of since such year-
end, and
estimated oil and gas reserves attributable to downward revisions of estimates of
proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  since  such  year-end  due  to  changes  in  geological
conditions  or  other  factors  which  would,  in  accordance  with  standard  industry
practice,  cause  such  revisions,  in  each  case  calculated  in  accordance  with
Commission  guidelines  (utilizing  the  prices  utilized  in  such  year-end  reserve
report);
provided that, in the case of each of the determinations made pursuant to clauses (i) through
(iv),  such  increases  and  decreases  shall  be  as  estimated  by  the  Company’s  petroleum
engineers, unless there is a Material Change as a result of such acquisitions, dispositions or
revisions, in which event the discounted future net revenues utilized for purposes of this clause
(1)(a) shall be confirmed in writing by a nationally recognized firm of independent petroleum
engineers;
(b)
the  capitalized  costs  that  are  attributable  to  oil  and  gas  properties  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted Subsidiaries to which no proved oil and gas reserves are attributable, based on the
Company’s books and records as of a date no earlier than the date of the Company’s latest
annual or quarterly financial statements;
Table of Contents
(c)
(d)
the Net Working Capital on a date no earlier than the date of the Company’s latest annual or
quarterly financial statements; and
the greater of (i) the net book value on a date no earlier than the date of the Company’s latest
annual  or  quarterly  financial  statements  and  (ii)  the  appraised  value,  as  estimated  by
independent appraisers, of other tangible assets (including, without duplication, Investments in
unconsolidated Restricted Subsidiaries) of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries, as of
the date no earlier than the date of the Company’s latest audited financial statements, minus
(2)
the sum of:
(a)
Minority Interests;
(b)
(c)
(d)
any net gas balancing liabilities of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries reflected in the
Company’s latest audited financial statements;
to  the  extent  included  in  (1)(a)  above,  the  discounted  future  net  revenues,  calculated  in
accordance with Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in the Company’s year-
end reserve report), attributable to reserves which are required to be delivered to third parties
to fully satisfy the obligations of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries with respect to
Volumetric Production Payments (determined, if applicable, using the schedules specified with
respect thereto); and
A-1-22
the  discounted  future  net  revenues,  calculated  in  accordance  with  Commission  guidelines,
attributable to reserves subject to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments which, based on
the  estimates  of  production  and  price  assumptions  included  in  determining  the  discounted
future net revenues specified in (1)(a) above, would be necessary to fully satisfy the payment
obligations  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  with  respect  to  Dollar-
Denominated Production Payments (determined, if applicable, using the schedules specified
with respect thereto).
“Adjusted  Net  Assets”  of  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  at  any  date  shall  mean  the  amount  by  which  the  fair  value  of  the
properties and assets of such Subsidiary Guarantor exceeds the total amount of liabilities, including, without limitation,
contingent liabilities (after giving effect to all other fixed and contingent liabilities incurred or assumed on such date), but
excluding liabilities under its Subsidiary Guarantee, of such Subsidiary Guarantor at such date.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to any specified Person, any other Person directly or indirectly controlling or controlled by
or under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person; and the term “Affiliated” shall have a meaning
correlative to the foregoing. For the purposes of this definition, “control,” when used with respect to any Person, means
the power to direct the management and policies of such Person, directly or indirectly, whether through the ownership of
voting securities, by contract or otherwise; and the terms “controlling” and “controlled” have meanings correlative to the
foregoing. For purposes of this definition, beneficial ownership of 10% or more of the voting common equity (on a fully
diluted basis) or options or warrants to purchase such equity (but only if exercisable at the date of determination or within
60 days thereof) of a Person shall be deemed to constitute control of such Person.
“Agents” means, collectively, the Collateral Agent, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, the Trustee and any Authorized
Representative for the Other Pari Passu Secured Parties that is specified in the applicable joinder agreement to the Pari
Passu Intercreditor Agreementthe Senior Secured Notes Trustee, and “Agent” means any one of them.
“Alternate Controlling Party”  means (a) in the case of the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, the Trustee and (b) in the
case of the Trustee, the Authorized Representative of the Major Non-Controlling Partythe Senior Secured Notes Trustee.
“Applicable Premium” means, with respect to any note on any redemption date, the greater of:
(1) 1.0% of the principal amount of the note; and
(2) the excess of:
(a) the present value at such redemption date of (i) the redemption price of the note at March 15, 2016 (such redemption
price being set forth in the table appearing above under “—Redemption—Optional Redemption”, excluding accrued and
unpaid interest to the redemption date), plus (ii) all required interest payments due on the note through March 15, 2016
(excluding accrued but unpaid interest to the redemption date), computed using a discount rate equal to the Treasury
Rate as of such redemption date plus 50 basis points; over
(b) the principal amount of the note.
“Asset Sale” means any sale, issuance, conveyance, transfer, lease or other disposition to any Person other than the
Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (including, without limitation, by means of a Production
Table of Contents
A-1-23
Payment,  net  profits  interest,  overriding  royalty  interest,  sale  and  leaseback  transaction,  merger  or  consolidation)
(collectively, for purposes of this definition, a “transfer”), directly or indirectly, in one or a series of related transactions, of
(i) any Capital Stock of any Restricted Subsidiary, (ii) all or substantially all of the properties and assets of any division or
line of business of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries or (iii) any other properties or assets of the Company
or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries other than (a) a transfer of cash, Cash Equivalents, hydrocarbons or other mineral
products in the ordinary course of business or (b) any lease, abandonment, disposition, relinquishment or farm-out of any
oil and gas properties in the ordinary course of business. For the purposes of this definition, the term “Asset Sale” also
shall  not  include  (A)  any  transfer  of  properties  or  assets  (including  Capital  Stock)  that  is  governed  by,  and  made  in
accordance  with,  the  provisions  described  under  “—Merger,  Consolidation  and  Sale  of  Assets;”  (B)  any  transfer  of
properties or assets to an Unrestricted Subsidiary, if permitted under the “Limitation on Restricted Payments” covenant;
or (C) any transfer (in a single transaction or a series of related transactions) of properties or assets (including Capital
Stock) having a Fair Market Value of less than $25.0 million.
“Attributable Indebtedness” means, with respect to any particular lease under which any Person is at the time liable and at
any date as of which the amount thereof is to be determined, the present value of the total net amount of rent required to
be paid by such Person under the lease during the primary term thereof, without giving effect to any renewals at the option
of the lessee, discounted from the respective due dates thereof to such date at the rate of interest per annum implicit in the
terms of the lease. As used in the preceding sentence, the net amount of rent under any lease for any such period shall
mean the sum of rental and other payments required to be paid with respect to such period by the lessee thereunder
excluding  any  amounts  required  to  be  paid  by  such  lessee  on  account  of  maintenance  and  repairs,  insurance,  taxes,
assessments, water rates or similar charges. In the case of any lease which is terminable by the lessee upon payment of a
penalty,  such  net  amount  of  rent  shall  also  include  the  amount  of  such  penalty,  but  no  rent  shall  be  considered  as
required to be paid under such lease subsequent to the first date upon which it may be so terminated.
“Authorized Representative” means (a) in the case of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations or the Revolving Credit
Agreement Secured Parties, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, (b) in the case of the Senior Secured Note Obligations
or the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the Holders of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes,  the Senior Secured Notes
Trustee, and (c) in the case of any Series of Other Pari Passu Obligations or Other Pari Passu Secured Parties that become
subject to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement after the Issue Date, the Authorized Representative and (c) as used in
the context of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement under “—Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement,” in the case of the
Junior  Lien  Obligations,  the  authorized  representative  named  for such  Seriesthe  applicable  series  of  New  Convertible
Notes in the applicable joinder agreement to the Pari Passu Intercreditor AgreementConvertible Notes Indenture.
“Average Life” means, with respect to any Indebtedness, as at any date of determination, the quotient obtained by dividing
(i) the sum of the products of (a) the number of years (and any portion thereof) from the date of determination to the date or
dates  of  each  successive  scheduled  principal  payment  (including,  without  limitation,  any  sinking  fund  or  mandatory
redemption payment requirements) of such Indebtedness multiplied by (b) the amount of each such principal payment by
(ii) the sum of all such principal payments.
“Bankruptcy Code” means Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.
“Board of Directors” means:
Table of Contents
(1)
with respect to a corporation, the board of directors of the corporation or any committee thereof duly
authorized to act on behalf of such board;
(2)
with respect to a partnership, the board of directors of the general partner of the partnership;
A-1-24
(3)
with  respect  to  a  limited  liability  company,  the  managing  member  or  members  or  any  controlling
committee of managing members thereof; and
(4)
with respect to any other Person, the board or committee of such Person serving a similar function.
“Capital Stock” means, with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests, participations, rights or other equivalents
in the equity interests (however designated) in such Person, and any rights (other than debt securities convertible into an
equity interest), warrants or options exercisable for, exchangeable for or convertible into such an equity interest in such
Person.
“Capitalized Lease Obligation” means any obligation to pay rent or other amounts under a lease of (or other agreement
conveying the right to use) any property (whether real, personal or mixed) that is required to be classified and accounted
for as a capital lease obligation under GAAP, and, for the purpose of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the amount of
such obligation at any date shall be the capitalized amount thereof at such date, determined in accordance with GAAP.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any lease (whether entered into before or after date of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture)
that would have been classified as an operating lease pursuant to GAAP as in effect on the date of the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture will be deemed not to represent a Capitalized Lease Obligation.
“Cash Equivalents” means:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
any evidence of Indebtedness with a maturity of 180 days or less issued or directly and fully guaranteed or
insured by the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof (provided that the full faith
and credit of the United States of America is pledged in support thereof);
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit or acceptances with a maturity of 180 days or less of any
financial institution that is a member of the Federal Reserve System having combined capital and surplus and
undivided profits of not less than $500 million;
commercial paper with a maturity of 180 days or less issued by a corporation that is not an Affiliate of the
Company and is organized under the laws of any state of the United States or the District of Columbia and
rated at least A-1 by S&P or at least P-1 by Moody’s;
repurchase obligations with a term of not more than seven days for underlying securities of the types described
in clause (1) above entered into with any commercial bank meeting the specifications of clause (2) above;
overnight  bank  deposits  and  bankers  acceptances  at  any  commercial  bank  meeting  the  qualifications
specified in clause (2) above;
deposits  available  for  withdrawal  on  demand  with  any  commercial  bank  not  meeting  the  qualifications
specified in clause (2) above but which is a lending bank under the Revolving Credit Agreement, provided all
such deposits do not exceed $5.0 million in the aggregate at any one time;
(7)
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit with any commercial bank organized in the United States
not  meeting  the  qualifications  specified  in  clause  (2)  above,  provided  that  such  deposits  and  certificates
support bond, letter of credit and other similar types of obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business;
and
Table of Contents
A-1-25
(8)
investments in money market or other mutual funds substantially all of whose assets comprise securities of the
types described in clauses (1) through (5) above.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any event or series of events by which:
(1)
(2)
(3)
any  “person”  or  “group”  (as  such  terms  are  used  in  Sections  13(d)  and  14(d)  of  the  Exchange  Act)  is  or
becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act), directly or indirectly, of
more than 50% of the total Voting Stock of the Company;
the Company consolidates with or merges into another Person or any Person consolidates with, or merges
into, the Company, in any such event pursuant to a transaction in which the outstanding Voting Stock of the
Company is changed into or exchanged for cash, securities or other property, other than any such transaction
where (a) the outstanding Voting Stock of the Company is changed into or exchanged for Voting Stock of the
surviving  or  resulting  Person  that  is  Qualified  Capital  Stock  and  (b)  the  holders  of  the  Voting  Stock  of  the
Company immediately prior to such transaction own, directly or indirectly, not less than a majority of the Voting
Stock of the surviving or resulting Person immediately after such transaction;
the Company, either individually or in conjunction with one or more Restricted Subsidiaries, sells, assigns,
conveys,  transfers,  leases  or  otherwise  disposes  of,  or  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  sell,  assign,  convey,
transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of, all or substantially all of the properties and assets of the Company and
such Restricted Subsidiaries, taken as a whole (either in one transaction or a series of related transactions),
including Capital Stock of the Restricted Subsidiaries, to any Person (other than the Company or a Wholly
Owned Restricted Subsidiary);
(4)
the Company is liquidated or dissolved; or
(5)
the  occurrence  of  any  other  event  that  constitutes  a  “Change  of  Control”  under eitherany  of  the
ExistingConvertible Note Indentures or the Old Indentures.
“Charter Amendment” means the amendment of Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of
shares of Comstock’s common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized
shares  of  the  Comstock’s  common  stock  for  the  issuance  of  shares  upon  conversion  of  all  of  the  outstanding  New
Convertible Notes and exercise of all of the warrants.
“Collateral” means all property wherever located and whether now owned or at any time acquired after the date of the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture by any Collateral Grantor as to which a Lien is granted under the Collateral Agreements
to secure the notesNew Senior Secured Notes or any Subsidiary Guarantee.
“Collateral Agent” means the collateral agent for all holders of Pari Passu Obligations. Bank of Montreal will initially serve
as the Collateral Agent.
“Collateral  Agreements”  means,  collectively,  each  Mortgage,  the  Pledge  Agreement,  the  Security  Agreement,  the
Intercreditor Agreements and each other instrument, including any assignment, security agreement, mortgage, deed of
trust, pledge agreement or other security instrument, creating Liens in favor of the Collateral Agent as required by the Pari
Passu Documents or the Intercreditor Agreements, in each case, as the same may be in effect from time to time.
“Collateral Grantors” means the Company and each Subsidiary Guarantor that is party to a Collateral Agreement.
Table of Contents
A-1-26
“Commodity Exchange Act” means the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and
any successor statute.
“Consolidated Exploration Expenses” means, for any period, exploration expenses of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio”  means,  for  any  period,  the  ratio  on  a  pro  forma  basis  of  (1)  the  sum  of
Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated Interest Expense, Consolidated Income Tax Expense and Consolidated Non-cash
Charges  each  to  the  extent  deducted  in  computing  Consolidated  Net  Income,  in  each  case,  for  such  period,  of  the
Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, all determined in accordance with GAAP, decreased (to
the extent included in determining Consolidated Net Income) by the sum of (a) the amount of deferred revenues that are
amortized during such period and are attributable to reserves that are subject to Volumetric Production Payments and
(b) amounts recorded in accordance with GAAP as repayments of principal and interest pursuant to Dollar- Denominated
Production Payments, to (2) Consolidated Interest Expense for such period; provided, however, that (i) the Consolidated
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio shall be calculated on a pro forma basis assuming that (A) the Indebtedness to be incurred
(and all other Indebtedness incurred after the first day of such period of four full fiscal quarters referred to in the covenant
described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”  through  and
including the date of determination), and (if applicable) the application of the net proceeds therefrom (and from any other
such Indebtedness), including to refinance other Indebtedness, had been incurred on the first day of such four-quarter
period and, in the case of Acquired Indebtedness, on the assumption that the related transaction (whether by means of
purchase, merger or otherwise) also had occurred on such date with the appropriate adjustments with respect to such
acquisition being included in such pro forma calculation and (B) any acquisition or disposition by the Company or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  of  any  properties  or  assets  outside  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  or  any  repayment  of  any
principal amount of any Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary prior to the Stated Maturity thereof, in
either case since the first day of such period of four full fiscal quarters through and including the date of determination,
had been consummated on such first day of such four-quarter period, (ii) in making such computation, the Consolidated
Interest Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness required to be computed on a pro forma basis in accordance
with the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock”
and (A) bearing a floating interest rate shall be computed as if the rate in effect on the date of computation had been the
applicable rate for the entire period and (B) which was not outstanding during the period for which the computation is
being  made  but  which  bears,  at  the  option  of  the  Company,  a  fixed  or  floating  rate  of  interest,  shall  be  computed  by
applying, at the option of the Company, either the fixed or floating rate, (iii) in making such computation, the Consolidated
Interest Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness under a revolving credit facility required to be computed on
a pro forma basis in accordance with the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness
and Disqualified Capital Stock” shall be computed based upon the average daily balance of such Indebtedness during the
applicable  period,  provided  that  such  average  daily  balance  shall  be  reduced  by  the  amount  of  any  repayment  of
Indebtedness  under  a  revolving  credit  facility  during  the  applicable  period,  which  repayment  permanently  reduced  the
commitments or amounts available to be reborrowed under such facility, (iv) notwithstanding clauses (ii) and (iii) of this
provision,  interest  on  Indebtedness  determined  on  a  fluctuating  basis,  to  the  extent  such  interest  is  covered  by
agreements  relating  to  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  accrued  at  the  rate  per  annum
resulting  after  giving  effect  to  the  operation  of  such  agreements,  (v)  in  making  such  calculation,  Consolidated  Interest
Expense shall exclude interest attributable to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments, and (vi) if after the first day of the
period referred to in clause (1) of this definition the Company has permanently retired any Indebtedness out of the Net
Cash  Proceeds  of  the  issuance  and  sale  of  shares  of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  within  30  days  of  such
issuance and sale, Consolidated Interest Expense shall be calculated on a pro forma basis as if such Indebtedness had
been retired on the first day of such period.
Table of Contents
A-1-27
“Consolidated Income Tax Expense” means, for any period, the provision for federal, state, local and foreign income taxes
(including  state  franchise  taxes  accounted  for  as  income  taxes  in  accordance  with  GAAP)  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated Interest Expense” means, for any period, without duplication, the sum of (1) the interest expense of the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  for  such  period  as  determined  on  a  consolidated  basis  in  accordance  with
GAAP, including, without limitation, (a) any amortization of debt discount, (b) the net cost under Interest Rate Protection
Obligations  (including  any  amortization  of  discounts),  (c)  the  interest  portion  of  any  deferred  payment  obligation
constituting  Indebtedness,  (d)  all  commissions,  discounts  and  other  fees  and  charges  owed  with  respect  to  letters  of
credit  and  bankers’  acceptance  financing  and  (e)  all  accrued  interest,  in  each  case  to  the  extent  attributable  to  such
period,  (2)  to  the  extent  any  Indebtedness  of  any  Person  (other  than  the  Company  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  is
guaranteed  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary,  the  aggregate  amount  of  interest  paid  (to  the  extent  not
accrued in a prior period) or accrued by such other Person during such period attributable to any such Indebtedness, in
each case to the extent attributable to that period, (3) the aggregate amount of the interest component of Capitalized Lease
Obligations paid (to the extent not accrued in a prior period), accrued or scheduled to be paid or accrued by the Company
and its Restricted Subsidiaries during such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP and
(4) the aggregate amount of dividends paid (to the extent such dividends are not accrued in a prior period and excluding
dividends  paid  in  Qualified  Capital  Stock)  or  accrued  on  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries, to the extent such Disqualified Capital Stock is owned by Persons other than Restricted Subsidiaries, less,
to the extent included in any of clauses (1) through (4), amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs of the Company
and its Restricted Subsidiaries during such period.
“Consolidated  Net  Income”  means,  for  any  period,  the  consolidated  net  income  (or  loss)  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted Subsidiaries for such period as determined in accordance with GAAP, adjusted by excluding:
Table of Contents
(1)
net after-tax extraordinary gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto);
(2)
net after-tax gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto) attributable to Asset Sales;
(3)
(4)
the  net  income  (or  net  loss)  of  any  Person  (other  than  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries), in which the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries has an ownership interest,
except to the extent of the amount of dividends or other distributions actually paid to the Company or
any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  cash  by  such  other  Person  during  such  period  (regardless  of
whether such cash dividends or distributions are attributable to net income (or net loss) of such Person
during such period or during any prior period);
the net income of any Restricted Subsidiary to the extent that the declaration or payment of dividends or
similar distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary is not at the date of determination permitted, directly or
indirectly, by operation of the terms of its charter or any agreement, instrument, judgment, decree, order,
statute, rule or governmental regulation applicable to that Restricted Subsidiary or its stockholders;
(5)
dividends paid in Qualified Capital Stock;
(6)
income resulting from transfers of assets received by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary from an
Unrestricted Subsidiary;
(7)
Consolidated Exploration Expenses and any write-downs or impairments of non-current assets; and
(8)
the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles.
A-1-28
“Consolidated  Non-cash  Charges”  means,  for  any  period,  the  aggregate  depreciation,  depletion,  amortization  and
exploration expense and other non-cash expenses of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries reducing Consolidated
Net Income for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP (excluding any such non-cash
charge for which an accrual of or reserve for cash charges for any future period is required).
“Controlling  Secured  Parties”  means,  at  any  time,  the Series  of  Pari  Passu Secured  Parties  whose  Authorized
Representative is the Controlling Party for the Collateral at such time.
“Convertible Notes Indentures” means, collectively, the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture and the 2020 Convertible Notes
Indenture.
“Default” means any event, act or condition that is, or after notice or passage of time or both would become, an Event of
Default.
“Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations” means, with respect to any Collateral and any Series of Pari Passu Obligations
other than the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, the date on which such Series of Pari Passu Obligations is no
longer  required  to  be  secured  by  such  Collateral.  The  term  “Discharged”  shall  have  a  corresponding  meaning.  the
occurrence of all of the following:
(1) termination or expiration of all commitments to extend credit that would constitute Pari Passu Obligations;
(2) payment in full in cash of the principal of and interest, premium (if any) and fees on all Pari Passu Obligations (other
than any undrawn letters of credit);
(3)  discharge  or  cash  collateralization  (at  105%  of  the  aggregate  undrawn  amount)  of  all  outstanding  letters  of  credit
constituting Pari Passu Obligations;
(4) payment in full in cash of obligations in respect of Secured Swap Obligations that are secured by Pari Passu Liens
(and, with respect to any particular Secured Swap Obligation, termination of such agreement and payment in full in cash of
all  obligations  thereunder  or  such  other  arrangements  as  have  been  made  by  the  counterparty  thereto  (and
communicated to the Collateral Agent)); and
(5) payment in full in cash of all other Pari Passu Obligations that are outstanding and unpaid at the time the Pari Passu
Obligations  are  paid  in  full  in  cash  (other  than  any  obligations  for  taxes,  costs,  indemnifications,  reimbursements,
damages and other liabilities in respect of which no claim or demand for payment has been made at or prior to such time);
provided that, if, at any time after the Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations has occurred, any Collateral Grantor enters into
any  Pari  Passu  Document  evidencing  a  Pari  Passu  Obligation  which  incurrence  is  not  prohibited  by  the  applicable
Secured  Debt  Documents,  then  such  Discharge  of  Pari  Passu  Obligations  shall  automatically  be  deemed  not  to  have
occurred for all purposes of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement with respect to such new Pari Passu Obligation (other
than with respect to any actions taken as a result of the occurrence of such first Discharge of Pari Passu Obligations), and,
from and after the date on which the Company designates such Indebtedness as a Pari Passu Obligation in accordance
with the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, the obligations under such Pari Passu Document shall automatically and
without any further action be treated as Pari Passu Obligations for all purposes of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement,
including  for  purposes  of  the  lien  priorities  and  rights  in  respect  of  Collateral  set  forth  in  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor
Agreement, and any Junior Lien Obligations shall be deemed to have been at all times Junior Lien Obligations and at no
time Pari Passu Obligations.
Table of Contents
A-1-29
“Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations” means, except to the extent otherwise provided in the Pari Passu
Intercreditor  Agreement,  payment  in  full,  in  cash  (except  for  contingent  indemnities  and  cost  and  reimbursement
obligations  to  the  extent  no  claim  has  been  made)  of  all  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  and,  with  respect  to
letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, delivery of cash collateral or backstop
letters of credit in respect thereof in a manner consistent with the Revolving Credit Agreement and otherwise reasonably
satisfactory to the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and termination of and payment in full in cash of, all Secured Swap
Obligations, in each case after or concurrently with the termination of all commitments to extend credit thereunder and the
termination of all commitments of the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents; provided that  the  Discharge  of  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  shall  not  be  deemed  to  have
occurred if such payments are made with the proceeds of other Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations that constitute an
exchange or replacement for or a refinancing of such Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations.
“Disinterested Director” means, with respect to any transaction or series of transactions in respect of which the Board of
Directors of the Company is required to deliver a resolution of the Board of Directors under the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture, a member of the Board of Directors of the Company who does not have any material direct or indirect financial
interest (other than an interest arising solely from the beneficial ownership of Capital Stock of the Company) in or with
respect to such transaction or series of transactions.
“Disqualified Capital Stock” means any Capital Stock that, either by its terms, by the terms of any security into which it is
convertible or exchangeable or by contract or otherwise, is, or upon the happening of an event or passage of time would
be, required to be redeemed or repurchased prior to the date that is 91 days after the final Stated Maturity of the notesNew
Senior Secured Notes or is redeemable at the option of the Holder thereof at any time prior to the date that is 91 days after
the final Stated Maturity of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes, or is convertible into or exchangeable for debt securities
at  any  time  prior  to  the  date  that  is  91  days  after  the  final  Stated  Maturity  of  the notesNew Senior Secured Notes.  For
purposes of the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital
Stock,” Disqualified Capital Stock shall be valued at the greater of its voluntary or involuntary maximum fixed redemption
or  repurchase  price  plus  accrued  and  unpaid  dividends.  For  such  purposes,  the  “maximum  fixed  redemption  or
repurchase price” of any Disqualified Capital Stock which does not have a fixed redemption or repurchase price shall be
calculated  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  as  if  such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  were
redeemed or repurchased on the date of determination, and if such price is based upon, or measured by, the fair market
value of such Disqualified Capital Stock, such fair market value shall be determined in good faith by the board of directors
of the issuer of such Disqualified Capital Stock; provided, however, that if such Disqualified Capital Stock is not at the date
of determination permitted or required to be redeemed or repurchased, the “maximum fixed redemption or repurchase
price” shall be the book value of such Disqualified Capital Stock.
“Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments”  means  production  payment  obligations  of  the  Company  or  a  Restricted
Subsidiary recorded as liabilities in accordance with GAAP, together with all undertakings and obligations in connection
therewith.
“Engineering Report”  means  a  reserve  report  as  of  each  December  31  and  June  30,  as  applicable,  with  respect  to  all
Hydrocarbons attributable to the Oil and Gas Properties of the Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors prepared by an
independent  engineering  firm  of  recognized  standing  in  accordance  with  accepted  industry  practice  and  all  updates
thereto.
“Equity Interests” means Capital Stock and all warrants, options or other rights to acquire Capital Stock (but excluding
any debt security that is convertible into, or exchangeable for, Capital Stock).
“Equity Offering” means a public or private offering of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company made for cash on a primary
basis  by  the  Company  after  the  date  of  the  Indenture,  other  than  (1)  public  offerings  with  respect  to  the  Company’s
common stock registered on Form S-8 and (2) issuances to any Subsidiary of the Company.
Table of Contents
A-1-30
“Event of Default” has the meaning set forth above under the caption “Events of Default.”
“Excess Pari Passu Obligations” means Obligations constituting Pari Passu Obligations for the principal amount of loans,
letters of credit, reimbursement Obligations under the Pari Passu Documents to the extent that such Obligations are in
excess of the Pari Passu Lien Cap.
“Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation” means a series of transactions in which the Company will (i) exchange the New
Senior Secured Notes and warrants for the Old Senior Secured Notes, (ii) exchange the New 2019 Convertible Notes for
the Company’s 7  3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019, (iii) exchange the New2020 Convertible Notes for the Company’s 9  1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020 and
(iv) solicit the consent of the holders of the Old Senior Secured Notes and Old Unsecured Notes for certain amendments to the Old Indentures, including amendments to
eliminate or amend substantially all restrictive covenants contained in the Old Indentures and release the collateral securing the Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Exchanged Properties” means properties or assets used or useful in the Oil and Gas Business received by the Company
or a Restricted Subsidiary in trade or as a portion of the total consideration for other such properties or assets.
“Excluded Collateral” means any cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets to the extent that such cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets are on deposit or maintained with the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or any other Revolving Credit Agreement
Secured Party (other than the Collateral Agent, in its capacity as such) to cash collateralize letters of credit constituting
Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  or  Secured  Swap  Obligations  constituting  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
Obligations.
“Existing Indentures” means (i) the Indenture, dated as of October 9, 2009 (the “Base Indenture”), among the Company,
the subsidiary guarantors named therein, and the Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, as amended
and supplemented by the Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 14, 2011, among the Company, the subsidiary
guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the Company’s
7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019 and (ii) the Base Indenture, as amended and supplemented by the Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 5,
2012, among the Company, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to
the Company’s 9  1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
“Existing Unsecured Notes” means the Company’s 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019 and 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
“Fair Market Value” means with respect to any asset or property, the sale value that would be obtained in an arm’s-length
free market transaction between an informed and willing seller under no compulsion to sell and an informed and willing
buyer under no compulsion to buy. Fair Market Value of an asset or property equal to or in excess of $10.0 million shall be
determined by the Board of Directors of the Company acting in good faith, whose determination shall be conclusive and
evidenced by a resolution of such Board of Directors delivered to the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, and any lesser Fair
Market Value may be determined by an officer of the Company acting in good faith.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America as in effect from time to time. All
ratios and computations based on GAAP contained in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture will be computed in conformity
with GAAP.
The term “guarantee” means, as applied to any obligation, (1i) a guarantee (other than by endorsement of negotiable
instruments for collection in the ordinary course of business), direct or indirect, in any manner, of any part or all of such
obligation and (ii) an agreement, direct or indirect, contingent or otherwise, the practical effect of which is to assure in any
way the payment or performance (or payment of damages in the event of
Table of Contents
A-1-31
non-performance) of all or any part of such obligation, including, without limiting the foregoing, the payment of amounts
drawn down under letters of credit. When used as a verb, “guarantee” has a corresponding meaning.
“Hedging Agreement” means (a) any and all rate swap transactions, basis swaps, credit derivative transactions, forward
rate transactions, commodity swaps, commodity options, forward commodity contracts, equity or equity index swaps or
options, bond or bond price or bond index swaps or options or forward bond or forward bond price or forward bond index
transactions,  interest  rate  options,  forward  foreign  exchange  transactions,  cap  transactions,  floor  transactions,  collar
transactions, currency swap transactions, cross-currency rate swap transactions, currency options, spot contracts or any
similar transactions or any combination of any of the foregoing (including any options to enter into any of the foregoing
and  any  agreement,  contract  or  transaction  that  constitutes  a  “swap”  within  the  meaning  of  section  1a(47)  of  the
Commodity Exchange Act), whether or not any such transaction is governed by or subject to any master agreement, and
(b) any and all transactions of any kind, and the related confirmations, which are subject to the terms and conditions of, or
governed by, any form of master agreement published by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc., any
International Foreign Exchange Master Agreement, or any other master agreement (any such master agreement, together
with  any  related  schedules,  a  “Master  Agreement”),  including  any  such  obligations  or  liabilities  under  any  Master
Agreement.
“Holder” means a Person in whose name a noteNew Senior Secured Note (including an Additional New Senior Secured
Note) is registered in the Note Register.
“Hydrocarbon Interest” means all rights, titles, interests and estates now or hereafter acquired in and to oil and gas leases,
oil, gas and mineral leases or other liquid or gaseous hydrocarbon leases, mineral fee interests, overriding royalty and
royalty interests, operating rights, net profit interests, production payment interests and other similar types of interests,
including any reserved or residual interest of whatever nature.
“Hydrocarbons”  means  oil,  gas,  casinghead  gas,  drip  gasoline,  natural  gasoline,  condensate,  distillate,  liquid
hydrocarbons, gaseous hydrocarbons and all products refined or separated therefrom.
“Indebtedness” means, with respect to any Person, without duplication:
(1)
all liabilities of such Person, contingent or otherwise, for borrowed money or for the deferred purchase
price of property or services (excluding any trade accounts payable and other accrued current liabilities
incurred and reserves established in the ordinary course of business) and all liabilities of such Person
incurred  in  connection  with  any  agreement  to  purchase,  redeem,  exchange,  convert  or  otherwise
acquire for value any Capital Stock of such Person, or any warrants, rights or options to acquire such
Capital Stock, outstanding on the Issue Date or thereafter, if, and to the extent, any of the foregoing
would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of such Person prepared in accordance with GAAP;
(2)
all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, notes, debentures or other similar instruments, if,
and to the extent, any of the foregoing would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of such Person
prepared in accordance with GAAP;
(3)
all obligations of such Person with respect to letters of credit;
(4)
all indebtedness of such Person created or arising under any conditional sale or other title retention
agreement  with  respect  to  property  acquired  by  such  Person  (even  if  the  rights  and  remedies  of  the
seller or lender under such agreement in the event of default are limited to repossession or sale of such
property), but excluding trade accounts payable arising and reserves established in the ordinary course
of business;
Table of Contents
A-1-32
(5)
all Capitalized Lease Obligations of such Person;
(6)
(7)
(8)
the Attributable Indebtedness (in excess of any related Capitalized Lease Obligations) related to any
Sale/Leaseback Transaction of such Person;
all Indebtedness referred to in the preceding clauses of other Persons and all dividends of other
Persons, the payment of which is secured by (or for which the holder of such Indebtedness has an
existing right, contingent or otherwise, to be secured by) any Lien upon property (including, without
limitation, accounts and contract rights) owned by such Person, even though such Person has not
assumed or become liable for the payment of such Indebtedness (the amount of such obligation being
deemed to be the lesser of the value of such property or the amount of the obligation so secured);
all guarantees by such Person of Indebtedness referred to in this definition (including, with respect to
any Production Payment, any warranties or guaranties of production or payment by such Person with
respect to such Production Payment but excluding other contractual obligations of such Person with
respect to such Production Payment); and
(9)
all obligations of such Person under or in respect of currency exchange contracts, oil and natural gas
price hedging arrangements and Interest Rate Protection Obligations.
The  accrual  of  interest,  the  accretion  or  amortization  of  original  issue  discount,  the  payment  of  interest  on  any
Indebtedness in the form of additional Indebtedness with the same terms, and the payment of dividends on Disqualified
Capital  Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  in  the  form  of  additional  shares  of  the  same  class  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred  Stock  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  incurrence  of  Indebtedness  or  an  issuance  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred Stock for purposes of this definition.
Subject  to  clause  (8)  of  the  first  sentence  of  this  definition,  neither  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  nor
Volumetric Production Payments shall be deemed to be Indebtedness. In addition, Disqualified Capital Stock shall not be
deemed to be Indebtedness.
“Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding” means (a) any voluntary or involuntary case or proceeding under any bankruptcy
law with respect to any Collateral Grantor, (b) any other voluntary or involuntary insolvency, reorganization or bankruptcy
case or proceeding, or any receivership, liquidation, reorganization or other similar case or proceeding with respect to any
Collateral Grantor or with respect to any of its assets, (c) any liquidation, dissolution, reorganization or winding up of any
Collateral Grantor whether voluntary or involuntary and whether or not involving insolvency or bankruptcy (other than any
liquidation,  dissolution,  reorganization  or  winding  up  of  any  Subsidiary  of  the  Issuer  permitted  by  the  Pari  Passu
Documents),  (d)  any  assignment  for  the  benefit  of  creditors  or  any  other  marshalling  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  any
Collateral Grantor or (e) any other proceeding of any type or nature in which substantially all claims of creditors of any
Collateral Grantor are determined and any payment or distribution is or may be made on account of such claims.
“Intercreditor AgreementAgreements”  means, individually  or  collectively, as  the  context  may  require,  the  Pari  Passu
Intercreditor Agreement and anythe Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
“Interest Rate Protection Obligations” means the obligations of any Person pursuant to any arrangement with any other
Person whereby, directly or indirectly, such Person is entitled to receive from time to time periodic payments calculated by
applying either a floating or a fixed rate of interest on a stated notional amount in exchange for periodic payments made
by such Person calculated by applying a fixed or a floating rate of interest on the same notional amount and shall include,
without limitation, interest rate swaps, caps, floors, collars and similar agreements or arrangements designed to protect
against or manage such Person’s and any of its Subsidiaries exposure to fluctuations in interest rates.
Table of Contents
A-1-33
“Investment” means, with respect to any Person, any direct or indirect advance, loan, guarantee of Indebtedness or other
extension of credit or capital contribution by such Person to (by means of any transfer of cash or other property or assets
to others or any payment for property, assets or services for the account or use of others), or any purchase or acquisition
by such Person of any Capital Stock, bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (including derivatives) or evidences of
Indebtedness issued by, any other Person. In addition, the Fair Market Value of the net assets of any Restricted Subsidiary
at  the  time  that  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  designated  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an
“Investment”  made  by  the  Company  in  such  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  at  such  time.  “Investments”  shall  exclude
(1)  extensions  of  trade  credit  or  other  advances  to  customers  on  commercially  reasonable  terms  in  accordance  with
normal trade practices or otherwise in the ordinary course of business, (2) Interest Rate Protection Obligations entered
into in the ordinary course of business or as required by any Permitted Indebtedness or any Indebtedness incurred in
compliance with the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” covenant, but only to the extent that the
stated  aggregate  notional  amounts  of  such  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  do  not  exceed  105%  of  the  aggregate
principal amount of such Indebtedness to which such Interest Rate Protection Obligations relate and (3) endorsements of
negotiable instruments and documents in the ordinary course of business. If the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary
sells or otherwise disposes of any Capital Stock of any direct or indirect Restricted Subsidiary of the Company such that,
after  giving  effect  to  such  sale  or  disposition,  such  Person  is  no  longer  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  the  Company,  the
Company will be deemed to have made an Investment on the date of any such sale or disposition equal to the Fair Market
Value of the Company’s Investments in such Restricted Subsidiary that were not sold or disposed of.
“Issue Date” means the date of original issuance of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes.
“Junior Lien” means any Lien which (i) is also granted to secure the Pari Passu Obligations and (ii) is subordinate to the
Liens securing the Pari Passu Obligations pursuant to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
“Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement”  means  an  intercreditor  agreement  in  form  and  substance  satisfactory  to  the
Collateral  Agent  in  its  sole  discretion,  to  be  entered  into  on  a  future  date,  if  at  all,  between  the  Collateral  Agent,  the
Collateral  Grantors  and  any  collateral  agent  or  other  representative  with  respect  to  any  Junior  Lien  Obligations,  as
amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, pursuant to which, among other things, (i) the
Liens securing the Junior Lien Obligations are expressly subordinated to the Liens securing the Pari Passu Obligations,
(ii) no Liens are granted to secure the Junior Lien Obligations unless such Liens also secure, on a first priority basis, the
Pari  Passu  Obligations,  and  (iii)  the  holders  of  such  Junior  Lien  Obligations  waive  certain  voting  and  other  rights  in
connection with any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding with respect to the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor, in
each  case  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  the  Collateral  Agent  in  its  sole  discretion. Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent”  means,
individually or collectively, as the context may require, any collateral agent for holders of New Convertible Notes. Bank of
Montreal will initially serve as the Junior Lien Collateral Agent.
“Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agreements”  means,  collectively,  each  mortgage,  pledge  agreement,  security  agreement,  the
Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement and each other instrument, including any assignment, security agreement, mortgage,
deed of trust, pledge agreement or other security instrument, creating Junior Liens in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral
Agent as required by the documents governing the Junior Lien Obligations.
“Junior Lien Documents” means, collectively, any indenture, credit agreement or other agreement or instrument pursuant
to which Junior Lien Obligations are incurred (including the New Convertible Notes and the Convertible Notes Indentures)
and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements, in each case, as amended, modified, renewed, restated or replaced, in whole or
in part, from time to time.
“Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Intercreditor Agreement among the Collateral Agent, the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent, the Company, each other Collateral Grantor and the other parties from time to time party thereto, to be
entered into on the Issue Date, as it may be amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise
Table of Contents
A-1-34
modified from time to time in accordance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and (ii) any replacement thereof that
contains terms not materially less favorable to the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes than the Junior Intercreditor
Agreement referred to in clause (i).
“Junior  Lien  Obligations”  means (i)  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes,  (ii)  the  New  2020  Convertible  Notes  and
(iii) Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  that  is  secured  on  a  junior  basis  with  the  Pari  Passu
Obligations  by  a  Junior  Lien  that  was  permitted  to  be  incurred  and  so  secured  under  each  applicable  Pari  Passu
Document; provided that, in the case of any Indebtedness referred to in this definition:
(1) on or before the date on which such Indebtedness is incurred by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor, such
Indebtedness  is  designated  by  the  Company,  in  an  officers’  certificate  delivered  to  the  Collateral,  as  “Junior  Lien
Obligations” for the purposes of the Senior Secured Notes  Indenture  and  any  other  applicable  Pari  Passu  Document;
provided that if such Indebtedness is designated as “Junior Lien Obligations,” it cannot also be designated as Pari Passu
Obligations; and
(2) the collateral agent or other representative with respect to such Indebtedness, the Collateral Agent, the Senior Secured
Notes Trustee, the Company and each Subsidiary Guarantor have duly executed and delivered a joinder to the Junior Lien
Intercreditor  Agreement  and  all  requirements  set  forth  in suchthe  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  as  to  the
confirmation, grant or perfection of the Liens of the holders of Junior Lien Obligations to secure such Indebtedness in
respect thereof are satisfied.
“Lender  Provided  Hedging  Agreement”  means  any  Hedging  Agreement  between  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor and a Secured Swap Counterparty.
“Lien “Lien” means any mortgage, charge, pledge, lien (statutory or other), security interest, hypothecation, assignment
for security, claim or similar type of encumbrance (including, without limitation, any agreement to give or grant any lease,
conditional sale or other title retention agreement having substantially the same economic effect as any of the foregoing)
upon or with respect to any property of any kind. A Person shall be deemed to own subject to a Lien any property which
such Person has acquired or holds subject to the interest of a vendor or lessor under any conditional sale agreement,
capital lease or other title retention agreement.
“Liquid Securities” means securities (1) of an issuer that is not an Affiliate of the Company, (2) that are publicly traded on
the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  the  American  Stock  Exchange  or  the  Nasdaq  Stock  Market  and  (3)  as  to  which  the
Company is not subject to any restrictions on sale or transfer (including any volume restrictions under Rule 144 under the
Securities Act or any other restrictions imposed by the Securities Act) or as to which a registration statement under the
Securities Act covering the resale thereof is in effect for as long as the securities are held; provided that securities meeting
the requirements of clauses (1), (2) and (3) above shall be treated as Liquid Securities from the date of receipt thereof until
and only until the earlier of (a) the date on which such securities are sold or exchanged for cash or Cash Equivalents and
(b) 150 days following the date of receipt of such securities. If such securities are not sold or exchanged for cash or Cash
Equivalents within 120 days of receipt thereof, for purposes of determining whether the transaction pursuant to which the
Company or a Restricted Subsidiary received the securities was in compliance with the provisions of the Senior Secured
Notes Indenture described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales,” such securities shall be deemed not
to have been Liquid Securities at any time.
“Material Change” means an increase or decrease (except to the extent resulting from changes in prices) of more than
30%  during  a  fiscal  quarter  in  the  estimated  discounted  future  net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  of  the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  calculated  in  accordance  with  clause  (1)(a)  of  the  definition  of  Adjusted
Consolidated Net Tangible Assets; provided, however, that the following will be excluded from the calculation of Material
Change: (i) any acquisitions during the quarter of oil and gas reserves with respect to
A-1-35
Table of Contents
which  the  Company’s  estimate  of  the  discounted  future  net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  has  been
confirmed by independent petroleum engineers and (ii) any dispositions of properties and assets during such quarter that
were disposed of in compliance with the provisions of the Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture described under “—Certain
Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
“Minority Interest” means the percentage interest represented by any class of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that
are not owned by the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary.
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. or any successor to the rating agency business thereof.
“Mortgage”  means  all  mortgages,  deeds  of  trust  and  similar  documents,  instruments  and  agreements  (and  all
amendments, modifications and supplements thereof) creating, evidencing, perfecting or otherwise establishing the Liens
on Oil and Gas Properties and other related assets to secure payment of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes  and  the
Subsidiary Guarantees or any part thereof.
“Mortgaged Properties” means any property owned by a Collateral Grantor that is subject to the Liens existing and to exist
under the terms of the Mortgages.
“Net  Available  Cash”  from  an  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction  means  cash  proceeds  received  therefrom
(including  (1)  any  cash  proceeds  received  by  way  of  deferred  payment  of  principal  pursuant  to  a  note  or  installment
receivable  or  otherwise,  but  only  as  and  when  received,  and  (2)  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  Liquid  Securities  and  Cash
Equivalents, and excluding (a) any other consideration received in the form of assumption by the acquiring Person of
Indebtedness  or  other  obligations  relating  to  the  assets  or  property  that  is  the  subject  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback  Transaction  and  (b)  except  to  the  extent  subsequently  converted  to  cash,  Cash  Equivalents  or  Liquid
Securities within 240 days after such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction, consideration constituting Exchanged
Properties or consideration other than as identified in the immediately preceding clauses (1) and (2)), in each case net of
(i) all legal, title and recording expenses, commissions and other fees and expenses incurred, and all federal, state, foreign
and  local  taxes  required  to  be  paid  or  accrued  as  a  liability  under  GAAP  as  a  consequence  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback Transaction, (ii) all payments made on any Indebtedness (but specifically excluding Indebtedness of the
Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  assumed  in  connection  with  or  in  anticipation  of  such  Asset  Sale  or
Sale/Leaseback Transaction) which is secured by any assets subject to such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction,
in accordance with the terms of any Lien upon such assets, or which must by its terms, or in order to obtain a necessary
consent to such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction or by applicable law, be repaid out of the proceeds from such
Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction,  provided  that  such  payments  are  made  in  a  manner  that  results  in  the
permanent reduction in the balance of such Indebtedness and, if applicable, a permanent reduction in any outstanding
commitment for future incurrences of Indebtedness thereunder, (iii) all distributions and other payments required to be
made  to  minority  interest  holders  in  Subsidiaries  or  joint  ventures  as  a  result  of  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback
Transaction and (d) the deduction of appropriate amounts to be provided by the seller as a reserve, in accordance with
GAAP, against any liabilities associated with the assets disposed of in such Asset Sale or Sale/Leaseback Transaction
and  retained  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  after  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction;
provided, however,  that  if  any  consideration  for  an  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/Leaseback  Transaction  (which  would  otherwise
constitute  Net  Available  Cash)  is  required  to  be  held  in  escrow  pending  determination  of  whether  a  purchase  price
adjustment will be made, such consideration (or any portion thereof) shall become Net Available Cash only at such time as
it is released to such Person or its Restricted Subsidiaries from escrow.
“Net Cash Proceeds” with respect to any issuance or sale of Qualified Capital Stock or other securities, means the cash
proceeds  of  such  issuance  or  sale  net  of  attorneys’  fees,  accountants’  fees,  underwriters’  or  placement  agents’  fees,
discounts or commissions and brokerage, consultant and other fees and expenses actually incurred in connection with
such issuance or sale and net of taxes paid or payable as a result thereof.
Table of Contents
A-1-36
“Net Working Capital”  means  (1)  all  current  assets  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  less  (2)  all  current
liabilities of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries, except current liabilities included in Indebtedness, in each case
as set forth in consolidated financial statements of the Company prepared in accordance with GAAP.
“New 2019 Convertible Notes” means the Company’s 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019.
“New 2020 Convertible Notes” means the Company’s 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020.
“New Convertible Notes” means, collectively, the New 2019 Convertible Notes and the New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“Non-Conforming  Plan  of  Reorganization”  means  any  Plan  of  Reorganization  that  does  not  provide  for  payments  in
respect of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations to be made with the priority specified in the Pari Passu Intercreditor
Agreement and that has not been approved by the Majority Lenders (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement).
“Non-Controlling  Authorized  Representative”  means,  at  any  time,  with  respect  to  any  Collateral,  an  Authorized
Representative that is not the Controlling Party with respect to such Collateral at such time.
“Non-Controlling Secured Parties” means, at any time, with respect to any Collateral, the Pari Passu Secured Parties that
are not Controlling Secured Parties with respect to such Collateral at such time.
“Non-Recourse Indebtedness” means Indebtedness or that portion of Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary incurred in connection with the acquisition by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary of any property or
assets and as to which (i) the holders of such Indebtedness agree that they will look solely to the property or assets so
acquired and securing such Indebtedness for payment on or in respect of such Indebtedness, and neither the Company
nor  any  Subsidiary  (other  than  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary)  (a)  provides  credit  support,  including  any  undertaking,
agreement or instrument which would constitute Indebtedness, or (b) is directly or indirectly liable for such Indebtedness,
and (ii) no default with respect to such Indebtedness would permit (after notice or passage of time or both), according to
the terms thereof, any holder of any Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary to declare a default on such
Indebtedness or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated or payable prior to its Stated Maturity.
“Note Documents”  means  the  Indenture,  the  Collateral  Agreements  and  any  agreement  instrument  or  other  document
evidencing or governing any Note Obligations.
“Note Obligations” means all advances to, and debts, liabilities, obligations, covenants and duties of, the Company or any
Subsidiary Guarantor arising under the Indenture, the notes, the Subsidiary Guarantees and the Collateral Agreements
(including all principal, premium, interest, penalties, fees, charges, charges, expenses, indemnifications, reimbursement
obligations,  damages,  guarantees,  and  other  liabilities  or  amounts  payable  or  arising  thereunder),  whether  direct  or
indirect  (including  those  acquired  by  assumption),  absolute  or  contingent,  due  or  to  become  due,  now  existing  or
hereafter arising and including interest and fees that accrue after the commencement by or against the Company or any
Subsidiary  Guarantor  of  any  proceeding  in  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  law  naming  such  Person  as  the  debtor  in  such
proceeding, regardless of whether such interest and fees are allowed claims in such proceeding.
“Note  Register”  means  the  register  maintained  by  or  for  the  Company  in  which  the  Company  shall  provide  for  the
registration of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes and the transfer of the notesNew Senior Secured Notes.
“Obligations”  means  all  obligations  for  principal,  premium,  interest,  penalties,  fees,  indemnifications,  payments  with
respect to any letters of credit, reimbursements, damages and other liabilities payable under the documentation governing
any Indebtedness.
Table of Contents
A-1-37
“Oil and Gas Business” means (i) the acquisition, exploration, development, operation and disposition of interests in oil,
gas  and  other  hydrocarbon  properties,  (ii)  the  gathering,  marketing,  treating,  processing,  storage,  refining,  selling  and
transporting of any production from such interests or properties, (iii) any business relating to or arising from exploration
for or development, production, treatment, processing, storage, refining, transportation or marketing of oil, gas and other
minerals and products produced in association therewith, and (iv) any activity necessary, appropriate or incidental to the
activities described in the foregoing clauses (i) through (iii) of this definition.
“Oil  and  Gas  Properties”  means  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  the  properties  now  or  hereafter  pooled  or  unitized  with
Hydrocarbon Interests; all presently existing or future unitization, pooling agreements and declarations of pooled units
and  the  units  created  thereby  (including  without  limitation  all  units  created  under  orders,  regulations  and  rules  of  any
Governmental Authority have jurisdiction) that may affect all or any portion of the Hydrocarbon Interests; all operating
agreements,  contracts  and  other  agreements  that  relate  to  any  of  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests  or  the  production,  sale,
purchase, exchange or processing of Hydrocarbons from or attributable to such Hydrocarbon Interest; all Hydrocarbons
in  and  under  and  which  may  be  produced  and  saved  or  attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests,  the  lands  covered
thereby  and  all  oil  in  tanks  and  all  rents,  issues,  profits,  proceeds,  products,  revenues  and  other  income  from  or
attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  all  tenements,  hereditaments,  appurtenances  and  properties  in  any  manner
appertaining, belonging, affixed or incidental to the Hydrocarbon Interests, properties, rights, titles, interests and estates
described or referred to above, including any and all property, real or personal, now owned or hereinafter acquired and
situated  upon,  used,  held  for  use  or  useful  in  connection  with  the  operating,  working  or  development  of  any  of  such
Hydrocarbon Interests or property (excluding drilling rigs, automotive equipment or other personal property which may be
on such premises for the purpose of drilling a well or for other similar temporary uses) and including any and all oil wells,
gas wells, injection wells or other wells, buildings, structures, fuel separators, liquid extraction plants, plant compressors,
pumps, pumping units, field gathering systems, tanks and tank batteries, fixtures, valves, fittings, machinery and parts,
engines, boilers, meters, apparatus, equipment, appliances, tools, implements, cables, wires, towers, casing, tubing and
rods,  surface  leases,  rightsofway,  easements  and  servitudes  together  with  all  additions,  substitutions,  replacements,
accessions and attachments to any and all of the foregoing.
“Other Pari Passu Obligations” means other Indebtedness of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor that is secured by
a Pari Passu Lien (subject to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement) as permitted by the Pari Passu Documents and is
designated by the Company as an Other Pari Passu Obligation pursuant to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement. Old
Indentures”  means  (i)  the  Indenture,  dated  as  of  October  9,  2009  (the  “Base  Indenture”),  among  the  Company,  the
subsidiary guarantors named therein, and the Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, as amended and
supplemented  by  the  Third  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  as  of  March  14,  2011,  among  the  Company,  the  subsidiary
guarantors named therein and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the Company’s 7
  3⁄4%  Senior  Notes  due  2019,  (ii)  the  Base  Indenture,  as  amended  and  supplemented  by  the  Fourth  Supplemental
Indenture, dated as of June 5, 2012, among the Company, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and The Bank of New
York  Mellon  Trust  Company,  N.A.,  as  trustee,  relating  to  the  Company’s  9    1⁄2%  Senior  Notes  due  2020  and  (iii)  the
Indenture, dated as of March 13, 2015, among the Company, the subsidiary guarantors named therein, and the Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., relating to the Company’s Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Other  Pari  Passu  Secured  Parties”  means  the  holders  of  any  Other  Pari  Passu  Obligations  and  any  Authorized
Representative with respect thereto. Old Senior Secured Notes” means the Company’s 10% Senior Secured Notes due
2020.
“Old Unsecured Notes” means the Company’s 7  3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019 and 9  1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
“Pari Passu Documents” means, collectively, the Revolving Credit Agreement Documents, and the Senior Secured Note
Documents and any document or instrument evidencing or governing any Other Pari Passu Obligations. .
Table of Contents
A-1-38
“Pari Passu Excluded Collateral” has the meaning set forth in the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement.
“Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Amended and Restated Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement among
the Collateral Agent, the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, the Company, each other
Collateral Grantor and, the other parties from time to time party thereto, The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A.
in  its  capacity  as  the  trustee  under  the  Old  Senior  Secured  Notes to  be  entered  into  on  the  Issue  Date,  as  it  may  be
amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time in accordance with the Senior Secured Notes
Indenture and (ii) any replacement thereof that contains terms not materially less favorable to the Holders of the notesNew
Senior Secured Notes than the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement referred to in clause (i).
“Pari Passu Lien” means a Lien granted (or purported to be granted) by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor in
favor of the Collateral Agent, at any time, upon any assets or property of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor to
secure any Pari Passu Obligations.
“Pari Passu Lien Cap” means, as of any date, (a) the principal amount of Pari Passu Obligations (including any interest
paid-in-kind) that may be incurred as “Permitted Indebtedness” as of such date, plus (b) the amount of all Secured Swap
Obligations, to the extent such Secured Swap Obligations are secured by the Pari Passu Liens, plus (c) the amount of
accrued and unpaid interest (excluding any interest paid-in-kind) and outstanding fees, to the extent such Obligations are
secured by the Pari Passu Liens. For purposes of this definition, all letters  of  credit  will  be  valued  at  the  face  amount
thereof, whether or not drawn.
“Pari Passu Obligations” means, collectively, (a) the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, and (b) the Senior Secured
Note Obligations,  (c)  all  Other  Pari  Passu  Obligations  and  (e)  all  other  obligations  of  the Company  and  the  Subsidiary
Guarantors  in  respect  of,  or  arising  under,  the  Pari  Passu  Documents,  plus  interest  and  all  fees,  costs,  charges  and
expenses,  including  legal  fees  and  expenses  to  the  extent  authorized  under  the  Pari  Passu  Documents,  in  each  case
whether accrued or incurred before or after the commencement of an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding, and whether
or not allowed or allowable in an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
“Pari Passu Secured Parties” means (a) the Collateral Agent, (b) the Senior Secured Notes Trustee, (c) the Holders of the
New Senior Secured Notes and (d) the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties.
“Permitted Collateral Liens” means Liens described in clauses (1), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (12), (17), (18), (19), (20), (21),
(22)  and  (23)  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted  Liens”  that,  by  operation  of  law,  have  priority  over  the  Liens  securing  the
notesNew Senior Secured Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees.
“Permitted Investments” means any of the following:
(1)
Investments in Cash Equivalents;
(2)
Investments in property, plant and equipment used in the ordinary course of business;
(3)
Investments in the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(4)
Investments by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in another Person, if (a) as a result of
such  Investment  (i)  such  other  Person  becomes  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  (ii)  such  other  Person  is
merged or consolidated with or into, or transfers or conveys all or substantially all of its properties and
assets to, the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary and (b) such other Person is primarily engaged in the
Oil and Gas Business;
(5)
entry  into  operating  agreements,  joint  ventures,  partnership  agreements,  working  interests,  royalty
interests, mineral leases, processing agreements, farm-out agreements,
Table of Contents
A-1-39
contracts for the sale, transportation or exchange of oil and natural gas, unitization agreements, pooling
arrangements,  area  of  mutual  interest  agreements  or  other  similar  or  customary  agreements,
transactions,  properties,  interests  or  arrangements,  and  Investments  and  expenditures  in  connection
therewith or pursuant thereto, in each case made or entered into in the ordinary course of the Oil and
Gas Business;
(6)
entry into any hedging arrangements in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting the
Company’s or any Restricted Subsidiary’s production, purchases and resales against fluctuations in oil
or natural gas prices;
(7)
entry into any currency exchange contract in the ordinary course of business;
(8)
Investments in stock, obligations or securities received in settlement of debts owing to the Company or
any Restricted Subsidiary as a result of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings or upon the foreclosure,
perfection or enforcement of any Lien in favor of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, in each
case as to debt owing to the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary that arose in the ordinary course of
business of the Company or any such Restricted Subsidiary;
(9)
guarantees of Indebtedness permitted under the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital
Stock” covenant;
(10)
investments in Unrestricted Subsidiaries or joint ventures in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any
one time outstanding $15.0 million; and
(11)
other Investments, in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any one time outstanding the greater of
(a) $25.0 million and (b) 5% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
“Permitted Liens” means the following types of Liens:
(1)
(2)
Liens existing as of the Issue Date (excluding Liens securing Indebtedness of the Company and any
Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  or  any  Indebtedness  repaid  with  the
proceeds of the notes);
Liens on any property or assets of the Company and any Subsidiary Guarantor securing the notesNew
Senior  Secured  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  and  up  to  $75,000,000  of  Additional  New  Senior
Secured Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees in respect thereof;
(3)
Liens in favor of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary;
(4)
(5)
Liens  for  taxes,  assessments  and  governmental  charges  or  claims  either  (a)  not  delinquent  or
(b) contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and as to which the Company or its Restricted
Subsidiaries shall have set aside on its books such reserves as may be required pursuant to GAAP;
statutory Liens of landlords and Liens of carriers, warehousemen, mechanics, suppliers, materialmen,
repairmen and other Liens imposed by law incurred in the ordinary course of business for sums not
delinquent or being contested in good faith, if such reserve or other appropriate provision, if any, as
shall be required by GAAP shall have been made in respect thereof;
(6)
Liens  incurred  or  deposits  made  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  in  connection  with  workers’
compensation, unemployment insurance and other types of social security, or
Table of Contents
A-1-40
to secure the payment or performance of tenders, statutory or regulatory obligations, surety and appeal
bonds,  bids,  government  contracts  and  leases,  performance  and  return  of  money  bonds  and  other
similar obligations (exclusive of obligations for the payment of borrowed money but including lessee or
operator obligations under statutes, governmental regulations or instruments related to the ownership,
exploration and production of oil, gas and minerals on state, Federal or foreign lands or waters);
(7)
(8)
judgment and attachment Liens not giving rise to an Event of Default so long as any appropriate legal
proceedings which may have been duly initiated for the review of such judgment shall not have been
finally terminated or the period within which such proceeding may be initiated shall not have expired;
easements, rights-of-way, restrictions and other similar charges or encumbrances not interfering in any
material  respect  with  the  ordinary  conduct  of  the  business  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries;
(9)
any interest or title of a lessor under any capitalized lease or operating lease;
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
purchase money Liens; provided, however, that (a) the related purchase money Indebtedness shall not
be  secured  by  any  property  or  assets  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  other  than  the
property  or  assets  so  acquired  (including,  without  limitation,  those  acquired  indirectly  through  the
acquisition  of  stock  or  other  ownership  interests)  and  any  proceeds  therefrom,  (b)  the  aggregate
principal amount of Indebtedness secured by such Liens it otherwise permitted to be incurred under the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture and does not exceed the cost of the property or assets so acquired and
(c) the Liens securing such Indebtedness shall be created within 90 days of such acquisition;
Liens securing obligations under hedging agreements that the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary
enters into in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting its production, purchases and
resales against fluctuations in oil or natural gas prices;
Liens upon specific items of inventory or other goods of any Person securing such Person’s obligations
in respect of bankers’ acceptances issued or created for the account of such Person to facilitate the
purchase, shipment or storage of such inventory or other goods;
Liens securing reimbursement obligations with respect to commercial letters of credit which encumber
documents  and  other  property  or  assets  relating  to  such  letters  of  credit  and  products  and  proceeds
thereof;
(14)
Liens encumbering property or assets under construction arising from progress or partial payments by a
customer of the Company or its Restricted Subsidiaries relating to such property or assets;
(15)
Liens encumbering deposits made to secure obligations arising from statutory, regulatory, contractual or
warranty requirements of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, including rights of offset
and set-off;
(16)
Liens securing Interest Rate Protection Obligations which Interest Rate Protection Obligations relate to
Indebtedness that is secured by Liens otherwise permitted under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture;
Table of Contents
A-1-41
(17)
Liens (other than Liens securing Indebtedness) on, or related to, properties or assets to secure all or part
of  the  costs  incurred  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the  exploration,  drilling,  development  or
operation thereof;
(18)
Liens on pipeline or pipeline facilities which arise by operation of law;
(19)
Liens arising under operating agreements, joint venture agreements, partnership agreements, oil and
gas leases, farm-out agreements, division orders, contracts for the sale, transportation or exchange of oil
and  natural  gas,  unitization  and  pooling  declarations  and  agreements,  area  of  mutual  interest
agreements and other agreements which are customary in the Oil and Gas Business;
(20)
Liens reserved in oil and gas mineral leases for bonus or rental payments or for compliance with the
terms of such leases;
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
Liens constituting survey exceptions, encumbrances, easements, or reservations of, or rights to others
for, rights-of-way, zoning or other restrictions as to the use of real properties, and minor defects of title
which,  in  the  case  of  any  of  the  foregoing,  were  not  incurred  or  created  to  secure  the  payment  of
borrowed money or the deferred purchase price of property, assets or services, and in the aggregate do
not materially adversely affect the value of properties and assets of the Company and the Restricted
Subsidiaries,  taken  as  a  whole,  or  materially  impair  the  use  of  such  properties  and  assets  for  the
purposes for which such properties and assets are held by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiaries;
Liens  securing  Non-Recourse  Indebtedness; provided,  however,  that  the  related  Non-Recourse
Indebtedness  shall  not  be  secured  by  any  property  or  assets  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary  other  than  the  property  and  assets  acquired  (including,  without  limitation,  those  acquired
indirectly  through  the  acquisition  of  stock  or  other  ownership  interests)  by  the  Company  or  any
Restricted Subsidiary with the proceeds of such Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
Liens on property existing at the time of acquisition thereof by the Company or any Subsidiary of the
Company and Liens on property or assets of a Subsidiary existing at the time it became a Subsidiary;
provided  that  such  Liens  were  in  existence  prior  to  the  contemplation  of  the  acquisition  and  do  not
extend to any assets other than the acquired property;
Liens  resulting  from  the  deposit  of  funds  or  evidences  of  Indebtedness  in  trust  for  the  purpose  of
defeasing Indebtedness of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries so long as such deposit
and  such  defeasance  are  permitted  under  the  covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—
Limitation on Restricted Payments;”
Junior Liens to secure Junior Lien Obligations (a)the New Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date
and the Additional New Convertible Notes, in each case incurred under clause (611) of the definition of
“Permitted Indebtedness” to; provided that such Junior Liens are subject to the Junior Lien Intercreditor
Agreement;
Liens to secure any Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to renew, refinance, refund, replace,
amend, defease or discharge, as a whole or in part, any Existing Unsecured Notes, together with any
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness permitted by clause (6) of the definition of Permitted Indebtedness
in respect thereof, (b) incurred in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio test set forth in the
first paragraph of
Table of Contents
A-1-42
the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” covenant, together with any Permitted
Refinancing Indebtedness permitted by clause (6) of the definition of Permitted Indebtedness in respect
thereof,  or  (c)  incurred  under  clause  (10)  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted  Indebtedness”;  provided that
Liens  incurred  under  clauses  (b)  and  (c)  of  this  clause  (25)  do  not  secure  obligations  in  excess  of
$200.0  million  in  the  aggregate;  (26)  Liens  to  secure  any  Permitted  Refinancing  Indebtedness  in
respect of the notes issued on the Issue DateIndebtedness that was previously so secured; provided
that (a) the new Lien shall be limited to all or part of the same property and assets (plus improvements,
accessions, proceeds or dividends or distributions in respect thereof) that secured (or, under the written
arrangements under which the original Lien arose, could secure) the Indebtedness being refinanced
and (b) the new Lien has no greater priority relative to the notesNew Senior Secured Notes  and  the
Subsidiary  Guarantees,  and  the  holders  of  the  Indebtedness  secured  by  such  Lien  have  no  greater
intercreditor rights relative to the notesNew Senior Secured Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees and
the Holders thereof than the original Liens and the related Indebtedness and the holders thereof and
such new Liens are subject to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement;Agreements, as applicable; and
(27)
Liens securing Indebtedness of the Company and any Subsidiary Guarantor under the Revolving Credit
Agreement  in  an  aggregate  principal  amount  not  to  exceed  $50.0  million  at  any  time  outstanding;
provided that such Liens are subject to the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement; and
(28)  additional  Liens  incurred  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  the
Company with respect to obligations that do not exceed at any one time outstanding the greater of (a) $75.0 million or
(b)  5%  of  Adjusted  Consolidated  Net  Tangible  Assets; provided  that  such  Liens  cannot  secure  any  Junior  Lien
Obligations unless such Liens (i) are also granted to secure the Pari Passu Obligations and (ii) are subordinate to the
Liens securing the Pari Passu Obligations pursuant to the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
Notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) through (2827) of this definition, the term “Permitted Liens” does not include any
Liens resulting from the creation, incurrence, issuance, assumption or guarantee of any Production Payments other than
Production Payments that are created, incurred, issued, assumed or guaranteed in connection with the financing of, and
within 30 days after, the acquisition of the properties or assets that are subject thereto.
“Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary, the net proceeds
of which are used to renew, extend, refinance, refund or repurchase (including, without limitation, pursuant to a Change of
Control Offer or Asset Sale Offer) outstanding Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary; provided that
(1) if the Indebtedness (including the notesNew Senior Secured Notes) being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or
repurchased is pari passu with or subordinated in right of payment to either the notesNew Senior Secured Notes or the
Subsidiary Guarantees, then such Indebtedness is pari passu with or subordinated in right of payment to the notesNew
Senior Secured Notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees, as the case may be, at least to the same extent as the Indebtedness
being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased, (2) such Indebtedness has a Stated Maturity for its final
scheduled principal payment that is no earlier than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled principal payment of the
Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased,  (3)  if  the  Company  or  a  Subsidiary
Guarantor is the issuer of, or otherwise an obligor in respect of the Indebtedness being renewed, refinanced, refunded or
repurchased,  such  Permitted  Refinancing  Indebtedness  is  not  Incurred  by  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  is  not  the
Company or a Subsidiary Guarantor and, (4) such Indebtedness has an Average Life at the time such Indebtedness is
incurred  that  is  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  Average  Life  of  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,
refunded or repurchased and (5) if the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased by its
terms provides that interest is payable only in kind, then such Indebtedness may not permit the payment of scheduled
interest in cash; provided, further, that such Indebtedness is in an aggregate principal
Table of Contents
A-1-43
amount (or, if such Indebtedness is issued at a price less than the principal amount thereof, the aggregate amount of
gross proceeds therefrom is) not in excess of the aggregate principal amount then outstanding of the Indebtedness being
renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased  (or  if  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,
refunded or repurchased was issued at a price less than the principal amount thereof, then not in excess of the amount of
liability in respect thereof determined in accordance with GAAP) plus the amount of any premium required to be paid in
connection  with  such  renewal,  extension  or  refinancing,  refunding  or  repurchase  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the
Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased or the amount of any premium reasonably
determined by the Company as necessary to accomplish such renewal, extension, refinancing, refunding or repurchase,
plus the amount of reasonable fees and expenses incurred by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary in connection
therewith.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock
company, trust, unincorporated organization or government or any agency or political subdivision thereof.
“Plan of Reorganization” means any plan of reorganization, plan of liquidation, agreement for composition, or other type
of plan or arrangement proposed in or in connection with any Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
“Pledge Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy to be entered into on the Issue Date in favor of
the  Collateral  Agent  for  the  benefit  of  the  Holders  of  the notes,New  Senior  Secured  Notes  and  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement Secured Parties and the Other Pari Passu Secured Parties and each other pledge agreement in substantially
the same form in favor of the Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the notes,New Senior Secured Notes and the
Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties and the Other Pari Passu Secured Parties delivered in accordance with the
Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the Collateral Agreements.
“Preferred Stock,” as applied to the Capital Stock of any Person, means Capital Stock of such Person of any class or
classes (however designated) that ranks prior, as to the payment of dividends or as to the distribution of assets upon any
voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of such Person, to shares of Capital Stock of any other
class of such Person.
“Production  Payments”  means,  collectively,  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  and  Volumetric  Production
Payments.
“Proved Reserves” means those Hydrocarbons that have been estimated with reasonable certainty, as demonstrated by
geological and engineering data, to be economically recoverable from the Oil and Gas Properties by existing producing
methods under existing economic conditions.
“Qualified Capital Stock” of any Person means any and all Capital Stock of such Person other than Disqualified Capital
Stock.
“Required Stockholder Approval” means the approval by (1) a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of common
stock of the amendment to Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of shares of Comstock’s
common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized shares of Comstock’s
common stock for the issuance of shares upon conversion of the New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary,
exercise of the warrants and (2) a majority of the shares of common stock represented at the special meeting and entitled
to vote on the issuance of the maximum number of shares of common stock that would be issued upon conversion of all
of the outstanding New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary, exercise of all of the warrants.
“Restricted Investment” means (without duplication) (i) the designation of a Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in
the  manner  described  in  the  definition  of  “Unrestricted  Subsidiary”  and  (ii)  any  Investment  other  than  a  Permitted
Investment.
Table of Contents
A-1-44
“Restricted Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary of the Company, whether existing on or after the Issue Date, unless such
Subsidiary of the Company is an Unrestricted Subsidiary or is designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary pursuant to the
terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture.
“Revolving Credit Agreement” means that certain Credit Agreement to be, dated on or about the Issue Date,as of March 4,
2015, among the Company, the lenders from time to time party thereto and the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, as
amended, restated, modified, renewed, refunded, replaced or refinanced, from time to time.
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent”  means  Bank  of  Montreal  (or  other  agent  designated  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), together with its successors and permitted assigns in such capacity.
“Revolving Credit Agreement Documents” means the Revolving Credit Agreement, the Collateral Agreements and any
other Loan Documents (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement).
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations”  means,  collectively,  (a)  the  Obligations  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement)  of  the  Company  and  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Documents,  in  an
aggregate principal amount for all such Obligations not to exceed $50,000,000, plus interest and all fees, costs, charges,
penalties and expenses, including legal fees and expenses to the extent authorized under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents, in each case whether accrued or incurred before or after the commencement of an Insolvency or Liquidation
Proceeding,  and  whether  or  not  allowed  or  allowable  in  an  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding,  and  (b)  the  Secured
Swap Obligations.
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Secured  Parties”  means,  collectively,  the  Lenders  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), the Secured Swap Counterparties and the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent.
“S&P”  means Standard and Poor’sS&P Global Ratings Services, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., or any
successor to the rating agency business thereof.
“Sale/Leaseback Transaction” means, with respect to the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, any arrangement
with any Person providing for the leasing by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of any principal property,
whereby such property has been or is to be sold or transferred by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to
such Person.
“Secured Parties” means (a) the Collateral Agent, (b) the Trustee and the Holders of the notes, (c) the Revolving Credit
Agreement Secured Parties and (d) the Other Pari Passu Secured PartiesDebt” means, collectively, Pari Passu Obligations
and Junior Lien Obligations.
“Secured Debt Documents” means the Pari Passu Documents and the Junior Lien Documents.
“Secured Swap Counterparty” means, with respect to a Lender Provided Hedging Agreement, a counterparty that at the
time such Hedging Agreement is entered into is a Lender (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement) or an Affiliate of a
Lender  (including  a  Hedging  Agreement  in  existence  prior  to  the  date  hereof  or  prior  to  such  Person  or  its  Affiliate
becoming a Lender); provided that, for the avoidance of doubt, the term “Lender Provided Hedging Agreement” shall not
include  any  Hedging  Agreement  or  transactions  under  any  Hedging  Agreement  entered  into  after  the  time  that  such
counterparty ceases to be a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender.
“Secured  Swap  Obligations”  means  all  obligations  of  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  under  any  Lender
Provided Hedging Agreement.
“Security Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy dated as of the Issue Date in favor of the
Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the notes,New Senior Secured Notes and the Revolving Credit Agreement
Secured Parties and the Other Pari Passu Secured Parties and each other security agreement in
Table of Contents
A-1-45
substantially the same form in favor of the Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the notes,New Senior Secured
Notes  and  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Secured  Parties  and  the  Other  Pari  Passu  Secured  Parties  delivered  in
accordance with the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and the Collateral Agreements.
“Security Documents” means the Collateral Agreements and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
“Senior Indebtedness” means any Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary (whether outstanding on the
date hereof or hereinafter incurred), unless such Indebtedness is Subordinated Indebtedness.
“Series” means each of (i) the Note Obligations, (ii) the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations and (iii) the Other Pari
Passu Obligations incurred pursuant to any document or instrument evidencing such Other Pari Passu Obligations, which
pursuant  to  any  joinder  agreement  to  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement,  are  to  be  represented  hereunder  by  a
common Authorized Representative (in its capacity as such for such Other Pari Passu Obligations). Senior Secured Note
Documents”  means  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture,  the  Collateral  Agreements  and  any  agreement  instrument  or
other document evidencing or governing any Senor Secured Note Obligations.
“Senior Secured Note Obligations” means all advances to, and debts, liabilities, obligations, covenants and duties of, the
Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor arising under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the New Senior Secured Notes,
the  Subsidiary  Guarantees  and  the  Collateral  Agreements  (including  all  principal,  premium,  interest,  penalties,  fees,
charges, charges, expenses, indemnifications, reimbursement obligations, damages, guarantees, and other liabilities or
amounts payable or arising thereunder), whether direct or indirect (including those acquired by assumption), absolute or
contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and including interest and fees that accrue after the
commencement by or against the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor of any proceeding in bankruptcy or insolvency
law  naming  such  Person  as  the  debtor  in  such  proceeding,  regardless  of  whether  such  interest  and  fees  are  allowed
claims in such proceeding.
“Series” means (a) with respect to the Pari Passu Secured Parties, each of (i) the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured
Parties (in their capacities as such) and (ii) the Holders of the New Senior Secured Notes and the Senior Secured Notes
Trustee and (b) with respect to Pari Passu Obligations, each of (i) the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, and (ii) the
Senior Secured Note Obligations.
“Significant Subsidiary” means any Restricted Subsidiary that would be a “significant subsidiary” as defined in Article 1,
Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X, promulgated pursuant to the Securities Act, as such Regulation is in effect on the Issue Date,
provided, however, that notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Indenture.
“Stated Maturity”  means,  when  used  with  respect  to  any  Indebtedness  or  any  installment  of  interest  thereon,  the  date
specified in the instrument evidencing or governing such Indebtedness as the fixed date on which the principal of such
Indebtedness or such installment of interest is due and payable.
“Subordinated  Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  which  is  expressly
subordinated in right of payment to the notesNew Senior Secured Notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees, as the case may
be.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person:
(1)
any corporation, limited liability company, association or other business entity (other than a partnership)
Table of Contents
any corporation, limited liability company, association or other business entity (other than a partnership)
of which more than 50% of the total voting power of its Voting Stock is at the time owned or controlled,
directly  or  indirectly,  by  that  Person  or  one  or  more  of  the  other  Subsidiaries  of  that  Person  (or  a
combination thereof); and
(2)
any partnership of which (a) more than 50% of the capital accounts, distribution rights, total equity and
voting interests or general and limited partnership interests, as
A-1-46
applicable, are owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by such Person or one or more of the other
Subsidiaries of that Person (or a combination thereof), whether in the form of general, special or limited
partnership interests or otherwise, or (b) such Person or any Subsidiary of such Person is a controlling
general partner or otherwise controls such entity.
“Subsidiary Guarantee”  means  any  guarantee  of  the notesNew Senior Secured Notes  by  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  in
accordance with the provisions described under “—Subsidiary Guarantees of New Senior Secured Notes” and “—Certain
Covenants—Future Subsidiary Guarantees.”
“Subsidiary Guarantor” means (1) Comstock Oil & Gas, LP, (2) Comstock Oil & Gas—Louisiana, LLC, (3) Comstock Oil &
Gas GP, LLC, (4) Comstock Oil & Gas Investments, LLC, (5) Comstock Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., (6) each of Comstock’s
other Restricted Subsidiaries, if any, executing a supplemental indenture in which such Subsidiary agrees to be bound by
the terms of the Senior Secured Notes Indenture and (7) any Person that becomes a successor guarantor of the notesNew
Senior  Secured  Notes  in  compliance  with  the  provisions  described  under  “—Subsidiary  Guarantees  of  New  Senior
Secured Notes” and “Certain Covenants—Future Subsidiary Guarantees.”
“Swap  Obligation”  means,  with  respect  to  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  any  obligation  to  pay  or  perform  under  any
agreement,  contract  or  transaction  that  constitutes  a  “swap”  within  the  meaning  of  Section  1(a)(47)  of  the  Commodity
Exchange Act.
“Treasury Rate” means,  as  of  any  redemption  date,  the  yield  to  maturity  as  of  such  redemption  date  of  United  States
Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical
Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly available at least two business days prior to the redemption date (or, if such
statistical release is no longer published, any publicly available source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to the
period  from  the  redemption  date  to  March  15,  2016 provided, however,  that  if  the  period  from  the  redemption  date  to
March  15,  2016  is  less  than  one  year,  the  weekly  average  yield  on  actually  traded  United  States  Treasury  securities
adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will be used.
“Trustee  Control  Termination  Date”  has  the  meaning  set  forth  under  “—Intercreditor  Agreement—Identity  of  the
Controlling Party.”
“Unrestricted Subsidiary” means:
(1)
any  Subsidiary  of  the  Company  that  at  the  time  of  determination  will  be  designated  an  Unrestricted
Subsidiary by the Board of Directors of the Company as provided below; and
(2)
any Subsidiary of an Unrestricted Subsidiary.
The  Company  may  designate  any  Subsidiary  of  the  Company  (other  than  a  Collateral  Grantor)  as  an  Unrestricted
Subsidiary pursuant to a resolution of the Board of Directors unless such Subsidiary or any of its Subsidiaries owns any
Equity  Interests  or  Indebtedness  of,  or  owns  or  holds  any  Lien  on,  any  property  of,  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary (other than solely any Subsidiary of the Subsidiary to be so designated); provided that the Subsidiary to be so
designated and each Subsidiary of such Subsidiary:
(1)
has no Indebtedness other than Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
is  not  party  to  any  agreement,  contract,  arrangement  or  understanding  with  the  Company  or  any
Restricted Subsidiary unless the terms of any such agreement, contract, arrangement or understanding
are no less favorable to the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary than those that might be obtained at
the time from Persons who are not Affiliates of the Company;
A-1-47
is a Person with respect to which neither the Company nor any of the Restricted Subsidiaries has any
direct or indirect obligation (a) to subscribe for additional Equity Interests or (b) to maintain or preserve
such Person’s financial condition or to cause such Person to achieve any specified levels of operating
results; and
Table of Contents
(2)
(3)
(4)
has not guaranteed or otherwise directly or indirectly provided credit support for any Indebtedness of the
Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries.
“Volumetric Production Payments” means production payment obligations of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary
recorded  as  deferred  revenue  in  accordance  with  GAAP,  together  with  all  undertakings  and  obligations  in  connection
therewith.
“Voting Stock”  of  any  specified  Person  as  of  any  date  means  the  Capital  Stock  of  such  Person  entitling  the  holders
thereof  (whether  at  all  times  or  only  so  long  as  no  senior  class  of  Capital  Stock  has  voting  power  by  reason  of  any
contingency) to vote in the election of members of the Board of Directors of such Person; provided that with respect to a
limited  partnership  or  other  entity  which  does  not  have  a  Board  of  Directors,  Voting  Stock  means  the  managing
membership interest or the Capital Stock of the general partner of such limited partnership or other business entity with
the ultimate authority to manage the business and operations of such Person, as applicable.
“Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary” means any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company to the extent (1) all of the Capital
Stock or other ownership interests in such Restricted Subsidiary, other than directors’ qualifying shares mandated by
applicable law, is owned directly or indirectly by the Company or (2) such Restricted Subsidiary does substantially all of its
business in one or more foreign jurisdictions and is required by the applicable laws and regulations of any such foreign
jurisdiction to be partially owned by the government of such foreign jurisdiction or individual or corporate citizens of such
foreign jurisdiction in order for such Restricted Subsidiary to transact business in such foreign jurisdiction, provided that
the Company, directly or indirectly, owns the remaining Capital Stock or ownership interest in such Restricted Subsidiary
and,  by  contract  or  otherwise,  controls  the  management  and  business  of  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  and  derives  the
economic benefits of ownership of such Restricted Subsidiary to substantially the same extent as if such Subsidiary were
a wholly owned subsidiary.
Table of Contents
A-1-48
APPENDIX 2: COMPARISON OF TERMS OF THE NEW CONVERTIBLE NOTES TO OLD 2020 NOTES
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  “Certain  Covenants”,  “Events  of  Default”  and  “Certain  Definitions”  of  the  New
Convertible  Notes  (as  set  forth  under  “Description  of  New  Convertible  Notes”)  as  compared  to  a  summary  of  Certain
“Covenants”, “Events of Default” and “Certain Definitions” of the Old 2020 Notes, showing provisions that will be deleted
or changed or provisions that will be added. The following summary does not restate the terms of the New Convertible
Notes or the Old 2020 Notes in their entirety. We urge you to read the documents governing the New Senior Secured
Notes and the Old 2020 Notes, including the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture, the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture and
the indenture governing the Old 2020 Notes, because they, and not this description, define your rights as a holder of the
New Convertible Notes or the Old 2020 Notes.
Certain Covenants
Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock
Comstock will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, issue, assume, guarantee or in
any manner become directly or indirectly liable for the payment of (collectively, “incur”) any Indebtedness (including any
Acquired  Indebtedness),  and  Comstock  will  not,  and  will  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  issue  any
Disqualified Capital Stock (except for the issuance by Comstock of Disqualified Capital Stock (A) which is redeemable at
Comstock’s option in cash or Qualified Capital Stock and (B) the dividends on which are payable at Comstock’s option in
cash  or  Qualified  Capital  Stock); provided,  however, that  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  that  are  Subsidiary
Guarantors may incur Indebtedness or issue shares of Disqualified Capital Stock if (i) at the time of such event and after
giving  effect  thereto  on  a  pro  forma  basis  the  Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  for  the  four  full  quarters
immediately preceding such event, taken as one period, would have been equal to or greater than 2.25 to 1.0 and (ii) no
Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time such additional Indebtedness is incurred or
such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  is  issued  or  would  occur  as  a  consequence  of  the  incurrence  of  the  additional
Indebtedness or the issuance of the Disqualified Capital Stock.
The  first  paragraph  of  this  covenant  will  not  prohibit  the  incurrence  of  any  of  the  following  items  of  Indebtedness
(collectively, “Permitted Indebtedness”):
Table of Contents
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Priority  Credit  Facility  Debt,  in  an  aggregate  amount  at  any  one  time  outstanding  not  to  exceed  the
greater of (a) the borrowing base under the Bank Credit Agreement at such time less the sum of all
repayments of principal of Priority Credit Facility Debt made pursuant to “—Limitation on Asset Sales”
and (b) 25% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets; provided, however, that Indebtedness and
Disqualified Capital Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries that are not Subsidiary Guarantors shall not at any
time constitute more than 50% of all Priority Credit Facility Debt otherwise permitted under this clause
(1); Indebtedness  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  in  an  aggregate  principal  amount  not  in
excess  of  $50.0  million  at  any  one  time  outstanding  and  any  guarantee  thereof  by  a  Subsidiary
Guarantor;
Indebtedness  under the  notes; (a)  the  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  issued  on  the  Issue  Date  in  the
Exchange  Offer  and  Consent  Solicitation  and  the  Additional  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  issued  in
connection with the payment of interest thereon and (b) the New 2020 Convertible Notes issued on the
Issue Date in the Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation and the Additional New 2020 Convertible
Notes issued in connection with the payment of interest thereon;
A-2-1
Indebtedness outstanding or in effect on the Issue Date (and not repaid or defeased with the proceeds
of the offering of the notesexchanged in connection with this Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation);
obligations pursuant to Interest Rate Protection Obligations, but only to the extent such obligations do
not exceed 105% of the aggregate principal amount of the Indebtedness covered by such Interest Rate
Protection  Obligations;  obligations  under  currency  exchange  contracts  entered  into  in  the  ordinary
course  of  business;  hedging  arrangements  entered  into  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the
purpose of protecting production, purchases and resales against fluctuations in oil or natural gas prices,
and any guarantee of any of the foregoing;
the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees of the notes(a) the New 2019 Convertible Notes issued on the
Issue  Date  in  this  Exchange  and  Consent  Solicitation  (and  any  assumption  of  the  obligations
guaranteed thereby)  and  the  Additional  New  2019  Convertible  Notes  issued  in  connection  with  the
payment of interest thereon and (b) the New 2020 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in this
Exchange and Consent Solicitation (and any assumption of obligations guaranteed thereby) and the
Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the payment of interest thereon;
(6)
the  incurrence  by  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  of  intercompany  Indebtedness
between or among Comstock and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; provided, however, that:
if  the  Company  is  the  obligor  on  such  Indebtedness  and  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  not  the
(a)
(b)
if  the  Company  is  the  obligor  on  such  Indebtedness  and  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  not  the
obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash
of all Obligations with respect to the notesNew Convertible Notes, or if a Subsidiary Guarantor
is the obligor on such Indebtedness and neither Comstock nor another Subsidiary Guarantor is
the obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in
cash of all Obligations with respect to the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee of such Subsidiary
Guarantor; and
any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such Indebtedness
being  held  by  a  Person  other  than  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  Comstock  and
(ii) any sale or other transfer of any such Indebtedness to a Person that is neither Comstock
nor  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  Comstock  will  be  deemed,  in  each  case,  to  constitute  an
incurrence of such Indebtedness by Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may
be, that was not permitted by this clause (6);
(7)
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness and any guarantee thereof;
(8)
Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
(9)
in-kind  obligations  relating  to  net  oil  or  gas  balancing  positions  arising  in  the  ordinary  course  of
business;
(10)
Indebtedness in respect of bid, performance or surety bonds issued for the account of Comstock or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  including  guaranties  and  letters  of  credit
supporting such bid, performance or surety obligations (in each case other than for an obligation for
money borrowed); and
A-2-2
Table of Contents
(11)
any additional Indebtedness in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of $75.0 million (including
additional Indebtedness incurred in connection with the Additional New Senior Secured Notes) at any
one time outstanding and any guarantee thereof; and
(12)
Indebtedness under the New Senior Secured Notes issued on the Issue Date in an aggregate principal
amount not to exceed $700.0 million and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor.
For purposes of determining compliance with this covenant, in the event that an item of Indebtedness meets the criteria of
one or more of the categories of Permitted Indebtedness described in clauses (1) through (1112) described above or is
entitled to be incurred pursuant to the first paragraph of this covenant, Comstock may, in its sole discretion, classify such
item of Indebtedness in any manner that complies with this covenant and such item of Indebtedness will be treated as
having been incurred pursuant to only one of such clauses of the definition of Permitted Indebtedness or the proviso of
the  foregoing  sentence  and  an  item  of  Indebtedness  may  be  divided  and  classified  in  more  than  one  of  the  types  of
Indebtedness  permitted  hereunder; provided  that  all  Indebtedness  outstanding  on  the  Issue  Date  under  the Revolving
Credit Agreement shall be deemed incurred under clause (1) of the second paragraph of this covenant and not under the
first paragraph or clause (3) of the second paragraph. The accrual of interest, the accretion or amortization of original
issue discount, the payment of interest on any Indebtedness in the form of additional Indebtedness with the same terms,
and the payment of dividends on Disqualified Stock in the form of additional shares of the same class of Disqualified
Stock will not be deemed to be an incurrence of Indebtedness or an issuance of Disqualified Stock for purposes of this
covenant and may not be later reclassified; provided, further, that all Indebtedness under the New Senior Secured Notes
incurred on the Issue Date shall be deemed incurred under clause (12) of the second paragraph of this covenant and may
not be later reclassified.
The amount of any Indebtedness outstanding as of any date shall be (i) the accreted value thereof in the case of any
Indebtedness issued with original issue discount and (ii) the principal amount or liquidation preference thereof, together
with any interest thereon that is more than 30 days past due, in the case of any other Indebtedness.
For purposes of determining compliance with any U.S. dollar-denominated restriction on the incurrence of Indebtedness,
the U.S. dollar-equivalent principal amount of Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency shall be calculated based
on  the  relevant  currency  exchange  rate  in  effect  on  the  date  such  Indebtedness  was  incurred,  in  the  case  of  term
Indebtedness,  or  first  committed,  in  the  case  of  revolving  credit  Indebtedness; provided  that  if  such  Indebtedness  is
incurred  to  refinance  other  Indebtedness  denominated  in  a  foreign  currency,  and  such  refinancing  would  cause  the
applicable U.S. dollar-denominated restriction to be exceeded if calculated at the relevant currency exchange rate in effect
on the date of such refinancing, such U.S. dollar-denominated restriction shall be deemed not to have been exceeded so
long  as  the  principal  amount  of  such  refinancing  Indebtedness  does  not  exceed  the  principal  amount  of  such
Indebtedness  being  refinanced  (plus  all  accrued  interest  on  the  Indebtedness  being  refinanced  and  the  amount  of  all
expenses and premiums incurred in connection therewith).
Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  covenant,  the  maximum  amount  of  Indebtedness  that  Comstock  or  any
Restricted  Subsidiary  may  incur  pursuant  to  this  covenant  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  exceeded  solely  as  a  result  of
fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  of  currencies.  The  principal  amount  of  any  Indebtedness  incurred  to  refinance  other
Indebtedness, if incurred in a different currency from the Indebtedness being refinanced, shall be calculated based on the
currency exchange rate applicable to the currencies in which such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness is denominated
that is in effect on the date of such refinancing.
Table of Contents
Limitation on Restricted Payments
A-2-3
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly:
(1)
(2)
(3)
declare or pay any dividend on, or make any other distribution to holders of, any shares of Capital Stock
of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary (other than dividends or distributions payable solely in shares
of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  Comstock  or  in  options,  warrants  or  other  rights  to  purchase  Qualified
Capital Stock of Comstock);
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire or retire for value any Capital Stock of Comstock or any Affiliate
thereof (other than any Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock) or any options, warrants or
other rights to acquire such Capital Stock (other than the purchase, redemption, acquisition or retirement
of any Disqualified Capital Stock of Comstock solely in shares of Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock);
make any principal payment on or repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value,
prior  to  any  scheduled  principal  payment,  scheduled  sinking  fund  payment  or  maturity,  any
Subordinated Indebtedness (excluding any intercompany Indebtedness between or among Comstock
and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries), except in any case out of the net cash proceeds of Permitted
Refinancing Indebtedness; or
(4)
make any Restricted Investment;
(such payments or other actions described in clauses (1) through (4) above being collectively referred to as “Restricted
Payments”), unless at the time of and after giving effect to the proposed Restricted Payment:
(1)
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
(2)
Comstock could incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage
Table of Contents
Ratio  test  set  forth  in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  “Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital
Stock” covenant; and
(3)
the  aggregate  amount  of  all  Restricted  Payments  declared  or  made  after  January  1,  2004  shall  not
exceed the sum (without duplication) of the following (the “Restricted Payments Basket”):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
50% of the Consolidated Net Income of Comstock accrued on a cumulative basis during the
period  beginning  on  January  1,  2004  and  ending  on  the  last  day  of  Comstock’s  last  fiscal
quarter ending prior to the date of such proposed Restricted Payment (or, if such Consolidated
Net Income is a loss, minus 100% of such loss); plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than
cash, received after January 1, 2004 by Comstock from the issuance or sale (other than to any
of its Restricted Subsidiaries) of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock or any options,
warrants or rights to purchase such shares of Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and property other than
cash,  received  after  January  1,  2004  by  Comstock  (other  than  from  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries)  upon  the  exercise  of  any  options,  warrants  or  rights  to  purchase  shares  of
Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock; plus
A-2-4
the  aggregate  Net  Cash  Proceeds  received  after  January  1,  2004  by  Comstock  from  the
issuance or sale (other than to any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) of Indebtedness or shares of
Disqualified Capital Stock that have been converted into or exchanged for Qualified Capital
Stock of Comstock, together with the aggregate cash received by Comstock at the time of such
conversion or exchange; plus
to  the  extent  not  otherwise  included  in  Consolidated  Net  Income,  the  net  reduction  in
Investments  in  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries  resulting  from  dividends,  repayments  of  loans  or
advances, or other transfers of assets, in each case to Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary
after  January  1,  2004  from  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  from  the  redesignation  of  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary (valued in each case as provided in the
definition of “Investment”), not to exceed in the case of any Unrestricted Subsidiary the total
amount  of  Investments  (other  than  Permitted  Investments)  in  such  Unrestricted  Subsidiary
made  by  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  such  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  after
January 1, 2004.
The amount of the Restricted Payments Basket as of March 31, 2012 was approximately $239.3 million. Notwithstanding
the preceding provisions, Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries may take the following actions so long as (in the case
of clauses (3), (4), (5) and (7) below) no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing:
(1)
the  payment  of  any  dividend  on  any  Capital  Stock  of  Comstock  within  60  days  after  the  date  of
declaration  thereof,  if  at  such  declaration  date  such  declaration  complied  with  the  provisions  of  the
preceding  paragraph  (and  such  payment  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  paid  on  such  date  of
declaration for purposes of any calculation required by the provisions of the preceding paragraph);
(2)
the payment of any dividend payable from a Restricted Subsidiary to Comstock or any other Restricted
Subsidiary of Comstock;
(3)
(4)
(5)
the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement of any shares of any class of Capital Stock
of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary, in exchange for, or out of the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds
from, a substantially concurrent issuance and sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary) of shares of
Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of  any
Subordinated  Indebtedness  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the  aggregate  Net  Cash  Proceeds  from,  a
substantially concurrent issuance and sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary) of shares of Qualified
Capital Stock of Comstock;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of
Subordinated  Indebtedness  (other  than  Disqualified  Capital  Stock)  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the
aggregate  net  cash  proceeds  of,  a  substantially  concurrent  incurrence  (other  than  to  a  Restricted
Subsidiary) of Subordinated Indebtedness of Comstock so long as (a) the principal amount of such new
Indebtedness  does  not  exceed  the  principal  amount  (or,  if  such  Subordinated  Indebtedness  being
refinanced provides for an amount less than the principal amount thereof to be due and payable upon a
declaration  of  acceleration  thereof,  such  lesser  amount  as  of  the  date  of  determination)  of  the
Subordinated Indebtedness being so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or retired, plus
the amount of any premium required to be paid in connection with such
Table of Contents
A-2-5
refinancing  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Indebtedness  refinanced  or  the  amount  of  any  premium
reasonably determined by Comstock as necessary to accomplish such refinancing, plus the amount of
expenses  of  Comstock  incurred  in  connection  with  such  refinancing,  (b)  such  new  Indebtedness  is
subordinated  to  the notesNew  Convertible  Notes  at  least  to  the  same  extent  as  such  Subordinated
Indebtedness  so  purchased,  redeemed,  repaid,  defeased,  acquired  or  retired,  and  (c)  such  new
Indebtedness  has  an  Average  Life  to  Stated  Maturity  that  is  longer  than  the  Average  Life  to  Stated
Maturity  of  the notesNew Convertible Notes and such new Indebtedness has a Stated Maturity for its
final  scheduled  principal  payment  that  is  at  least  91  days  later  than  the  Stated  Maturity  for  the  final
scheduled principal payment of the notesNew Convertible Notes;
(6)
loans made to officers, directors or employees of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary approved by
the Board of Directors in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.0 million outstanding at any one time,
the proceeds of which are used solely (a) to purchase common stock of Comstock in connection with a
restricted stock or employee stock purchase plan, or to exercise stock options received pursuant to an
employee or director stock option plan or other incentive plan, in a principal amount not to exceed the
exercise price of such stock options, or (b) to refinance loans, together with accrued interest thereon,
made pursuant to item (a) of this clause (6); and
(7)
other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $10.0 million.
The actions described in clauses (1), (3), (4) and (6) above shall be Restricted Payments that shall be permitted to be made
in accordance with the preceding paragraph but shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available for Restricted
Payments  under  clause  (3)  of  the  second  preceding  paragraph  (provided  that  any  dividend  paid  pursuant  to  clause
(1) above shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph
when declared, but not also when subsequently paid pursuant to such clause (1)), and the actions described in clauses
(2), (5) and (7) above shall be permitted to be taken in accordance with this paragraph and shall not reduce the amount that
would otherwise be available for Restricted Payments under clause (3) of the second preceding paragraph.
The  amount  of  all  Restricted  Payments  (other  than  cash)  will  be  the  Fair  Market  Value  on  the  date  of  the  Restricted
Payment of the asset(s) or securities proposed to be transferred or issued by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary,
as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted Payment.
Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries
Comstock  (1)  will  not  permit  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  issue  or  sell  any  Preferred  Stock  to  any  Person  other  than
Comstock or one of its Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiaries and (2) will not permit any Person other than Comstock or
one of its Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiaries to own any Preferred Stock of any Restricted Subsidiary, except, in each
case, for (a) the Preferred Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary owned by a Person at the time such Restricted Subsidiary
became a Restricted Subsidiary, or (b) a sale of Preferred Stock in connection with the sale of all the Capital Stock of a
Restricted Subsidiary owned by Comstock or its Subsidiaries effected in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture described under “—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
A-2-6
Table of Contents
Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, enter into or suffer to exist any
transaction or series of related transactions (including, without limitation, the sale, purchase, exchange or lease of assets
or property or the rendering of any services) with, or for the benefit of, any Affiliate of Comstock (other than Comstock or a
Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) (each, an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless
(1)
such transaction or series of related transactions is on terms that are no less favorable to Comstock or
such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, than those that would be available in a comparable
arm’s length transaction with unrelated third parties; and
(2)
Comstock delivers to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee:
(a)
(b)
with  respect  to  any  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  related  Affiliate  Transactions  involving
aggregate  consideration  in  excess  of  $10.0  million  but  no  greater  than  $25.0  million,  an
Officers’  Certificateofficers’  certificate  certifying  that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of
Affiliate Transactions complies with this covenant; and
with  respect  to  any  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  related  Affiliate  Transactions  involving
aggregate consideration in excess of $25.0 million, an Officers’ Certificateofficers’  certificate
certifying that such Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions complies with this
covenant  and  that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  Affiliate  Transactions  has  been
approved by a majority of the Disinterested Directors of Comstock.
The following items will not be deemed to be Affiliate Transactions and, therefore, will not be subject to the provisions of
the prior paragraph:
(1)
(2)
(3)
loans or advances to officers, directors and employees of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary made
in the ordinary course of business in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.0 million outstanding at any
one time;
indemnities of officers, directors, employees and other agents of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary
permitted by corporate charter or other organizational document, bylaw or statutory provisions;
the  payment  of  reasonable  and  customary  fees  to  directors  of  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries who are not employees of Comstock or any Affiliate;
Comstock’s employee compensation and other benefit arrangements;
Comstock’s employee compensation and other benefit arrangements;
transactions  exclusively  between  or  among  Comstock  and  any  of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  or
exclusively  between  or  among  such  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  provided  such  transactions  are  not
otherwise prohibited by the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture; and
any Restricted Payment permitted to be paid pursuant to the terms of the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture described under “—Limitation on Restricted Payments.”
A-2-7
(4)
(5)
(6)
Table of Contents
Limitation on Liens
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create, incur, assume, affirm or
suffer to exist or become effective any Lien of any kind, except for Permitted Liens, upon any of their respective property
or assets, whether now owned or acquired after the Issue Date, or any income, profits or proceeds therefrom, or assign or
convey any right to receive income thereon, unless (1) in the case of any Lien securing Subordinated Indebtedness, the
notesNew Convertible Notes are secured by a lien on such property, assets or proceeds that is senior in priority to such
Lien and (2) in the case of any other Lien, the notesNew Convertible Notes are directly secured equally and ratably with the
obligation  or  liability  secured  by  such  Lien.  The  incurrence  of  additional  secured  Indebtedness  by  Comstock  and  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries  is  subject  to  further  limitations  on  the  incurrence  of  Indebtedness  as  described  under  “—
Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock.”
Limitation on Asset Sales
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, consummate any Asset Sale unless (i) Comstock or
such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, receives consideration at the time of such Asset Sale at least equal to the
Fair Market Value of the assets and property subject to such Asset Sale and (ii) all of the consideration paid to Comstock
or  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  in  connection  with  such  Asset  Sale  is  in  the  form  of  cash,  Cash  Equivalents,  Liquid
Securities, Exchanged Properties or the assumption by the purchaser of liabilities of Comstock (other than liabilities of
Comstock  that  are  by  their  terms  subordinated  to  the notesNew  Convertible  Notes)  or  liabilities  of  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor that made such Asset Sale (other than liabilities of a Subsidiary Guarantor that are by their terms subordinated
to such Subsidiary Guarantor’s Junior  Lien Subsidiary Guarantee), in each case as a result of which Comstock and its
remaining Restricted Subsidiaries are no longer liable for such liabilities (“Permitted Consideration”); provided, however,
that  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  shall  be  permitted  to  receive  assets  and  property  other  than  Permitted
Consideration,  so  long  as  the  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value  of  all  such  assets  and  property  other  than  Permitted
Consideration  received  from  Asset  Sales  since  the  2009  Notes  Issue  Date  and  held  by  Comstock  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary at any one time shall not exceed 10% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
The Net Available Cash from Asset Sales by Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary may be applied by Comstock or such
Restricted Subsidiary, to the extent Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary elects (or is required by the terms of any
Senior Indebtedness of Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary), to
•
•
prepay, repay, redeem or purchase Senior Indebtedness of Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary; or
reinvest  in  Additional  Assets  (including  by  means  of  an  Investment  in  Additional  Assets  by  a  Restricted
Subsidiary with Net Available Cash received by Comstock or another Restricted Subsidiary).
Any Net Available Cash from an Asset Sale not applied in accordance with the preceding paragraph within 365 days from
the  date  of  such  Asset  Sale  shall  constitute  “Excess  Proceeds.”  When  the  aggregate  amount  of  Excess  Proceeds
exceeds  $10.0  million,  Comstock  will  be  required  to  make  an  offer  (the  “Prepayment Offer”)  to  all  Holders  of notesthe
applicable  series  New  Convertible  Notes  and  all  Holders  of  other  Indebtedness  that  is  pari  passu  with the  notessuch
series of the New Convertible Notes containing provisions similar to those set forth in the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture with respect to offers to purchase or redeem with the proceeds of sales of assets to purchase the maximum
principal amount of notessuch New Convertible Notes and such other pari passu Indebtedness that may be purchased
out  of  the  Excess  Proceeds.  The  offer  price  in  any  Prepayment  Offer  will  be  equal  to  100%  of  principal  amount  plus
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the Purchase Date (subject to the right of the Holders of record of the applicable
series of New Convertible Notes on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on
or prior to the Purchase Date), and will
Table of Contents
A-2-8
be payable in cash. If the aggregate principal amount of notesNew Convertible Notes tendered by Holders thereof exceeds
the  amount  of  available  Excess  Proceeds  allocated  for  repurchases  of notesNew  Convertible  Notes  pursuant  to  the
Prepayment Offer for notesthe applicable series of New Convertible Notes, then such Excess Proceeds will be allocated
pro rata according to the principal amount of the notesNew Convertible Notes tendered and the applicable Convertible
Notes Trustee will select the notesNew Convertible Notes to be purchased in accordance with the applicable Convertible
Notes Indenture.  To  the  extent  that  any  portion  of  the  amount  of  Excess  Proceeds  remains  after  compliance  with  the
second sentence of this paragraph and provided that all Holders of notesthe applicable series of New Convertible Notes
have been given the opportunity to tender their notesNew Convertible Notes for purchase as described in the following
paragraph in accordance with the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries may
use  such  remaining  amount  for  purposes  permitted  by  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Indenture  and  the  amount  of
Excess Proceeds will be reset to zero.
Within 30 days after the 365th day following the date of an Asset Sale, Comstock shall, if it is obligated to make an offer to
purchase  the notesapplicable series New Convertible Notes pursuant to the preceding paragraph, senddeliver a written
Prepayment Offer notice, by first-class mail, to the Holders of the notesapplicable series New Convertible Notes, with a
copy  to  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  (the  “Prepayment  Offer  Notice”),  accompanied  by  such  information
regarding  Comstock  and  its  Subsidiaries  as  Comstock  believes  will  enable  such  Holders  of the  notessuch  New
Convertible Notes to make an informed decision with respect to the Prepayment Offer. The Prepayment Offer Notice will
state, among other things:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
that  Comstock  is  offering  to  purchase notesNew  Convertible  Notes  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the
Convertible Notes Indenture;
that  any noteNew  Convertible  Note  (or  any  portion  thereof)  accepted  for  payment  (and  duly  paid  on  the
Purchase Date) pursuant to the Prepayment Offer shall cease to accrue interest on the Purchase Date;
that  any notesNew  Convertible  Note  (or  portions  thereof)  not  properly  tendered  will  continue  to  accrue
interest;
the purchase price and purchase date, which shall be, subject to any contrary requirements of applicable
law, no less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the date the Prepayment Offer Notice is mailed (the
“Purchase Date”);
the aggregate principal amount of notesNew Convertible Notes to be purchased;
a description of the procedure which Holders of notesNew Convertible Notes must follow in order to tender
their notesNew Convertible Notes and the procedures that Holders of notesNew Convertible Notes  must
follow in order to withdraw an election to tender their notesNew Convertible Notes for payment; and
all  other  instructions  and  materials  necessary  to  enable  Holders  to  tender notesNew  Convertible  Notes
pursuant to the Prepayment Offer.
Comstock will comply, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any other
securities laws or regulations thereunder to the extent such laws and regulations are applicable in connection with the
purchase of notesNew Convertible Notes as described above. To the extent that the provisions of any securities laws or
regulations  conflict  with  the  provisions  relating  to  the  Prepayment  Offer,  Comstock  will  comply  with  the  applicable
securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations described above by virtue thereof.
Table of Contents
A-2-9
Future Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees
If  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  is  not  already  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  has  outstanding  or  guarantees  any  other
Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  then  in  either  case  that  Subsidiary  will  become  a  Subsidiary
Guarantor by executing (x) a supplemental indenture and delivering it to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee within
20  business  days  of  the  date  on  which  it  incurred  or  guaranteed  such  Indebtedness,  as  the  case  may  be; provided,
however,  that  the  foregoing  shall  not  apply  to  Subsidiaries  of  Comstock  that  have  properly  been  designated  as
Unrestricted Subsidiaries in accordance with the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture for so long as they continue to
constitute Unrestricted Subsidiaries., (y) amendments to the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements pursuant to which it will
grant a Junior Lien on any Collateral held by it in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of
the New Convertible Notes and the other Convertible Note Obligations, and become a Collateral Grantor thereunder, and
cause such Liens to be perfected as required thereby and (z) deliver to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee one or
more opinions of counsel in connection with the foregoing as specified in the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture.
Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries
Comstock will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create or suffer to exist or allow to
become effective any consensual encumbrance or restriction of any kind on the ability of any Restricted Subsidiary:
•
•
•
to  pay  dividends,  in  cash  or  otherwise,  or  make  any  other  distributions  on  its  Capital  Stock,  or  make
payments on any Indebtedness owed, to Comstock or any other Restricted Subsidiary;
to make loans or advances to Comstock or any other Restricted Subsidiary; or
to transfer any of its property or assets to Comstock or any other Restricted Subsidiary
(any  such  restrictions  being  collectively  referred  to  herein  as  a  “Payment  Restriction”).  However,  the  preceding
restrictions will not apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of:
(1)
(2)
(3)
customary provisions restricting subletting or assignment of any lease governing a leasehold interest of
Comstock  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary,  or  customary  restrictions  in  licenses  relating  to  the  property
covered thereby and entered into in the ordinary course of business;
any instrument governing Indebtedness of a Person acquired by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary
at the time of such acquisition, which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any other Person,
other  than  the  Person,  or  the  property  or  assets  of  the  Person,  so  acquired,  provided  that  such
Indebtedness was not incurred in anticipation of such acquisition;
any instrument governing Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that is
not  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor,;  provided  that  (a)  such  Indebtedness  or  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  is
permitted  under  the  covenant  described  in  “—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital
Stock” and (b) the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions thereunder are not materially more
restrictive  than  the  Payment  Restrictions  contained  in  the BankRevolving  Credit  Agreement  and  the
IndentureConvertible Notes Indentures as in effect on the Issue Date;
the BankRevolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date  or  any  agreement  that  amends,
Table of Contents
(4)
the BankRevolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date  or  any  agreement  that  amends,
modifies, supplements, restates, extends, renews, refinances or replaces the
A-2-10
BankRevolving Credit Agreement,; provided that the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions
thereunder  are  not  materially  more  restrictive  than  the  Payment  Restrictions  contained  in  the
BankRevolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the Issue Date;
(5)
(6)
t h e Senior  Secured  Notes Indenture, 
the Subsidiary
Guarantees; or (6) the indenture governing Comstock’s existing 8 3/8% Senior Notes due 2017, 7  3/4%
Senior Notes due 2019 and any subsidiary guarantees thereof; or
the notesNew  Senior  Secured  Notes  and
the  Convertible  Notes  Indentures,  the  New  Convertible  Notes  and  any  Junior  Lien  Subsidiary
Guarantees, in each case as in effect on the Issue Date.
Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions
Comstock will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, enter into any Sale/ Leaseback Transaction
unless (1) Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, would be able to incur Indebtedness in an amount
equal  to  the  Attributable  Indebtedness  with  respect  to  such  Sale/  Leaseback  Transaction  or  (2)  Comstock  or  such
Restricted Subsidiary receives proceeds from such Sale/ Leaseback Transaction at least equal to the Fair Market Value
thereof and such proceeds are applied in the same manner and to the same extent as Net Available Cash and Excess
Proceeds from an Asset Sale.
Change of Control
UponEach Convertible Notes Indenture will provide that upon the occurrence of a Change of Control, Comstock shall be
obligated to make an offer to purchase all of the then outstanding notesNew Convertible Notes under the applicable series
(a “Change of Control Offer”), and shall purchase, on a business day (the “Change of Control Purchase Date”) not more
than 60 nor less than 30 days following such Change of Control, all of the then outstanding notesNew Convertible Notes
under the applicable series validly tendered pursuant to such Change of Control Offer, at a purchase price (the “Change
of Control Purchase Price”) equal to 101% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest to the Change
of Control Purchase Date (subject to the right of Holders of record on the relevant record date to receive interest due on
an  interest  payment  date  that  is  on  or  prior  to  the  Change  of  Control  Purchase  Date).  The  Change  of  Control  Offer  is
required to remain open for at least 20 business days and until the close of business on the fifth business day prior to the
Change of Control Purchase Date.
In order to effect a Change of Control Offer, Comstock shall, not later than the 30th day after the occurrence of a Change of
Control, give to the applicable  Convertible  Notes Trustee and each applicable Holder a notice of the Change of Control
Offer,  which  notice  shall  govern  the  terms  of  the  Change  of  Control  Offer  and  shall  state,  among  other  things,  the
procedures that Holders must follow to accept the Change of Control Offer.
The  Bank  Credit  Agreement  contains,  and  any  future  credit  agreements  or  other  agreements  relating  to  Senior
Indebtedness or other obligations of Comstock may contain, prohibitions or restrictions on Comstock’s ability to effect a
Change of Control Offer. In the event a Change of Control occurs at a time when such prohibitions or restrictions are in
effect,  Comstock  could  seek  the  consent  of  its  lenders  to  the  repurchase  of  notes  or  could  attempt  to  refinance  the
borrowings or renegotiate the agreements that contain such prohibitions. If Comstock does not obtain such a consent or
repay  such  borrowings  or  change  such  agreements,  Comstock  will  be  effectively  prohibited  from  repurchasing  notes.
Failure by Comstock to purchase the notes when required would result in an Event of Default. See “—Events of Default.”
There can be no assurance that Comstock would have adequate resources to repay or refinance all Indebtedness and
other obligations owing under the Bank Credit Agreement and such other agreements and to fund the purchase of the
notes upon a Change of Control.
Comstock will not be required to make a Change of Control Offer upon a Change of Control if another Person makes the
Change of Control Offer at the same purchase price, at the same times and otherwise in substantial
A-2-11
Table of Contents
compliance with the requirements set forth in the Convertible Notes Indenture applicable to a Change of Control Offer to
be made by Comstock and purchases all notesrelated New Convertible Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn under
such Change of Control Offer.
If holdersHolders  of  not  less  than  90%  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  outstanding notesNew  Convertible  Notes
under the applicable series validly tender and do not withdraw such notesNew Convertible Notes in a Change of Control
Offer  and  Comstock,  or  any  third  party  making  a  Change  of  Control  Offer  in  lieu  of  Comstock  as  described  above,
purchases all of the notesNew Convertible Notes validly tendered and not withdrawn by such holdersHolders, Comstock
will have the right, upon not less than 30 nor more than 60 days’ prior notice, given not more than 30 days following such
purchase pursuant to the Change of Control Offer described above, to redeem all notesNew Convertible Notes that remain
outstanding following such purchase at a redemption price in cash equal to the applicable Change of Control Purchase
Price plus, to the extent not included in the Change of Control Purchase Price, accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the
date of redemption.
The  definition  of  Change  of  Control  includes  a  phrase  relating  to  the  disposition  of  “all  or  substantially  all”  of  the
properties  and  assets  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  taken  as  a  whole.  Although  there  is  a
developinglimited body of case law interpreting the phrase “substantially all,” there is no precise established definition of
the  phrase  under  applicable  law.  Accordingly,  the  ability  of  a  Holder  of the  notesNew  Convertible  Notes  to  require
Comstock to purchase such notesrepurchase its New Convertible Notes as a result of a disposition of less than all of the
properties and assets of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, to another Person may be uncertain.
Comstock  intends  to  comply  with  Rule  14e-1  under  the  Exchange  Act  and  any  other  securities  laws  and  regulations
thereunder, if applicable, in the event that a Change of Control occurs and Comstock is required to purchase notes as
described above. The existence of a Holder’s right to require, subject to certain conditions, Comstock to repurchase its
notes  upon  a  Change  of  Control  may  deter  a  third party from acquiring Comstock in a transaction that constitutes, or
results in, a Change of ControlChange of Control provisions of the New Convertible Notes may, in certain circumstances,
make  more  difficult  or  discourage  a  sale  or  takeover  of  Comstock  and,  thus,  the  removal  of  incumbent  management.
Subject  to  the  limitations  discussed  below,  Comstock  could,  in  the  future,  enter  into  certain  transactions,  including
acquisitions, refinancings or other recapitalizations, that would not constitute a Change of Control under the applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture, but that could increase the amount of Indebtedness outstanding at such time or otherwise
affect Comstock’s capital structure or credit ratings. Restrictions on Comstock’s ability to Incur additional Indebtedness
are  contained  in  the  covenants  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified
Capital  Stock”  and  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Restricted  Payments.”  Such  restrictions  in  the  applicable
Convertible  Notes  Indenture  can  be  waived  only  with  the  consent  of  Holders  of  a  majority  in  principal  amount  of  the
applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes  then  outstanding.  Except  for  the  limitations  contained  in  such  covenants,
however, the Convertible Notes Indentures will not contain any covenants or provisions that may afford Holders of the
New Convertible Notes protection in the event of a highly leveraged transaction.
Comstock’s ability to repurchase the New Convertible Notes pursuant to the Change of Control Offer may be limited by a
number  of  factors.  The  ability  of  Comstock  to  pay  cash  to  the  Holders  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  following  the
occurrence of a Change of Control may be limited by Comstock’s and the Restricted Subsidiaries’ then existing financial
resources,  and  sufficient  funds  may  not  be  available  when  necessary  to  make  any  required  repurchases.  See  “Risk
Factors—Risks Related to the Exchange Offer and Holding the New Notes—Risks Related to Holding the New Notes—We
may not have the ability to purchase the new notes upon a change of control or upon certain sales or other dispositions of
assets, or to make the cash payment due upon conversion or at maturity.”
The  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  and  the  Senior  Secured  Notes  Indenture  contain,  and  future  agreements  governing
Indebtedness of Comstock or its Subsidiaries may contain prohibitions of certain events, including
Table of Contents
A-2-12
events that would constitute a Change of Control and including repurchases or other prepayments in respect of the New
Convertible Notes. The exercise by the Holders of New Convertible Notes of their right to require Comstock to repurchase
the New Convertible Notes upon a Change of Control could cause a default under these other agreements, even if the
Change of Control itself does not, due to the financial effect of such repurchases on Comstock or its Subsidiaries. In the
event a Change of Control occurs at a time when Comstock is prohibited from purchasing or redeeming New Convertible
Notes, Comstock could seek the consent of its other applicable debt holders or lenders to purchase the New Convertible
Notes or could attempt to refinance the borrowings that contain such prohibition. If Comstock does not obtain a consent
or  repay  those  borrowings,  Comstock  will  remain  prohibited  from  purchasing  New  Convertible  Notes.  In  that  case,
Comstock’s  failure  to  purchase  tendered  New  Convertible  Notes  would  constitute  an  Event  of  Default  under  the
Convertible Notes Indentures, which could, in turn, constitute a default under other Indebtedness of Comstock.
Reports
TheEach Convertible Notes Indenture will provide that, whether or not Comstock is subject to the reporting requirements
of Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, to the extent not prohibited by the Exchange Act, Comstock will file
with  the  Commission,  and  make  available  to  the TrusteeConvertible  Notes  Trustees  and  the holdersHolders  of  the
notesNew Convertible Notes  without  cost  to  any holderHolder, the annual reports and the information, documents and
other  reports  (or  copies  of  such  portions  of  any  of  the  foregoing  as  the  Commission  may  by  rules  and  regulations
prescribe) that are specified in Sections 13 and 15(d) of the Exchange Act and applicable to a U.S. corporation within the
time periods specified therein with respect to an accelerated filer. In the event that Comstock is not permitted to file such
reports,  documents  and  information  with  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Act,  Comstock  will  nevertheless
make available such Exchange Act information to the TrusteeConvertible Notes Trustees and the holdersHolders of the
notesNew Convertible Notes without cost to any holderHolder as if Comstock were subject to the reporting requirements
of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act within the time periods specified therein with respect to a non-accelerated filer.
If Comstock has designated any of its Subsidiaries as Unrestricted Subsidiaries, then, to the extent material, the quarterly
and  annual  financial  information  required  by  the  preceding  paragraph  will  include  a  reasonably  detailed  presentation,
either on the face of the financial statements or in the footnotes thereto, and in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the financial condition and results of operations of Comstock and its
Restricted Subsidiaries separate from the financial condition and results of operations of the Unrestricted Subsidiaries of
Comstock.
The availability of the foregoing materials on the Commission’s website or on Comstock’s website shall be deemed to
satisfy the foregoing delivery obligations.
Each  New  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  will  also  provide  that  Comstock  will  deliver  all  reports  and  other  information
required to be delivered under the TIA within the time periods set forth in the TIA.
Future Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries
The foregoing covenants (including calculation of financial ratios and the determination of limitations on the incurrence of
Indebtedness  and  Liens)  may  be  affected  by  the  designation  by  Comstock  of  any  existing  or  future  Subsidiary  of
Comstock  as  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary.  The  definition  of  “Unrestricted  Subsidiary”  set  forth  under the  caption  “—
Certain  Definitions”  describes  the  circumstances  under  which  a  Subsidiary  of  Comstock  may  be  designated  as  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary by the Board of Directors of Comstock.
Table of Contents
A-2-13
Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets
Comstock will not, in any single transaction or series of related transactions, merge or consolidate with or into any other
Person, or sell, assign, convey, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the properties and assets
of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any Person or group of Affiliated Persons, and
Comstock  will  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  enter  into  any  such  transaction  or  series  of  related
transactions  if  such  transaction  or  series  of  transactions,  in  the  aggregate,  would  result  in  the  sale,  assignment,
conveyance, transfer, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of the properties and assets of Comstock and its
Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any other Person or group of Affiliated Persons, unless at the time and
after giving effect thereto:
(1)
either (a) if the transaction is a merger or consolidation, Comstock shall be the surviving Person of such
merger or consolidation, or (b) the Person (if other than Comstock) formed by such consolidation or into
which  Comstock  is  merged  or  to  which  the  properties  and  assets  of  Comstock  or  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries,  as  the  case  may  be,  are  sold,  assigned,  conveyed,  transferred,  leased  or  otherwise
disposed of (any such surviving Person or transferee Person being the “Surviving Entity”) shall be a
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the United States of America, any state thereof or
the District of Columbia and shall, in either case, expressly assume by a supplemental indenture to the
applicable  Convertible  Notes Indenture  executed  and  delivered  to  the applicable  Convertible  Notes
Trustee, in form satisfactory to the Trusteesuch Convertible Notes Trustee, and pursuant to agreements
reasonably  satisfactory  to  such  Convertible  Notes  Trustee  and  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent,  as
applicable, all the obligations of Comstock under the notes and the Indenture, and, in each case, the
Indentureapplicable series of New Convertible Notes, the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and
the  other  Convertible  Note  Documents  to  which  Comstock  is  a  party,  and,  in  each  case,  such
Convertible Note Documents shall remain in full force and effect;
(2)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of related transactions on a pro forma basis
(and  treating  any  Indebtedness  not  previously  an  obligation  of  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries  which  becomes  an  obligation  of  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in
connection  with  or  as  a  result  of  such  transaction  as  having  been  incurred  at  the  time  of  such
transaction), no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
(3)
except in the case of the consolidation or merger of any Restricted Subsidiary with or into Comstock or
another Restricted Subsidiary, either:
(a)
immediately before and immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a
pro forma basis (assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the
period of four fiscal quarters ending immediately prior to the consummation of such transaction
or transactions, with the appropriate adjustments with respect to the transaction or transactions
being included in such pro forma calculation), Comstock (or the Surviving Entity if Comstock is
not the continuing obligor under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture) could incur $1.00
of additional Indebtedness in accordance with the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio test set forth
in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  “—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”
covenant; or
(b)
immediately  after  giving  effect  to  such  transaction  or  transactions  on  a  pro  forma  basis
(assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of
Table of Contents
A-2-14
the  period  of  four  fiscal  quarters  ending  immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such
transaction or transactions, with the appropriate adjustments with respect to the transaction or
transactions being included in such pro forma calculation), the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio
of  Comstock  (or  the  Surviving  Entity  if  Comstock  is  not  the  continuing  obligor  under  the
applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture)  will  be  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  Fixed  Charge
Coverage Ratio of Comstock immediately before such transaction or transactions;
(4)
(5)
if Comstock is not the continuing obligor under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, then each
Subsidiary  Guarantor,  unless  it  is  the  Surviving  Entity,  shall  have  by  supplemental  indenture  to  the
applicable  Convertible  Notes Indenture  confirmed  that  its Junior  Lien Subsidiary  Guarantee  of  the
notesapplicable series of New Convertible Notes shall apply to the Surviving Entity’s obligations under
thesuch Convertible Notes Indenture and the notessuch New Convertible Notes;
if any of the properties or assets of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries would upon such
transaction or series of related transactions become subject to any Lien (other than a Permitted Lien),
the creation and imposition of such Lien shall have been in compliance with the “Limitation on Liens”
covenant;  and any  Collateral  owned  by  or  transferred  to  the  Surviving  Entity  shall  (a)  continue  to
constitute Collateral under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and the Junior Lien Collateral
Agreements and (b) be subject to a Junior Lien in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit
of the holders of the Junior Lien Note Obligations;
the  Surviving  Entity  shall  take  such  action  (or  agree  to  take  such  action)  as  may  be  reasonably
(6)
(67)
the  Surviving  Entity  shall  take  such  action  (or  agree  to  take  such  action)  as  may  be  reasonably
necessary  to  cause  any  property  or  assets  that  constitute  Collateral  owned  by  or  transferred  to  the
Surviving Entity to be subject to the Junior Liens in the manner and to the extent required under the
Junior Lien Collateral Agreements and shall deliver an opinion of counsel as to the enforceability of any
amendments, supplements or other instruments with respect to the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements to
be executed, delivered, filed and recorded, as applicable, and such other matters as the Convertible
Notes Trustees or Junior Lien Collateral Agent, as applicable, may reasonably request; and
Comstock  (or  the  Surviving  Entity  if  Comstock  is  not  the  continuing  obligor  under  the applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture) shall have delivered to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee, in form
and  substance  reasonably  satisfactory  to thesuch  Convertible  Notes  Trustee, a n ( a ) an  Officers’
Certificateofficers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel each stating that  such  consolidation,  merger,
transfer, lease or other disposition and any supplemental indenture in respect thereto comply with the
requirements  under thesuch  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  and  (b)  an Opinionopinion  of Counsel
statingcounsel that the requirements of clause (1) of this paragraph have been satisfiedcomplied with.
Upon  any  consolidation  or  merger  or  any  sale,  assignment,  lease,  conveyance,  transfer  or  other  disposition  of  all  or
substantially  all  of  the  properties  and  assets  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  on  a  consolidated  basis  in
accordance with the foregoing, in which Comstock is not the continuing corporation, the Surviving Entity shall succeed
to, and be substituted for, and may exercise every right and power of, Comstock under the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture and the other Convertible Note Documents with the same effect as if the Surviving Entity had been named as
Comstock  therein,  and  thereafter  Comstock,  except  in  the  case  of  a  lease,  will  be  discharged  from  all  obligations  and
covenants  under  the applicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes,  the  related  Convertible  Notes Indenture  and  the
notesother Convertible Note Documents and may be liquidated and dissolved.
Table of Contents
Events of Default
A-2-15
The following are “Events of Default” under the Indentureeach of the Convertible Notes Indentures:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
default in the payment of the principal of or premium, if any, on any of the notesapplicable series of New
Convertible Notes, whether such payment is due at Stated Maturity, upon redemption, upon repurchase
pursuant to a Change of Control Offer or a Prepayment Offer, upon acceleration or otherwise;
default  in  the  payment  of  any  installment  of  interest  on  any  of  the notesapplicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes, when due, and the continuance of such default for a period of 30 days;
default in the performance or breach of the provisions of the “Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets”
section of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, the failure to make or consummate a Change of
Control Offer in accordance with the provisions of the “Change of Control” covenant or the failure to
make or consummate a Prepayment Offer in accordance with the provisions of the “Limitation on Asset
Sales” covenant;
Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  shall  fail  to  comply  with  the  provisions  described  under  “—
Certain Covenants—Reports” for a period of 90 days after written notice of such failure stating that it is a
“notice  of  default”  under  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Indenture  shall  have  been  given  (a)  to
Comstock  by  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Trustee  or  (y)  to  Comstock  and  the applicable
Convertible  Notes Trustee  by  the  Holders  of  at  least  25%  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the
notesapplicable series of New Convertible Notes then outstanding);
(5)
Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  shall  fail  to  perform  or  observe  any  other  term,  covenant  or
Table of Contents
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
agreement  contained  in  the notesapplicable  series  of  New  Convertible  Notes,  any  Subsidiary
Guarantee or the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture (other than a default specified in (1), (2), (3) or
(4) above) for a period of 60 days after written notice of such failure stating that it is a “notice of default”
under  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Indenture  shall  have  been  given  (a)  to  Comstock  by  the
applicable Convertible Notes Trustee or (b) to Comstock and the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee
by  the  Holders  of  at  least  25%  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the notesapplicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes then outstanding);
the occurrence and continuation beyond any applicable grace period of any default in the payment of
the  principal  of,  premium,  if  any,  or  interest  on  any  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  (other  than  the
notesapplicable  series  New  Convertible  Notes)  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted
Subsidiary  for  money  borrowed  when  due,  or  any  other  default  resulting  in  acceleration  of  any
Indebtedness of Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary for money
borrowed,;  provided  that  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  such  Indebtedness,  together  with  the
aggregate  principal  amount  of  any  other  such  Indebtedness  under  which  there  has  been  a  payment
default  or  the  maturity  of  which  has  been  so  accelerated,  shall  exceed  $50.0  million  and provided,
further,  that  if  any  such  default  is  cured  or  waived  or  any  such  acceleration  rescinded,  or  such
Indebtedness  is  repaid,  within  a  period  of  10  days  from  the  continuation  of  such  default  beyond  the
applicable  grace  period  or  the  occurrence  of  such  acceleration,  as  the  case  may  be,  such  Event  of
Default  under  the applicable Convertible Notes  Indenture  and  any  consequential  acceleration  of  the
notes shall be automatically rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any judgment
or decree;
A-2-16
any  Subsidiary  Guarantee  shall  for  any  reason  cease  to  be,  or  be  asserted  by  Comstock  or  any
Subsidiary Guarantor, as applicable, not to be in full force and effect (except pursuant to the release of
any such Subsidiary Guarantee in accordance with the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture);
failure  by  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  pay  final
judgments or orders rendered against Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted
Subsidiary  aggregating  in  excess  of  $50.0  million  (net  of  any  amounts  covered  by  insurance  with  a
reputable  and  creditworthy  insurance  company  that  has  not  disclaimed  liability)  and  either
(a) commencement by any creditor of an enforcement proceeding upon such judgment (other than a
judgment that is stayed by reason of a pending appeal or otherwise) or (b) the occurrence of a 60-day
period during which a stay of such judgment or order, by reason of pending appeal or otherwise, was
not in effect;
the entry of a decree or order by a court having jurisdiction in the premises (a) for relief in respect of
Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  in  an  involuntary  case  or
proceeding under any applicable federal or state bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or other similar
law or (b) adjudging Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary bankrupt
or insolvent, or approving a petition seeking reorganization, arrangement, adjustment or composition of
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary under any applicable federal
or  state  law,  or  appointing  under  any  such  law  a  custodian,  receiver,  liquidator,  assignee,  trustee,
sequestrator or other similar official of Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted
Subsidiary or of a substantial part of its consolidated assets, or ordering the winding up or liquidation of
its affairs, and the continuance of any such decree or order for relief or any such other decree or order
unstayed and in effect for a period of 60 consecutive days; or
(10)
the commencement by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary of a
voluntary  case  or  proceeding  under  any  applicable  federal  or  state  bankruptcy,  insolvency,
reorganization  or  other  similar  law  or  any  other  case  or  proceeding  to  be  adjudicated  bankrupt  or
insolvent, or the consent by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary to
the entry of a decree or order for relief in respect thereof in an involuntary case or proceeding under any
applicable  federal  or  state  bankruptcy,  insolvency,  reorganization  or  other  similar  law  or  to  the
commencement of any bankruptcy or insolvency case or proceeding against it, or the filing by Comstock
or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  a  petition  or  consent  seeking
reorganization or relief under any applicable federal or state law, or the consent by it under any such
law  to  the  filing  of  any  such  petition  or  to  the  appointment  of  or  taking  possession  by  a  custodian,
receiver,  liquidator,  assignee,  trustee  or  sequestrator  (or  other  similar  official)  of  Comstock  or  any
Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary or of any substantial part of its consolidated
assets,  or  the  making  by  it  of  an  assignment  for  the  benefit  of  creditors  under  any  such  law,  or  the
admission  by  it  in  writing  of  its  inability  to  pay  its  debts  generally  as  they  become  due  or  taking  of
corporate  action  by  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  in
furtherance of any such action;
(11)
the occurrence of the following:
(a) except as permitted by the applicable Convertible Note Documents, any Junior Lien Collateral Agreement establishing
the Junior Liens ceases for any reason to be
Table of Contents
A-2-17
enforceable; provided that it will not be an Event of Default under this clause (11)(a) if the sole result of the failure of one or
more Junior Lien Collateral Agreements to be fully enforceable is that any Junior Lien purported to be granted under such
Junior Lien Collateral Agreements on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value of not more
than  $10.0  million,  ceases  to  be  an  enforceable  and  perfected  second-priority  Lien,  subject  only  to  the  Priority  Liens
securing the Priority Lien Obligations and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided, further, that if such failure is
susceptible to cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after any officer of Comstock or any
Restricted Subsidiary becomes aware of such failure, which failure has not been cured during such time period;
(b) except as permitted by the applicable Convertible Note Documents, any Junior Lien purported to be granted under any
Junior Lien Collateral Agreement on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value in excess of
$10.0 million, ceases to be an enforceable and perfected second-priority Lien, subject only to the Priority Liens securing
the Priority Lien Obligations and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided that if such failure is susceptible to cure,
no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after any officer of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary
becomes aware of such failure, which failure has not been cured during such time period; and
(c)  Comstock  or  any  other  Collateral  Grantor,  or  any  Person  acting  on  behalf  of  any  of  them,  denies  or  disaffirms,  in
writing, any obligation of Comstock or any other Collateral Grantor set forth in or arising under any Junior Lien Collateral
Agreement establishing Junior Liens; and
(12)
the  Required  Stockholder  Approval  is  not  obtained  and  the  Charter  Amendment  has  not  become
effective, in each case by December 31, 2016, and such failure shall continue for a period of 90 days.
If an Event of Default (other than as specified in clause (9) or (10) above) shall occur and be continuing, the applicable
Convertible Notes Trustee, by written notice to Comstock, or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of
th e notesapplicable  New  Convertible  Notes  then  outstanding,  by  written  notice  to  the applicable  Convertible  Notes
Trustee and Comstock, may, and the Trustee upon the request of the Holders of not less than 25% in aggregate principal
amount of the notes then outstanding shall, declare the principal of, premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest on
all of the notessuch New Convertible Notes due and payable immediately, upon which declaration all amounts payable in
respect of the notessuch New Convertible Notes shall be immediately due and payable. If an Event of Default specified in
clause (9) or (10) above occurs and is continuing, then the principal of, premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest
on all of the notessuch New Convertible Notes shall become and be immediately due and payable without any declaration,
notice or other act on the part of the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee or any Holder of notesthe applicable series of
New Convertible Notes.
After a declaration of acceleration under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture, but before a judgment or decree for
payment of the money due has been obtained by the applicable  Convertible  Notes Trustee, the Holders of a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the applicable series of New Convertible Notes then outstanding notes, by written notice to
Comstock,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  and  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Trustee,  may  rescind  and  annul  such
declaration  if  (1)  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  has  paid  or  deposited  with  the applicable  Convertible  Notes
Trustee a sum sufficient to pay (a) all sums paid or advanced by thesuch Convertible Notes Trustee under the applicable
Convertible  Notes  Indenture  and  the  reasonable  compensation,  expenses,  disbursements  and  advances  of thesuch
Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  its  agents  and  counsel,  (b)  all  overdue  interest  on all  notesthe  applicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes, (c) the principal of and premium, if
Table of Contents
A-2-18
any, on any notes whichNew Convertible Notes under the applicable series that have become due otherwise than by such
declaration of acceleration and interest thereon at the rate borne by the notessuch New Convertible Notes, and (d) to the
extent that payment of such interest is lawful, interest upon overdue interest and overdue principal at the rate borne by the
notessuch New Convertible Notes (without duplication of any amount paid or deposited pursuant to clause (b) or (c));
(2) the rescission would not conflict with any judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction; and (3) all Events of
Default, other than the non-payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the notesNew Convertible Notes under
the applicable series that has become due solely by such declaration of acceleration, have been cured or waived.
No Holder will have any right to institute any proceeding with respect tounder the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture
or any remedy thereunder, unless (i) such Holder has notified the applicable  Convertible  Notes Trustee of a continuing
Event of Default and the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding notesNew Convertible
Notes under the applicable series have made written request, and offered such reasonable indemnity as thesatisfactory to
the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee may require, to thesuch Convertible Notes Trustee to institute such proceeding
as  Trustee under the notessuch  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the related  New  Convertible  Notes Indenture, the(ii)  such
Convertible Notes Trustee has failed to institute such proceeding within 60 days after receipt of such notice and the(iii)
such Convertible Notes  Trustee,  within  such  60-day  period,  has  not  received  directions  inconsistent  with  such  written
request by Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding notesNew Convertible Notes under the
applicable series. Such limitations will not apply, however, to a suit instituted by the Holder of a noteany New Convertible
Note for the enforcement of the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, or interest on such noteNew Convertible Note
on or after the respective due dates expressed in such noteNew Convertible Note.
During the existence of an Event of Default, the applicable  Convertible  Notes Trustee will be required to exercise such
rights and powers vested in it under the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture and use the same degree of care and skill
in its exercise thereof as a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in the conduct of such person’s own
affairs. Subject to the provisions of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture relating to the duties of the Trusteetrustee
thereunder, in case an Event of Default shall occur and be continuing, the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee will not be
under  any  obligation  to  exercise  any  of  its  rights  or  powers  under  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Indenture  at  the
request or direction of any of the applicable Holders unless such Holders shall have offered to thesuch Convertible Notes
Trustee such reasonable security or indemnity as it may requiresatisfactory to the Convertible Notes Trustee. Subject to
certain  provisions  concerning  the  rights  of thesuch  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  the  Holders  of  a  majority  in  aggregate
principal amount of the outstanding notesNew Convertible Notes under the applicable series will have the right to direct
the time, method and place of conducting any proceeding for any remedy available to the applicable Convertible Notes
Trustee, or exercising any trust or power conferred on thesuch Convertible Notes Trustee under the related Convertible
Notes Indenture.
If a Default or an Event of Default occurs and is continuing and is known to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee, the
Trusteesuch trustee shall mail to each applicable Holder notice of the Default or Event of Default within 60 days after the
occurrence thereof. Except in the case of a Default or an Event of Default in payment of principal of, premium, if any, or
interest  on  any notesNew  Convertible  Notes,  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Trustee  may  withhold  the  notice  to  the
applicable Holders of the notes  if the Trusteesuch trustee determines in good faith that withholding the notice is in the
interest of thesuch Holders of the notes.
Each  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  will  provide  that Comstock  will  be  required  to  furnish  to  the applicable  Convertible
Notes Trustee annual statements as to the performance by Comstock of its obligations under the applicable Convertible
Notes Indenture and as to any default in such performance. Comstock is also required to notify thesuch Convertible Notes
Trustee within 10 days of any Default or Event of Default.
Table of Contents
Certain Definitions
A-2-19
“Act of Junior Lien Debtholders” means, as to any matter at any time, a direction in writing delivered to the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent by or with the written consent of the holders of Convertible Note Obligations representing the Required
Junior Lien Debtholders.
“Acquired Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of a Person (1) existing at the time such Person becomes a Restricted
Subsidiary  or  (2)  assumed  in  connection  with  acquisitions  of  properties  or  assets  from  such  Person  (other  than  any
Indebtedness incurred in connection with, or in contemplation of, such Person becoming a Restricted Subsidiary or such
acquisition).  Acquired  Indebtedness  shall  be  deemed  to  be  incurred  on  the  date  the  acquired  Person  becomes  a
Restricted Subsidiary or the date of the related acquisition of properties or assets from such Person.
“Additional Assets” means:
(1)
(2)
any  assets  or  property  (other  than  cash,  Cash  Equivalents  or  securities)  used  in  the  Oil  and  Gas
Business or any business ancillary thereto;
Investments in any other Person engaged in the Oil and Gas Business or any business ancillary thereto
(including the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of such Person) as a result of which such
other Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary;
(3)
the acquisition from third parties of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary; or
(4)
capital expenditures by Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary in the Oil and Gas Business.
“Additional New Senior Secured Notes” means the additional securities issued under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture
solely in connection with the payment of interest in kind on the New Senior Secured Notes.
“Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets” means (without duplication), as of the date of determination, the remainder
of:
(1)
the sum of:
(a)
discounted  future  net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  of  Comstock  and  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries  calculated  in  accordance  with  Commission  guidelines  before  any
state, federal or foreign income taxes, as estimated by Comstock and confirmed by a nationally
recognized firm of independent petroleum engineers in a reserve report prepared as of the end
of Comstock’s most recently completed fiscal year for which audited financial statements are
available, as increased by, as of the date of determination, the estimated discounted future net
revenues from:
(i)
(ii)
estimated  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  acquired  since  such  year-end,  which
reserves were not reflected in such year-end reserve report, and
estimated  oil  and  gas  reserves  attributable  to  upward  revisions  of  estimates  of
proved oil and gas reserves since such year-end due to exploration, development
or exploitation activities, in each case calculated in accordance with Commission
guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in such year-end reserve report),
Table of Contents
A-2-20
and decreased by, as of the date of determination, the estimated discounted future net revenues from:
(iii)
(iv)
estimated proved oil and gas reserves produced or disposed of since such year-
end, and
estimated oil and gas reserves attributable to downward revisions of estimates of
proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  since  such  year-end  due  to  changes  in  geological
conditions  or  other  factors  which  would,  in  accordance  with  standard  industry
practice,  cause  such  revisions,  in  each  case  calculated  in  accordance  with
Commission  guidelines  (utilizing  the  prices  utilized  in  such  year-end  reserve
report);
provided that, in the case of each of the determinations made pursuant to clauses (i) through (iv), such increases and
decreases shall be as estimated by Comstock’s petroleum engineers, unless there is a Material Change as a result of such
acquisitions, dispositions or revisions, in which event the discounted future net revenues utilized for purposes of this
clause (i1)(a) shall be confirmed in writing by a nationally recognized firm of independent petroleum engineers;
(b)
(c)
(d)
the  capitalized  costs  that  are  attributable  to  oil  and  gas  properties  of  Comstock  and  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  which  no  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  are  attributable,  based  on
Comstock’s  books  and  records  as  of  a  date  no  earlier  than  the  date  of  Comstock’s  latest
annual or quarterly financial statements;
the  Net  Working  Capital  on  a  date  no  earlier  than  the  date  of  Comstock’s  latest  annual  or
quarterly financial statements; and
the greater of (i) the net book value on a date no earlier than the date of Comstock’s latest
annual  or  quarterly  financial  statements  and  (ii)  the  appraised  value,  as  estimated  by
independent appraisers, of other tangible assets (including, without duplication, Investments in
unconsolidated Restricted Subsidiaries) of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, as of the
date no earlier than the date of Comstock’s latest audited financial statements, minus
(2)
the sum of:
(a)
Minority Interests;
(b)
(c)
(d)
any  net  gas  balancing  liabilities  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  reflected  in
Comstock’s latest audited financial statements;
to  the  extent  included  in  (1)(a)  above,  the  discounted  future  net  revenues,  calculated  in
accordance with Commission guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in Comstock’s year-end
reserve report), attributable to reserves which are required to be delivered to third parties to
fully  satisfy  the  obligations  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  with  respect  to
Volumetric Production Payments (determined, if applicable, using the schedules specified with
respect thereto); and
the  discounted  future  net  revenues,  calculated  in  accordance  with  Commission  guidelines,
attributable to reserves subject to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments which, based on
the estimates of production and price assumptions
A-2-21
Table of Contents
included in determining the discounted future net revenues specified in (1)(a) above, would be
necessary to fully satisfy the payment obligations of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries
with respect to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments (determined, if applicable, using the
schedules specified with respect thereto).
“Adjusted  Net  Assets”  of  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  at  any  date  shall  mean  the  amount  by  which  the  fair  value  of  the
properties and assets of such Subsidiary Guarantor exceeds the total amount of liabilities, including, without limitation,
contingent liabilities (after giving effect to all other fixed and contingent liabilities incurred or assumed on such date), but
excluding liabilities under its Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee, of such Subsidiary Guarantor at such date.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to any specified Person, any other Person directly or indirectly controlling or controlled by
or under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person. For the purposes of this definition, “control,” when
used with respect to any Person, means the power to direct the management and policies of such Person, directly or
indirectly, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise; and the terms “controlling” and
“controlled” have meanings correlative to the foregoing. For purposes of this definition, beneficial ownership of 10% or
more of the voting common equity (on a fully diluted basis) or options or warrants to purchase such equity (but only if
exercisable at the date of determination or within 60 days thereof) of a Person shall be deemed to constitute control of
such Person.
“Agents” means, collectively, the Priority Collateral Agent, the Junior Lien Collateral Agent and each Convertible Notes
Trustee, and “Agent” means any one of them.
“Asset  Sale”  means  any  sale,  issuance,  conveyance,  transfer,  lease  or  other  disposition  to  any  Person  other  than
Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  (including,  without  limitation,  by  means  of  a  merger  or  consolidation)
(collectively, for purposes of this definition, a “transfer”), directly or indirectly, in one or a series of related transactions, of
(i) any Capital Stock of any Restricted Subsidiary, (ii) all or substantially all of the properties and assets of any division or
line of business of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries or (iii) any other properties or assets of Comstock or
any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  other  than  (a)  a  transfer  of  cash,  Cash  Equivalents,  hydrocarbons  or  other  mineral
products in the ordinary course of business or (b) any lease, abandonment, disposition, relinquishment or farm-out of any
oil and gas properties in the ordinary course of business. For the purposes of this definition, the term “Asset Sale” also
shall  not  include  (A)  any  transfer  of  properties  or  assets  (including  Capital  Stock)  that  is  governed  by,  and  made  in
accordance  with,  the  provisions  described  under  “—Merger,  Consolidation  and  Sale  of  Assets;”  (B)  any  transfer  of
properties or assets to an Unrestricted Subsidiary, if permitted under the “Limitation on Restricted Payments” covenant;
or (C) any transfer (in a single transaction or a series of related transactions) of properties or assets (including Capital
Stock) having a Fair Market Value of less than $25.0 million.
“Attributable Indebtedness” means, with respect to any particular lease under which any Person is at the time liable and at
any date as of which the amount thereof is to be determined, the present value of the total net amount of rent required to
be paid by such Person under the lease during the primary term thereof, without giving effect to any renewals at the option
of the lessee, discounted from the respective due dates thereof to such date at the rate of interest per annum implicit in the
terms of the lease. As used in the preceding sentence, the net amount of rent under any lease for any such period shall
mean the sum of rental and other payments required to be paid with respect to such period by the lessee thereunder
excluding  any  amounts  required  to  be  paid  by  such  lessee  on  account  of  maintenance  and  repairs,  insurance,  taxes,
assessments, water rates or similar charges. In the case of any lease which is terminable by the lessee upon payment of a
penalty,  such  net  amount  of  rent  shall  also  include  the  amount  of  such  penalty,  but  no  rent  shall  be  considered  as
required to be paid under such lease subsequent to the first date upon which it may be so terminated.
“Authorized Representative” means (a) in the case of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations or the Revolving Credit
Agreement Secured Parties, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, (b) in the case of the
Table of Contents
A-2-22
Senior Secured Note Obligations or the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and the holders of the New Senior Secured Notes,
the Senior Secured Notes Trustee and (c) in the case of the Convertible Note Obligations and the Holders of the applicable
series of New Convertible Notes, the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee.
“Average Life” means, with respect to any Indebtedness, as at any date of determination, the quotient obtained by dividing
(i) the sum of the products of (a) the number of years (and any portion thereof) from the date of determination to the date or
dates  of  each  successive  scheduled  principal  payment  (including,  without  limitation,  any  sinking  fund  or  mandatory
redemption payment requirements) of such Indebtedness multiplied by (b) the amount of each such principal payment by
(ii) the sum of all such principal payments.
“Bank Credit Agreement” means that certain Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of November 30,
2010  among  Comstock,  as  Borrower,  the  lenders  party  thereto  from  time  to  time,  Bank  of  Montreal,  as  Administrative
Agent and Issuing Bank, Bank of America, N.A., as Syndication Agent, and Comerica Bank, JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A.
and  Union  Bank,  N.A.,  as  Co-Documentation  Agents,  and  together  with  all  related  documents  executed  or  delivered
pursuant thereto at any time (including, without limitation, all mortgages, deeds of trust, guarantees, security agreements
and  all  other  collateral  and  security  documents),  in  each  case  as  such  agreements  may  be  amended  (including  any
amendment and restatement thereof), supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, including any agreement or
agreements  extending  the  maturity  of,  refinancing,  replacing  or  otherwise  restructuring  (including  into  two  or  more
separate  credit  facilities,  and  including  increasing  the  amount  of  available  borrowings  thereunder  provided  that  such
increase in borrowings is within the definition of Permitted Indebtedness or is otherwise permitted under the covenant
described under “Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock”) or adding Subsidiaries
as additional borrowers or guarantors thereunder and all or any portion of the Indebtedness and other Obligations under
such agreement or agreements or any successor or replacement agreement or agreements, and whether by the same or
any  other  agent(s),  lender(s)  or  group(s)  of  lenders.  Bankruptcy  Code”  means  Title  11  of  the  United  States  Code,  as
amended.
“Capital Stock” means, with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests, participations, rights or other equivalents
in the equity interests (however designated) in such Person, and any rights (other than debt securities convertible into an
equity interest), warrants or options exercisable for, exchangeable for or convertible into such an equity interest in such
Person.
“Capitalized Lease Obligation” means any obligation to pay rent or other amounts under a lease of (or other agreement
conveying the right to use) any property (whether real, personal or mixed) that is required to be classified and accounted
for  as  a  capital  lease  obligation  under  GAAP,  and,  for  the  purpose  of  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture,  the
amount of such obligation at any date shall be the capitalized amount thereof at such date, determined in accordance with
GAAP.
“Cash Equivalents” means:
Table of Contents
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
any evidence of Indebtedness with a maturity of 180 days or less issued or directly and fully guaranteed
or insured by the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof (provided that the full
faith and credit of the United States of America is pledged in support thereof);
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit or acceptances with a maturity of 180 days or less
of any financial institution that is a member of the Federal Reserve System having combined capital and
surplus and undivided profits of not less than $500 million;
commercial paper with a maturity of 180 days or less issued by a corporation that is not an Affiliate of
Comstock and is organized under the laws of any state of the United States or the District of Columbia
and rated at least A-1 by S&P or at least P-1 by Moody’s;
A-2-23
repurchase obligations with a term of not more than seven days for underlying securities of the types
described  in  clause  (1)  above  entered  into  with  any  commercial  bank  meeting  the  specifications  of
clause (2) above;
overnight bank deposits and bankers acceptances at any commercial bank meeting the qualifications
specified in clause (2) above;
(6)
(7)
deposits available for withdrawal on demand with any commercial bank not meeting the qualifications
specified in clause (2) above but which is a lending bank under the BankRevolving Credit Agreement,
provided all such deposits do not exceed $5.0 million in the aggregate at any one time;
demand and time deposits and certificates of deposit with any commercial bank organized in the United
States  not  meeting  the  qualifications  specified  in  clause  (2)  above,  provided  that  such  deposits  and
certificates support bond, letter of credit and other similar types of obligations incurred in the ordinary
course of business; and
(8)
investments in money market or other mutual funds substantially all of whose assets comprise securities
of the types described in clauses (1) through (5) above.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any event or series of events by which:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
any “person” or “group” (as such terms are used in Sections 13(d) and 14(d) of the Exchange Act) is or
becomes  the  “beneficial  owner”  (as  defined  in  Rule  13d-3  under  the  Exchange  Act),  directly  or
indirectly, of more than 50% of the total Voting Stock of Comstock;
Comstock consolidates with or merges into another Person or any Person consolidates with, or merges
into, Comstock, in any such event pursuant to a transaction in which the outstanding Voting Stock of
Comstock  is  changed  into  or  exchanged  for  cash,  securities  or  other  property,  other  than  any  such
transaction  where  (a)  the  outstanding  Voting  Stock  of  Comstock  is  changed  into  or  exchanged  for
Voting Stock of the surviving or resulting Person that is Qualified Capital Stock and (b) the holders of the
Voting Stock of Comstock immediately prior to such transaction own, directly or indirectly, not less than
a majority of the Voting Stock of the surviving or resulting Person immediately after such transaction;
Comstock, either individually or in conjunction with one or more Restricted Subsidiaries, sells, assigns,
conveys, transfers, leases or otherwise disposes of, or the Restricted Subsidiaries sell, assign, convey,
transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of, all or substantially all of the properties and assets of Comstock
and  such  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  taken  as  a  whole  (either  in  one  transaction  or  a  series  of  related
transactions),  including  Capital  Stock  of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  to  any  Person  (other  than
Comstock or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary);
during any consecutive two-year period, individuals who at the beginning of such period constituted the
Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  (together  with  any  new  directors  whose  election  by  such  Board  of
Directors or whose nomination for election by the stockholders of Comstock was approved by a vote of
66 2/3% of the directors then still in office who were either directors at the beginning of such period or
whose  election  or  nomination  for  election  was  previously  so  approved)  cease  for  any  reason  to
constitute a majority of the Board of Directors of Comstock then in office; or
(5)
Comstock is liquidated or dissolved.
A-2-24
Table of Contents
“Charter Amendment” means the amendment of Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of
shares of Comstock’s common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized
shares  of  the  Comstock’s  common  stock  for  the  issuance  of  shares  upon  conversion  of  all  of  the  outstanding  New
Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary, exercise of all of the warrants.
“Collateral” means all property wherever located and whether now owned or at any time acquired after the date of the
applicable  Convertible  Notes  Indenture  by  any  Collateral  Grantor  as  to  which  a  Lien  is  granted  under  the  Junior  Lien
Collateral Agreements to secure the New Convertible Notes or any Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee.
“Collateral Grantors” means Comstock and each Subsidiary Guarantor that is party to a Junior Lien Collateral Agreement.
“Commodity Exchange Act” means the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and
any successor statute.
“Common Stock” of  any  Person  means  Capital  Stock  of  such  Person  that  does  not  rank  prior,  as  to  the  payment  of
dividends or as to the distribution of assets upon any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of
such Person, to shares of Capital Stock of any other class of such Person. means the common stock, par value $0.50 per
share, of Comstock.
“Consolidated  Exploration  Expenses”  means,  for  any  period,  exploration  expenses  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio”  means,  for  any  period,  the  ratio  on  a  pro  forma  basis  of  (1)  the  sum  of
Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated Interest Expense, Consolidated Income Tax Expense and Consolidated Non-cash
Charges each to the extent deducted in computing Consolidated Net Income, in each case, for such period, of Comstock
and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, all determined in accordance with GAAP, decreased (to the extent
included in determining Consolidated Net Income) by the sum of (a) the amount of deferred revenues that are amortized
during such period and are attributable to reserves that are subject to Volumetric Production Payments and (b) amounts
recorded in accordance with GAAP as repayments of principal and interest pursuant to Dollar- Denominated Production
Payments, to (2) Consolidated Interest Expense for such period; provided, however, that (i) the Consolidated Fixed Charge
Coverage Ratio shall be calculated on a pro forma basis assuming that (A) the Indebtedness to be incurred (and all other
Indebtedness incurred after the first day of such period of four full fiscal quarters referred to in the covenant described
under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” through and including the date
of  determination),  and  (if  applicable)  the  application  of  the  net  proceeds  therefrom  (and  from  any  other  such
Indebtedness), including to refinance other Indebtedness, had been incurred on the first day of such four-quarter period
and, in the case of Acquired Indebtedness, on the assumption that the related transaction (whether by means of purchase,
merger or otherwise) also had occurred on such date with the appropriate adjustments with respect to such acquisition
being  included  in  such  pro  forma  calculation  and  (B)  any  acquisition  or  disposition  by  Comstock  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary of any properties or assets outside the ordinary course of business, or any repayment of any principal amount
of any Indebtedness of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary prior to the Stated Maturity thereof, in either case since the
first  day  of  such  period  of  four  full  fiscal  quarters  through  and  including  the  date  of  determination,  had  been
consummated on such first day of such four-quarter period, (ii) in making such computation, the Consolidated Interest
Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness required to be computed on a pro forma basis in accordance with
the  covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”  and
(A)  bearing  a  floating  interest  rate  shall  be  computed  as  if  the  rate  in  effect  on  the  date  of  computation  had  been  the
applicable rate for the entire period and (B) which was not outstanding during the period for which the computation is
being made but which bears, at the option of Comstock, a fixed or floating rate of interest, shall be computed by applying,
at  the  option  of  Comstock,  either  the  fixed  or  floating  rate,  (iii)  in  making  such  computation,  the  Consolidated  Interest
Expense
Table of Contents
A-2-25
attributable to interest on any Indebtedness under a revolving credit facility required to be computed on a pro forma basis
in  accordance  with  the  covenant  described  under  “—Certain  Covenants—Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified
Capital  Stock”  shall  be  computed  based  upon  the  average  daily  balance  of  such  Indebtedness  during  the  applicable
period, provided that such average daily balance shall be reduced by the amount of any repayment of Indebtedness under
a  revolving  credit  facility  during  the  applicable  period,  which  repayment  permanently  reduced  the  commitments  or
amounts available to be reborrowed under such facility, (iv) notwithstanding clauses (ii) and (iii) of this provision, interest
on  Indebtedness  determined  on  a  fluctuating  basis,  to  the  extent  such  interest  is  covered  by  agreements  relating  to
Interest Rate Protection Obligations, shall be deemed to have accrued at the rate per annum resulting after giving effect to
the operation of such agreements, (v) in making such calculation, Consolidated Interest Expense shall exclude interest
attributable to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments, and (vi) if after the first day of the period referred to in clause
(1) of this definition Comstock has permanently retired any Indebtedness out of the Net Cash Proceeds of the issuance
and sale of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of Comstock within 30 days of such issuance and sale, Consolidated Interest
Expense shall be calculated on a pro forma basis as if such Indebtedness had been retired on the first day of such period.
“Consolidated Income Tax Expense” means, for any period, the provision for federal, state, local and foreign income taxes
(including state franchise taxes accounted for as income taxes in accordance with GAAP) of Comstock and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated  Interest  Expense”  means,  for  any  period,  without  duplication,  the  sum  of  (1)  the  interest  expense  of
Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  for  such  period  as  determined  on  a  consolidated  basis  in  accordance  with
GAAP, including, without limitation, (a) any amortization of debt discount, (b) the net cost under Interest Rate Protection
Obligations  (including  any  amortization  of  discounts),  (c)  the  interest  portion  of  any  deferred  payment  obligation
constituting  Indebtedness,  (d)  all  commissions,  discounts  and  other  fees  and  charges  owed  with  respect  to  letters  of
credit  and  bankers’  acceptance  financing  and  (e)  all  accrued  interest,  in  each  case  to  the  extent  attributable  to  such
period, (2) to the extent any Indebtedness of any Person (other than Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary) is guaranteed
by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary, the aggregate amount of interest paid (to the extent not accrued in a prior
period) or accrued by such other Person during such period attributable to any such Indebtedness, in each case to the
extent attributable to that period, (3) the aggregate amount of the interest component of Capitalized Lease Obligations paid
(to the extent not accrued in a prior period), accrued or scheduled to be paid or accrued by Comstock and its Restricted
Subsidiaries during such period as determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP and (4) the aggregate
amount of dividends paid (to the extent such dividends are not accrued in a prior period and excluding dividends paid in
Qualified Capital Stock) or accrued on Disqualified Capital Stock of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, to the extent
such Disqualified Capital Stock is owned by Persons other than Restricted Subsidiaries, less, to the extent included in any
of clauses (1) through (4), amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries
during such period.
“Consolidated Net Income” means, for any period, the consolidated net income (or loss) of Comstock and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined in accordance with GAAP, adjusted by excluding:
(1)
net after-tax extraordinary gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto);
(2)
net after-tax gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto) attributable to Asset Sales;
(3)
the net income (or net loss) of any Person (other than Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries), in
which Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries has an ownership interest, except to the extent of
the  amount  of  dividends  or  other  distributions  actually  paid  to  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries in cash by such other Person
Table of Contents
A-2-26
during such period (regardless of whether such cash dividends or distributions are attributable to net
income (or net loss) of such Person during such period or during any prior period);
(4)
the net income of any Restricted Subsidiary to the extent that the declaration or payment of dividends or
similar distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary is not at the date of determination permitted, directly or
indirectly, by operation of the terms of its charter or any agreement, instrument, judgment, decree, order,
statute, rule or governmental regulation applicable to that Restricted Subsidiary or its stockholders;
(5)
dividends paid in Qualified Capital Stock;
(6)
income resulting from transfers of assets received by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary from an
Unrestricted Subsidiary;
(7)
Consolidated Exploration Expenses and any write-downs or impairments of non-current assets; and
the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles.
(8)
the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles.
“Consolidated  Net  Worth”  means,  at  any  date,  the  consolidated  stockholders’  equity  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries less the amount of such stockholders’ equity attributable to Disqualified Capital Stock or treasury stock of
Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, as determined in accordance with GAAP.
“Consolidated  Non-cash  Charges”  means,  for  any  period,  the  aggregate  depreciation,  depletion,  amortization  and
exploration expense and other non-cash expenses of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries reducing Consolidated
Net Income for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP (excluding any such non-cash
charge for which an accrual of or reserve for cash charges for any future period is required).
“Consolidated  Total  Indebtedness” means, with respect to Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries as of any date of
determination,  the  aggregate  of  all  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  as  of  such  date  of
determination, on a consolidated basis, determined in accordance with GAAP. Convertible Note Documents” means the
2019 Convertible Notes Indenture or the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture, as the context may require, the Junior Lien
Collateral Agreements and any agreement instrument or other document evidencing or governing any Convertible Note
Obligations related to the 2019 Convertible Notes Indenture or the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture, as the context may
require.
“Convertible  Note  Obligations”  means  all  advances  to,  and  debts,  liabilities,  obligations,  covenants  and  duties  of,
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor arising under the Convertible Notes Indentures, the New Convertible Notes, the
Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements (including all principal, premium, interest,
penalties,  fees,  charges,  charges,  expenses,  indemnifications,  reimbursement  obligations,  damages,  guarantees,  and
other  liabilities  or  amounts  payable  or  arising  thereunder),  whether  direct  or  indirect  (including  those  acquired  by
assumption), absolute or contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and including interest and
fees  that  accrue  after  the  commencement  by  or  against  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  of  any  proceeding  in
bankruptcy or insolvency law naming such Person as the debtor in such proceeding, regardless of whether such interest
and fees are allowed claims in such proceeding.
“Convertible Notes Indentures” means, individually or collectively, as the context may require, the 2019 Convertible Notes
Indenture and the 2020 Convertible Notes Indenture.
Table of Contents
A-2-27
“Convertible Notes Trustees” means, individually or collectively, as the context may require, the 2019 Convertible Notes
Trustee and the 2020 Convertible Notes Trustee.
“Daily VWAP” means for any Trading Day, the per share volume-weighted average price as displayed under the heading
“Bloomberg VWAP” on Bloomberg page “WLL<equity>VWAP” (or its equivalent successor if such page is not available)
in respect of the period from the scheduled open of trading until the scheduled close of trading of the primary trading
session on such Trading Day, up to and including the final closing print (which is indicated by Condition Code “6” in
Bloomberg) (or if such volume-weighted average price is unavailable, the market value of one share of Common Stock on
such  Trading  Day,  determined,  using  a  volume-weighted  average  method,  by  a  nationally  recognized  independent
investment banking firm retained for this purpose by Comstock).
“Default” means any event, act or condition that is, or after notice or passage of time or both would become, an Event of
Default.
“Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations” means the occurrence of all of the following:
(1)
termination or expiration of all commitments to extend credit that would constitute Priority Lien Obligations;
(2)
(3)
payment in full in cash of the principal of and interest, premium (if any) and fees on all Priority Lien Obligations
(other than any undrawn letters of credit);
discharge or cash collateralization (at 105% of the aggregate undrawn amount) of all outstanding letters of
credit constituting Priority Lien Obligations;
(4)
(5)
payment in full in cash of obligations in respect of Secured Swap Obligations that are secured by Priority Liens
(and, with respect to any particular Secured Swap Obligation, termination of such agreement and payment in
full in cash of all obligations thereunder or such other arrangements as have been made by the counterparty
thereto (and communicated to the Priority Lien Collateral Agent)); and
payment in full in cash of all other Priority Lien Obligations that are outstanding and unpaid at the time the
Priority Lien Obligations are paid in full in cash (other than any obligations for taxes, costs, indemnifications,
reimbursements, damages and other liabilities in respect of which no claim or demand for payment has been
made at or prior to such time);
provided that, if, at any time after the Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations has occurred, any Collateral Grantor enters
into any Priority Lien Document evidencing a Priority Lien Obligation which incurrence is not prohibited by the applicable
Secured Debt Documents, then such Discharge of Priority Lien Obligations shall automatically be deemed not to have
occurred for all purposes of the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement with respect to such new Priority Lien Obligation
(other  than  with  respect  to  any  actions  taken  as  a  result  of  the  occurrence  of  such  first  Discharge  of  Priority  Lien
Obligations), and, from and after the date on which Comstock designates such Indebtedness as a Priority Lien Obligation
in  accordance  with  the  Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement,  the  obligations  under  such  Priority  Lien  Document  shall
automatically  and  without  any  further  action  be  treated  as  Priority  Lien  Obligations  for  all  purposes  of  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement, including for purposes of the Lien priorities and rights in respect of Collateral set forth in the
Junior  Lien  Intercreditor  Agreement  and  any  Convertible  Note  Obligations  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  at  all  times
Convertible Note Obligations and at no time Priority Lien Obligations.
“Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations” means, except to the extent otherwise provided in the Pari Passu
Intercreditor Agreement, payment in full, in cash (except for contingent indemnities and cost and
Table of Contents
A-2-28
reimbursement obligations to the extent no claim has been made) of all Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations and, with
respect to letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations, delivery of cash collateral or
backstop letters of credit in respect thereof in a manner consistent with the Revolving Credit Agreement and otherwise
reasonably satisfactory to the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and termination of and payment in full in cash of, all
Secured Swap Obligations, in each case after or concurrently with the termination of all commitments to extend credit
thereunder  and  the  termination  of  all  commitments  of  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Secured  Parties  under  the
Revolving Credit Agreement Documents; provided that the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations shall not
be  deemed  to  have  occurred  if  such  payments  are  made  with  the  proceeds  of  other  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
Obligations  that  constitute  an  exchange  or  replacement  for  or  a  refinancing  of  such  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
Obligations.
“Disinterested Director” means, with respect to any transaction or series of transactions in respect of which the Board of
Directors of Comstock is required to deliver a resolution of the Board of Directors under the applicable Convertible Notes
Indenture, a member of the Board of Directors of Comstock who does not have any material direct or indirect financial
interest (other than an interest arising solely from the beneficial ownership of Capital Stock of Comstock) in or with respect
to such transaction or series of transactions.
“Disqualified Capital Stock” means any Capital Stock that, either by its terms, by the terms of any security into which it is
convertible or exchangeable or by contract or otherwise, is, or upon the happening of an event or passage of time would
be,  required  to  be  redeemed  or  repurchased  prior  to  the  final  Stated  Maturity  of  the notesapplicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes or is redeemable at the option of the Holder thereof at any time prior to such final Stated Maturity of
such  New  Convertible  Notes,  or  is  convertible  into  or  exchangeable  for  debt  securities  at  any  time  prior  to  such  final
Stated Maturity of such New Convertible Notes. For purposes of the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—
Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock,” Disqualified Capital Stock shall be valued at the greater of its
voluntary or involuntary maximum fixed redemption or repurchase price plus accrued and unpaid dividends. For such
purposes, the “maximum fixed redemption or repurchase price” of any Disqualified Capital Stock which does not have a
fixed redemption or repurchase price shall be calculated in accordance with the terms of such Disqualified Capital Stock
as if such Disqualified Capital Stock were redeemed or repurchased on the date of determination, and if such price is
based  upon,  or  measured  by,  the  fair  market  value  of  such  Disqualified  Capital  Stock,  such  fair  market  value  shall  be
determined in good faith by the board of directors of the issuer of such Disqualified Capital Stock; provided, however, that
if such Disqualified Capital Stock is not at the date of determination permitted or required to be redeemed or repurchased,
the “maximum fixed redemption or repurchase price” shall be the book value of such Disqualified Capital Stock.
“Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments”  means  production  payment  obligations  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted
Subsidiary recorded as liabilities in accordance with GAAP, together with all undertakings and obligations in connection
therewith.
“Engineering Report”  means  a  reserve  report  as  of  each  December  31  and  June  30,  as  applicable,  with  respect  to  all
Hydrocarbons  attributable  to  the  Oil  and  Gas  Properties  of  Comstock  and  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  prepared  by  an
independent  engineering  firm  of  recognized  standing  in  accordance  with  accepted  industry  practice  and  all  updates
thereto.
“Equity Interests” means Capital Stock and all warrants, options or other rights to acquire Capital Stock (but excluding
any debt security that is convertible into, or exchangeable for, Capital Stock).
“Event of Default” has the meaning set forth above under the caption “Events of Default.”
“Excess Priority Lien Obligations”  means  Obligations  constituting  Priority  Lien  Obligations  for  the  principal  amount  of
loans, letters of credit, reimbursement Obligations under the Priority Lien Documents to the extent that such Obligations
are in excess of the Priority Lien Cap.
Table of Contents
A-2-29
“Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation” means a series of transactions in which Comstock will (i) exchange the New
Senior Secured Notes and warrants for the Old Senior Secured Notes, (ii) exchange the New Convertible Notes for the Old
Unsecured Notes and (iii) solicit the consent of the holders of the Old Senior Secured Notes and Old Unsecured Notes for
certain  amendments  to  the  Old  Indentures,  including  amendments  to  eliminate  or  amend  certain  of  the  restrictive
covenants contained in the Old Indentures and release the collateral securing the Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Exchanged Properties” means properties or assets used or useful in the Oil and Gas Business received by Comstock or
a Restricted Subsidiary in trade or as a portion of the total consideration for other such properties or assets.
“Excluded Collateral” means any cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets to the extent that such cash, certificate of deposit, deposit account, money market account or other such liquid
assets are on deposit or maintained with the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or any other Revolving Credit Agreement
Secured Party (other than the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, in its capacity as such) to cash collateralize letters of credit
constituting  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  or  Secured  Swap  Obligations  constituting  Revolving  Credit
Agreement Obligations.
“Fair Market Value” means with respect to any asset or property, the sale value that would be obtained in an arm’s-length
free market transaction between an informed and willing seller under no compulsion to sell and an informed and willing
buyer under no compulsion to buy. Fair Market Value of an asset or property equal to or in excess of $10.0 million shall be
determined  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  acting  in  good  faith,  whose  determination  shall  be  conclusive  and
evidenced  by  a  resolution  of  such  Board  of  Directors  delivered  to  the  applicable  Convertible  Notes  Trustee,  and  any
lesser Fair Market Value may be determined by an officer of Comstock acting in good faith.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America as in effect from time to time. All
ratios and computations based on GAAP contained in the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture will be computed in
conformity with GAAP.
The  term  “guarantee”  means,  as  applied  to  any  obligation,  (1i)  a  guarantee  (other  than  by  endorsement  of  negotiable
instruments for collection in the ordinary course of business), direct or indirect, in any manner, of any part or all of such
obligation and (ii) an agreement, direct or indirect, contingent or otherwise, the practical effect of which is to assure in any
way  the  payment  or  performance  (or  payment  of  damages  in  the  event  of  non-performance)  of  all  or  any  part  of  such
obligation, including, without limiting the foregoing, the payment of amounts drawn down under letters of credit. When
used as a verb, “guarantee” has a corresponding meaning.
“Holder” means a Person in whose name a note is registered in the Note Register. Hedging Agreement” means (a) any
and all rate swap transactions, basis swaps, credit derivative transactions, forward rate transactions, commodity swaps,
commodity options, forward commodity contracts, equity or equity index swaps or options, bond or bond price or bond
index swaps or options or forward bond or forward bond price or forward bond index transactions, interest rate options,
forward  foreign  exchange  transactions,  cap  transactions,  floor  transactions,  collar  transactions,  currency  swap
transactions, cross-currency rate swap transactions, currency options, spot contracts or any similar transactions or any
combination of any of the foregoing (including any options to enter into any of the foregoing and any agreement, contract
or transaction that constitutes a “swap” within the meaning of section 1a(47) of the Commodity Exchange Act), whether or
not any such transaction is governed by or subject to any master agreement, and (b) any and all transactions of any kind,
and  the  related  confirmations,  which  are  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of,  or  governed  by,  any  form  of  master
agreement published by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc., any International Foreign Exchange
Master Agreement, or any other master agreement (any such master agreement, together with any related schedules, a
“Master Agreement”), including any such obligations or liabilities under any Master Agreement.
“Holder” means a Person in whose name a New Convertible Note is registered in the Note Register.
Table of Contents
A-2-30
“Hydrocarbon Interest” means all rights, titles, interests and estates now or hereafter acquired in and to oil and gas leases,
oil, gas and mineral leases or other liquid or gaseous hydrocarbon leases, mineral fee interests, overriding royalty and
royalty interests, operating rights, net profit interests, production payment interests and other similar types of interests,
including any reserved or residual interest of whatever nature.
“Hydrocarbons”  means  oil,  gas,  casinghead  gas,  drip  gasoline,  natural  gasoline,  condensate,  distillate,  liquid
hydrocarbons, gaseous hydrocarbons and all products refined or separated therefrom.
“Indebtedness” means, with respect to any Person, without duplication:
(1)
(2)
all liabilities of such Person, contingent or otherwise, for borrowed money or for the deferred purchase
price of property or services (excluding any trade accounts payable and other accrued current liabilities
incurred and reserves established in the ordinary course of business) and all liabilities of such Person
incurred  in  connection  with  any  agreement  to  purchase,  redeem,  exchange,  convert  or  otherwise
acquire for value any Capital Stock of such Person, or any warrants, rights or options to acquire such
Capital Stock, outstanding on the Issue Date or thereafter, if, and to the extent, any of the foregoing
would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of such Person prepared in accordance with GAAP;
all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, notes, debentures or other similar instruments, if,
and to the extent, any of the foregoing would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of such Person
prepared in accordance with GAAP;
(3)
all obligations of such Person with respect to letters of credit;
(4)
all indebtedness of such Person created or arising under any conditional sale or other title retention
agreement  with  respect  to  property  acquired  by  such  Person  (even  if  the  rights  and  remedies  of  the
seller or lender under such agreement in the event of default are limited to repossession or sale of such
property), but excluding trade accounts payable arising and reserves established in the ordinary course
of business;
(5)
all Capitalized Lease Obligations of such Person;
(6)
(7)
the Attributable Indebtedness (in excess of any related Capitalized Lease Obligations) related to any
Sale/ Leaseback Transaction of such Person;
all  Indebtedness  referred  to  in  the  preceding  clauses  of  other  Persons  and  all  dividends  of  other
Persons,  the  payment  of  which  is  secured  by  (or  for  which  the  holder  of  such  Indebtedness  has  an
existing  right,  contingent  or  otherwise,  to  be  secured  by)  any  Lien  upon  property  (including,  without
limitation,  accounts  and  contract  rights)  owned  by  such  Person,  even  though  such  Person  has  not
assumed or become liable for the payment of such Indebtedness (the amount of such obligation being
deemed to be the lesser of the value of such property or the amount of the obligation so secured);
(8)
all guarantees by such Person of Indebtedness referred to in this definition (including, with respect to
any Production Payment, any warranties or guaranties of production or payment by such Person with
respect to such Production Payment but excluding other contractual obligations of such Person with
respect to such Production Payment); and
(9)
all obligations of such Person under or in respect of currency exchange contracts, oil and natural gas
price hedging arrangements and Interest Rate Protection Obligations.
A-2-31
Table of Contents
Subject  to  clause  (8)  of  the  first  sentence  of  this  definition,  neither  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  nor
Volumetric Production Payments shall be deemed to be Indebtedness. In addition, Disqualified Capital Stock shall not be
deemed to be Indebtedness.
The  accrual  of  interest,  the  accretion  or  amortization  of  original  issue  discount,  the  payment  of  interest  on  any
Indebtedness in the form of additional Indebtedness with the same terms, and the payment of dividends on Disqualified
Capital  Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  in  the  form  of  additional  shares  of  the  same  class  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred  Stock  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  incurrence  of  Indebtedness  or  an  issuance  of  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or
Preferred Stock for purposes of this definition.
“Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding” means (a) any voluntary or involuntary case or proceeding under any bankruptcy
law with respect to any Collateral Grantor, (b) any other voluntary or involuntary insolvency, reorganization or bankruptcy
case or proceeding, or any receivership, liquidation, reorganization or other similar case or proceeding with respect to any
Collateral Grantor or with respect to any of its assets, (c) any liquidation, dissolution, reorganization or winding up of any
Collateral Grantor whether voluntary or involuntary and whether or not involving insolvency or bankruptcy (other than any
liquidation,  dissolution,  reorganization  or  winding  up  of  any  Subsidiary  of  the  Issuer  permitted  by  the  applicable
Convertible  Note  Documents),  (d)  any  assignment  for  the  benefit  of  creditors  or  any  other  marshalling  of  assets  and
liabilities of any Collateral Grantor or (e) any other proceeding of any type or nature in which substantially all claims of
creditors of any Collateral Grantor are determined and any payment or distribution is or may be made on account of such
claims.
“Interest Rate Protection Obligations” means the obligations of any Person pursuant to any arrangement with any other
Person whereby, directly or indirectly, such Person is entitled to receive from time to time periodic payments calculated by
applying either a floating or a fixed rate of interest on a stated notional amount in exchange for periodic payments made
by such Person calculated by applying a fixed or a floating rate of interest on the same notional amount and shall include,
without limitation, interest rate swaps, caps, floors, collars and similar agreements or arrangements designed to protect
against or manage such Person’s and any of its Subsidiaries exposure to fluctuations in interest rates.
“Investment” means, with respect to any Person, any direct or indirect advance, loan, guarantee of Indebtedness or other
extension of credit or capital contribution by such Person to (by means of any transfer of cash or other property or assets
to others or any payment for property, assets or services for the account or use of others), or any purchase or acquisition
by such Person of any Capital Stock, bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (including derivatives) or evidences of
Indebtedness issued by, any other Person. In addition, the Fair Market Value of the net assets of any Restricted Subsidiary
at  the  time  that  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  designated  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an
“Investment” made by Comstock in such Unrestricted Subsidiary at such time. “Investments” shall exclude (1) extensions
of  trade  credit  or  other  advances  to  customers  on  commercially  reasonable  terms  in  accordance  with  normal  trade
practices  or  otherwise  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  (2)  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  entered  into  in  the
ordinary course of business or as required by any Permitted Indebtedness or any Indebtedness incurred in compliance
with  the  “Limitation  on  Indebtedness  and  Disqualified  Capital  Stock”  covenant,  but  only  to  the  extent  that  the  stated
aggregate notional amounts of such Interest Rate Protection Obligations do not exceed 105% of the aggregate principal
amount  of  such  Indebtedness  to  which  such  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations  relate  and  (3)  endorsements  of
negotiable instruments and documents in the ordinary course of business. If Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary sells
or otherwise disposes of any Capital Stock of any direct or indirect Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock such that, after
giving effect to such sale or disposition, such Person is no longer a Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock, Comstock will be
deemed  to  have  made  an  Investment  on  the  date  of  any  such  sale  or  disposition  equal  to  the  Fair  Market  Value  of
Comstock’s Investments in such Restricted Subsidiary that were not sold or disposed of.
“Issue Date” means the date of original issuance of the notesapplicable series of New Convertible Notes.
Table of Contents
A-2-32
“Junior Lien” means a Lien granted (or purported to be granted) by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor in favor of the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent, at any time, upon any assets or property of Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor to secure
any Convertible Note Obligations.
“Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent”  means  the  collateral  agent  for  all  holders  of  the  Convertible  Note  Obligations.  Bank  of
Montreal will initially serve as the Junior Lien Collateral Agent.
“Junior Lien Collateral Agreements” means, collectively, each Junior Lien Mortgage, the Junior Lien Pledge Agreement,
the Junior Lien Security Agreement, the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement, the Collateral Trust Agreement and each
other  instrument,  including  any  assignment,  security  agreement,  mortgage,  deed  of  trust,  pledge  agreement  or  other
security  instrument,  creating  Liens  in  favor  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  as  required  by  the  Convertible  Note
Documents the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement or the Collateral Trust Agreement, in each case, as the same may be
in effect from time to time.
“Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Intercreditor Agreement among the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, the
Junior Lien Collateral Agent, Comstock, each other Collateral Grantor and the other parties from time to time party thereto,
to be entered into on the Issue Date, as it may be amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to
time  in  accordance  with  the  Convertible  Notes  Indentures  and  (ii)  any  replacement  thereof  that  contains  terms  not
materially less favorable to the Holders of the New Convertible Notes than the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement referred
to in clause (i).
“Junior Lien Mortgage” means all mortgages, deeds of trust and similar documents, instruments and agreements (and all
amendments, modifications and supplements thereof) creating, evidencing, perfecting or otherwise establishing the Liens
on Oil and Gas Properties and other related assets to secure payment of the New Convertible Notes and the Junior Lien
Subsidiary Guarantees or any part thereof.
“Junior Lien Pledge Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy to be entered into on the Issue
Date in favor of the Junior Lien Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Convertible Notes and the other
Convertible Note Obligations and each other pledge agreement in substantially the same form in favor of the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Convertible Notes and the other Convertible Note Obligations
delivered in accordance with the Convertible Notes Indentures and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
“Junior Lien Security Agreement” means each Pledge Agreement and Irrevocable Proxy dated as of the Issue Date in
favor  of  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral  Agent  for  the  benefit  of  the  Holders  of  the  New  Convertible  Notes  and  the  other
Convertible Note Obligations and each other security agreement in substantially the same form in favor of the Junior Lien
Collateral Agent for the benefit of the Holders of the New Convertible Notes and the other Convertible Note Obligations
delivered in accordance with the Convertible Notes Indentures and the Junior Lien Collateral Agreements.
“Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantee” means any guarantee of the New Convertible Notes by any Subsidiary Guarantor in
accordance with the provisions described under “—Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees of New Convertible Notes” and “—
Certain Covenants—Future Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees.”
“Lender Provided Hedging Agreement” means any Hedging Agreement between Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor
and a Secured Swap Counterparty.
“Lien”  means  any  mortgage,  charge,  pledge,  lien  (statutory  or  other),  security  interest,  hypothecation,  assignment  for
security, claim or similar type of encumbrance (including, without limitation, any agreement to give or grant any lease,
conditional sale or other title retention agreement having substantially the same economic effect as any of the foregoing)
upon or with respect to any property of any kind. A Person shall be deemed to own subject to a Lien any property which
such Person has acquired or holds subject to the interest of a vendor or lessor under any conditional sale agreement,
capital lease or other title retention agreement.
Table of Contents
A-2-33
“Liquid Securities” means securities (1) of an issuer that is not an Affiliate of Comstock, (2) that are publicly traded on the
New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange or the Nasdaq Stock Market and (3) as to which Comstock is
not subject to any restrictions on sale or transfer (including any volume restrictions under Rule 144 under the Securities
Act or any other restrictions imposed by the Securities Act) or as to which a registration statement under the Securities
Act  covering  the  resale  thereof  is  in  effect  for  as  long  as  the  securities  are  held;  provided  that  securities  meeting  the
requirements of clauses (1), (2) and (3) above shall be treated as Liquid Securities from the date of receipt thereof until and
only until the earlier of (a) the date on which such securities are sold or exchanged for cash or Cash Equivalents and
(b) 150 days following the date of receipt of such securities. If such securities are not sold or exchanged for cash or Cash
Equivalents within 120 days of receipt thereof, for purposes of determining whether the transaction pursuant to which
Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  received  the  securities  was  in  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the Convertible
Notes Indenture described under “—Certain Covenants —Limitation on Asset Sales,” such securities shall be deemed not
to have been Liquid Securities at any time.
“Material Change” means an increase or decrease (except to the extent resulting from changes in prices) of more than
30% during a fiscal quarter in the estimated discounted future net revenues from proved oil and gas reserves of Comstock
and its Restricted Subsidiaries, calculated in accordance with clause (1)(a) of the definition of Adjusted Consolidated Net
Tangible  Assets; provided, however, that the following will be excluded from the calculation of Material Change: (i) any
acquisitions during the quarter of oil and gas reserves with respect to which Comstock’s estimate of the discounted future
net  revenues  from  proved  oil  and  gas  reserves  has  been  confirmed  by  independent  petroleum  engineers  and  (ii)  any
dispositions of properties and assets during such quarter that were disposed of in compliance with the provisions of the
applicable Convertible Notes Indenture described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Asset Sales.”
“Maturity” means, with respect to any note, the date on which any principal of such note becomes due and payable as
therein or in the Indenture provided, whether at the Stated Maturity with respect to such principal or by declaration of
acceleration, call for redemption or purchase or otherwise.
“Minority Interest” means the percentage interest represented by any class of Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that
are not owned by Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary.
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. or any successor to the rating agency business thereof.
“Mortgaged Properties” means any property owned by a Collateral Grantor that is subject to the Liens existing and to exist
under the terms of the Junior Lien Mortgages.
“Net  Available  Cash”  from  an  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/  Leaseback  Transaction  means  cash  proceeds  received  therefrom
(including  (1)  any  cash  proceeds  received  by  way  of  deferred  payment  of  principal  pursuant  to  a  note  or  installment
receivable  or  otherwise,  but  only  as  and  when  received,  and  (2)  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  Liquid  Securities  and  Cash
Equivalents, and excluding (a) any other consideration received in the form of assumption by the acquiring Person of
Indebtedness  or  other  obligations  relating  to  the  assets  or  property  that  is  the  subject  of  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/
Leaseback  Transaction  and  (b)  except  to  the  extent  subsequently  converted  to  cash,  Cash  Equivalents  or  Liquid
Securities within 240 days after such Asset Sale or Sale/ Leaseback Transaction, consideration constituting Exchanged
Properties or consideration other than as identified in the immediately preceding clauses (1) and (2)), in each case net of
(i) all legal, title and recording expenses, commissions and other fees and expenses incurred, and all federal, state, foreign
and local taxes required to be paid or accrued as a liability under GAAP as a consequence of such Asset Sale or Sale/
Leaseback Transaction, (ii) all payments made on any Indebtedness (but specifically excluding Indebtedness of Comstock
and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  assumed  in  connection  with  or  in  anticipation  of  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/  Leaseback
Transaction) which is secured by any assets subject to such Asset Sale or Sale/ Leaseback Transaction, in accordance
with the terms of any Lien upon such assets, or which must by its terms, or in order to obtain a necessary consent to such
Asset Sale or Sale/ Leaseback Transaction or by applicable law, be repaid out of the proceeds from such Asset Sale or
Table of Contents
A-2-34
Sale/ Leaseback Transaction, provided that such payments are made in a manner that results in the permanent reduction
in the balance of such Indebtedness and, if applicable, a permanent reduction in any outstanding commitment for future
incurrences of Indebtedness thereunder, (iii) all distributions and other payments required to be made to minority interest
holders  in  Subsidiaries  or  joint  ventures  as  a  result  of  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/  Leaseback  Transaction  and  (d)  the
deduction  of  appropriate  amounts  to  be  provided  by  the  seller  as  a  reserve,  in  accordance  with  GAAP,  against  any
liabilities  associated  with  the  assets  disposed  of  in  such  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/  Leaseback  Transaction  and  retained  by
Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary after such Asset Sale or Sale/ Leaseback Transaction; provided, however, that if
any  consideration  for  an  Asset  Sale  or  Sale/  Leaseback  Transaction  (which  would  otherwise  constitute  Net  Available
Cash) is required to be held in escrow pending determination of whether a purchase price adjustment will be made, such
consideration (or any portion thereof) shall become Net Available Cash only at such time as it is released to such Person
or its Restricted Subsidiaries from escrow.
“Net Cash Proceeds” with respect to any issuance or sale of Qualified Capital Stock or other securities, means the cash
proceeds  of  such  issuance  or  sale  net  of  attorneys’  fees,  accountants’  fees,  underwriters’  or  placement  agents’  fees,
discounts or commissions and brokerage, consultant and other fees and expenses actually incurred in connection with
such issuance or sale and net of taxes paid or payable as a result thereof.
“Net  Working  Capital”  means  (1)  all  current  assets  of  Comstock  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  less  (2)  all  current
liabilities of Comstock and its Restricted Subsidiaries, except current liabilities included in Indebtedness, in each case as
set forth in consolidated financial statements of Comstock prepared in accordance with GAAP.
“New Convertible Notes” means, individually or collectively, as the context may require, the New 2019 Convertible Notes
and the New 2020 Convertible Notes.
“New Senior Secured Notes” means Comstock’s 10.0% Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020.
“Non-Recourse  Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  or  that  portion  of  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary  incurred  in  connection  with  the  acquisition  by  Comstock  or  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  any  property  or
assets and as to which (i) the holders of such Indebtedness agree that they will look solely to the property or assets so
acquired and securing such Indebtedness for payment on or in respect of such Indebtedness, and neither Comstock nor
any Subsidiary (other than an Unrestricted Subsidiary) (a) provides credit support, including any undertaking, agreement
or instrument which would constitute Indebtedness, or (b) is directly or indirectly liable for such Indebtedness, and (ii) no
default with respect to such Indebtedness would permit (after notice or passage of time or both), according to the terms
thereof,  any  holder  of  any  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  to  declare  a  default  on  such
Indebtedness or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated or payable prior to its Stated Maturity.
“Note Register” means the register maintained by or for Comstock in which Comstock shall provide for the registration of
the notesapplicable series of New Convertible Notes and the transfer of the notessuch New Convertible Notes.
“Obligations”  means  all  obligations  for  principal,  premium,  interest,  penalties,  fees,  indemnifications,  payments  with
respect to any letters of credit, reimbursements, damages and other liabilities payable under the documentation governing
any Indebtedness.
“Oil and Gas Business” means (i) the acquisition, exploration, development, operation and disposition of interests in oil,
gas  and  other  hydrocarbon  properties,  (ii)  the  gathering,  marketing,  treating,  processing,  storage,  refining,  selling  and
transporting of any production from such interests or properties, (iii) any business relating to or arising from exploration
for or development, production, treatment, processing, storage, refining, transportation or marketing of oil, gas and other
minerals and products produced in association therewith, and (iv) any activity necessary, appropriate or incidental to the
activities described in the foregoing clauses (i) through (iii) of this definition.
Table of Contents
A-2-35
“Oil  and  Gas  Properties”  means  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  the  properties  now  or  hereafter  pooled  or  unitized  with
Hydrocarbon Interests; all presently existing or future unitization, pooling agreements and declarations of pooled units
and  the  units  created  thereby  (including  without  limitation  all  units  created  under  orders,  regulations  and  rules  of  any
Governmental Authority have jurisdiction) that may affect all or any portion of the Hydrocarbon Interests; all operating
agreements,  contracts  and  other  agreements  that  relate  to  any  of  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests  or  the  production,  sale,
purchase, exchange or processing of Hydrocarbons from or attributable to such Hydrocarbon Interest; all Hydrocarbons
in  and  under  and  which  may  be  produced  and  saved  or  attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests,  the  lands  covered
thereby  and  all  oil  in  tanks  and  all  rents,  issues,  profits,  proceeds,  products,  revenues  and  other  income  from  or
attributable  to  the  Hydrocarbon  Interests;  all  tenements,  hereditaments,  appurtenances  and  properties  in  any  manner
appertaining, belonging, affixed or incidental to the Hydrocarbon Interests, properties, rights, titles, interests and estates
described or referred to above, including any and all property, real or personal, now owned or hereinafter acquired and
situated  upon,  used,  held  for  use  or  useful  in  connection  with  the  operating,  working  or  development  of  any  of  such
Hydrocarbon Interests or property (excluding drilling rigs, automotive equipment or other personal property which may be
on such premises for the purpose of drilling a well or for other similar temporary uses) and including any and all oil wells,
gas wells, injection wells or other wells, buildings, structures, fuel separators, liquid extraction plants, plant compressors,
pumps, pumping units, field gathering systems, tanks and tank batteries, fixtures, valves, fittings, machinery and parts,
engines, boilers, meters, apparatus, equipment, appliances, tools, implements, cables, wires, towers, casing, tubing and
rods,  surface  leases,  rightsofway,  easements  and  servitudes  together  with  all  additions,  substitutions,  replacements,
accessions and attachments to any and all of the foregoing.
“Old  Indentures”  means  (i)  the  Indenture,  dated  as  of  October  9,  2009  (the  “Base  Indenture”),  among  Comstock,  the
subsidiary guarantors named therein, and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, as amended and
supplemented  by  the  Third  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  as  of  March  14,  2011,  among  Comstock,  the  subsidiary
guarantors  named  therein  and  The  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  Trust  Company,  N.A.,  as  trustee,  relating  to  Comstock’s
7  3⁄4%  Senior  Notes  due  2019,  (ii)  the  Base  Indenture,  as  amended  and  supplemented  by  the  Fourth  Supplemental
Indenture, dated as of June 5, 2012, among Comstock, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and The Bank of New
York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to Comstock’s 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020 and (iii) the Indenture,
dated as of March 13, 2015, among Comstock, the subsidiary guarantors named therein, and The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A., relating to Comstock’s Old Senior Secured Notes.
“Old Senior Secured Notes” means Comstock’s 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020.
“Old Unsecured Notes” means, collectively, Comstock’s 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019 and 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
“Permitted Collateral Liens” means Liens described in clauses (1), (2), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (13), (18), (19), (20), (21),
(22), (23) and (24) of the definition of “Permitted Liens” that, by operation of law, have priority over the Liens securing the
New Convertible Notes and the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees.
“Permitted Investments” means any of the following:
Table of Contents
(1)
Investments in Cash Equivalents;
(2)
Investments in property, plant and equipment used in the ordinary course of business;
(3)
Investments in Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(4)
(5)
(6)
Investments by Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in another Person, if (a) as a result of
such  Investment  (i)  such  other  Person  becomes  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  (ii)  such  other  Person  is
merged or consolidated with or into, or transfers or conveys all or substantially all of its properties and
assets to, Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary and (b) such other Person is primarily engaged in the Oil
and Gas Business;
A-2-36
entry  into  operating  agreements,  joint  ventures,  partnership  agreements,  working  interests,  royalty
interests,  mineral  leases,  processing  agreements,  farm-out  agreements,  contracts  for  the  sale,
transportation or exchange of oil and natural gas, unitization agreements, pooling arrangements, area of
mutual interest agreements or other similar or customary agreements, transactions, properties, interests
or arrangements, and Investments and expenditures in connection therewith or pursuant thereto, in each
case made or entered into in the ordinary course of the Oil and Gas Business;
entry into any hedging arrangements in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting
Comstock’s or any Restricted Subsidiary’s production, purchases and resales against fluctuations in oil
or natural gas prices;
(7)
entry into any currency exchange contract in the ordinary course of business;
(8)
Investments in stock, obligations or securities received in settlement of debts owing to Comstock or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  as  a  result  of  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  proceedings  or  upon  the  foreclosure,
perfection or enforcement of any Lien in favor of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary, in each case
as to debt owing to Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary that arose in the ordinary course of business
of Comstock or any such Restricted Subsidiary;
(9)
guarantees of Indebtedness permitted under the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital
Stock” covenant; and
(10)
other Investments, in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any one time outstanding the greater of
(a) $25.0 million and (b) 5% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
“Permitted Liens” means the following types of Liens:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Liens  securing  Indebtedness  of  Comstock orand  any Restricted  Subsidiary  that  constitutes  Priority
Credit  Facility  Debt  permitted  pursuant 
“Permitted
Indebtedness”;Subsidiary Guarantor under the Revolving Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal
amount not to exceed $50.0 million at any time outstanding; provided that such Liens are subject to the
Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement
the  definition  of
to  clause
(1)  of
Liens  existing  as  of  the  Issue  Date  (excluding  Liens  securing  Indebtedness  of  Comstock and  any
Subsidiary Guarantor under the BankRevolving Credit Agreement);
Liens securing the notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees; on any property or assets of Comstock and any
Subsidiary Guarantor (a) the New 2019 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue Date in this Exchange
and Consent Solicitation (and any assumption of obligations guaranteed thereby), the Additional New
2019 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the payment of interest thereon, and the Junior Lien
Subsidiary Guarantees in respect thereof and (b) the New 2020 Convertible Notes issued on the Issue
Date  in  this  Exchange  and  Consent  Solicitation  (and  any  assumption  of  obligations  guaranteed
thereby), the Additional New 2020 Convertible Notes issued in connection with the payment of interest
thereon, and the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees in respect thereof;
(4)
Liens in favor of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary;
A-2-37
Table of Contents
(5)
(6)
(7)
Liens  for  taxes,  assessments  and  governmental  charges  or  claims  either  (a)  not  delinquent  or
(b)  contested  in  good  faith  by  appropriate  proceedings  and  as  to  which  Comstock  or  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries shall have set aside on its books such reserves as may be required pursuant to GAAP;
statutory Liens of landlords and Liens of carriers, warehousemen, mechanics, suppliers, materialmen,
repairmen and other Liens imposed by law incurred in the ordinary course of business for sums not
delinquent or being contested in good faith, if such reserve or other appropriate provision, if any, as
shall be required by GAAP shall have been made in respect thereof;
Liens  incurred  or  deposits  made  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  in  connection  with  workers’
compensation, unemployment insurance and other types of social security, or to secure the payment or
performance of tenders, statutory or regulatory obligations, surety and appeal bonds, bids, government
contracts and leases, performance and return of money bonds and other similar obligations (exclusive
of obligations for the payment of borrowed money but including lessee or operator obligations under
statutes, governmental regulations or instruments related to the ownership, exploration and production
of oil, gas and minerals on state, Federal or foreign lands or waters);
(8)
(9)
judgment and attachment Liens not giving rise to an Event of Default so long as any appropriate legal
proceedings which may have been duly initiated for the review of such judgment shall not have been
finally terminated or the period within which such proceeding may be initiated shall not have expired;
easements, rights-of-way, restrictions and other similar charges or encumbrances not interfering in any
material  respect  with  the  ordinary  conduct  of  the  business  of  Comstock  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries;
(10)
any interest or title of a lessor under any capitalized lease or operating lease;
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
purchase money Liens; provided, however, that (a) the related purchase money Indebtedness shall not
be secured by any property or assets of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary other than the property
or assets so acquired (including, without limitation, those acquired indirectly through the acquisition of
stock or other ownership interests) and any proceeds therefrom, (b) the aggregate principal amount of
Indebtedness  secured  by  such  Liens  it  otherwise  permitted  to  be  incurred  under  the  applicable
Convertible Notes Indenture and does not exceed the cost of the property or assets so acquired and
(c) the Liens securing such Indebtedness shall be created within 90 days of such acquisition;
Liens  securing  obligations  under  hedging  agreements  that  Comstock  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary
enters into in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting its production, purchases and
resales against fluctuations in oil or natural gas prices;
Liens upon specific items of inventory or other goods of any Person securing such Person’s obligations
in respect of bankers’ acceptances issued or created for the account of such Person to facilitate the
purchase, shipment or storage of such inventory or other goods;
Liens securing reimbursement obligations with respect to commercial letters of credit which encumber
documents  and  other  property  or  assets  relating  to  such  letters  of  credit  and  products  and  proceeds
thereof;
Table of Contents
A-2-38
(15)
Liens encumbering property or assets under construction arising from progress or partial payments by a
customer of Comstock or its Restricted Subsidiaries relating to such property or assets;
(16)
(17)
Liens encumbering deposits made to secure obligations arising from statutory, regulatory, contractual or
warranty requirements of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, including rights of offset and
set-off;
Liens securing Interest Rate Protection Obligations which Interest Rate Protection Obligations relate to
Indebtedness  that  is  secured  by  Liens  otherwise  permitted  under  the applicable  Convertible  Notes
Indenture;
(18)
Liens (other than Liens securing Indebtedness) on, or related to, properties or assets to secure all or part
of  the  costs  incurred  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the  exploration,  drilling,  development  or
Table of Contents
operation thereof;
(19)
Liens on pipeline or pipeline facilities which arise by operation of law;
(20)
Liens arising under operating agreements, joint venture agreements, partnership agreements, oil and
gas leases, farm-out agreements, division orders, contracts for the sale, transportation or exchange of oil
and  natural  gas,  unitization  and  pooling  declarations  and  agreements,  area  of  mutual  interest
agreements and other agreements which are customary in the Oil and Gas Business;
(21)
Liens reserved in oil and gas mineral leases for bonus or rental payments or for compliance with the
terms of such leases;
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
Liens constituting survey exceptions, encumbrances, easements, or reservations of, or rights to others
for, rights-of-way, zoning or other restrictions as to the use of real properties, and minor defects of title
which,  in  the  case  of  any  of  the  foregoing,  were  not  incurred  or  created  to  secure  the  payment  of
borrowed money or the deferred purchase price of property, assets or services, and in the aggregate do
not  materially  adversely  affect  the  value  of  properties  and  assets  of  Comstock  and  the  Restricted
Subsidiaries,  taken  as  a  whole,  or  materially  impair  the  use  of  such  properties  and  assets  for  the
purposes for which such properties and assets are held by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiaries;
Liens  securing  Non-Recourse  Indebtedness; provided,  however, that  the  related  Non-  Recourse
Indebtedness shall not be secured by any property or assets of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary
other  than  the  property  and  assets  acquired  (including,  without  limitation,  those  acquired  indirectly
through the acquisition of stock or other ownership interests) by Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary
with the proceeds of such Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
Liens on property existing at the time of acquisition thereof by Comstock or any Subsidiary of Comstock
and Liens on property or assets of a Subsidiary existing at the time it became a Subsidiary,; provided
that such Liens were in existence prior to the contemplation of the acquisition and do not extend to any
assets other than the acquired property;
Liens  resulting  from  the  deposit  of  funds  or  evidences  of  Indebtedness  in  trust  for  the  purpose  of
defeasing Indebtedness of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries so long as such deposit and
such defeasance are permitted under the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Limitation
on Restricted Payments;” and
A-2-39
Priority Liens to secure the New Senior Secured Notes issued on the Issue Date (and the subsidiary
guarantees  in  respect  thereof)  and  incurred  under  clause  (12)  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted
Indebtedness”;
Liens to secure any Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to renew, refinance, refund, replace,
amend,  defease  or  discharge,  as  a  whole  or  in  part,  Indebtedness  that  was  previously  so  secured;
provided  that  (a)  the  new  Lien  shall  be  limited  to  all  or  part  of  the  same  property  and  assets  (plus
improvements, accessions, proceeds or dividends or distributions in respect thereof) that secured (or,
under the written arrangements under which the original Lien arose, could secure) the Indebtedness
being refinanced and (b) the new Lien has no greater priority relative to the applicable series of New
Convertible  Notes  and  the  Junior  Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantees,  and  the  holders  of  the  Indebtedness
secured  by  such  Lien  have  no  greater  intercreditor  rights  relative  to  the  applicable  series  of  New
Convertible Notes and the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees and the Holders thereof, than the original
Liens and the related Indebtedness; and
(28)
additional Liens (including Liens securing Indebtedness incurred in connection with the ordinary course
of  businessissuance  of  Additional  New  Senior  Secured  Notes)  of  Comstock  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary of Comstock with respect to obligations that do not exceed at any one time outstanding the
greater of (a) $75.0 million or (b) 5% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
Notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) through (2528) of this definition, the term “Permitted Liens” does not include any
Liens resulting from the creation, incurrence, issuance, assumption or guarantee of any Production Payments other than
Production Payments that are created, incurred, issued, assumed or guaranteed in connection with the financing of, and
within 30 days after, the acquisition of the properties or assets that are subject thereto.
“Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary, the net proceeds of
which are used to renew, extend, refinance, refund or repurchase (including, without limitation, pursuant to a Change of
Control Offer or Prepayment Offer) outstanding Indebtedness of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary,; provided that
(1)  if  the  Indebtedness  (including  the notesNew  Convertible  Notes)  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or
repurchased is pari passu with or subordinated in right of payment to either the notesNew Convertible Notes or the Junior
Lien  Subsidiary  Guarantees,  then  such  Indebtedness  is pari  passu  with  or  subordinated  in  right  of  payment  to  the
notesNew Convertible Notes or the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees, as the case may be, at least to the same extent as
the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased,  (2)  such  Indebtedness  has  a  Stated
Maturity for its final scheduled principal payment that is no earlier than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled principal
payment of the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased and, (3) such Indebtedness
has an Average Life at the time such Indebtedness is incurred that is equal to or greater than the Average Life of the
Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased and (4) if the Indebtedness being renewed,
extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased  by  its  terms  provides  that  interest  is  payable  only  in  kind,  then  such
Indebtedness may not permit the payment of scheduled interest in cash; provided, further, that such Indebtedness is in an
aggregate  principal  amount  (or,  if  such  Indebtedness  is  issued  at  a  price  less  than  the  principal  amount  thereof,  the
aggregate amount of gross proceeds therefrom is) not in excess of the aggregate principal amount then outstanding of
the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased (or if the Indebtedness being renewed,
extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased was issued at a price less than the principal amount thereof, then not in
excess of the amount of liability in respect thereof determined in accordance with GAAP) plus the amount of any premium
required to be paid in connection with such renewal, extension or refinancing, refunding or repurchase pursuant to the
terms of the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased or the amount of any premium
reasonably  determined  by  Comstock  as  necessary  to  accomplish  such  renewal,  extension,  refinancing,  refunding  or
repurchase, plus the amount of reasonable fees and expenses incurred by Comstock or such Restricted Subsidiary in
connection therewith.
Table of Contents
A-2-40
“Person” means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock
company, trust, unincorporated organization or government or any agency or political subdivision thereof.
“Priority Credit Facility Debt” means, collectively, (1) Indebtedness of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary (including,
without limitation, Indebtedness under the Bank Credit Agreement) secured by Liens not otherwise permitted under any of
clauses (2) through (25), inclusive, of the definition of “Permitted Liens,” and (2) other Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital
Stock  of  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  is  not  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor.  For  purposes  of  clause  (1)  of  the  definition  of
“Permitted Indebtedness,” Priority Credit Facility Debt shall be calculated, at any time of determination, (a) in the case of
Indebtedness under the Bank Credit Agreement or Indebtedness under any other instrument or agreement, with reference
to the aggregate principal amount outstanding thereunder at such time, excluding all interest, fees and other Obligations
under such facility, instrument or agreement, and (b) in the case of Disqualified Capital Stock, in the manner specified in
the definition of “Disqualified Capital Stock.”
“Preferred Stock,” means, with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests, participations or other equivalents
(however designated) of such Person’s preferred or preference stock, whether now outstanding or issued after the Issue
Date, including, without limitation, all classes and series of preferred or preference stock of such Person.
“Production  Payments”  means,  collectively,  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  and  Volumetric  Production
Payments. Priority Lien” means a Lien granted (or purported to be granted) by Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor in
favor  of  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent,  at  any  time,  upon  any  assets  or  property  of  Comstock  or  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor to secure any Priority Lien Obligations.
“Priority Lien Cap” means, as of any date, (a) the principal amount of Priority Lien Obligations (including any interest paid-
in-kind)  that  may  be  incurred  as  “Permitted  Indebtedness”  as  of  such  date,  plus  (b)  the  amount  of  all  Secured  Swap
Obligations, to the extent such Secured Swap Obligations are secured by the Priority Liens, plus (c) the amount of accrued
and unpaid interest (excluding any interest paid-in-kind) and outstanding fees, to the extent such Obligations are secured
by the Priority Liens. For purposes of this definition, all letters of credit will be valued at the face amount thereof, whether
or not drawn.
“Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agent”  means  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent,  or  if  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement
ceases to exist, on the Junior Lien Intercreditor Agreement the collateral agent or other representative of the holders of the
New  Senior  Secured  Notes  designated  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Priority  Lien  Documents  and  the  Junior  Lien
Intercreditor Agreement.
“Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agreements”  means,  collectively,  each  mortgage,  pledge  agreement,  security  agreement,
instrument,  assignment,  deed  of  trust  or  other  security  instrument  creating  Priority  Liens  in  favor  of  the  Priority  Lien
Collateral Agent as required by the Revolving Credit Agreement, the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the Priority Lien
Intercreditor Agreements, in each case, as the same may be in effect from time to time.
“Priority Lien Documents” means, collectively, the Revolving Credit Agreement Documents and the Senior Secured Note
Documents.
“Priority Lien Excluded Collateral” has the meaning set forth in the Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement.
“Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement” means (i) the Amended and Restated Priority Lien Intercreditor Agreement, among
the Priority Lien Collateral Agent, Senior Secured Notes Trustee, the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, Comstock, each
other  Collateral  Grantor,  the  other  parties  from  time  to  time  party  thereto,  and  The  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  Trust
Company in its capacity as the trustee under the Old Senior Secured Notes to be entered into on the Issue Date, as it may
be  amended,  restated,  supplemented  or  otherwise  modified  from  time  to  time  in  accordance  with  the  Priority  Lien
Documents and (ii) any replacement thereof.
Table of Contents
A-2-41
“Priority Lien Obligations” means, collectively, (a) the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations and (b) the Senior Secured
Note  Obligations,  in  each  case  whether  accrued  or  incurred  before  or  after  the  commencement  of  an  Insolvency  or
Liquidation Proceeding, and whether or not allowed or allowable in an Insolvency or Liquidation Proceeding.
“Priority  Lien  Security  Documents”  means,  collectively,  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Documents  and  the  Senior
Secured Note Documents.
“Production  Payments”  means,  collectively,  Dollar-Denominated  Production  Payments  and  Volumetric  Production
Payments.
“Public Equity Offering” means an offer and sale of Common Stock (other than Disqualified Stock) of Comstock for cash
pursuant to a registration statement that has been declared effective by the Commission pursuant to the Securities Act
(other than a registration statement on Form S-8 or otherwise relating to equity securities issuable under any employee
benefit  plan  of  Comstock). Proved  Reserves”  means  those  Hydrocarbons  that  have  been  estimated  with  reasonable
certainty,  as  demonstrated  by  geological  and  engineering  data,  to  be  economically  recoverable  from  the  Oil  and  Gas
Properties by existing producing methods under existing economic conditions.
“Qualified Capital Stock” of any Person means any and all Capital Stock of such Person other than Disqualified Capital
Stock.
“Relevant Stock Exchange” means The New York Stock Exchange or, if the Common Stock (or other security for which a
Daily VWAP must be determined) is not then listed on The New York Stock Exchange, the principal other U.S. national or
regional securities exchange on which the Common Stock (or such other security) is then listed.
“Required Junior Lien Debtholders”  means,  at  any  time,  the  holders  of  a  majority  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  all
Convertible Note Obligations then outstanding, calculated in accordance with the provisions described above under the
caption “—Collateral Trust Agreement—Voting”. For purposes of this definition, Convertible Note Obligations registered
in the name of, or beneficially owned by, Comstock or any Affiliate of Comstock will be deemed not to be outstanding.
“Required Stockholder Approval” means the approval by (1) a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of common
stock of the amendment to Comstock’s restated articles of incorporation to increase the number of shares of Comstock’s
common stock authorized for issuance in an amount to provide a sufficient number of authorized shares of Comstock’s
common stock for the issuance of shares upon conversion of the New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary,
exercise of the warrants and (2) a majority of the shares of common stock represented at the special meeting and entitled
to vote on the issuance of the maximum number of shares of Common Stock that would be issued upon conversion of all
of the outstanding New Convertible Notes and, to the extent necessary, exercise of all of the warrants.
“Restricted Investment” means (without duplication) (i) the designation of a Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in
the  manner  described  in  the  definition  of  “Unrestricted  Subsidiary”  and  (ii)  any  Investment  other  than  a  Permitted
Investment.
“Restricted Subsidiary” means  any  Subsidiary  of  Comstock,  whether  existing  on  or  after  the  Issue  Date,  unless  such
Subsidiary  of  Comstock  is  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  is  designated  as  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  pursuant  to  the
terms of the Convertible Notes Indenture.
“S&P” means Standard and Poor’s Ratings Services, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., or any successor to
the  rating  agency  business  thereof. Revolving  Credit  Agreement”  means  that  certain  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of
March 4, 2015, among Comstock, the lenders from time to time party thereto and the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent,
as amended, restated, modified, renewed, refunded, replaced or refinanced, from time to time.
Table of Contents
A-2-42
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent”  means  Bank  of  Montreal  (or  other  agent  designated  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), together with its successors and permitted assigns in such capacity.
“Revolving Credit Agreement Documents” means the Revolving Credit Agreement and any other Loan Documents (as
defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement).
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations”  means,  collectively,  (a)  the  Obligations  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement)  of  Comstock  and  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Documents,  in  an
aggregate principal amount for all such Obligations not to exceed $50,000,000, plus interest and all fees, costs, charges,
penalties and expenses, including legal fees and expenses to the extent authorized under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents, in each case whether accrued or incurred before or after the commencement of an Insolvency or Liquidation
Proceeding,  and  whether  or  not  allowed  or  allowable  in  an  Insolvency  or  Liquidation  Proceeding,  and  (b)  the  Secured
Swap Obligations.
“Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Secured  Parties”  means,  collectively,  the  Lenders  (as  defined  in  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement), the Secured Swap Counterparties and the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent.
“S&P” means S&P Global Ratings, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., or any successor to the rating agency
business thereof.
“Sale/ Leaseback Transaction” means, with respect to Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, any arrangement
with any Person providing for the leasing by Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of any principal property,
whereby such property has been or is to be sold or transferred by Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to such
Person.
“Secured Debt” means, collectively, the Priority Lien Obligations and the Convertible Note Obligations.
“Secured Debt Documents” means, collectively, the Priority Lien Documents and the Convertible Note Documents.
“Secured Swap Counterparty” means, with respect to a Lender Provided Hedging Agreement, a counterparty that at the
time such Hedging Agreement is entered into is a Lender (as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement) or an Affiliate of a
Lender  (including  a  Hedging  Agreement  in  existence  prior  to  the  date  hereof  or  prior  to  such  Person  or  its  Affiliate
becoming a Lender); provided that, for the avoidance of doubt, the term “Lender Provided Hedging Agreement” shall not
include  any  Hedging  Agreement  or  transactions  under  any  Hedging  Agreement  entered  into  after  the  time  that  such
counterparty ceases to be a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender.
“Secured Swap Obligations” means all obligations of Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor under any Lender Provided
Hedging Agreement.
“Security  Documents”  means,  collectively  the  Priority  Lien  Collateral  Agreements  and  the  Junior  Lien  Collateral
Agreements.
“Senior Indebtedness”  means  any  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  (whether  outstanding  on  the
date hereof or hereinafter incurred), unless such Indebtedness is Subordinated Indebtedness.
“Senior Secured Note Documents” means the Senior Secured Note Indenture, the Priority Lien Collateral Agreements and
any agreement, instrument or other document evidencing or governing the Senior Secured Note Obligations.
“Senior  Secured  Note  Obligations”  means  all  advances  to,  and  debts,  liabilities,  obligations,  covenants  and  duties  of,
Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor arising under the Senior Secured Notes Indenture, the New Senior
Table of Contents
A-2-43
Secured  Notes,  the  New  Senior  Secured  Notes,  the  subsidiary  guarantees  thereof  and  the  other  Senior  Secured  Note
Documents (as defined in the Senior Secured Notes Indenture) (including all principal, premium, interest, penalties, fees,
charges, charges, expenses, indemnifications, reimbursement obligations, damages, guarantees, and other liabilities or
amounts payable or arising thereunder), whether direct or indirect (including those acquired by assumption), absolute or
contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and including interest and fees that accrue after the
commencement by or against Comstock or any Subsidiary Guarantor of any proceeding in bankruptcy or insolvency law
naming such Person as the debtor in such proceeding, regardless of whether such interest and fees are allowed claims in
such proceeding.
“Senior Secured Notes Indenture” means the Indenture, dated as of                     , 2016, by and among Comstock, as issuer,
the Subsidiary Guarantors and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee, relating to the New Senior
Secured Notes.
“Stated Maturity”  means,  when  used  with  respect  to  any  Indebtedness  or  any  installment  of  interest  thereon,  the  date
specified in the instrument evidencing or governing such Indebtedness as the fixed date on which the principal of such
Indebtedness or such installment of interest is due and payable.
“Subordinated  Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  of  Comstock  or  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  which  is  expressly
subordinated in right of payment to the notesNew Junior Secured Notes or the Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees, as the
case may be.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person, (1) a corporation a majority of whose Voting Stock is at the time owned,
directly or indirectly, by such Person, by one or more Subsidiaries of such Person or by such Person and one or more
Subsidiaries  of  such  Person,  or  (2)  any  other  Person  (other  than  a  corporation),  including,  without  limitation,  a  joint
venture, in which such Person, one or more Subsidiaries of such Person or such Person and one or more Subsidiaries of
such Person have, directly or indirectly, at the date of determination thereof, at least majority ownership interest entitled to
vote in the election of directors, managers or trustees thereof (or other Person performing similar functions).
“Subsidiary Guarantee” means any guarantee of the notes by any Subsidiary Guarantor in accordance with the provisions
described under “—Subsidiary Guarantees of Notes” and “—Certain Covenants—Limitation on Guarantees by Restricted
Subsidiaries.” “Subsidiary Guarantor Guarantor” means (1) Comstock Oil & Gas, LP, (2) Comstock Oil & Gas—Louisiana,
LLC, (3) Comstock Oil & Gas GP, LLC, (4) Comstock Oil & Gas Investments, LLC, (5) Comstock Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.,
(6) each of Comstock’s other Restricted Subsidiaries, if any, executing a supplemental indenture in which such Subsidiary
agrees  to  be  bound  by  the  terms  of  the applicable  Convertible  Notes Indenture  and  (7)  any  Person  that  becomes  a
successor guarantor of the notesapplicable series of New Convertible Notes in compliance with the provisions described
under “—Junior  Lien Subsidiary  Guarantees  of  New  Convertible  Notes”  and  “Certain  Covenants—Limitation  onFuture
Junior Lien Subsidiary Guarantees by Restricted Subsidiaries.”
“2009 Notes Issue Date” means October 9, 2009.
“Swap  Obligation”  means,  with  respect  to  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  any  obligation  to  pay  or  perform  under  any
agreement,  contract  or  transaction  that  constitutes  a  “swap”  within  the  meaning  of  Section  1(a)(47)  of  the  Commodity
Exchange Act.
“Threshold  Price”  means,  initially,  $9.24.  The  Threshold  Price  is  subject  to  adjustment  in  inverse  proportion  to  the
adjustments to the Conversion Rate pursuant to the terms of the applicable Convertible Notes Indenture.
“Trading Day” means a day on which:
(i) trading in the Common Stock (or other security for which a Daily VWAP must be determined) generally occurs on the
Relevant  Stock  Exchange  or,  if  the  Common  Stock  (or  such  other  security)  is  not  then  listed  on  the  Relevant  Stock
Exchange, on the principal other market on which the Common Stock (or such other security) is then traded; and
Table of Contents
A-2-44
(ii) a Daily VWAP for the Common Stock (or other security for which a Daily VWAP must be determined) is available on
such securities exchange or market;
provided that if the Common Stock (or other security for which a Daily  VWAP  must  be  determined)  is  not  so  listed  or
traded, “Trading Day” means a business day.
“Unrestricted Subsidiary” means (1) any Subsidiary of Comstock that at the time of determination will be designated an
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  as  provided  below  and  (2)  any  Subsidiary  of  an
Unrestricted  Subsidiary.  The  Board  of  Directors  of  Comstock  may  designate  any  Subsidiary  of  Comstock  as  an
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  so  long  as  (a)  neither  Comstock  nor  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  directly  or  indirectly  liable
pursuant to the terms of any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary; (b) no default with respect to any Indebtedness of such
Subsidiary would permit (upon notice, lapse of time or otherwise) any holder of any other Indebtedness of Comstock or
any Restricted Subsidiary to declare a default on such other Indebtedness or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated
or payable prior to its Stated Maturity; (c) such designation as an Unrestricted Subsidiary would be permitted under the
“Limitation on Restricted Payments” covenant; and (d) such designation shall not result in the creation or imposition of
any Lien on any of the properties or assets of Comstock or any Restricted Subsidiary (other than any Permitted Lien or
any  Lien  the  creation  or  imposition  of  which  shall  have  been  in  compliance  with  the  “Limitation  on  Liens”  covenant);
provided, however, that with respect to clause (a), Comstock or a Restricted Subsidiary may be liable for Indebtedness of
an Unrestricted Subsidiary if (i) such liability constituted a Permitted Investment or a Restricted Payment permitted by the
“Limitation  on  Restricted  Payments”  covenant,  in  each  case  at  the  time  of  incurrence,  or  (ii)  the  liability  would  be  a
Permitted Investment at the time of designation of such Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary. Any such designation
by the Board of Directors of Comstock shall be evidenced to the applicable Convertible Notes Trustee by filing a Board
Resolutionboard resolution with the Trusteesuch trustee giving effect to such designation. If, at any time any Unrestricted
Subsidiary would fail to meet the foregoing requirements as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, it shall thereafter cease to be an
Unrestricted Subsidiary for purposes of the Indenture and any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary shall be deemed to be
Incurred as of such date. The Board of Directors of Comstock may designate any Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted
Subsidiary if, immediately after giving effect to such designation on a pro forma basis, (i) no Default or Event of Default
shall  have  occurred  and  be  continuing,  (ii)  Comstock  could  incur  $1.00  of  additional  Indebtedness  under  the  first
paragraph of the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” covenant and (iii) if any of the properties
and assets of Comstock or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries would upon such designation become subject to any Lien
(other than a Permitted Lien), the creation or imposition of such Lien shall have been in compliance with the “Limitation on
Liens” covenant.
“Volumetric  Production  Payments”  means  production  payment  obligations  of  Comstock  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary
recorded  as  deferred  revenue  in  accordance  with  GAAP,  together  with  all  undertakings  and  obligations  in  connection
therewith.
“Voting Stock” means any class or classes of Capital Stock pursuant to which the holders thereof have the general voting
power under ordinary circumstances to elect at least a majority of the board of directors, managers or trustees of any
Person (irrespective of whether or not, at the time, stock of any other class or classes shall have, or might have, voting
power by reason of the happening of any contingency).
“Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary” means any Restricted Subsidiary of Comstock to the extent (1) all of the Capital
Stock or other ownership interests in such Restricted Subsidiary, other than directors’ qualifying shares mandated by
applicable law, is owned directly or indirectly by Comstock or (2) such Restricted Subsidiary does substantially all of its
business in one or more foreign jurisdictions and is required by the applicable laws and regulations of any such foreign
jurisdiction to be partially owned by the government of such foreign jurisdiction or individual or corporate citizens of such
foreign jurisdiction in order for such Restricted Subsidiary to transact business in such foreign jurisdiction, provided that
Comstock, directly or indirectly, owns the remaining Capital Stock or ownership interest in such Restricted Subsidiary
and,  by  contract  or  otherwise,  controls  the  management  and  business  of  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  and  derives  the
economic benefits of ownership of such Restricted Subsidiary to substantially the same extent as if such Subsidiary were
a wholly owned subsidiary.
Table of Contents
A-2-45
APPENDIX 3: TERMS OF EXISTING INDENTURES TO BE MODIFIED BY THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS
Terms of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture to be Modified by the Proposed Amendments
The following Sections of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture will be deleted under the Proposed Amendments:
•
Subsection (b) of Section 4.04 Certificates and Other Information.
(b)
The Company shall deliver to the Trustee and the Collateral Agent, promptly after delivery to the Revolving Credit
Agreement Agent or the lenders under the Revolving Credit Agreement or, if no Revolving Credit Agreement is then
in effect, upon the reasonable request of the Collateral Agent in form and detail satisfactory to the Collateral Agent or
otherwise as required by Section 11.01:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a schedule of all oil, gas, and other mineral production attributable to all material Oil and Gas Properties of
the  Collateral  Grantors,  and  in  any  event  all  such  Oil  and  Gas  Properties  included  in  the  most  recent
Engineering Report;
all title or other information received after the Issue Date by the Collateral Grantors which discloses any
material defect in the title to any material asset included in the most recent Engineering Report;
(I) as soon as available and in any event within 90 days after each January 1, commencing with January 1,
2015, an annual reserve report as of each December 31 with respect to all Hydrocarbons attributable to
the  Oil  and  Gas  Properties  of  the  Collateral  Grantors  prepared  by  an  independent  engineering  firm  of
recognized standing acceptable to the Collateral Agent (in the case of delivery upon the request of the
Collateral Agent) in accordance with accepted industry practices, and (II) within 90 days after each July 1
commencing  with  July  1,  2015,  a  reserve  report  as  of  each  June  30,  with  respect  to  all  Hydrocarbons
attributable  to  the  Oil  and  Gas  Properties  of  the  Collateral  Grantors  prepared  by  the  Company  in
accordance with accepted industry practices;
an updated reserve report with respect to all Hydrocarbons attributable to the Oil and Gas Properties of the
Collateral Grantors prepared by an independent engineering firm of recognized standing acceptable to the
Collateral  Agent  (in  the  case  of  delivery  upon  the  request  of  the  Collateral  Agent)  in  accordance  with
accepted industry practices;
title opinions (or other title reports or title information) and other opinions of counsel, in each case in form
and substance acceptable to the Collateral Agent (in the case of delivery upon the request of the Collateral
Agent), with respect to at least eighty percent (80%) of the PV-9 of the Proved Reserves included in the
most recent Engineering Report, for which satisfactory title reports have not been previously delivered to
the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent or Collateral Agent as applicable, if any; and
(6)
concurrently with the delivery of each Engineering Report hereunder:
(I)
a  certificate  of  an  Officer  (in  form  and  substance  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Collateral
Agent in the case of delivery upon the request of the Collateral Agent):
(A)
setting  forth  as  of  a  recent  date,  a  true  and  complete  list  of  all  Hedging
Agreements of the Company and each Restricted
A-3-1
Table of Contents
•
Subsidiary, the material terms thereof (including the type, term, effective
date, termination date and notional amounts or volumes), the net mark-to-
market value therefor, any new credit support agreements relating thereto,
any margin required or supplied under any credit support document, and
the counterparty to each such agreement; and
(B)
comparing aggregate notional volumes of all Hedging Agreements of the
Company  and  each  Restricted  Subsidiary,  which  were  in  effect  during
such  period  (other  than  basis  differential  hedgings)  and  the  actual
production  volumes  for  each  of  natural  gas  and  crude  oil  during  such
period, which certificate shall certify that the hedged volumes for each of
natural gas and crude oil did not exceed 100% of actual production or if
such hedged volumes did exceed actual production, specify the amount of
such excess;
(II)
(III)
a report, prepared by or on behalf of the Company detailing on a monthly basis for the next
twelve month period (A) the projected production of Hydrocarbons by the Company and the
Restricted  Subsidiaries  and  the  assumptions  used  in  calculating  such  projections,  (B)  an
annual  operating  budget  for  the  Company  and  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries,  and  (C)  such
other  information  as  may  be  reasonably  requested  by  the  Collateral  Agent  (in  the  case  of
delivery upon the request of the Collateral Agent);
an Officer’s Certificate, certifying whether the Company is in compliance with the mortgage
and title requirements set forth in Section 11.01 and setting forth the actual percentages as to
which compliance has been achieved and if the Company is not in compliance the Company
shall identify which Oil and Gas Properties are required to be mortgaged and/or as to which
adequate title information has not been delivered; and
(7)
prompt written notice (and in any event within 30 days prior thereto) of any change (I) in any Collateral
Grantor’s corporate name or in any trade name used to identify such Person in the conduct of its business
or in the ownership of its properties, (II) in the location of any Collateral Grantor’s chief executive office or
principal  place  of  business,  (III)  in  any  Collateral  Grantor’s  identity  or  corporate  structure  or  in  the
jurisdiction in which such Person is incorporated or formed, (IV) in any Collateral Grantor’s jurisdiction of
organization or such Person’s organizational identification number in such jurisdiction of organization, and
(V) in any Collateral Grantor’s federal taxpayer identification number.
Section 4.07. Limitation on Restricted Payments.
(a)
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly:
(1)
declare or pay any dividend on, or make any other distribution to holders of, any shares of Capital Stock of
the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary (other than dividends or distributions payable solely in shares
of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company or in options, warrants or other rights to purchase Qualified
Capital Stock of the Company);
A-3-2
Table of Contents
(2)
(3)
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire or retire for value any Capital Stock of the Company or any Affiliate
thereof (other than any Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary of the Company) or any options, warrants or
other rights to acquire such Capital Stock (other than the purchase, redemption, acquisition or retirement of
any  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  solely  in  shares  of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  the
Company);
make any principal payment on or repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value,
prior to any scheduled principal payment, scheduled sinking fund payment or maturity, any Subordinated
Indebtedness (excluding any intercompany Indebtedness between or among the Company and any of its
Restricted  Subsidiaries),  except  in  any  case  out  of  the  net  cash  proceeds  of  Permitted  Refinancing
Indebtedness; or
(4)
make any Restricted Investment;
(all such payments or other actions described in these clauses (1) through (4) being collectively referred to as “Restricted
Payments”), unless at the time of and after giving effect to such Restricted Payment:
(I)
(II)
(III)
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
the  Company  could  Incur  $1.00  of  additional  Indebtedness  in  accordance  with  the  Fixed
Charge Coverage Ratio test set forth in Section 4.09(a); and
the aggregate amount of all Restricted Payments declared or made after January 1, 2015,
shall not exceed the sum (without duplication) of the following:
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
50%  of  the  Consolidated  Net  Income  of  the  Company  accrued  on  a
cumulative  basis  during  the  period  beginning  on  January  1,  2015,  and
ending on the last day of the Company’s last fiscal quarter ending prior to
the  date  of  such  proposed  Restricted  Payment  (or,  if  such  Consolidated
Net Income is a loss, minus 100% of such loss); plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and
property other than cash, received after January 1, 2015, by the Company
from the issuance or sale (other than to any of its Restricted Subsidiaries)
of  shares  of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  or  any  options,
warrants or rights to purchase such shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the
Company; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds, or the Fair Market Value of assets and
property other than cash, received after January 1, 2015, by the Company
(other  than  from  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries)  upon  the  exercise  of
any  options,  warrants  or  rights  to  purchase  shares  of  Qualified  Capital
Stock of the Company; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds received after January 1, 2015, by the
Company  from  the  issuance  or  sale  (other  than  to  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries) of Indebtedness or shares of
Table of Contents
A-3-3
Disqualified Capital Stock that have been converted into or exchanged for
Qualified Capital Stock of the Company, together with the aggregate cash
received by the Company at the time of such conversion or exchange; plus
(E)
to the extent not otherwise included in Consolidated Net Income, the net
reduction  in  Investments  in  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries  resulting  from
dividends, repayments of loans or advances, or other transfers of assets, in
each  case  to  the  Company  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  after  January  1,
2015,  from  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  from  the  redesignation  of  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary (valued in each case as
provided in the definition of “Investment”), not to exceed in the case of any
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  the  total  amount  of  Investments  (other  than
Permitted  Investments)  in  such  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  made  by  the
Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries in such Unrestricted Subsidiary
after January 1, 2015.
(b)
Notwithstanding  the  preceding  provisions,  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  may  take  the  following
actions so long as (in the case of clauses (3), (4), (5) and (8) of this Section 4.07(b)) no Default or Event of Default
shall have occurred and be continuing:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
the  payment  of  any  dividend  on  any  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  within  60  days  after  the  date  of
declaration  thereof,  if  at  such  declaration  date  such  declaration  complied  with  the  provisions  of  the
preceding paragraph (and such payment shall be deemed to have been paid on such date of declaration
for purposes of any calculation required by the provisions of the preceding paragraph);
the payment of any dividend payable from a Restricted Subsidiary to the Company or any other Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company;
the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement of any shares of any class of Capital Stock of
the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, in exchange for, or out of the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds
from,  a  substantially  concurrent  issuance  and  sale  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of  shares  of
Qualified Capital Stock of the Company;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of  any
Subordinated  Indebtedness  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the  aggregate  Net  Cash  Proceeds  from,  a
substantially concurrent issuance and sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary) of shares of Qualified
Capital Stock of the Company;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of
Subordinated Indebtedness (other than Disqualified Capital Stock) in exchange for, or out of the aggregate
net  cash  proceeds  of,  a  substantially  concurrent  Incurrence  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of
Subordinated Indebtedness of the Company so long as (a) the principal amount of such new Indebtedness
does not exceed the principal amount (or, if such Subordinated Indebtedness being refinanced provides
for  an  amount  less  than  the  principal  amount  thereof  to  be  due  and  payable  upon  a  declaration  of
acceleration thereof, such lesser amount as of the date of determination) of the
Table of Contents
A-3-4
•
Subordinated Indebtedness being so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or retired, plus the
amount of any premium required to be paid in connection with such refinancing pursuant to the terms of
the Indebtedness refinanced or the amount of any premium reasonably determined by the Company as
necessary to accomplish such refinancing, plus the amount of expenses of the Company incurred in
connection with such refinancing, (b) such new Indebtedness is subordinated to the Notes at least to the
same extent as such Subordinated Indebtedness so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or
retired, and (c) such new Indebtedness has an Average Life to Stated Maturity that is longer than the
Average Life to Stated Maturity of the Notes and such new Indebtedness has a Stated Maturity for its final
scheduled principal payment that is at least 91 days later than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled
principal payment of the Notes;
(6)
(7)
loans made to officers, directors or employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary approved by
the Board of Directors in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1,000,000 outstanding at any one time, the
proceeds of which are used solely (a) to purchase common stock of the Company in connection with a
restricted stock or employee stock purchase plan,  or  to  exercise  stock  options  received  pursuant  to  an
employee or director stock option plan or other incentive plan, in a principal amount not to exceed the
exercise price of such stock options, or (b) to refinance loans, together with accrued interest thereon, made
pursuant to item (a) of this clause (6);
the repurchase of Equity Interests deemed to occur upon the exercise of stock or other equity options to the
extent such Equity Interests represent a portion of the exercise price of those stock or other equity options
and any repurchase or other acquisition of Equity Interests is made in lieu of or to satisfy withholding taxes
in  connection  with  any  exercise  or  exchange  of  stock  options,  warrants,  incentives  or  other  rights  to
acquire Equity Interests; and
(8)
other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $35,000,000.
(c)
(d)
The actions described in clauses (1), (3), (4) and (6) of Section 4.07(b) shall be Restricted Payments that shall be
permitted  to  be  made  in  accordance  with  Section  4.07(b)  but  shall  reduce  the  amount  that  would  otherwise  be
available for Restricted Payments under Section 4.07(a)(III) (provided that any dividend paid pursuant to clause (1) of
Section 4.07(b) shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available under Section 4.07(a)(III) when declared,
but not also when subsequently paid pursuant to such clause (1)), and the actions described in clauses (2), (5), (7)
and (8) of Section 4.07(b) shall be permitted to be taken in accordance with this clause (c) and shall not reduce the
amount that would otherwise be available for Restricted Payments under Section 4.07(a)(III).
The amount of all Restricted Payments (other than cash) will be the Fair Market Value on the date of the Restricted
Payment  of  the  asset(s)  or  securities  proposed  to  be  transferred  or  issued  by  the  Company  or  such  Restricted
Subsidiary, as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted Payment.
Section 4.08. Limitation on Dividend and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Subsidiaries.
(a)
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create or suffer to exist
or allow to become effective any consensual encumbrance or restriction of any kind on the ability of any Restricted
Subsidiary:
(1)
to  pay  dividends,  in  cash  or  otherwise,  or  make  any  other  distributions  on  its  Capital  Stock,  or  make
to  pay  dividends,  in  cash  or  otherwise,  or  make  any  other  distributions  on  its  Capital  Stock,  or  make
payments on any Indebtedness owed, to the Company or any other Restricted
Table of Contents
A-3-5
•
Subsidiary; provided that the priority that any series of preferred stock of a Restricted Subsidiary has in
receiving dividends or liquidating distributions before dividends or liquidating distributions are paid in
respect of common stock of such Restricted Subsidiary shall not constitute a restriction on the ability to
make dividends or distributions on Capital Stock for purposes of this Section 4.08;
(2)
(3)
to make loans or advances to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary; or
to transfer any of its property or assets to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary.
(b)
The  restrictions  in  Section  4.08(a)  are  collectively  referred  to  herein  as  a  “Payment  Restriction.”  However,  the
preceding restrictions will not apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
customary provisions restricting subletting or assignment of any lease governing a leasehold interest of
the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, or customary restrictions in licenses relating to the property
covered thereby and entered into in the ordinary course of business;
any  instrument  governing  Indebtedness  of  a  Person  acquired  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary at the time of such acquisition, which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any other
Person, other than the Person, or the property or assets of the Person, so acquired, provided that such
Indebtedness was not Incurred in anticipation of such acquisition;
any instrument governing Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that is not
a  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  provided  that  (a)  such  Indebtedness  or  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  is  permitted
under  Section  4.09  and  (b)  the  terms  and  conditions  of  any  Payment  Restrictions  thereunder  are  not
materially more restrictive than the Payment Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement and
this Indenture as in effect on the Issue Date;
the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the Issue Date or any agreement that amends, modifies,
supplements, restates, extends, renews, refinances or replaces the Revolving Credit Agreement, provided
that the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions thereunder are not materially more restrictive
than the Payment Restrictions contained in the Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the Issue Date;
this Indenture, the Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees; or
the Existing Indentures and any subsidiary guarantees thereof, in each case as in effect on the Issue Date.
Section 4.09. Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Stock.
(a)
The  Company  will  not,  and  will  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  create,  incur,  issue,  assume,
The  Company  will  not,  and  will  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  create,  incur,  issue,  assume,
guarantee or in any manner become directly or indirectly liable for the payment of (collectively, “Incur,” “Incurrence,”
“Incurred”  and  “Incurring”  shall  have  meanings  correlative  to  the  foregoing)  any  Indebtedness  (including  any
Acquired Indebtedness), and the Company will not issue any Disqualified Capital Stock and will not permit any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries to issue any Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock; provided that the Company may
Incur
(a)
Table of Contents
A-3-6
Indebtedness (including Acquired Indebtedness) or issue Disqualified Capital Stock, and any Restricted Subsidiary
that is a Subsidiary Guarantor may Incur Indebtedness (including Acquired Indebtedness) or issue shares of
Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock if (1) at the time of such event and after giving effect thereto on a pro
forma basis the Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the four full quarters immediately preceding such
event, taken as one period, would have been equal to or greater than 2.25 to 1.0 and (2) no Default or Event of
Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time such additional Indebtedness is Incurred or such
Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock is issued or would occur as a consequence of the Incurrence of the
additional Indebtedness or the issuance of the Disqualified Capital Stock or Preferred Stock.
(b)
The  restrictions  in  Section  4.09(a)  will  not  prohibit  the  Incurrence  of  any  of  the  following  items  of  Indebtedness
(collectively, “Permitted Indebtedness”):
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Indebtedness under the Notes issued on the Issue Date;
Indebtedness outstanding or in effect on the Issue Date (and not repaid or defeased with the proceeds of
the offering of the Notes);
(I) obligations pursuant to Interest Rate Protection Obligations, but only to the extent such obligations do
not exceed 105% of the aggregate principal amount of the Indebtedness covered by such Interest Rate
Protection  Obligations;  (II)  obligations  under  currency  exchange  contracts  entered  into  in  the  ordinary
course of business; and (III) hedging arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business for the
purpose of protecting production, purchases and resales against fluctuations in oil or natural gas prices,
and any guarantee of any of the foregoing;
the Subsidiary Guarantees (and any assumption of the obligations guaranteed thereby);
the  Incurrence  by  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  of  intercompany  Indebtedness
between or among the Company and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; provided that:
(I)
(II)
if the Company is the obligor on such Indebtedness and a Subsidiary Guarantor is
not  the  obligee,  such  Indebtedness  must  be  expressly  subordinated  to  the  prior
payment  in  full  in  cash  of  all  Note  Obligations  with  respect  to  the  Notes,  or  if  a
Subsidiary Guarantor is the obligor on such Indebtedness and neither the Company
nor  another  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  the  obligee,  such  Indebtedness  must  be
expressly  subordinated  to  the  prior  payment  in  full  in  cash  of  all  Obligations  with
respect to the Subsidiary Guarantee of such Subsidiary Guarantor; and
(A) any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such
(A) any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such
Indebtedness  being  held  by  a  Person  other  than  the  Company  or  a  Restricted
Subsidiary  of  the  Company  and  (B)  any  sale  or  other  transfer  of  any  such
Indebtedness to a Person that is neither the Company nor a Restricted Subsidiary of
the  Company  will  be  deemed,  in  each  case,  to  constitute  an  Incurrence  of  such
Indebtedness by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be,
that was not permitted by this clause (5);
A-3-7
Table of Contents
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Permitted  Refinancing  Indebtedness  in  exchange  for,  or  the  net  proceeds  of  which  are  used  to  renew,
refund,  refinance,  replace,  defease  or  discharge,  in  whole  or  in  part,  any  Indebtedness  (other  than
intercompany Indebtedness) that was permitted by the Indenture to be incurred under the first paragraph of
this covenant or clauses (1) or (2) of this Section 4.09(b) or this clause (6);
Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
in-kind obligations relating to net oil or gas balancing positions arising in the ordinary course of business;
Indebtedness in respect of bid, performance or surety bonds issued for the account of the Company or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  including  guaranties  and  letters  of  credit
supporting such bid, performance or surety obligations (in each case other than for an obligation for money
borrowed);
Indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of
$50,000,000 at any one time outstanding and any guarantee thereof by a Subsidiary Guarantor; and
any additional Indebtedness in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of $75,000,000 at any one
time outstanding and any guarantee thereof.
For purposes of determining compliance with this Section 4.09, in the event that an item of Indebtedness meets the
criteria of one or more of the categories of Permitted Indebtedness described in clauses (1) through (11) described
above or is entitled to be Incurred pursuant to clause (a) of this Section 4.09, the Company may, in its sole discretion,
classify such item of Indebtedness in any manner that complies with this Section 4.09 and such item of Indebtedness
will  be  treated  as  having  been  Incurred  pursuant  to  only  one  of  such  clauses  of  the  definition  of  Permitted
Indebtedness or the proviso of the foregoing sentence and an item of Indebtedness may be divided and classified in
more than one of the types of Indebtedness permitted hereunder; provided that all Indebtedness outstanding on the
Issue Date under the Revolving Credit Agreement shall be deemed Incurred under Section 4.09(b)(10) and not under
Section 4.09(a) or Section 4.09(b)(2).
The  accrual  of  interest,  the  accretion  or  amortization  of  original  issue  discount,  the  payment  of  interest  on  any
Indebtedness  in  the  form  of  additional  Indebtedness  with  the  same  terms,  and  the  payment  of  dividends  on
Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  in  the  form  of  additional  shares  of  the  same  class  of  Disqualified
Capital  Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  will  not  be  deemed  to  be  an  Incurrence  of  Indebtedness  or  an  issuance  of
Disqualified  Capital  Stock  or  Preferred  Stock  for  purposes  of  this  covenant.  The  amount  of  any  Indebtedness
outstanding as of any date shall be (i) the accreted value thereof in the case of any Indebtedness issued with original
issue discount and (ii) the principal amount or liquidation preference thereof, together with any interest thereon that is
more than 30 days past due, in the case of any other Indebtedness.
(e)
For  purposes  of  determining  compliance  with  any  U.S.  dollar-denominated  restriction  on  the  Incurrence  of
Indebtedness, the U.S. dollar-equivalent principal amount of Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency shall
be calculated based on the relevant currency exchange rate in effect on the date such Indebtedness was Incurred, in
the case of term Indebtedness, or first committed, in the case of revolving credit Indebtedness; provided that if such
Indebtedness is Incurred to refinance other Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency, and such refinancing
would cause the applicable U.S. dollar-denominated restriction to be exceeded if calculated at the
Table of Contents
A-3-8
•
relevant currency exchange rate in effect on the date of such refinancing, such U.S. dollar-denominated restriction
shall be deemed not to have been exceeded so long as the principal amount of such refinancing Indebtedness does
not exceed the principal amount of such Indebtedness being refinanced (plus all accrued interest on the
Indebtedness being refinanced and the amount of all expenses and premiums incurred in connection therewith).
(f)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 4.09, the maximum amount of Indebtedness that the Company or
any Restricted Subsidiary may Incur pursuant to this covenant shall not be deemed to be exceeded solely as a result
of fluctuations in the exchange rate of currencies. The principal amount of any Indebtedness Incurred to refinance
other Indebtedness, if Incurred in a different currency from the Indebtedness being refinanced, shall be calculated
based on the currency exchange rate applicable to the currencies in which such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness
is denominated that is in effect on the date of such refinancing.
Section 4.11. Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates.
(a)
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, enter into or suffer to
exist any transaction or series of related transactions (including, without limitation, the sale, purchase, exchange or
lease of assets or property or the rendering of any services) with, or for the benefit of, any Affiliate of the Company
(other than the Company or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) (each, an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless
(1)
such transaction or series of related transactions is on terms that are no less favorable to the Company or
such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, than those that would be available in a comparable arm’s
length transaction with unrelated third parties; and
(2)
the Company delivers to the Trustee:
(I)
(II)
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving
aggregate  consideration  in  excess  of  $10,000,000  but  no  greater  than  $25,000,000,  an
Officers’ Certificate certifying that such Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions
complies with this covenant; and
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving
aggregate consideration in excess of $25,000,000, an Officers’ Certificate certifying that such
Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions complies with this Section 4.11 and
that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  Affiliate  Transactions  has  been  approved  by  a
majority of the Disinterested Directors of the Company.
(b)
The  following  items  will  not  be  deemed  to  be  Affiliate  Transactions  and,  therefore,  will  not  be  subject  to  the
(b)
The  following  items  will  not  be  deemed  to  be  Affiliate  Transactions  and,  therefore,  will  not  be  subject  to  the
provisions of Section 4.11(a):
(1)
(2)
loans or advances to officers, directors and employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary made
in the ordinary course of business in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1,000,000 outstanding at any
one time;
indemnities  of  officers,  directors,  employees  and  other  agents  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary permitted by corporate charter or other organizational document, bylaw or statutory provisions;
Table of Contents
A-3-9
(3)
(4)
(5)
the  payment  of  reasonable  and  customary  fees  to  directors  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries who are not employees of the Company or any Affiliate;
the Company’s employee compensation and other benefit arrangements;
transactions  exclusively  between  or  among  the  Company  and  any  of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  or
exclusively between or among such Restricted Subsidiaries, provided such transactions are not otherwise
prohibited by this Indenture; and
(6)
any Restricted Payment permitted to be paid pursuant to Section 4.07.
•
Section 4.12. Limitation on Liens.
The Company will not, and will not permit any of the Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, create, incur, assume
or suffer to exist any Lien of any kind securing Indebtedness on any of its property or assets, except for Permitted Liens.
•
Section 4.16. Future Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries.
(a)
The Board of Directors of the Company may designate any Restricted Subsidiary to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary if:
(1)
(2)
(3)
the  Company  would  be  permitted  to  make  (i)  a  Permitted  Investment  or  (ii)  an  Investment  pursuant  to
Section 4.07, in either case, in an amount equal to the Fair Market Value of all outstanding Investments
owned  by  the  Company  and  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  such  Subsidiary  at  the  time  of  such
designation;
such Restricted Subsidiary meets the definition of an “Unrestricted Subsidiary”;
the designation would not constitute or cause (with or without the passage of time) a Default or Event of
Default and no Default or Event of Default would be in existence following such designation; and
(b)
(c)
(4)
the Company delivers to the Trustee a certified copy of a resolution of the Board of Directors of Company
giving effect to such designation and an Officers’ Certificate certifying that such designation complied with
the preceding conditions and was permitted by Section 4.07.
If  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  designated  as  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary,  the  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value  of  all
outstanding Investments owned by the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries in the Subsidiary designated as an
Unrestricted Subsidiary will be deemed to be an Investment made as of the time of the designation and will reduce
the amount available for Restricted Payments under Section 4.07 or under one or more clauses of the definition of
Permitted Investments, as determined by the Company.
If, at any time, any Unrestricted Subsidiary designated as such would fail to meet the preceding requirements as an
Unrestricted Subsidiary, then such Subsidiary will thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary for purposes of
this Indenture and any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary will be deemed to be Incurred by a Restricted Subsidiary as
of such date and, if such Indebtedness is not permitted to be Incurred as of such date under the covenant set forth
under Section 4.09, the Company or the applicable Restricted Subsidiary will be in default of such covenant.
Table of Contents
A-3-10
•
(d)
The Board of Directors of the Company may at any time designate any Unrestricted Subsidiary to be a Restricted
Subsidiary if:
(1)
(2)
(3)
the  Company  and  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  could  Incur  the  Indebtedness  which  is  deemed  to  be
Incurred upon such designation under Section 4.09, equal to the total Indebtedness of such Subsidiary
calculated on a pro forma basis as if such designation had occurred on the first day of the four-quarter
reference period;
the designation would not constitute or cause a Default or Event of Default; and
the  Company  delivers  to  the  Trustee  a  certified  copy  of  a  resolution  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the
Company  giving  effect  to  such  designation  and  an  Officers’  Certificate  certifying  that  such  designation
complied with the preceding conditions, including the Incurrence of Indebtedness under Section 4.09.
Section 4.17. Suspended Covenants.
(a)
During any period that the Notes have a rating equal to or higher than BBB- (or the equivalent) by S&P and Baa3 (or
the equivalent) by Moody’s (“Investment Grade Ratings”) and no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing (such period, a “Covenant Suspension Period”), the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries will not be
subject to the following Sections (collectively, the “Suspended Covenants”):
(1)
(2)
Section 4.07;
Section 4.08;
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Section 4.09;
Section 4.11;
Section 4.10; and
Section 5.01(a)(2).
In the event that the Company and the Restricted Subsidiaries are not subject to the Suspended Covenants for any
period of time as a result of the preceding paragraph and either S&P or Moody’s subsequently withdraws its rating or
downgrades its rating of the Notes below the applicable Investment Grade Rating, or a Default or Event of Default
occurs and is continuing, then the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries will thereafter again be subject to the
Suspended Covenants, and compliance with the Suspended Covenants with respect to Restricted Payments made
after the time of such withdrawal, downgrade, Default or Event of Default will be calculated in accordance with the
covenant described under Section 4.07 as though such covenant had been in effect during the entire period of time
from the Issue Date.
During  any  Covenant  Suspension  Period,  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company  may  not  designate  any  of  the
Company’s  Subsidiaries  as  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries  pursuant  to  this  Indenture.  The  Company  shall  give  the
Trustee written notice of the commencement of any Covenant Suspension Period promptly, and in any event not later
than 5 Business Days, after the commencement thereof. In the absence of such notice, the Trustee shall assume the
Suspended Covenants apply and are in full force and effect. The Company shall give the Trustee written notice of the
termination of any
(b)
(c)
Table of Contents
A-3-11
•
Covenant Suspension Period not later than 5 Business Days after the occurrence thereof. After any such notice of
the termination of any Covenant Suspension Period, the Trustee shall assume the Suspended Covenants apply and
are in full force and effect.
Section 4.19.            Limitation on Certain Agreements.
The Company shall not permit any Collateral Grantor to enter into any agreement that requires the proceeds received from
any  sale  of  Collateral  to  be  applied  to  repay,  redeem,  defease  or  otherwise  acquire  or  retire  any  Indebtedness  of  any
Person, other than (i) the Notes, (ii) any other Pari Passu Obligations or (iii) otherwise as may be permitted or required by
this  Indenture,  the  Pari  Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  and  the  Collateral  Agreements,  including  with  respect  to  any
Permitted Collateral Liens; provided that subject to Section 4.09, any such agreement may be entered into to the extent
that it permits such proceeds to be applied to Pari Passu Obligations prior to or instead of such other Indebtedness.
•
Section 4.20.            Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, enter into any Sale/Leaseback Transaction
unless (1) the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, would be able to Incur Indebtedness in an
amount equal to the Attributable Indebtedness with respect to such Sale/ Leaseback Transaction or (2) the Company or
such Restricted Subsidiary receives proceeds from such Sale/Leaseback Transaction at least equal to the Fair Market
Value  thereof  and  such  proceeds  are  applied  in  the  same  manner  and  to  the  same  extent  as  Net  Available  Cash  and
Excess Proceeds from an Asset Sale.
•
Section 11.01.          Collateral Agreements; Additional Collateral.
(a)
(b)
In order to secure the due and punctual payment of the Note Obligations, on the Issue Date, simultaneously with the
execution and delivery of this Indenture, the Subsidiary Guarantors have
executed  the  Collateral  Agreements  granting  to  the  Collateral  Agent  for  the  benefit  of  the  Secured  Parties  (in
accordance with the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement) a first-priority perfected Lien in the Collateral.
The Company shall promptly deliver, and to cause each of the other Collateral Grantors to deliver, but in each case
not later than the date that is 60 days following the Issue Date, to further secure the Pari Passu Obligations, deeds of
trust, Mortgages, chattel mortgages, security agreements, financing statements and other Collateral Agreements in
form and substance satisfactory to the Collateral Agent for the purpose of granting, confirming, and perfecting first-
priority liens or security interests in (1) prior to the occurrence of a default under the Revolving Credit Agreement (or
any agreements refinancing, replacing, refunding or restating  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the
Issue Date) or, if no Revolving Credit Agreement is then in effect, a Default under this Indenture, (A) at least eighty
percent (80%) of the PV-9 of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil and Gas Properties constituting Proved Reserves, (B) after
the  occurrence  of  a  default  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (or  any  agreements  refinancing,  replacing,
refunding  or  restating  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date)  or,  if  no  Revolving  Credit
Agreement  is  then  in  effect,  a  Default  under  this  Indenture,  at  least  ninety-five  percent  (95%)  of  the  PV-9  of  the
Collateral Grantors’ Oil and Gas Properties, (2) all of the equity interests of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor
in any other Subsidiary Guarantor now owned or hereafter acquired by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor,
and (3) all property of the Collateral Grantors of the type described in the Security Agreement. If no Engineering
Report is delivered pursuant to Section 4.02(b), the Company shall deliver to the Collateral Agent semi-annually on
or before April 1 and October 1 in each calendar year an Officers’ Certificate certifying that as of the date of such
certificate, (i) no
Table of Contents
A-3-12
(c)
Default has occurred and is continuing and (ii) at least eighty percent (80%) of the PV-9 of the Collateral Grantors’ Oil
and Gas Properties constituting Proved Reserves.
In connection with each delivery of an Engineering Report, the Company shall review the Engineering Report and
the  list  of  current  Mortgaged  Properties  to  ascertain  whether  the  Mortgaged  Properties  represent  at  least  eighty
percent (80%) of the PV-9 of the Oil and Gas Properties constituting Proved Reserves evaluated in the most recently
completed Engineering Report after giving effect to exploration and production activities, acquisitions, dispositions
and production. In the event that the Mortgaged Properties do not represent at least such required percentages, then
the Company shall, and shall cause its Restricted Subsidiaries to, promptly grant to the Collateral Agent as security
for the Pari Passu Obligations a first-priority perfected Lien on additional Oil and Gas Properties not already subject
to  a  Lien  created  by  Collateral  Agreements  such  that  after  giving  effect  thereto,  the  Mortgaged  Properties  will
represent at least such required percentages. All such Liens will be created and perfected by and in accordance with
the provisions of deeds of trust, security agreements and financing statements or other Collateral Agreements, all in
form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Collateral Agent and in sufficient executed (and acknowledged
where necessary or appropriate) counterparts for recording purposes. In order to comply with the foregoing, if any
Restricted Subsidiary places a Lien on its Oil and Gas Properties and such Subsidiary is not a Subsidiary Guarantor,
then it shall become a Subsidiary Guarantor and comply. To the extent that any Oil and Gas Properties constituting
Collateral are disposed of after the date of any applicable Engineering Report or certificate delivered pursuant to
clause (b) of this Section 11.01, any Proved Reserves attributable to such Oil and Gas Properties shall be deemed
excluded  from  such  Engineering  Report  or  certificate  for  the  purpose  of  determining  whether  such  minimum
Mortgage requirement is met after giving effect to such release.
(d)
The  Company  also  agrees  to  promptly  deliver,  or  to  cause  to  be  promptly  delivered,  to  the  extent  not  already
delivered,  whenever  requested  by  the  Collateral  Agent  in  its  sole  and  absolute  discretion  (1)  favorable  title
information (including, if reasonably requested by the Collateral Agent, title opinions) acceptable to the Collateral
Agent with respect to any Collateral Grantor’s Oil and Gas Properties constituting at least eighty percent (80%) of the
PV-9 of the Oil and Gas Properties constituting Proved Reserves, and demonstrating that such Collateral Grantor has
good and defensible title to such properties and interests, free and clear of all Liens (other than Permitted Liens) and
covering such other matters as the Collateral Agent may reasonably request and (2) favorable opinions of counsel
satisfactory to the Collateral Agent in its sole discretion opining that the forms of Mortgage are sufficient to create
valid first deed of trust or mortgage liens in such properties and interests and first priority assignments of and security
interests in the Hydrocarbons attributable to such properties and interests and proceeds thereof.
(e)
If (1) a Collateral Grantor acquires any asset or property of a type that is required to constitute Collateral pursuant to
the terms of this Indenture and such asset or property is not automatically subject to a first-priority perfected Lien in
favor of the Collateral Agent, (2) a Subsidiary of the Company that is not already a Subsidiary Guarantor is required
to become a Subsidiary Guarantor pursuant to Section 4.13 or (3) any Collateral Grantor creates any additional Lien
upon any Oil and Gas Properties or any other assets or properties to secure any Pari Passu Obligations or Junior
Lien Obligations (or takes additional actions to perfect any existing Lien on Collateral), then such Collateral Grantor
or such other Subsidiary shall, as soon as practicable after the acquisition of the applicable asset or property, the
occurrence of the event requiring such Subsidiary to become a Subsidiary Guarantor or the creation of any such
additional Lien or taking of any such additional perfection action (and, in any event, within 10 Business Days after
such  acquisition,  event  or  creation),  (i)  grant  to  the  Collateral  Agent  a  first-priority  perfect  Lien  in  all  assets  and
property of
Table of Contents
A-3-13
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
such Collateral Grantor or such other Subsidiary that are required to, but do not already, constitute Collateral, (ii)
deliver any certificates to the Collateral Agent in respect thereof and (iii) take all other appropriate actions as
necessary to ensure the Collateral Agent has a first-priority perfect Lien therein.
In addition and not by way of limitation of the foregoing, in the case of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor
granting a Lien in favor of the Collateral Agent upon any assets having a present value in excess of $10,000,000
located in a new jurisdiction, the Company or Subsidiary Guarantor will at its own expense, promptly obtain and
furnish to the Collateral Agent all such opinions of legal counsel as the Collateral Agent may reasonably request in
connection with any such security or instrument.
Commencing on a date no later than 60 days after the Issue Date, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries shall
keep  and  maintain  each  deposit  account  and  each  securities  account  with  a  financial  institution  reasonably
acceptable  to  the  Collateral  Agent  and  subject  to  an  Account  Control  Agreement,  other  than  deposit  accounts
holding in the aggregate less than $10,000,000.
The Company shall cause every Subsidiary Guarantor to make all filings (including filings of continuation statements
and amendments to Uniform Commercial Code financing statements in the United States (or the applicable political
subdivision,  territory  or  possession  thereof)  that  may  be  necessary  to  continue  the  effectiveness  of  such  Uniform
Commercial Code financing statements) and take all other actions as are reasonably necessary or required by the
Collateral Agreements to maintain (at the sole cost and expense of the Subsidiary Guarantors) the security interest
created by the Collateral Agreements in the Collateral as a first-priority perfected Lien.
All references to a “first-priority perfected Lien” in this Section 11.01 shall be understood to be subject to the terms of
the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and the Permitted Collateral Liens, if any.
The Company shall, and shall cause every other Collateral Grantor to, from time to time take the actions required by
Section 4.18.
•
Section 11.04.            No Impairment of the Security Interests.
The Company shall not, and shall not permit any other Collateral Grantor to take any action, or knowingly omit to take any
action,  which  action  or  omission  would  have  the  result  of  materially  impairing  the  validity,  perfection  or  priority  of  the
security interests in the Collateral created by the Collateral Agreements (except as permitted in this Indenture, the Pari
Passu  Intercreditor  Agreement  or  the  Collateral  Agreements,  including  any  action  that  would  result  in  a  Permitted
Collateral Lien).
The following definition will be added to Section 1.01 of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture (which term is currently
defined in Section 4.09, which section is otherwise being deleted):
•
“Incur,” “Incurrence,” “Incurred” and “Incurring” shall have meanings correlative to create, incur, issue, assume, guarantee
or in any manner become directly or indirectly liable for the payment of.
The following definitions will be deleted from Section 1.01 of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture:
•
“Account Control Agreement” each Account Control Agreement executed and delivered by the Company pursuant to this
Indenture, in form and substance satisfactory to the parties thereto.
Table of Contents
A-3-14
•
•
“Acquired Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  of  a  Person  (1)  existing  at  the  time  such  Person  becomes  a  Restricted
Subsidiary  or  (2)  assumed  in  connection  with  acquisitions  of  properties  or  assets  from  such  Person  (other  than  any
Indebtedness Incurred in connection with, or in contemplation of, such Person becoming a Restricted Subsidiary or such
acquisition).  Acquired  Indebtedness  shall  be  deemed  to  be  Incurred  on  the  date  the  acquired  Person  becomes  a
Restricted Subsidiary or the date of the related acquisition of properties or assets from such Person.
“Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio”  means,  for  any  period,  the  ratio  on  a  pro  forma  basis  of:  (1)  the  sum  of
Consolidated  Net  Income,  Consolidated  Interest  Expense,  Consolidated  Income  Tax  Expense  and  Consolidated  Non-
cash Charges each to the extent deducted in computing Consolidated Net Income, in each case, for such period, of the
Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, all determined in accordance with GAAP, decreased (to
the extent included in determining Consolidated Net Income) by the sum of (a) the amount of deferred revenues that are
amortized during such period and are attributable to reserves that are subject to Volumetric Production Payments and (b)
amounts recorded in accordance with GAAP as  repayments  of  principal  and  interest  pursuant  to  Dollar-  Denominated
Production  Payments,  to  (2)  Consolidated  Interest  Expense  for  such  period;  provided  that  (i)  the  Consolidated  Fixed
Charge Coverage Ratio shall be calculated on a pro forma basis assuming that (A) the Indebtedness to be Incurred (and
all  other  Indebtedness  Incurred  after  the  first  day  of  such  period  of  four  full  fiscal  quarters  referred  to  in  Section  4.09
through and including the date of determination), and (if applicable) the application of the net proceeds therefrom (and from
any other such Indebtedness), including to refinance other Indebtedness, had been Incurred on the first day of such four-
quarter  period  and,  in  the  case  of  Acquired  Indebtedness,  on  the  assumption  that  the  related  transaction  (whether  by
means of purchase, merger or otherwise) also had occurred on such date with the appropriate adjustments with respect to
such acquisition being included in such pro forma calculation and (B) any acquisition or disposition by the Company or
any Restricted Subsidiary of any properties or assets outside the ordinary course of business, or any repayment of any
principal amount of any Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary prior to the Stated Maturity thereof, in
either case since the first day of such period of four full fiscal quarters through and including the date of determination, had
been consummated on such first day of such four-quarter period, (ii) in making such computation, the Consolidated Interest
Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness required to be computed on a pro forma basis in accordance with
Section 4.09 and (A) bearing a floating interest rate shall be computed as if the rate in effect on the date of computation
had  been  the  applicable  rate  for  the  entire  period  and  (B)  which  was  not  outstanding  during  the  period  for  which  the
computation is being made but which bears, at the option of the Company, a fixed or floating rate of interest, shall be
computed by applying, at the option of the Company, either the fixed or floating rate, (iii) in making such computation, the
Consolidated Interest Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness under a revolving credit facility required to be
computed on a pro forma basis in accordance with Section 4.09 shall be computed based upon the average daily balance
of  such  Indebtedness  during  the  applicable  period,  provided  that  such  average  daily  balance  shall  be  reduced  by  the
amount of any repayment of Indebtedness under a revolving credit facility during the applicable period, which repayment
permanently  reduced  the  commitments  or  amounts  available  to  be  reborrowed  under  such  facility,  (iv)  notwithstanding
clauses (ii) and (iii) of this proviso, interest on Indebtedness determined on a fluctuating basis, to the extent such interest is
covered by agreements relating to Interest Rate Protection Obligations, shall be deemed to have accrued at the rate per
annum  resulting  after  giving  effect  to  the  operation  of  such  agreements,  (v)  in  making  such  calculation,  Consolidated
Interest Expense shall exclude interest attributable to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments, and (vi) if after the first
day of the period referred to in clause (1) of this definition the Company has permanently retired any Indebtedness out of
the Net Cash Proceeds of the issuance and sale of shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company within 30 days of
such issuance and sale, Consolidated Interest Expense shall be calculated on a pro forma basis as if such Indebtedness
had been retired on the first day of such period.
Table of Contents
A-3-15
•
•
•
•
•
•
“Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations” means, except to the extent otherwise provided in the Pari Passu
Intercreditor  Agreement,  payment  in  full,  in  cash  (except  for  contingent  indemnities  and  cost  and  reimbursement
obligations to the extent no claim has been made) of all Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations and, with respect to
letters  of  credit  outstanding  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations,  delivery  of  cash  collateral  or  backstop
letters of credit in respect thereof in a manner consistent with the Revolving Credit Agreement and otherwise reasonably
satisfactory to the Revolving Credit Agreement Agent, and termination of and payment in full in cash of, all Secured Swap
Obligations, in each case after or concurrently with the termination of all commitments to extend credit thereunder and the
termination of all commitments of the Revolving Credit Agreement Secured Parties under the Revolving Credit Agreement
Documents; provided that the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations shall not be deemed to have occurred
if  such  payments  are  made  with  the  proceeds  of  other  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Obligations  that  constitute  an
exchange or replacement for or a refinancing of such Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations.
“Disinterested Director” means, with respect to any transaction or series of transactions in respect of which the Board of
Directors of the Company is required to deliver a resolution of the Board of Directors under this Indenture, a member of the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company  who  does  not  have  any  material  direct  or  indirect  financial  interest  (other  than  an
interest arising solely from the beneficial ownership of Capital Stock of the Company) in or with respect to such transaction
or series of transactions.
“Engineering Report”  means  the  Initial  Engineering  Report  and  each  engineering  report  delivered  pursuant  to  Section
4.04(b)(3) or (b)(4).
“Initial Engineering Report” means the engineering report dated as of December 31, 2014, prepared by Lee Keeling &
Associates, Inc.
“Mortgaged Properties” means any property owned by a Collateral Grantor that is subject to the Liens existing and to exist
under the terms of the Mortgages.
“Permitted Investments” means any of the following:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Investments in Cash Equivalents;
Investments in property, plant and equipment used in the ordinary course of business;
Investments in the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(4)
(5)
Investments by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in another Person, if (a) as a result of
such  Investment  (i)  such  other  Person  becomes  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  (ii)  such  other  Person  is
merged or consolidated with or into, or transfers or conveys all or substantially all of its properties and
assets to, the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary and (b) such other Person is primarily engaged in the
Oil and Gas Business;
entry  into  operating  agreements,  joint  ventures,  partnership  agreements,  working  interests,  royalty
interests,  mineral  leases,  processing  agreements,  farm-out  agreements,  contracts  for  the  sale,
transportation or exchange of oil and natural gas, unitization agreements, pooling arrangements, area of
mutual interest agreements or other similar or customary agreements, transactions, properties, interests or
arrangements,  and  Investments  and  expenditures  in  connection  therewith  or  pursuant  thereto,  in  each
case made or entered into in the ordinary course of the Oil and Gas Business;
Table of Contents
A-3-16
(6)
(7)
(8)
entry into any hedging arrangements in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of protecting the
Company’s or any Restricted Subsidiary’s production, purchases and resales against fluctuations in oil or
natural gas prices;
entry into any currency exchange contract in the ordinary course of business;
Investments in stock, obligations or securities received in settlement of debts owing to the Company or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  as  a  result  of  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  proceedings  or  upon  the  foreclosure,
perfection or enforcement of any Lien in favor of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, in each case
as  to  debt  owing  to  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  arose  in  the  ordinary  course  of
business of the Company or any such Restricted Subsidiary;
(9)
guarantees of Indebtedness permitted under Section 4.09;
(10)
(11)
investments in Unrestricted Subsidiaries or joint ventures in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any
one time outstanding $15,000,000; and
other Investments, in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any one time outstanding the greater of (a)
$25,000,000 and (b) 5% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
•
Subsection (25) of the definition of “Permitted Liens”;
(25)            Junior  Liens  to  secure  Junior  Lien  Obligations  (a)  Incurred  under  clause  (6)  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted
Indebtedness” to refinance, replace, defease or discharge, as a whole or in part, any Existing Unsecured Notes, together
with  any  Permitted  Refinancing  Indebtedness  permitted  by  clause  (6)  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted  Indebtedness”  in
respect  thereof,  (b)  Incurred  in  accordance  with  the  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  test  set  forth  under  Section  4.09(a),
together  with  any  Permitted  Refinancing  Indebtedness  permitted  by  clause  (6)  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted
Indebtedness” in respect thereof, or (c) incurred under clause (10) of the definition of “Permitted Indebtedness”; provided
that Liens incurred under clauses (b) and (c) of this clause (25) do not secure obligations in excess of $200,000,000 in the
aggregate;
“Preferred Stock,” as applied to the Capital Stock of any Person, means Capital Stock of such Person of any class or
classes (however designated) that ranks prior, as to the payment of dividends or as to the distribution of assets upon any
voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of such Person, to shares of Capital Stock of any other class
of such Person.
“Proved  Developed  Non-Producing  Reserves”  shall  mean  oil  and  gas  reserves  that,  in  accordance  with  Petroleum
Industry Standards, are classified as both “Proved Reserves” and “Developed Non-Producing Reserves.”
“Proved Developed Producing Reserves”  shall  mean  oil  and  gas  reserves  that  in  accordance  with  Petroleum  Industry
Standards, are classified as both “Proved Reserves” and “Developed Producing Reserves”.
“Proved Developed Reserves” shall mean oil and gas reserves that, in accordance with Petroleum Industry Standards, are
classified as both “Proved Reserves” and one of the following: (1) “Developed Producing Reserves” or (2) “Developed
Non-Producing Reserves.”
•
•
•
•
Table of Contents
A-3-17
•
•
•
“Proved Reserves” shall mean oil and gas reserves that, in accordance with Petroleum Industry Standards, are classified
as both “Proved Reserves” and one of the following: (1) “Developed Producing Reserves”, (2) “Developed Non-Producing
Reserves” or (3) “Undeveloped Reserves”.
“PV-9”  means,  with  respect  to  any  Proved  Developed  Reserves  expected  to  be  produced,  the  net  present  value,
discounted at 9% per annum, of the future net revenues expected to accrue to the Collateral Grantors’ collective interests
in  such  reserves  during  the  remaining  expected  economic  lives  of  such  reserves,  calculated  by  the  Revolving  Credit
Agreement Agent (or, if no Revolving Credit Agreement is then in effect, the Collateral Agent) in its sole and absolute
discretion; provided that the PV-9 associated with Proved Developed Non-Producing Reserves shall comprise no more
than 25% of total PV-9.
“Restricted Investment” means (without duplication) (1) the designation of a Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in
the  manner  described  in  the  definition  of  “Unrestricted  Subsidiary”  and  (2)  any  Investment  other  than  a  Permitted
Investment.
The following provisions of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture will be amended, as shown below (stricken text indicates
the portion of such provision that will be eliminated and underlined text indicates language that will be added to such
provision):
•
Definition of “Investment” under Section 1.01:
“Investment” means, with respect to any Person, any direct or indirect advance, loan, guarantee of Indebtedness or other
extension of credit or capital contribution by such Person to (by means of any transfer of cash or other property or assets
to others or any payment for property, assets or services for the account or use of others), or any purchase or acquisition
by such Person of any Capital Stock, bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (including derivatives) or evidences of
Indebtedness issued by, any other Person. In addition, the Fair Market Value of the net assets of any Restricted Subsidiary
at  the  time  that  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  is  designated  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an
“Investment”  made  by  the  Company  in  such  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  at  such  time.  “Investments”  shall  exclude  (1)
extensions of trade credit or other advances to customers on commercially reasonable terms in accordance with normal
trade practices or otherwise in the ordinary course of business, (2) Interest Rate Protection Obligations entered into in the
ordinary  course  of  business otherwise  as  permitted  hereunder or  as  required  by  any  Permitted  Indebtedness  or  any
Indebtedness Incurred in compliance with the “Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock” covenant, but
only to the extent that the stated aggregate notional amounts of such Interest Rate Protection Obligations do not exceed
105% of the aggregate principal amount of such Indebtedness to which such Interest Rate Protection Obligations relate
and (3) endorsements of negotiable instruments and documents in the ordinary course of business. If the Company or
any Restricted Subsidiary sells or otherwise disposes of any Capital Stock of any direct or indirect Restricted Subsidiary
of the Company such that, after giving effect to such sale or disposition, such Person is no longer a Restricted Subsidiary
of the Company, the Company will be deemed to have made an Investment on the date of any such sale or disposition
equal to the Fair Market Value of the Company’s Investments in such Restricted Subsidiary that were not sold or disposed
of.
A-3-18
Table of Contents
•
Section 1.02 Other Definitions.
Term
“Act”
“Affiliate Transaction”
“Appendix”
“Asset Sale Offer”
“Asset Sale Offer Amount”
“Asset Sale Offer Notice”
“Asset Sale Offer Period”
“Base Indenture”
“Change of Control Offer”
“Change of Control Payment”
“Change of Control Payment Date”
“Covenant Defeasance”
“Covenant Suspension Period”
“Discharge”
“Event of Default”
“Excess Proceeds”
“Incur”
“Investment Grade Rating”
“Legal Defeasance”
“Paying Agent”
“Payment Default”
“Payment Restriction”
“Permitted Consideration”
“Permitted Indebtedness”
“Purchase Date”
“Register”
“Registrar”
“Restricted Payments”
“Successor Guarantor”
“Surviving Entity”
“Suspended Covenants”
Defined in Section  
 9.07
  
  
 4.11
  
 2.01
  
 4.10
 3.08
  
  
 3.08
  
 3.08
  
 1.01
 4.15
  
  
 4.15
  
 4.15
  
 8.03
 4.17
  
  
 8.08
  
 6.01
  
 4.10
  
 4.09
 4.17
  
  
 8.02
  
 2.03
  
 6.01
 4.08
  
  
 4.10
  
 4.09
  
 3.08
 2.03
  
  
 2.03
  
 4.07
  
 5.01
 5.01
  
  
 4.17
•
Section 4.10. Limitation on Asset Sales.
(a)
The Company will not, and will not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, consummate any Asset Sale unless:
(1)
the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, receives consideration at the time of
such Asset Sale at least equal to the Fair Market Value of the assets and property subject to such Asset
Sale; and
(2)
all of the consideration paid to the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary in connection with such Asset
Sale is in the form of cash, Cash Equivalents, Liquid Securities,
Table of Contents
A-3-19
Exchanged  Properties  or  the  assumption  by  the  purchaser  of  liabilities  of  the  Company  (other  than
liabilities of the Company that are by their terms subordinated to the Notes) or liabilities of any Subsidiary
Guarantor  that  made  such  Asset  Sale  (other  than  liabilities  of  a  Subsidiary  Guarantor  that  are  by  their
terms  subordinated  to  such  Subsidiary  Guarantor’s  Subsidiary  Guarantee),  in  each  case  as  a  result  of
which the Company and its remaining Restricted Subsidiaries are no longer liable for such liabilities (the
“Permitted Consideration”);
provided that the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries shall be permitted to receive assets and property other than
Permitted Consideration, so long as the aggregate Fair Market Value of all such assets and property other than Permitted
Consideration received from Asset Sales since the Issue Date and held by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary at
any one time shall not exceed 10% of Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
(b)
The  Net  Available  Cash  from  Asset  Sales  by  the  Company  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  may  be  applied  by  the
Company  or  such  Restricted  Subsidiary,  to  the  extent  the  Company  or  such  Restricted  Subsidiary  elects  (or  is
required by the terms of any Senior Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary), to
(1)
(2)
purchase,  repay  or  prepay  Pari  Passu  Obligations  or  other  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  any
Subsidiary Guarantor secured by Permitted Collateral Liens (and, to the extent required pursuant to the
terms  of  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  (as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date)  in  the  case  of  revolving
obligations, to correspondingly reduce commitments with respect thereto); or
reinvest in Additional Assets (including by means of an Investment in Additional Assets by a Restricted
Subsidiary with Net Available Cash received by the Company or another Restricted Subsidiary); provided
that  if  such  Asset  Sale  includes  Oil  and  Gas  Properties,  after  giving  effect  to  such  Asset  Sale,  the
Company is in compliance with the Collateral requirements of this Indenture.
(c)
Any Net Available Cash from an Asset Sale not applied in accordance with clause (b) of this Section 4.10 within 365
days from the date of such Asset Sale shall constitute “Excess Proceeds.” When the aggregate amount of Excess
Proceeds exceeds $10,000,000, the Company will be required to make an offer (the “Asset Sale Offer”) to all Holders
of Notes in accordance with Section 3.08 and all holders of other Indebtedness that is pari passu with the Notes
containing provisions similar to those set forth in this Indenture with respect to offers to purchase or redeem with the
proceeds  of  sales  of  assets  to  purchase  the  maximum  principal  amount  of  Notes  and  such  other  pari  passu
Indebtedness that may be purchased out of the Excess Proceeds; provided to the extent such Excess Proceeds were
received in respect of the sale or transfer of assets that constituted Collateral, an Asset Sale Offer will be made solely
to the holders of Pari Passu Obligations. The offer price in any Asset Sale Offer will be equal to 100% of principal
amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the Purchase Date (subject to the right of Holders of record on the
relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the Purchase Date), and
will be payable in cash. If the aggregate principal amount of Notes tendered by Holders thereof exceeds the amount
of available Excess Proceeds allocated for repurchases of Notes pursuant to the Asset Sale Offer, then such Excess
Proceeds will be allocated pro rata according to the principal amount of the Notes tendered and the Trustee will
select the Notes to be purchased in accordance with this Indenture. To the extent that any portion of the amount of
Excess Proceeds remains after compliance with the second sentence of this clause (c) and provided that all
A-3-20
Table of Contents
•
(d)
Holders of Notes have been given the opportunity to tender their Notes for purchase as described in Section 4.10(d),
the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  may  use  such  remaining  amount  for  purposes  permitted  by  this
Indenture and the amount of Excess Proceeds will be reset to zero.
The Company will comply, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and
any  other  securities  laws  or  regulations  thereunder  to  the  extent  such  laws  and  regulations  are  applicable  in
connection  with  the  purchase  of  Notes  pursuant  to  an  Asset  Sale  Offer.  To  the  extent  that  the  provisions  of  any
securities laws or regulations conflict with the provisions relating to the Asset Sale Offer, the Company will comply
with the applicable securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations under
this Section 4.10 by virtue of such compliance.
Section 5.01.    Merger, Consolidation, or Sale of Assets.
(a)
The Company will not, in any single transaction or series of related transactions, merge or consolidate with or into
any  other  Person,  or  sell,  assign,  convey,  transfer,  lease  or  otherwise  dispose  of  all  or  substantially  all  of  the
properties  and  assets  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  on  a  consolidated  basis  to  any  Person  or
group of Affiliated Persons, and the Company will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to enter into any such
transaction or series of related transactions if such transaction or series of transactions, in the aggregate, would result
in the sale, assignment, conveyance, transfer, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of the properties and
assets  of  the  Company  and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  on  a  consolidated  basis  to  any  other  Person  or  group  of
Affiliated Persons, unless at the time and after giving effect thereto:
(1)
(2)
(3)
either (i) if the transaction is a merger or consolidation, the Company shall be the surviving Person of
such merger or consolidation, or (ii) the Person (if other than the Company) formed by such consolidation
or  into  which  the  Company  is  merged  or  to  which  the  properties  and  assets  of  the  Company  or  its
Restricted  Subsidiaries,  as  the  case  may  be,  are  sold,  assigned,  conveyed,  transferred,  leased  or
otherwise disposed of (any such surviving Person or transferee Person being the “Surviving Entity”) shall
be a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the United States of America, any state thereof
or the District of Columbia and shall, in either case, expressly assume by a supplemental indenture to
this Indenture executed and delivered to the Trustee, in form satisfactory to the Trustee, and pursuant to
agreements  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Trustee  and  the  Collateral  Agent,  as  applicable,  all  the
obligations of the Company under the Notes, this Indenture and the other Note Documents to which the
Company is a party, and, in each case, such Note Documents shall remain in full force and effect;
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of related transactions on a pro forma basis
(and  treating  any  Indebtedness  not  previously  an  obligation  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries  which  becomes  an  obligation  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in
connection with or as a result of such transaction as having been incurred at the time of such transaction),
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
except in the case of the consolidation or merger of any Restricted Subsidiary with or into the Company
or another Restricted Subsidiary, either:
(I)
immediately before and immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on
a pro forma basis (assuming that the transaction or transactions
A-3-21
Table of Contents
(II)
occurred on the first day of the period of four fiscal quarters ending immediately prior to the
consummation  of  such  transaction  or  transactions,  with  the  appropriate  adjustments  with
respect to the transaction or transactions being included in such pro forma calculation), the
Company (or the Surviving Entity if the Company is not the continuing obligor under this
Indenture) could Incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness under Section 4.09(a); or
immediately  after  giving  effect  to  such  transaction  or  transactions  on  a  pro  forma  basis
(assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the period of four
fiscal  quarters  ending  immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or
transactions, with the appropriate adjustments with respect to the transaction or transactions
being  included  in  such  pro  forma  calculation),  the  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  of  the
Company (or the Surviving Entity if the Company is not the continuing obligor under this
Indenture)  will  be  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  of  the
Company immediately before such transaction or transactions;
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
if the Company is not the continuing obligor under this Indenture, then each Subsidiary Guarantor, unless
it  is  the  Surviving  Entity,  shall  have  by  supplemental  indenture  to  this  Indenture  confirmed  that  its
Subsidiary Guarantee of the Notes shall apply to the Surviving Entity’s obligations under this Indenture
and the Notes;
any Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity shall (i) continue to constitute Collateral
under this Indenture and the Collateral Agreements and (ii) be subject to a Pari Passu Lien in favor of the
Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations;
the Surviving Entity shall take such action (or agree to take such action) as may be reasonably necessary
to cause any property or assets that constitute Collateral owned by or transferred to the Surviving Entity to
be  subject  to  the  Pari  Passu  Liens  in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent  required  under  the  Collateral
Agreements  and  shall  deliver  an  opinion  of  counsel  as  to  the  enforceability  of  any  amendments,
supplements or other instruments with respect to the Collateral Agreements to be executed, delivered,
filed  and  recorded,  as  applicable,  and  such  other  matters  as  the  Trustee  or  Collateral  Agent,  as
applicable, may reasonably request; and
the Company (or the Surviving Entity if the Company is not the continuing obligor under this Indenture)
shall  have  delivered  to  the  Trustee,  in  form  and  substance  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Trustee,  an
Officers’  Certificate  and  an  Opinion  of  Counsel  each  stating  that  such  consolidation,  merger,  transfer,
lease  or  other  disposition  and  any  supplemental  indenture  in  respect  thereto  comply  with  the
requirements under this Indenture and that the requirements of this paragraph have been satisfied.
(b)
A Subsidiary Guarantor may not sell or otherwise dispose of, in one or more related transactions, all or substantially
all of its properties or assets to, or consolidate with or merge with or into (whether or not such Subsidiary Guarantor is
the surviving Person) another Person, other than with respect to a Subsidiary Guarantor, the Company or another
Subsidiary Guarantor, unless:
(1)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of transactions, no Default or Event of Default
exists;
A-3-22
Table of Contents
•
(2)
either:
(I)
(A)  such  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  the  surviving  Person  or  (B)  the  Person  acquiring  the
properties  or  assets  in  any  such  sale  or  other  disposition  or  the  Person  formed  by  or
surviving any such consolidation or merger is a Person organized and existing under the
laws  of  the  United  States  of  America,  any  state  thereof  or  the  District  of  Columbia  (such
Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  such  Person,  as  the  case  may  be,  being  herein  called  the
“Successor  Guarantor”)  and  the  Successor  Guarantor  (if  other  than  such  Subsidiary
Guarantor) unconditionally assumes all the obligations of such Subsidiary Guarantor under
its  Subsidiary  Guarantee,  this  Indenture  and  all  other  Note  Documents  pursuant  to  a
supplemental  indenture  in  form  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Trustee  and  such  other
agreements as are reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee and the Collateral Agent; or
(II)
with respect to a Subsidiary Guarantor, such transaction or series of transactions does not
violate Section 4.10;
(3)
(4)
(5)
any  Collateral  owned  by  or  transferred  to  the  Successor  Guarantor  shall  (i)  continue  to  constitute
Collateral under this Indenture and the Collateral Agreements and (ii) be subject to a Pari Passu Lien in
favor of the Collateral Agent for the benefit of the holders of the Pari Passu Obligations;
the  Successor  Guarantor  shall  take  such  action  (or  agree  to  take  such  action)  as  may  be  reasonably
necessary  to  cause  any  property  or  assets  that  constitute  Collateral  owned  by  or  transferred  to  the
Successor  Guarantor  to  be  subject  to  the  Pari  Passu  Liens  in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent  required
under the Collateral Agreements and shall deliver an opinion of counsel as to the enforceability of any
amendments,  supplements  or  other  instruments  with  respect  to  the  Collateral  Agreements  to  be
executed,  delivered,  filed  and  recorded,  as  applicable,  and  such  other  matters  as  the  Trustee  or
Collateral Agent, as applicable, may reasonably request; and
the Company delivers to the Trustee an  Officers’  Certificate  and  opinion  of  counsel,  each  stating  that
such  sale  or  other  disposition  or  merger  or  consolidation  and  such  supplemental  indenture  and  each
such amendment comply with this covenant.
Section 6.01.     Events of Default.
Each of the following is an “Event of Default”:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
default in any payment of interest with respect to the Notes when due, which default continues for 30 days;
default  in  the  payment  when  due  (at  maturity,  upon  optional  redemption,  upon  declaration  of  acceleration  or
otherwise) of the principal of, or premium, if any, on, the Notes;
failure by the Company to comply with the provisions described under Section 4.10, 4.15 or 5.01;
(1) except with respect to Section 4.03, failure by the Company or any of the Restricted Subsidiaries for 60 days after
notice to the Company by the Trustee or the Holders of at least 25%
Table of Contents
A-3-23
in aggregate principal amount of the Notes then outstanding voting as a single class to comply with any covenant or
agreement (other than a default referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) above) contained in this Indenture, the Collateral
Agreements or the Notes, or (2) failure by the Company for 120 days after notice to the Company by the Trustee or
the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the Notes then outstanding voting as a single class to
comply with Section 4.03;
(e)
default under the Revolving Credit Agreement, if that default:
(1)
(2)
is  caused  by  a  failure  to  pay  principal  of,  or  interest  or  premium,  if  any,  on,  any  Revolving  Credit
Agreement Obligation prior to the expiration of the grace period, if any, provided in the Revolving Credit
Agreement on the date of such default; or
permits  the  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Agent  or  any  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  Secured  Parties  to
accelerate all or any part of the Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations prior to their Stated Maturity,
provided that if any such default is cured or waived, or the Discharge of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations occurs,
within a period of 30 days from the occurrence of such default, such Event of Default and any consequential acceleration
of the Notes shall be automatically rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any judgment or decree;
(f)
default (other than a default referred to in clause (e) above) under any mortgage, indenture or instrument under which
there is issued or by which there is secured or evidenced any Indebtedness for money borrowed by the Company or
any of the Restricted Subsidiaries (or the payment of which is guaranteed by the Company or any of the Restricted
Subsidiaries), whether such Indebtedness or guarantee now exists or is created after the Issue Date, if that default:
(1)
is caused by a failure to pay principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on, such Indebtedness prior to the
expiration  of  the  grace  period  provided  in  such  Indebtedness  on  the  date  of  such  default  (a  “Payment
Default”); or
(2)
results in the acceleration of such Indebtedness prior to its Stated Maturity,
and, in either case, the principal amount of any such Indebtedness, together with the principal amount of any other such
Indebtedness  under  which  there  has  been  a  Payment  Default  or  the  maturity  of  which  has  been  so  accelerated,
aggregates $25,000,000 or more; provided that if any such default is cured or waived or any such acceleration rescinded,
or such Indebtedness is repaid, within a period of 60 days from the continuation of such default beyond the applicable
grace period or the occurrence of such acceleration, as the case may be, such Event of Default and any consequential
acceleration of the Notes shall be automatically rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any judgment
or decree;
failure  by  the  Company  or  any  of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  pay  final  judgments  entered  by  a  court  or  courts  of
competent jurisdiction aggregating in excess of $25,000,000, which judgments are not paid, discharged or stayed for a
period of 60 days;
(g)
the occurrence of the following:
(1)
except as permitted by the Note Documents, any Collateral Agreement establishing the Pari Passu Liens
ceases for any reason to be enforceable; provided that it will not be an
Table of Contents
A-3-24
(h)
(i)
(2)
(3)
Event  of  Default  under  this  clause  (g)(1)  if  the  sole  result  of  the  failure  of  one  or  more  Collateral
Agreements  to  be  fully  enforceable  is  that  any  Pari  Passu  Lien  purported  to  be  granted  under  such
Collateral  Agreements  on  Collateral,  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  having  a  fair  market  value  of  not
more than $10,000,000, ceases to be an enforceable and perfected first-priority Lien, subject only to the
payment priorities in favor of the holders of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations pursuant to the terms
of the Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided, further, that
if such failure is susceptible to cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after
any officer of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary becomes aware of such failure, which failure has
not been cured during such time period;
except  as  permitted  by  the  Note  Documents,  any  Pari  Passu  Lien  purported  to  be  granted  under  any
Collateral Agreement on Collateral, individually or in the aggregate, having a fair market value in excess of
$10,000,000,  ceases  to  be  an  enforceable  and  perfected  first-priority  Lien,  subject  only  to  the  payment
priorities in favor of the holders of Revolving Credit Agreement Obligations pursuant to the terms of the
Pari Passu Intercreditor Agreement and subject to Permitted Collateral Liens; provided that if such failure
is susceptible to cure, no Event of Default shall arise with respect thereto until 30 days after any officer of
the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  becomes  aware  of  such  failure,  which  failure  has  not  been
cured during such time period; and
the Company or any other Collateral Grantor, or any Person acting on behalf of any of them, denies or
disaffirms, in writing, any obligation of the Company or any other Collateral Grantor set forth in or arising
under any Collateral Agreement establishing Pari Passu Liens;
except  as  permitted  by  this  Indenture,  any  Subsidiary  Guarantee  is  held  in  any  judicial  proceeding  to  be
unenforceable or invalid or ceases for any reason to be in full force and effect, or any Subsidiary Guarantor, or any
Person  duly  acting  on  behalf  of  any  such  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  denies  or  disaffirms  its  obligations  under  its
Subsidiary Guarantee;
the Company, any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Significant Subsidiary or any group of Restricted Subsidiaries that,
taken as a whole, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary, pursuant to or within the meaning of Bankruptcy Law:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
commences a voluntary case,
consents in writing to the entry of an order for relief against it in an involuntary case,
consents in writing to the appointment of a Custodian of it or for all or substantially all of its property,
makes a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors, or
admits in writing it generally is not paying its debts as they become due; or
(j)
a court of competent jurisdiction enters an order or decree under any Bankruptcy Law that:
(j)
a court of competent jurisdiction enters an order or decree under any Bankruptcy Law that:
(1)
is for relief against the Company, any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Significant Subsidiary or any group of
Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken as a whole, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary, in an involuntary
case;
Table of Contents
A-3-25
(2)
appoints a Custodian (x) of the Company, any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Significant Subsidiary or any
group of Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken as a whole, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary, or (y) for
all  or  substantially  all  of  the  property  of  the  Company,  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  that  is  a  Significant
Subsidiary or any group of Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken as a whole, would constitute a Significant
Subsidiary; or
(3)
orders the liquidation of the Company, any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Significant Subsidiary or any
group of Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken as a whole, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary;
and the order or decree remains unstayed and in effect for 60 consecutive days.
Effect of Deleted Sections
The Proposed Amendments will provide that failure to comply with the terms of any of the foregoing deleted sections or
subsections of the Existing Secured Notes Indenture shall no longer constitute a Default or an Event of Default under
such Existing Secured Notes Indenture, and shall no longer have any other consequence under the Existing Secured
Notes  Indenture.  The  Proposed  Amendments  will  also  amend  the  Existing  Secured  Notes  Indenture  to  provide  that
provisions in the Existing Secured Notes Indenture that authorize action by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor
when permitted by a deleted section or which is to be done in accordance with a deleted section, shall be deemed to
permit such action (unless prohibited by such deleted section or performed in a way consistent with such section), and,
otherwise, references in the Existing Secured Notes Indenture to deleted provisions shall also no longer have any effect or
consequence under the Existing Secured Notes Indenture.
Terms of the Existing 2020 Notes Indenture and the Existing 2019 Notes Indenture to be Modified by the
Proposed Amendments
The following Sections of each of the Existing 2020 Notes Indenture and the Existing 2019 Notes Indenture will be deleted
under the Proposed Amendments:
•
Section 9.10 Limitation on Restricted Payments.
(a)
The Company shall not, and shall not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, take the following
actions:
(i)
(ii)
declare or pay any dividend on, or make any distribution to holders of, any shares of Capital Stock of the
Company or any Restricted Subsidiary (other than dividends or distributions payable solely in shares of
Qualified Capital Stock of the Company or in options, warrants or other rights to purchase Qualified Capital
Stock of the Company);
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire or retire for value any Capital Stock of the Company or any Affiliate
thereof (other than any Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary of the Company) or any options, warrants or
other rights to acquire such Capital Stock (other than the purchase, redemption, acquisition or retirement of
any  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  solely  in  shares  of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  the
Company);
(iii)
make any principal payment on or repurchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value,
prior to any scheduled principal payment, scheduled sinking fund payment or maturity, any Subordinated
Indebtedness (excluding any intercompany Indebtedness between or among the Company and any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries), except in any case out of the proceeds of Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness, or
A-3-26
Table of Contents
(iv)
make any Restricted Investment;
(such payments or other actions described in clauses (i) through (iv) above being collectively referred to as “Restricted
Payments”), unless at the time of and after giving effect to the proposed Restricted Payment:
(1)
(2)
(3)
no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
the Company could incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness in accordance with Section 9.12(a) hereof; and
the aggregate amount of all Restricted Payments declared or made after January 1, 2004 shall not exceed
the sum (without duplication) of the following:
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
50%  of  the  Consolidated  Net  Income  of  the  Company  accrued  on  a
cumulative  basis  during  the  period  beginning  on  January  1,  2004  and
ending on the last day of the Company’s last fiscal quarter ending prior to
the  date  of  such  proposed  Restricted  Payment  (or,  if  such  Consolidated
Net Income shall be a loss, minus 100% of such loss); plus
the  aggregate  Net  Cash  Proceeds,  or  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  Property
other than cash, received after January 1, 2004 by the Company from the
issuance or sale (other than to any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) of shares
of  Qualified  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  or  any  options,  warrants  or
rights to purchase such shares of Qualified Capital Stock of the Company;
plus
the  aggregate  Net  Cash  Proceeds,  or  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  Property
other  than  cash,  received  after  January  1,  2004  by  the  Company  (other
than  from  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries)  upon  the  exercise  of  any
options, warrants or rights to purchase shares of Qualified Capital Stock of
the Company; plus
the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds received after January 1, 2004 by the
Company  from  the  issuance  or  sale  (other  than  to  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries) of Indebtedness or shares of Disqualified Capital Stock that
have been converted into or exchanged for Qualified Capital Stock of the
Company, together with the aggregate cash received by the Company at
the time of such conversion or exchange; plus
Table of Contents
(E)
to the extent not otherwise included in Consolidated Net Income, the net
reduction  in  Investments  in  Unrestricted  Subsidiaries  resulting  from
dividends, repayments of loans or advances, or other transfers of assets, in
each  case  to  the  Company  or  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  after  January  1,
2004  from  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  or  from  the  redesignation  of  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary as a Restricted Subsidiary (valued in each case as
provided in the definition of “Investment”), not to
A-3-27
exceed in the case of any Unrestricted Subsidiary the total amount of
Investments (other than Permitted Investments) in such Unrestricted
Subsidiary made by the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries in such
Unrestricted Subsidiary after January 1, 2004.
(b)
Notwithstanding paragraph (a) above, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries may take the following actions so
long as (in the case of clauses (3), (4), (5) and (7) below) no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be
continuing:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
the  payment  of  any  dividend  on  any  Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  within  60  days  after  the  date  of
declaration thereof, if at such declaration date such declaration complied with the
provisions of paragraph (a) above (and such payment shall be deemed to have been paid on such date of
declaration for purposes of any calculation required by the provisions of paragraph (a) above);
the payment of any dividend payable from a Restricted Subsidiary to the Company or any other Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company;
the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement of any shares of any class of Capital Stock of
the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, in exchange for, or out of the aggregate Net Cash Proceeds of,
a  substantially  concurrent  issue  and  sale  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of  shares  of  Qualified
Capital Stock of the Company;
the  repurchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of  any
Subordinated  Indebtedness  in  exchange  for,  or  out  of  the  aggregate  Net  Cash  Proceeds  from,  a
substantially  concurrent  issue  and  sale  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of  shares  of  Qualified
Capital Stock of the Company;
the  purchase,  redemption,  repayment,  defeasance  or  other  acquisition  or  retirement  for  value  of
Subordinated Indebtedness (other than Disqualified Capital Stock) in exchange for, or out of the aggregate
net  cash  proceeds  of,  a  substantially  concurrent  incurrence  (other  than  to  a  Restricted  Subsidiary)  of
Subordinated Indebtedness of the Company so long as (a) the principal amount of such new Indebtedness
does not exceed the principal amount (or, if such Subordinated Indebtedness being refinanced provides
for  an  amount  less  than  the  principal  amount  thereof  to  be  due  and  payable  upon  a  declaration  of
acceleration  thereof,  such  lesser  amount  as  of  the  date  of  determination)  of  the  Subordinated
Indebtedness being so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or retired, plus the amount of
any  premium  required  to  be  paid  in  connection  with  such  refinancing  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the
Indebtedness  refinanced  or  the  amount  of  any  premium  reasonably  determined  by  the  Company  as
necessary  to  accomplish  such  refinancing,  plus  the  amount  of  expenses  of  the  Company  incurred  in
connection with such refinancing, (b) such new Indebtedness is subordinated to the Notes at least to the
same extent as such Subordinated Indebtedness so purchased, redeemed, repaid, defeased, acquired or
retired,  and  (c)  such  new  Indebtedness  has  an  Average  Life  to  Stated  Maturity  that  is  longer  than  the
Average Life to Stated Maturity of the Notes and such new Indebtedness has a Stated Maturity for its final
scheduled principal payment that is at least 91 days later than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled
principal payment of the Notes;
Table of Contents
A-3-28
(6)
loans made to officers, directors or employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary approved by
the Board of Directors of the Company in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1,000,000 outstanding at
any one time, the proceeds of which are used solely (a) to purchase common stock of the Company in
connection with a restricted stock or employee stock purchase plan, or to exercise stock options received
pursuant to an employee or director stock option plan or other incentive plan, in a principal amount not to
exceed the exercise price of such stock options, or (b) to refinance loans, together with accrued interest
thereon, made pursuant to item (a) of this clause (6); and
(7)
other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $10,000,000.
The  actions  described  in  clauses  (1),  (3),  (4)  and  (6)  of  this  paragraph  (b)  shall  be  Restricted  Payments  that  shall  be
permitted to be made in accordance with this paragraph (b) but shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available
for Restricted Payments under clause (3) of paragraph (a) (provided that any dividend paid pursuant to clause (1) of this
paragraph (b) shall reduce the amount that would otherwise be available under clause (3) of paragraph (a) when declared,
but not also when subsequently paid pursuant to such clause (1)), and the actions described in clauses (2), (5) and (7) of
this paragraph (b) shall be permitted to be taken in accordance with this paragraph and shall not reduce the amount that
would otherwise be available for Restricted Payments under clause (3) of paragraph (a).
•
(c)
(d)
The amount of all Restricted Payments (other than cash) will be the Fair Market Value on the date of the Restricted
Payment  of  the  asset(s)  or  securities  proposed  to  be  transferred  or  issued  by  the  Company  or  such  Restricted
Subsidiary, as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted Payment.
In  computing  Consolidated  Net  Income  under  paragraph  (a)  above,  (1)  the  Company  shall  use  audited  financial
statements for the portions of the relevant period for which audited financial statements are available on the date of
determination and unaudited financial statements and other current financial data based on the books and records of
the Company for the remaining portion of such period and (2) the Company shall be permitted to rely in good faith on
the  financial  statements  and  other  financial  data  derived  from  the  books  and  records  of  the  Company  that  are
available on the date of determination. If the Company makes a Restricted Payment which, at the time of the making
of  such  Restricted  Payment  would  in  the  good  faith  determination  of  the  Company  be  permitted  under  the
requirements of this Indenture, such Restricted Payment shall be deemed to have been made in compliance with this
Indenture notwithstanding any subsequent adjustments made in good faith to the Company’s financial statements
affecting Consolidated Net Income of the Company for any period.
Section 9.12 Limitation on Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock.
(a)
The Company shall not, and shall not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, assume, guarantee or
in  any  manner  become  directly  or  indirectly  liable  for  the  payment  of  (collectively,  “incur”)  any  Indebtedness
(including  any  Acquired  Indebtedness),  and  the  Company  shall  not,  and  shall  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries to, issue any Disqualified Capital Stock (except for the issuance by the Company of Disqualified Capital
Stock (a) which is redeemable at the Company’s option in cash or Qualified Capital Stock and (b) the dividends on
which are payable at the Company’s option in cash or Qualified Capital Stock); provided however, that the Company
and  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  that  are  Subsidiary  Guarantors  may  incur  Indebtedness  or  issue  shares  of
Disqualified  Capital  Stock  if  (i)  at  the  time  of  such  event  and  after  giving  effect  thereto  on  a  pro  forma  basis  the
Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the four full quarters immediately preceding such event, taken as one
period, would have been equal to
Table of Contents
A-3-29
or greater than 2.25 to 1.0 and (ii) no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time
such additional Indebtedness is incurred or such Disqualified Capital Stock is issued or would occur as a
consequence of the incurrence of the additional Indebtedness or the issuance of the Disqualified Capital Stock.
(b)
Notwithstanding the prohibitions of Section 9.12(a), the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries may incur any of
the following items of Indebtedness (collectively, “Permitted Indebtedness”):
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Priority Credit Facility Debt in an aggregate amount at any one time outstanding not to exceed the greater
of (a) the Borrowing Base under the Bank Credit Agreement at such time less the sum of all repayments of
principal of Priority Credit Facility Debt made pursuant to Section 9.17 hereof and (b) 25% of Adjusted
Consolidated Net Tangible Assets; provided, however, that Indebtedness and Disqualified Capital Stock
of Restricted
Subsidiaries  that  are  not  Subsidiary  Guarantors  shall  not  at  any  time  constitute  more  than  50%  of  all
Priority Credit Facility Debt otherwise permitted under this clause (1);
Indebtedness under the Notes (excluding any Additional Notes);
Indebtedness outstanding or in effect on the Issue Date (and not repaid or defeased with the proceeds of
the offering of the Notes);
obligations pursuant to Interest Rate Protection Obligations, but only to the extent such obligations do not
exceed  105%  of  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  Indebtedness  covered  by  such  Interest  Rate
Protection Obligations; obligations under currency exchange contracts entered into in the ordinary course
of  business;  hedging  arrangements  entered  into  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  for  the  purpose  of
protecting  production,  purchases  and  resales  against  fluctuations  in  oil  or  natural  gas  prices;  and  any
guarantee of any of the foregoing;
the Subsidiary Guarantees (and any assumption of the obligations guaranteed thereby);
the  incurrence  by  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  of  intercompany  Indebtedness
between or among the Company and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; provided, however, that:
(a)
if the Company is the obligor on such Indebtedness and a Subsidiary Guarantor is not the
obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in
cash of all Obligations with respect to the Notes, or if a Subsidiary Guarantor is the obligor on
such  Indebtedness  and  neither  the  Company  nor  another  Subsidiary  Guarantor  is  the
obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in
cash  of  all  Obligations  with  respect  to  the  Subsidiary  Guarantee  of  such  Subsidiary
Guarantor; and
(b)
(i)  any  subsequent  issuance  or  transfer  of  Equity  Interests  that  results  in  any  such
Indebtedness being held by a Person other than the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of
the Company and (ii) any sale or other transfer of any such Indebtedness to a Person that is
neither the Company nor a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company will be deemed, in each
case, to constitute an incurrence of such Indebtedness by the Company or such Restricted
Subsidiary, as the case may be, that was not permitted by this clause (6);
A-3-30
Table of Contents
(c)
(d)
(e)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness and any guarantee thereof;
Non-Recourse Indebtedness;
in kind obligations relating to net oil or gas balancing positions arising in the ordinary course of business;
Indebtedness in respect of bid, performance or surety bonds issued for the account of the Company or any
Restricted  Subsidiary  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  including  guaranties  and  letters  of  credit
supporting such bid, performance or surety obligations (in each case other than for an obligation for money
borrowed); and
(11)
any additional Indebtedness in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of $75,000,000 at any one
time outstanding and any guarantee thereof.
For purposes of determining compliance with this Section 9.12, in the event that an item of Indebtedness meets the
criteria of one or more of the categories of Permitted Indebtedness described in paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(11)
above or is entitled to be incurred pursuant to Section 9.12(a), the Company may, in its sole discretion, classify such
item of Indebtedness in any manner that complies with this covenant and such item of Indebtedness will be treated
as  having  been  incurred  pursuant  to  only  one  of  such  clauses  of  the  definition  of  Permitted  Indebtedness  or  the
proviso of the foregoing sentence and an item of Indebtedness may be divided and classified in more than one of the
types of Indebtedness permitted hereunder; provided that all Indebtedness outstanding on the Issue Date under the
[Bank]1 Credit Agreement shall be deemed incurred under paragraph (b)(1) above and not under paragraph (b)(3)
above.
The  accrual  of  interest,  the  accretion  or  amortization  of  original  issue  discount,  the  payment  of  interest  on  any
Indebtedness  in  the  form  of  additional  Indebtedness  with  the  same  terms,  and  the  payment  of  dividends  on
Disqualified Stock in the form of additional shares of the same class of Disqualified Stock will not be deemed to be
an incurrence of Indebtedness or an issuance of Disqualified Stock for purposes of this Section 9.12. The amount of
any Indebtedness outstanding as of any date shall be (i) the accreted value thereof in the case of any Indebtedness
issued with original issue discount and (ii) the principal amount or liquidation preference thereof, together with any
interest thereon that is more than 30 days past due, in the case of any other Indebtedness.
For  purposes  of  determining  compliance  with  any  U.S.  dollar-denominated  restriction  on  the  incurrence  of
Indebtedness, the U.S. dollar-equivalent principal amount of Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency shall
be calculated based on the relevant currency exchange rate in effect on the date such Indebtedness was incurred, in
the case of term Indebtedness, or first committed, in the case of revolving credit Indebtedness; provided that if such
Indebtedness is incurred to refinance other Indebtedness denominated in a foreign currency, and such refinancing
would cause the applicable U.S. dollar-denominated restriction to be exceeded if calculated at the relevant currency
exchange rate in effect on the date of such refinancing, such U.S. dollar-denominated restriction shall be deemed not
to  have  been  exceeded  so  long  as  the  principal  amount  of  such  refinancing  Indebtedness  does  not  exceed  the
principal  amount  of  such  Indebtedness  being  refinanced  (plus  all  accrued  interest  on  the  Indebtedness  being
refinanced and the amount of all expenses and premiums incurred in connection therewith).
1 Due to a scrivener’s error, the bracketed word was omitted from Section 9.12 of the Existing 2019 Notes Indenture.
Table of Contents
A-3-31
•
(f)
(g)
(h)
The amount of any guarantee by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of any Indebtedness of the Company or
one or more Restricted Subsidiaries shall not be deemed to be outstanding or incurred for purposes of this Section
9.12 in addition to the amount of Indebtedness which it guarantees.
For purposes of this Section 9.12, Indebtedness of any Person that becomes a Restricted Subsidiary by merger,
consolidation  or  other  acquisition  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  incurred  by  the  Company  and  the  Restricted
Subsidiary at the time such Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 9.12, the maximum amount of Indebtedness that the Company or
any Restricted Subsidiary may incur pursuant to this Section 9.12 shall not be deemed to be exceeded solely as a
result of fluctuations in the exchange rate of currencies. The
principal amount of any Indebtedness incurred to refinance other Indebtedness, if incurred in a different currency from
the  Indebtedness  being  refinanced,  shall  be  calculated  based  on  the  currency  exchange  rate  applicable  to  the
currencies in which such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness is denominated that is in effect on the date of such
refinancing.
Section 9.14            Limitation on Issuances and Sales of Preferred Stock of Restricted Subsidiaries.
The Company (a) shall not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to issue or sell any Preferred Stock to any Person other than
to the Company or one of its Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiaries and (b) shall not permit any Person other than the
Company  or  one  of  its  Wholly  Owned  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  own  any  Preferred  Stock  of  any  other  Restricted
Subsidiary except, in each case, for (i) the Preferred Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary owned by a Person at the time such
Restricted Subsidiary became a Restricted Subsidiary or (ii) a sale of Preferred Stock in connection with the sale of all of
the  Capital  Stock  of  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  owned  by  the  Company  or  its  Subsidiaries  effected  in  accordance  with
Section 9.17 hereof.
•
Section 9.15            Limitation on Liens.
The Company shall not, and shall not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create, incur, assume,
affirm or suffer to exist or become effective any Lien of any kind, except for Permitted Liens, upon any of their respective
Properties, whether now owned or acquired after the Issue Date, or any income or profits therefrom, or assign or convey
any right to receive income thereon, unless (a) in the case of any Lien securing Subordinated Indebtedness, the Notes are
secured by a lien on such Property or proceeds that is senior in priority to such Lien and (b) in the case of any other Lien,
the Notes are directly secured equally and ratably with the obligation or liability secured by such Lien.
•
Section 9.18            Limitation on Transactions with Affiliates.
(a)
The Company shall not, and shall not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, enter into or
suffer  to  exist  any  transaction  or  series  of  related  transactions  (including,  without  limitation,  the  sale,  purchase,
exchange or lease of Property or the rendering of any services) with, or for the benefit of, any Affiliate of the Company
(other than the Company or a Wholly Owned Restricted Subsidiary) (each, an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless:
(1)
such transaction or series of related transactions is on terms that are no less favorable to the Company or
such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, than would be available in a comparable transaction in
arm’s-length dealings with an unrelated third party; and
Table of Contents
A-3-32
(2)
the Company delivers to the Trustee:
(a) with  respect  to  any  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  related  Affiliate  Transactions  involving
aggregate consideration in excess of $10,000,000 but no greater than $25,000,000, an Officers’
Certificate  certifying  that  such  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  Affiliate  Transactions  complies
with this Section 9.18; and
(b) with  respect  to  any  Affiliate  Transaction  or  series  of  related  Affiliate  Transactions  involving
aggregate  consideration  in  excess  of  $25,000,000,  an  Officers’  Certificate  certifying  that  such
Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions complies with this Section 9.18 and that
such Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions has been approved by a majority of
the Disinterested Directors of Comstock.
(b)
The  following  items  will  not  be  deemed  to  be  Affiliate  Transactions  and,  therefore,  will  not  be  subject  to  the
provisions of Section 9.18(a):
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
loans or advances to officers, directors and employees of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary made
in the ordinary course of business in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1,000,000 outstanding at any
one time;
indemnities  of  officers,  directors,  employees  and  other  agents  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary permitted by corporate charter or other organizational document, bylaw or statutory provisions;
the  payment  of  reasonable  and  customary  fees  to  directors  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted
Subsidiaries who are not employees of the Company or any Affiliate,
the Company’s employee compensation and other benefit arrangements;
transactions  exclusively  between  or  among  the  Company  and  any  of  the  Restricted  Subsidiaries  or
exclusively between or among such Restricted Subsidiaries, provided such transactions are not otherwise
prohibited by this Indenture; and
(6)
any Restricted Payment permitted to be paid pursuant Section 9.10.
•
Section 9.19 Limitation on Dividends and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Restricted Subsidiaries.
The Company shall not, and shall not permit any Restricted Subsidiary to, directly or indirectly, create or suffer to exist or
allow  to  become  effective  any  consensual  encumbrance  or  restriction  of  any  kind  on  the  ability  of  any  Restricted
Subsidiary: (a) to pay dividends, in cash or otherwise, or make any other distributions on or in respect of its Capital Stock,
or make payments on any Indebtedness owed, to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary, (b) to make loans or
advances to the Company or any other Restricted Subsidiary or (c) to transfer any of its Property to the Company or any
other  Restricted  Subsidiary  (any  such  restrictions  being  collectively  referred  to  herein  as  a  “Payment  Restriction”).
However, the preceding restrictions will not apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of:
(1)
customary provisions restricting subletting or assignment of any lease governing a leasehold interest of
the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, or customary restrictions in licenses relating to the Property
covered thereby and entered into in the ordinary course of business;
Table of Contents
A-3-33
•
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
any  instrument  governing  Indebtedness  of  a  Person  acquired  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted
Subsidiary at the time of such acquisition, which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any other
Person, other than the Person, or the Property of the Person, so acquired, provided that such Indebtedness
was not incurred in anticipation of such acquisition;
any instrument governing Indebtedness or Disqualified Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary that is not
a  Subsidiary  Guarantor,  provided  that  (a)  such  Indebtedness  or  Disqualified  Capital  Stock  is  permitted
under  Section  9.12  and  (b)  the  terms  and  conditions  of  any  Payment  Restrictions  thereunder  are  not
materially more restrictive than the Payment Restrictions contained in the Bank Credit Agreement and the
Indenture as in effect on the Issue Date;
the  Bank  Credit  Agreement  as  in  effect  on  the  Issue  Date  or  any  agreement  that  amends,  modifies,
supplements, restates, extends, renews, refinances or replaces the Bank Credit Agreement, provided that
the terms and conditions of any Payment Restrictions thereunder are not materially more restrictive than
the Payment Restrictions contained in the Bank Credit Agreement as in effect on the Issue Date;
this Indenture, the Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees; or
[Existing 2020 Notes Indenture: the indenture governing the Company’s existing 8 3/8% Senior Notes due
2017, 7 3/4% Senior Notes due 2019, and any subsidiary guarantees thereof, in each case as in effect on
the Issue Date.] [Existing 2019 Notes Indenture: the indenture governing the Company’s existing 6 7/8%
Senior Notes due 2012, 8 3/8% Senior Notes due 2017 and any subsidiary guarantees thereof, in each
case as in effect on the Issue Date.]
Section 9.20            Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions.
The  Company  shall  not,  and  shall  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to,  enter  into  any  Sale/Leaseback
Transaction  unless  (1)  the  Company  or  such  Restricted  Subsidiary,  as  the  case  may  be,  would  be  able  to  incur
Indebtedness in an amount equal to the Attributable Indebtedness with respect to such Sale/Leaseback Transaction or (2)
the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary receives proceeds from such Sale/Leaseback Transaction at least equal to
the Fair Market Value thereof and such proceeds are applied in the same manner and to the same extent as Net Available
Cash and Excess Proceeds from an Asset Sale.
The  following  definitions  will  be  deleted  from  Section  2.01  of  the  Existing  2020  Notes  Indenture  and  the  Existing  2019
Notes Indenture:
•
•
“Acquired Indebtedness”  means  Indebtedness  of  a  Person  (1)  existing  at  the  time  such  Person  becomes  a  Restricted
Subsidiary or (2) assumed in connection with acquisitions of Properties from such Person (other than any Indebtedness
incurred in connection with, or in contemplation of, such Person becoming a Restricted Subsidiary or such acquisition).
Acquired Indebtedness shall be deemed to be incurred on the date the acquired Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary
or the date of the related acquisition of Properties from such Person.
“Average Life” means, with respect to any Indebtedness, as at any date of determination, the quotient obtained by dividing
(i) the sum of the products of (a) the number of years (and any portion thereof) from the date of determination to the date or
dates of each successive scheduled principal payment
Table of Contents
A-3-34
•
(including,  without  limitation,  any  sinking  fund  or  mandatory  redemption  payment  requirements)  of  such  Indebtedness
multiplied by (b) the amount of each such principal payment by (ii) the sum of all such principal payments.
“Consolidated  Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio”  means,  for  any  period,  the  ratio  on  a  pro  forma  basis  of  (1)  the  sum  of
Consolidated  Net  Income,  Consolidated  Interest  Expense,  Consolidated  Income  Tax  Expense  and  Consolidated  Non-
cash Charges each to the extent deducted in computing Consolidated Net Income, in each case, for such period, of the
Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, all determined in accordance with GAAP, decreased (to
the extent included in determining Consolidated Net Income) by the sum of (a) the amount of deferred revenues that are
amortized during such period and are attributable to reserves that are subject to Volumetric Production Payments and (b)
amounts  recorded  in  accordance  with  GAAP  as  repayments  of  principal  and  interest  pursuant  to  Dollar-Denominated
Production Payments, to (2) Consolidated Interest Expense for such period; provided, however, that (i) the Consolidated
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio shall be calculated on a pro forma basis on the assumptions that (A) the Indebtedness to be
incurred  (and  all  other  Indebtedness  incurred  after  the  first  day  of  such  period  of  four  full  fiscal  quarters  referred  to  in
Section  9.12(a)  hereof  through  and  including  the  date  of  determination),  and  (if  applicable)  the  application  of  the  net
proceeds therefrom (and from any other such Indebtedness), including to refinance other Indebtedness, had been incurred
on the first day of such four-quarter period and, in the case of Acquired Indebtedness, on the assumption that the related
transaction (whether by means of purchase, merger or otherwise) also had occurred on such date with the appropriate
adjustments  with  respect  to  such  acquisition  being  included  in  such  pro  forma  calculation  and  (B)  any  acquisition  or
disposition by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of any Properties outside the ordinary course of business, or any
repayment of any principal amount of any Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary prior to the Stated
Maturity thereof, in either case since the first day of such period of four full fiscal quarters through and including the date of
determination, had been consummated on such first day of such four-quarter period, (ii) in making such computation, the
Consolidated Interest Expense attributable to interest on any Indebtedness required to be computed on a pro forma basis
in accordance with Section 9.12(a) hereof and (A) bearing a floating interest rate shall be computed as if the rate in effect
on the date of computation had been the applicable rate for the entire period and (B) which was not outstanding during the
period for which the computation is being made but which bears, at the option of the Company, a fixed or floating rate of
interest, shall be computed by applying, at the option of the Company, either the fixed or floating rate, (iii) in making such
computation,  the  Consolidated  Interest  Expense  attributable  to  interest  on  any  Indebtedness  under  a  revolving  credit
facility required to be computed on a pro forma basis in accordance with Section 9.12(a) hereof shall be computed based
upon  the  average  daily  balance  of  such  Indebtedness  during  the  applicable  period,  provided  that  such  average  daily
balance shall be reduced by the amount of any repayment of Indebtedness under a revolving credit facility during the
applicable period, which repayment permanently reduced the commitments or amounts available to be reborrowed under
such facility, (iv) notwithstanding clauses (ii) and (iii) of this provision, interest on Indebtedness determined on a fluctuating
basis,  to  the  extent  such  interest  is  covered  by  agreements  relating  to  Interest  Rate  Protection  Obligations,  shall  be
deemed to have accrued at the rate per annum resulting after giving effect to the operation of such agreements, (v) in
making  such  calculation,  Consolidated  Interest  Expense  shall  exclude  interest  attributable  to  Dollar-Denominated
Production Payments, and (vi) if after the first day of the period referred to in clause (1) of this definition the Company has
permanently  retired  any  Indebtedness  out  of  the  Net  Cash  Proceeds  of  the  issuance  and  sale  of  shares  of  Qualified
Capital  Stock  of  the  Company  within  30  days  of  such  issuance  and  sale,  Consolidated  Interest  Expense  shall  be
calculated on a pro forma basis as if such Indebtedness had been retired on the first day of such period.
Table of Contents
A-3-35
•
“Consolidated Net Income” means, for any period, the consolidated net income (or loss) of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period as determined in accordance with GAAP, adjusted by excluding:
(1)
net after-tax extraordinary gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto);
(2)
net after-tax gains or losses (less all fees and expenses relating thereto) attributable to Asset Sales;
(3)
(4)
the net income (or net loss) of any Person (other than the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries), in
which the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries has an ownership interest, except to the extent of the
amount of dividends or other distributions actually paid to the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in
cash by such other Person during such period (regardless of whether such cash dividends or distributions are
attributable to net income (or net loss) of such Person during such period or during any prior period);
the net income of any Restricted Subsidiary to the extent that the declaration or payment of dividends or similar
distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary is not at the date of determination permitted, directly or indirectly, by
operation  of  the  terms  of  its  charter  or  any  agreement,  instrument,  judgment,  decree,  order,  statute,  rule  or
governmental regulation applicable to that Restricted Subsidiary or its stockholders;
(5)
dividends paid in Qualified Capital Stock;
(6)
income  resulting  from  transfers  of  assets  received  by  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  from  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary;
(7)
Consolidated Exploration Expenses and any write-downs or impairments of non-current assets; and
(8)
the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles.
•
•
•
“Consolidated  Non-cash  Charges”  means,  for  any  period,  the  aggregate  depreciation,  depletion,  amortization  and
exploration expense and other non-cash expenses of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries reducing Consolidated
Net Income for such period, determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP (excluding any such non-cash
charge for which an accrual of or reserve for cash charges for any future period is required).
“Disinterested Director” means, with respect to any transaction or series of transactions in respect of which the Board of
Directors of the Company is required to deliver a Board Resolution hereunder, a member of the Board of Directors of the
Company who does not have any material direct or indirect financial interest (other than an interest arising solely from the
beneficial ownership of Capital Stock of the Company) in or with respect to such transaction or series of transactions.
“Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness” means Indebtedness of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary, the net proceeds
of which are used to renew, extend, refinance, refund or repurchase (including, without limitation, pursuant to a Change of
Control Offer or Prepayment Offer) outstanding Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary, provided that
(1) if the Indebtedness (including the Notes) being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased is pari passu
with or subordinated in right of payment to either the Notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees, then such Indebtedness is pari
passu with or
Table of Contents
A-3-36
•
•
subordinated in right of payment to the Notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees, as the case may be, at least to the same
extent as the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased, (2) such Indebtedness has a
Stated Maturity for its final scheduled principal payment that is no earlier than the Stated Maturity for the final scheduled
principal  payment  of  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased  and  (3)  such
Indebtedness has an Average Life at the time such Indebtedness is incurred that is equal to or greater than the Average
Life  of  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased;  provided,  further,  that  such
Indebtedness is in an aggregate principal amount (or, if such Indebtedness is issued at a price less than the principal
amount thereof, the aggregate amount of gross proceeds therefrom is) not in excess of the aggregate principal amount
then  outstanding  of  the  Indebtedness  being  renewed,  extended,  refinanced,  refunded  or  repurchased  (or  if  the
Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased was issued at a price less than the principal
amount thereof, then not in excess of the amount of liability in respect thereof determined in accordance with GAAP) plus
the  amount  of  any  premium  required  to  be  paid  in  connection  with  such  renewal,  extension,  refinancing,  refunding  or
repurchase pursuant to the terms of the Indebtedness being renewed, extended, refinanced, refunded or repurchased or
the amount of
any premium reasonably determined by the Company as necessary to accomplish such renewal, extension, refinancing,
refunding or repurchase, plus the amount of reasonable fees and expenses incurred by the Company or such Restricted
Subsidiary in connection therewith.
“Preferred Stock”  means,  with  respect  to  any  Person,  any  and  all  shares,  interests,  participations  or  other  equivalents
(however designated) of such Person’s preferred or preference stock, whether now outstanding or issued after the Issue
Date, including, without limitation, all classes and series of preferred or preference stock of such Person.
“Restricted Investment” means (without duplication) (i) the designation of a Subsidiary as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in the
manner described in the definition of “Unrestricted Subsidiary” and (ii) any Investment other than a Permitted Investment.
The following provisions of the Existing 2020 Notes Indenture and the Existing 2019 Notes Indenture will be amended, as
shown below (stricken text indicates the portion of such provision that will be eliminated and underlined text indicates
language that will be added to such provision):
•
Definition of “Bank Credit Agreement” under Section 2.1:
“Bank Credit Agreement” means that certain Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of November 30,
2010 among the Company, as Borrower, the lenders party thereto from time to time, Bank of Montreal, as Administrative
Agent and Issuing Bank, Bank of America, N.A., as Syndication Agent, and Comerica Bank, JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A.
and Union Bank of California, N.A., as Co-Documentation Agents, and together with all related documents executed or
delivered pursuant thereto at any time (including, without limitation, all mortgages, deeds of trust, guarantees, security
agreements  and  all  other  collateral  and  security  documents),  in  each  case  as  such  agreements  may  be  amended
(including any amendment and restatement thereof), supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, including any
agreement or agreements extending the maturity of, refinancing, replacing or otherwise restructuring (including into two
or more separate credit facilities, and including increasing the amount of available borrowings thereunder provided that
such increase in borrowings is within the definition of “Permitted Indebtedness” or is otherwise permitted under Section
9.12) or adding Subsidiaries as additional borrowers or guarantors thereunder and all or any portion of the Indebtedness
and other Obligations under such agreement or agreements or any successor or replacement agreement or agreements,
and whether by the same or any other agent(s), lender(s) or group(s) of lenders.
A-3-37
Table of Contents
•
Definition of “Investment” under Section 2.1:
“Investment” means, with respect to any Person, any direct or indirect advance, loan, guarantee of Indebtedness or other
extension of credit or capital contribution by such Person to (by means of any transfer of cash or other Property to others
or any payment for Property or services for the account or use of others), or any purchase or acquisition by such Person
of any Capital Stock, bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (including derivatives) or evidences of Indebtedness
issued by, any other Person. In addition, the Fair Market Value of the net assets of any Restricted Subsidiary at the time
that such Restricted Subsidiary is designated an Unrestricted Subsidiary shall be deemed to be an “Investment” made by
the Company in such Unrestricted Subsidiary at such time. “Investments” shall exclude (1) extensions of trade credit or
other advances to customers on commercially reasonable terms in accordance with normal trade practices or otherwise in
the ordinary course of business, (2) Interest Rate Protection Obligations entered into in the ordinary course of business or
as permitted hereunder required by any Permitted Indebtedness or any Indebtedness incurred in compliance with Section
9.12 hereof, but only to the extent that the stated aggregate notional amounts of such Interest Rate Protection Obligations
do  not  exceed  105%  of  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  such  Indebtedness  to  which  such  Interest  Rate  Protection
Obligations relate and (3) endorsements of negotiable instruments and documents in the ordinary course of business. If
the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary  sells  or  otherwise  disposes  of  any  Capital  Stock  of  any  direct  or  indirect
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company such that, after giving effect to such sale or disposition, such Person is no longer a
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, the Company will be deemed to have made an Investment on the date of any such
sale or disposition equal to the Fair Market Value of the Company’s Investments in such Restricted Subsidiary that were
not sold or disposed of.
•
Subsection (1) of the definition of “Permitted Liens” under Section 2.1:
(1)        Liens securing Indebtedness of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary that constitutes Priority Credit Facility
Debt permitted pursuant to clause (1) of the definition of “Permitted Indebtedness”;
•
Definition of “Priority Credit Facility Debt” under Section 2.1:
“Priority  Credit  Facility  Debt”  means,  collectively,  (1)  Indebtedness  of  the  Company  or  any  Restricted  Subsidiary
(including, without limitation, Indebtedness under the Bank Credit Agreement) secured by Liens not otherwise permitted
under  any  of  clauses  (2)  through  (25),  inclusive,  of  the  definition  of  “Permitted  Liens,”  and  (2)  other  Indebtedness  or
Disqualified Capital Stock of any Restricted Subsidiary that is not a Subsidiary Guarantor. For purposes of clause (1) of
the definition of “Permitted Indebtedness,” Priority Credit Facility Debt shall be calculated, at any time of determination, (a)
in the case of Indebtedness under the Bank Credit Agreement or Indebtedness under any other instrument or agreement,
with  reference  to  the  aggregate  principal  amount  outstanding  thereunder  at  such  time,  excluding  all  interest,  fees  and
other Obligations under such facility, instrument or agreement, and (b) in the case of Disqualified Capital Stock, in the
manner specified in the definition of “Disqualified Capital Stock.”
•
Definition of “Unrestricted Subsidiary” under Section 2.1:
“Unrestricted Subsidiary” means (1) any Subsidiary of the Company that at the time of determination will be designated an
Unrestricted  Subsidiary  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company  as  provided  below  and  (2)  any  Subsidiary  of  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary. The Board of Directors of the Company may designate any Subsidiary of the Company as an
Unrestricted Subsidiary so long as (a) neither the Company nor any Restricted Subsidiary is directly or indirectly liable
pursuant to the terms of any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary; (b) no default with respect to any Indebtedness of such
Subsidiary would permit (upon notice, lapse of time or otherwise) any holder of any other Indebtedness of the Company or
any Restricted Subsidiary to declare a default on such other Indebtedness or cause the payment thereof to be accelerated
or payable prior to its Stated Maturity; and (c) such
Table of Contents
A-3-38
designation as an Unrestricted Subsidiary would be permitted under Section 9.10 hereof; and (d) such designation shall
not result in the creation or imposition of any Lien on any of the Properties of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary
(other than any Permitted Lien or any Lien the creation or imposition of which shall have been in compliance with Section
9.15 hereof); provided, however, that with respect to clause (a), the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary may be liable for
Indebtedness of an Unrestricted Subsidiary if (i) such liability constituted a Permitted Investment or a Restricted Payment
permitted by Section 9.10 hereof, in each case at the time of incurrence, or (ii) the liability would be a Permitted Investment
at  the  time  of  designation  of  such  Subsidiary  as  an  Unrestricted  Subsidiary.  Any  such  designation  by  the  Board  of
Directors of the Company shall be evidenced to the Trustee by filing a Board Resolution with the Trustee giving effect to
such  designation.  If  at  any  time  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  would  fail  to  meet  the  foregoing  requirements  as  an
Unrestricted Subsidiary, it shall thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary for purposes of the Indenture and any
Indebtedness of such Subsidiary shall be deemed to be Incurred as of such date. The Board of Directors of the Company
may  designate  any  Unrestricted  Subsidiary  as  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  if,  immediately  after  giving  effect  to  such
designation,  on  a  pro  forma  basis, (i)  no  Default  or  Event  of  Default  shall  have  occurred  and  be  continuing,  (ii)  the
Company could incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness under Section 9.12(a) hereof and (iii) if any of the Properties of the
Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries would upon such designation become subject to any Lien (other than a
Permitted Lien), the creation or imposition of such Lien shall have been in compliance with Section 9.15 hereof.
•
Section 2.2 Other Definitions.
Term
“Affiliate Transaction”
“Agent Members”
“Change of Control Notice”
“Change of Control Offer”
“Change of Control Purchase Date”
“Change of Control Purchase Price”
“Excess Proceeds”
“Funding Guarantor”
“Global Note”
“Investment Grade Ratings”
“Offer Amount”
“Offer Period”
“Paying Agent”
“Payment Restriction”
“Permitted Consideration”
“Permitted Indebtedness”
“Prepayment Offer”
“Prepayment Offer Notice”
“Purchase Date”
“Register”
“Registrar”
“Restricted Payment”
“Reversion Date”
“Surviving Entity”
“Suspended Covenants”
“Suspension Date”
“Suspension Period”
Table of Contents
•
Section 5.1 Events of Default.
A-3-39
Defined in
9.18(a)  
3.2(b)  
9.16(c)  
9.16(a)  
9.16(c)  
9.16(a)  
9.17(b)  
12.5  
3.2(a)  
9.21  
9.17(c)  
9.17(c)  
3.4  
9.19  
9.17(a)  
9.12(b)  
9.17(b)  
9.17(c)  
9.17(c)  
3.4  
3.4  
9.10(a)  
9.21  
7.1(a)  
9.21  
9.21  
9.21
“Event of Default,” wherever used herein, means any one of the following events (whatever the reason for such Event of
Default and whether it shall be voluntary or involuntary or be effected by operation of law or pursuant to any judgment,
decree or order of any court or any order, rule or regulation of any administrative or governmental body):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
default in the payment of the principal of or premium, if any, on any of the Notes when the same becomes due and
payable, whether such payment is due at Stated Maturity, upon redemption, upon repurchase pursuant to a Change
of Control Offer or a Prepayment Offer, upon acceleration or otherwise; or
default in the payment of any installment of interest on any of the Notes, when it becomes due and payable, and the
continuance of such default for a period of 30 days; or
default  in  the  performance  or  breach  of  the  provisions  of  Article  VII  hereof,  the  failure  to  make  or  consummate  a
Change of Control Offer in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.16 or the failure to make or consummate a
Prepayment Offer in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.17; or
the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor shall fail to comply with the provisions of Section 9.9 for a period of 90
days after written notice of such failure stating that it is a “notice of default” hereunder shall have been given (x) to the
Company by the Trustee or (y) to the Company and the Trustee by the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal
amount of the Notes then Outstanding); or
the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor shall fail to perform or observe any other term, covenant or agreement
contained in the Notes, any Subsidiary Guarantee or the Indenture (other than a default specified in subparagraph
(a), (b), (c) or (d) above) for a period of 60 days after written notice of such failure stating that it is a “notice of default”
hereunder shall have been given (x) to the Company by the Trustee or (y) to the Company and the Trustee by the
Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the Notes then Outstanding; or
the occurrence and continuation beyond any applicable grace period of any default in the payment of the principal of
(or premium, if any, on) or interest on any Indebtedness of the Company (other than the Notes) or any Subsidiary
Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  for  money  borrowed  when  due,  or  any  other  default  resulting  in
acceleration of any Indebtedness of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary for
money borrowed, provided that the aggregate principal amount of such Indebtedness, together with the aggregate
principal amount of any other such Indebtedness under which there has been a payment default or the maturity of
which has been so accelerated, shall exceed $50,000,000; or
any  Subsidiary  Guarantee  shall  for  any  reason  cease  to  be,  or  be  asserted  by  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary
Guarantor, as applicable, not to be, in full force and effect (except pursuant to the release of any such Subsidiary
Guarantee in accordance with this Indenture); or
failure by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary to pay final judgments or
orders rendered against the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary aggregating in
excess  of  $50,000,000  (net  of  any  amounts  covered  by  insurance  with  a  reputable  and  creditworthy  insurance
company that has not disclaimed liability)
Table of Contents
A-3-40
and either (a) commencement by any creditor of an enforcement proceeding upon such judgment (other than a
judgment that is stayed by reason of pending appeal or otherwise) or (b) the occurrence of a 60-day period during
which a stay of such judgment or order, by reason of pending appeal or otherwise, was not in effect; or
(i)
the entry of a decree or order by a court having jurisdiction in the premises (a) for relief in respect of the Company or
(i)
(j)
the entry of a decree or order by a court having jurisdiction in the premises (a) for relief in respect of the Company or
any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary in an involuntary case or proceeding under the Federal
Bankruptcy Code or any other applicable federal or state bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or other similar law
or (b) adjudging the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary bankrupt or insolvent,
or  approving  a  petition  seeking  reorganization,  arrangement,  adjustment  or  composition  of  the  Company  or  any
Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  under  the  Federal  Bankruptcy  Code  or  any  applicable
federal  or  state  law,  or  appointing  under  any  such  law  a  custodian,  receiver,  liquidator,  assignee,  trustee,
sequestrator or other similar official of the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary
or of a substantial part of its consolidated assets, or ordering the
winding up or liquidation of its affairs, and the continuance of any such decree or order for relief or any such other
decree or order unstayed and in effect for a period of 60 consecutive days; or
the commencement by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary of a voluntary
case  or  proceeding  under  the  Federal  Bankruptcy  Code  or  any  other  applicable  federal  or  state  bankruptcy,
insolvency,  reorganization  or  other  similar  law  or  any  other  case  or  proceeding  to  be  adjudicated  bankrupt  or
insolvent, or the consent by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary to the entry
of a decree or order for relief in respect thereof in an involuntary case or proceeding under the Federal Bankruptcy
Code or any other applicable federal or state bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or other similar law or to the
commencement of any bankruptcy or insolvency case or proceeding against it, or the filing by the Company or any
Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  of  a  petition  or  consent  seeking  reorganization  or  relief
under any applicable federal or state law, or the consent by it under any such law to the filing of any such petition or
to the appointment of or taking possession by a custodian, receiver, liquidator, assignee, trustee or sequestrator (or
other  similar  official)  of  the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  Guarantor  or  any  other  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  of  any
substantial part of its consolidated assets, or the making by it of an assignment for the benefit of creditors under any
such law, or the admission by it in writing of its inability to pay its debts generally as they become due or taking of
corporate action by the Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Restricted Subsidiary in furtherance of
any such action.
Section 7.1 Company May Consolidate, etc., Only on Certain Terms.
•
The Company shall not, in any single transaction or a series of related transactions, merge or consolidate with or into any
other Person, or sell, assign, convey, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all the Properties of the
Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any Person or group of Affiliated Persons, and the
Company  shall  not  permit  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  to  enter  into  any  such  transaction  or  series  of  related
transactions  if  such  transaction  or  series  of  transactions,  in  the  aggregate,  would  result  in  a  sale,  assignment,
conveyance,  transfer,  lease  or  other  disposition  of  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  Properties  of  the  Company  and  its
Restricted Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to any other Person or group of Affiliated Persons, unless at the time and
after giving effect thereto:
(a)
either (i) if the transaction is a merger or consolidation, the Company shall be the surviving Person of such merger or
consolidation, or (ii) the Person (if other than the Company) formed by such consolidation or into which the Company
is merged or to which the Properties of the Company or
Table of Contents
A-3-41
(b)
its Restricted Subsidiaries, as the case may be, are sold, assigned, conveyed, transferred, leased or otherwise
disposed of (any such surviving Person or transferee Person being called the “Surviving Entity”) shall be a
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the United States of America, any state thereof or the District of
Columbia and shall, in either case, expressly assume by an indenture supplemental to the Indenture executed and
delivered to the Trustee, in form satisfactory to the Trustee, all the obligations of the Company under the Notes and
the Indenture, and, in each case, the Indenture shall remain in full force and effect;
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of related transactions on a pro forma basis (and treating
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or series of related transactions on a pro forma basis (and treating
any Indebtedness not previously an obligation of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries which becomes
the  obligation  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Restricted  Subsidiaries  in  connection  with  or  as  a  result  of  such
transaction or transactions as having been incurred at the time of such transaction or transactions), no Default or
Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing;
(c)
except  in  the  case  of  the  consolidation  or  merger  of  the  Company  with  or  into  a  Restricted  Subsidiary  or  any
Restricted Subsidiary with or into the Company or another Restricted Subsidiary, either
(i)
(ii)
immediately before and immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a pro
forma basis (assuming that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the period of
four  full  fiscal  quarters  ending  immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or
transactions, with the appropriate adjustments with respect to the transaction or transactions being
included in such pro forma calculation), the Company (or the Surviving Entity if the Company is not
the  continuing  obligor  under  the  Indenture)  could  incur  $1.00  of  additional  Indebtedness  under
Section 9.12(a) hereof; or
immediately after giving effect to such transaction or transactions on a pro forma basis (assuming
that the transaction or transactions occurred on the first day of the period of four fiscal quarters
ending  immediately  prior  to  the  consummation  of  such  transaction  or  transactions,  with  the
appropriate adjustments with respect to the transaction or transactions being included in such pro
forma calculation), the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company (or the Surviving Entity if
Comstock is not the continuing obligor under the Indenture) will be equal to or greater than the
Fixed  Charge  Coverage  Ratio  of  the  Company  immediately  before  such  transaction  or
transactions;
(d)
(e)
(f)
if the Company is not the continuing obligor under the Indenture, then each Subsidiary Guarantor, unless it is the
Surviving Entity, shall have by supplemental indenture confirmed that its Subsidiary Guarantee of the Notes shall
apply to the Surviving Entity’s obligations under the Indenture and the Notes;
if any of the Properties of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries would upon such transaction or series of
related transactions become subject to any Lien (other than a Permitted Lien), the creation or imposition of such Lien
shall have been in compliance with Section 9.15 hereof; and
the Company (or the Surviving Entity if the Company is not the continuing obligor under the Indenture) shall have
delivered  to  the  Trustee,  in  form  and  substance  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Trustee,  (i)  an  Officers’  Certificate
stating that such consolidation, merger, conveyance, transfer,
Table of Contents
A-3-42
•
lease or other disposition and, if a supplemental indenture is required in connection with such transaction, such
supplemental indenture, comply with the Indenture and (ii) an Opinion of Counsel stating that the requirements of
Section 7.1(a) hereof have been satisfied.
Section 9.21 Covenant Suspension.
Following any day (a “Suspension Date”) that (a) the Notes have a rating equal to or higher than BBB- (or the equivalent)
by S&P and a rating equal to or higher than Baa3 (or the equivalent) by Moody’s (“Investment Grade Ratings”), (b) follows
a date on which the Notes do not have Investment Grade Ratings, and (c) no Default or Event of Default has occurred and
is continuing under this Indenture, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries shall not be subject to the covenants
described in Sections 7.1(c), 9.10, 9.12, 9.14, 9.17, 9.18 and 9.19 (collectively, the “Suspended Covenants”). In the event
that the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries are not subject to the Suspended Covenants for any period of time as a
result  of  the  preceding  sentence,  and  on  any  subsequent  date  the  Notes  fail  to  have  Investment  Grade  Ratings,  or  a
Default  or  Event  of  Default  occurs  and  is  continuing,  then  immediately  after  such  date  (a  “Reversion  Date”),  the
Suspended Covenants will again be in effect with respect to future events, unless and until a subsequent Suspension
Date  occurs.  The  period  between  a  Suspension  Date  and  a  Reversion  Date  is  referred  to  in  this  Indenture  as  a
“Suspension Period.” Notwithstanding that the Suspended Covenants may be reinstated, no Default or Event of Default
will be deemed to have occurred as a result of a failure to comply with the Suspended Covenants during any Suspension
Period. Calculations made after the Reversion Date of the amount available to be made as Restricted Payments under
Section 9.10 will be made as though the covenants described under Section 9.10 had been in effect since the Issue Date
and throughout the Suspension Period. During any Suspension Period, the Board of Directors of the Company may not
designate any of the Company’s Subsidiaries as Unrestricted Subsidiaries pursuant to this Indenture. [The Company shall
give the Trustee prompt written notification upon the occurrence of a Suspension Date or a Reversion Date.]2
Effect of Deleted Sections
The Proposed Amendments will provide that failure to comply with the terms of any of the foregoing deleted sections or
subsections  of  the  Existing  2020  Notes  Indenture  and  the  Existing  2019  Notes  Indenture  shall  no  longer  constitute  a
Default  or  an  Event  of  Default  under  such  Existing  2020  Notes  Indenture  or  such  Existing  2019  Notes  Indenture,  as
applicable,  and  shall  no  longer  have  any  other  consequence  under  the  respective  Existing  Indenture.  The  Proposed
Amendments will also amend the Existing 2020 Notes Indenture and the Existing 2019 Notes Indenture to provide that
provisions  in  the  Existing  2020  Notes  Indenture  and  the  Existing  2019  Notes  Indenture  that  authorize  action  by  the
Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor when permitted by a deleted section or which is to be done in accordance with a
deleted section, shall be deemed to permit such action (unless prohibited by such deleted section or performed in a way
consistent with such section), and, otherwise, references in the Existing 2020 Notes Indenture and the Existing 2019 Notes
Indenture to deleted provisions shall also no longer have any effect or consequence under such Existing Indenture.
2  Bracketed  language  will  be  added  to  Section  9.21  of  the  Existing  2019  Notes  Indenture  under  the  Proposed
Amendments. Bracketed language is already contained in Section 9.21 of the Existing 2020 Notes Indenture.
Table of Contents
A-3-43
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INDEX
Financial Statements (Unaudited):
Consolidated Balance Sheets — June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015
Consolidated Statements of Operations — Three Months and Six Months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Deficit — Six Months ended June 30, 2016
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows — Six Months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2014 and 2015
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit) for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
F-2  
 F-3  
 F-4  
 F-5  
 F-6
F-16  
 F-17  
 F-18  
 F-19  
 F-20  
 F-21  
 F-22
Table of Contents
F-1
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(Unaudited)
ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Accounts Receivable:
Oil and gas sales
Joint interest operations
Derivative Financial Instruments
Assets Held for Sale
Other Current Assets
Total current assets
Property and Equipment:
Unproved oil and gas properties
Oil and gas properties, successful efforts method
Other
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Net property and equipment
Other Assets
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIT
Accounts Payable
Accrued Liabilities
Total current liabilities
Long-term Debt
Deferred Income Taxes
Reserve for Future Abandonment Costs
Total liabilities
Commitments and Contingencies
Stockholders’ Deficit:
Common stock — $0.50 par, 50,000,000 shares authorized, 12,504,562 and 9,544,035
shares outstanding at June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total stockholders’ deficit
June 30,
2016
December 31,
2015
(In thousands)
$
67,412   
 
16,075   
2,387   
—     
42,542   
2,339   
   
130,755   
 
 
76,391   
  3,768,602   
 
19,532   
  (2,949,175)  
   
   
915,350   
 
1,121   
 
   
   
$ 1,047,226   
   
   
 
46,601   
$
40,220   
 
   
   
 
86,821   
  1,145,190   
6,510   
 
 
15,972   
   
   
  1,254,493
6,253   
 
518,905   
 
(732,425)  
 
   
   
(207,267)  
 
   
   
$ 1,047,226
$
$
$
$
134,006
15,241  
3,552  
1,446  
—    
1,993  
 
156,238
84,144  
4,332,222  
19,521  
(3,397,467) 
 
1,038,420  
1,192  
 
1,195,850
57,276  
38,444  
 
95,720  
1,249,330  
1,965  
20,093  
 
1,367,108
4,772  
504,670  
(680,700) 
 
(171,258) 
 
1,195,850
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-2
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(Unaudited)
Three Months Ended June 30,
2015
Six Months Ended June 30,
Table of Contents
Revenues:
Natural gas sales
Oil sales
2016
25,727   
14,988   
   
40,715   
 
1,327   
4,025   
12,988   
—     
36,029   
5,663   
1,742
1,647   
   
63,421   
   
(22,706)  
 
56,196   
18   
314   
(28,882)  
   
27,646   
   
4,940   
(88)  
   
4,852
0.41   
   
11,557
$
$
$
Total oil and gas sales
Operating expenses:
Production taxes
Gathering and transportation
Lease operating
Exploration
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
General and administrative
Impairment of oil and gas properties
Net loss on sales and exchange of oil and gas
properties
Total operating expenses
Operating loss
Other income (expenses):
Net gain on extinguishment of debt
Gain on derivative financial instruments
Other income
Interest expense
Total other income (expenses)
Income (loss) before income taxes
(Provision for) benefit from income taxes
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per share — basic and
diluted
Weighted average shares outstanding — basic
and diluted
$
$
2016            
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
 
50,874   
26,004   
   
76,878   
 
2,513   
8,390   
25,948   
7,753   
74,865   
11,238   
24,460
26,188   
51,124   
   
77,312   
 
3,807   
3,260   
17,827   
23,040   
90,573   
7,176   
1,984
$
$
111,830   
   
259,497   
   
(182,185)  
 
7,267   
627   
356   
(33,807)  
   
(25,557)  
   
(207,742)  
72,674   
   
(135,068)
(14.64)  
   
9,224
$
$
907   
   
156,074   
   
(79,196)  
 
89,576   
674   
595   
(58,826)  
   
32,019   
   
(47,177)  
(4,548)  
   
(51,725)
(4.82)  
   
10,729
2015
$
$
$
46,757  
97,077  
 
143,834
6,781  
6,113  
32,963  
65,269  
182,462  
15,142  
2,387
111,830  
 
422,947  
 
(279,113)
4,532  
627  
643  
(54,561) 
 
(48,759) 
 
(327,872) 
114,302  
 
(213,570)
(23.18) 
 
9,215
Table of Contents
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-3
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIT
Balance at January 1, 2016
Stock-based compensation
Restricted stock used for tax withholdings
Stock issued in exchange for debt
Net loss
Balance at June 30, 2016
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2016
(Unaudited)
Common
Stock
(Shares)
Common
Stock –
Par Value
Additional
Paid-in
Capital
(In thousands)
232   
(42)  
2,771   
—
9,544    $
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
     
   
     12,505    $
116   
(21)  
1,386   
—
4,772    $ 504,670    $
 
 
 
 
   
6,253    $ 518,905    $
2,377   
(292)  
12,150   
—
Accumulated
Deficit
Total
—     
—     
—     
(51,725)
(680,700)   $(171,258) 
2,493  
(313) 
13,536  
(51,725) 
 
(732,425)   $(207,267)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-4
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Unaudited)
Table of Contents
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash provided by (used for) operating activities:
Net loss on sales and exchange of oil and gas properties
Deferred income taxes
Leasehold impairments and other exploration costs
Impairment of oil and gas properties
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Gain on derivative financial instruments
Settlements of derivative financial instruments
Net gain on extinguishment of debt
Amortization of debt discount, premium and issuance costs
Stock-based compensation
Excess income taxes from stock-based compensation
Decrease in accounts receivable
Decrease (increase) in other current assets
Decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Net cash provided by (used for) operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
Capital expenditures
Proceeds from asset sales
Net cash used for investing activities
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2016
2015
(In thousands)
$ (51,725)  
 
907   
 
4,519   
 
 
7,753   
  24,460   
  74,865   
(674)  
 
 
2,120   
  (89,576)  
 
2,533   
2,493   
 
—     
 
331   
 
(346)  
 
 
(8,864)  
   
   
  (31,204)  
   
   
 
  (33,654)  
2,067
$(213,570)
111,830  
  (114,785) 
65,269  
 
 
2,387  
  182,462  
(627) 
 
—    
 
(4,532) 
 
 
2,564  
3,982  
 
1,903  
 
17,125  
 
7,600  
 
 
(37,370) 
   
 
24,238
(197,263) 
—
(31,587)
(197,263)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Borrowings
Payments to retire debt
Debt and equity issuance costs
Tax withholdings related to restricted stock
Excess income taxes from stock-based compensation
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
—     
 
(3,397)  
 
(93)  
 
(313)  
 
—     
   
   
 
(3,803)  
   
   
  (66,594)  
  134,006   
   
   
$ 67,412
740,000  
  (420,288) 
 
(16,115) 
(526) 
 
(1,903) 
 
   
 
  301,168  
   
 
  128,143  
2,071  
 
   
 
$ 130,214
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-5
Table of Contents
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
June 30, 2016
(Unaudited)
(1) SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES —
Basis of Presentation
In  management’s  opinion,  the  accompanying  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements  contain  all  adjustments
necessary  to  present  fairly  the  financial  position  of  Comstock  Resources,  Inc.  and  subsidiaries  (“Comstock”  or  the
“Company”) as of June 30, 2016, the related results of operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 and
2015, and cash flows for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015. Net loss and comprehensive loss are the same in
all periods presented. All adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless otherwise disclosed.
The  accompanying  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  pursuant  to  the  rules  and
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Certain information and disclosures normally included in annual
financial statements prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States have been
omitted pursuant to those rules and regulations, although Comstock believes that the disclosures made are adequate to
make  the  information  presented  not  misleading.  These  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements  should  be  read  in
conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included in Comstock’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2015 and its current report on Form 8-K dated August 1, 2016.
The results of operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 are not necessarily an indication of the results
expected for the full year.
These  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  accounts  of  Comstock  and  its  wholly-owned  and
controlled subsidiaries.
On July 19, 2016, the Company announced a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of its issued and outstanding common stock
which became effective on July 29, 2016. All amounts disclosed in these financial statements have been adjusted to give
effect to the effect of this reverse stock split in all periods.
Property and Equipment
The Company follows the successful efforts method of accounting for its oil and gas properties. Costs incurred to acquire
oil and gas leasehold are capitalized.
At June 30, 2016, the Company reflected certain of its natural gas properties located in South Texas as assets held for sale
in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. The Company engaged financial advisors in February 2016 to sell the
properties. At June 30, 2016, these assets were reflected on the balance sheet at $42.5 million, representing their estimated
net realizable value on a sale less costs to sell. The Company has recognized an impairment charge of $20.8 million during
the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2016  to  adjust  the  carrying  value  of  these  assets  to  their  net  realizable  value.  The
impairment, which is a Level 3 fair value measurement, was computed using a discounted cash flow valuation approach
which is consistent with the Company’s methodology for determining impairments of its proved oil and gas properties.
The asset retirement obligation related to these properties of $3.4 million is included in accrued liabilities at June 30, 2016.
In June 30, 2015, Comstock entered into an agreement to sell certain of its oil and gas properties located in and near
Burleson County, Texas to a third party. This sale closed on July 22, 2015 with an effective date of May 1, 2015 and the
Company received net proceeds from this sale of $102.5 million in the third quarter of 2015. The Company recognized a
loss on this sale of $111.8 million in the three months and six months ended June 30, 2015 operating results.
Table of Contents
F-6
Results of operations for the properties that were sold or are being held for sale were as follows:
Total oil and gas sales
Total operating expenses(1)
Operating income (loss)
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2016
2015
$ 1,728    
(1,712)   
 
   
    
16    
$
(In thousands)
14,208    
(18,616)   
    
(4,408)
$ 3,528    
  (3,399)   
   
    
129    
$
$
 
   
$
June 30,
2016
2015  
 
$ 22,755  
  (72,977) 
   
 
$ (50,222)
(1) Includes  direct  operating  expenses,  depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization  and  exploration  expense.  Excludes  interest
expense, general and administrative expenses and depreciation, depletion and amortization expense subsequent to the date
the assets were designated as held for sale.
In  January  2016,  the  Company  exchanged  certain  oil  and  gas  properties  with  another  operator  in  a  non-monetary
exchange. Under the exchange, the Company received 3,637 net acres in DeSoto Parish, Louisiana, prospective for the
Haynesville shale, including four producing wells (3.5 net). The Company exchanged 2,547 net acres in Atascosa County,
Texas, including seven producing wells (5.3 net) for the Haynesville shale properties. The Company recognized a gain of
$0.7 million on this transaction which is included in the net loss on sales and exchange of oil and gas properties for the six
months ended June 30, 2016. The Company also sold certain oil and gas properties during the first six months of 2016 for
total proceeds of $2.1 million. The Company recognized a loss of $1.6 million on these divestitures.
Unproved oil and gas properties are periodically assessed and any impairment in value is charged to exploration expense.
The costs of unproved properties which are determined to be productive are transferred to oil and gas properties and
amortized  on  an  equivalent  unit-of-production  basis.  The  Company  recognized  impairment  charges  in  exploration
expense and $23.0 million during the three months ended June 30, 2015 and $7.8 million and $63.5 million during the six
months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, respectively, related to certain leases that the Company currently does not plan to
develop. No unproved impairments were recognized during the three months ended June 30, 2016.
The Company also assesses the need for an impairment of the capitalized costs for its proved oil and gas properties on a
property basis. Reductions to management’s oil and natural gas price outlooks in 2016 and 2015 resulted in indications of
impairment of certain of the Company’s properties. Accordingly, the Company recognized additional impairments of its oil
and gas properties of $1.7 million and $2 million for the three months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, respectively, and $3.7
million and $2.4 million for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, respectively, to reduce the carrying value of
these properties to their estimated fair value.
The Company determines the fair values of its oil and gas properties using a discounted cash flow model and proved and
risk adjusted probable reserves. Undrilled acreage can also be valued based on sales transactions in comparable areas.
Significant Level 3 assumptions associated with the calculation of discounted future cash flows included in the cash flow
model include management’s outlook for oil and natural gas prices, production costs, capital expenditures, and future
production as well as estimated proved reserves and risk-adjusted probable reserves. Management’s oil and natural gas
price outlook is developed based on third-party longer-term price forecasts as of each measurement date. The expected
future net cash flows are discounted using an appropriate discount rate in determining a property’s fair value.
It is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimates of undiscounted future net cash flows attributable to its oil and gas
properties  may  change  in  the  future.  The  primary  factors  that  may  affect  estimates  of  future  cash  flows  include  future
adjustments, both positive and negative, to proved and appropriate risk-adjusted probable oil and gas reserves, results of
future  drilling  activities,  future  prices  for  oil  and  natural  gas,  and  increases  or  decreases  in  production  and  capital
costs. As a result of these changes, or if in the future the Company does not have access to sufficient capital to develop
any undrilled reserves used in its assessment, there may be further impairments in the carrying values of these or other
properties.
Table of Contents
Accrued Liabilities
F-7
Accrued liabilities at June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 consist of the following:
Accrued interest
Accrued drilling costs
Accrued ad valorem taxes
Asset retirement obligation of assets held for sale
Other accrued liabilities
As of
June
30,
2016
$26,892    
  2,005    
  2,400    
  3,442    
  5,481    
   
    
$40,220
(In thousands)
As of
2015
December 31,
 
 
29,075  
5,306  
—    
—    
4,063  
 
38,444
$
 
 
 
 
 
$
Reserve for Future Abandonment Costs
Comstock’s  asset  retirement  obligations  relate  to  future  plugging  and  abandonment  expenses  on  its  oil  and  gas
properties  and  related  facilities  disposal.  The  following  table  summarizes  the  changes  in  Comstock’s  total  estimated
liability for such obligations during the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015:
Six Months Ended June 30,
Future abandonment costs — beginning of period
Accretion expense
New wells placed on production
Assets held for sale
Liabilities settled and assets disposed of
Future abandonment costs — end of period
2016
(In thousands)
$
 
 
 
 
 
$
20,093     
496     
2     
(3,442)    
(1,177)    
  
15,972
$
 
 
 
 
 
$
2015
14,900  
401  
262  
(628) 
—    
 
14,935
Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities
Comstock periodically uses swaps, floors and collars to hedge oil and natural gas prices and interest rates. Swaps are
settled monthly based on differences between the prices specified in the instruments and the settlement prices of futures
contracts.  Generally,  when  the  applicable  settlement  price  is  less  than  the  price  specified  in  the  contract,  Comstock
receives  a  settlement  from  the  counterparty  based  on  the  difference  multiplied  by  the  volume  or  amounts  hedged.
Similarly,  when  the  applicable  settlement  price  exceeds  the  price  specified  in  the  contract,  Comstock  pays  the
counterparty based on the difference. Comstock generally receives a settlement from the counterparty for floors when the
applicable settlement price is less than the price specified in the contract, which is based on the difference multiplied by
the volumes hedged. For collars, generally Comstock receives a settlement from the counterparty when the settlement
price  is  below  the  floor  and  pays  a  settlement  to  the  counterparty  when  the  settlement  price  exceeds  the  cap.  No
settlement  occurs  when  the  settlement  price  falls  between  the  floor  and  cap.  All  of  the  Company’s  derivative  financial
instruments are used for risk management purposes and, by policy, none are held for trading or speculative purposes.
Comstock  minimizes  credit  risk  to  counterparties  of  its  derivative  financial  instruments  through  formal  credit  policies,
monitoring  procedures,  and  diversification.  All  of  Comstock’s  derivative  financial  instruments  are  with  parties  that  are
lenders under its bank credit facility. The Company is not required to provide any credit support to its counterparties other
than cross collateralization with the assets securing its bank credit facility. None of the Company’s derivative financial
instruments involve payment or receipt of premiums.
As  of  June  30,  2016,  the  Company  had  no  outstanding  commodity  derivatives.  The  Company  had  derivative  financial
instruments outstanding on June 30, 2015 that hedged production for the subsequent twelve month
Table of Contents
F-8
period. None of the Company’s derivative contracts were designated as cash flow hedges. The Company recognized cash
settlements and changes in the fair value of its derivative financial instruments as a single component of other income
(expenses). The Company recognized gains of $18,000 and $0.7 million related to the change in fair value of its natural gas
swap agreements during the three months and six months ended June 30, 2016, respectively. The Company recognized a
gain of $0.6 million related to the change in fair value of its natural gas swap agreements during the three and six months
ended June 30, 2015. Cash settlements on the Company’s natural gas derivative financial instruments were receipts of
$1.1 million and $2.1 million for the three months and six months ended June 30, 2016, respectively. The Company had no
cash settlements from derivative financial instruments in the first six months of 2015.
Stock-Based Compensation
Comstock  accounts  for  employee  stock-based  compensation  under  the  fair  value  method.  Compensation  cost  is
measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized over the award vesting period. During
the three months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, the Company recognized $1.2 million and $2.1 million, respectively, of
stock-based compensation expense within general and administrative expenses related to awards of restricted stock and
performance stock units to its employees and directors. For the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, the Company
recognized  $2.5  million  and  $4.0  million,  respectively,  of  stock-based  compensation  expense  within  general  and
administrative expenses.
During the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Company granted 229,618 shares of restricted stock with a grant date fair
value of $1.3 million, or $5.45 per share, to its employees. The fair value of each restricted share on the date of grant was
equal to its market price. As of June 30, 2016, Comstock had 354,974 shares of unvested restricted stock outstanding at a
weighted average grant date fair value of $15.25 per share. Total unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested
restricted stock grants of $4.4 million as of June 30, 2016 is expected to be recognized over a period of 2.1 years.
During the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Company granted 60,013 performance share units (“PSUs”) with a grant
date  fair  value  of  $0.4  million,  or  $7.00  per  unit,  to  its  employees.  As  of  June  30,  2016,  Comstock  had  134,627  PSUs
outstanding at a weighted average grant date fair value of $22.09 per unit. The number of shares of common stock to be
issued related to the PSUs is based on the Company’s stock price performance as compared to its peers which could
result in the issuance of anywhere from zero to 269,253 shares of common stock. Total unrecognized compensation cost
related to these grants of $1.7 million as of June 30, 2016 is expected to be recognized over a period of 1.7 years.
As  of  June  30,  2016,  Comstock  had  outstanding  options  to  purchase  11,730  shares  of  common  stock  at  a  weighted
average exercise price of $166.10 per share. All of the stock options were exercisable and there were no unrecognized
compensation costs related to the stock options as of June 30, 2016. No stock options were granted or exercised during
the six months ended June 30, 2016.
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes are provided to reflect the future tax consequences or benefits of differences between the tax basis
of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements using enacted tax rates. The deferred tax
provision in the first six months of 2016 related to an increase in the Company’s deferred income tax liability resulting from
state  tax  law  changes  enacted  during  the  period.  In  recording  deferred  income  tax  assets,  the  Company  considers
whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of its deferred income tax assets will be realized in the future. The
ultimate realization of deferred income tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the
periods in which those deferred income tax assets would be deductible. The Company believes that after considering all
the available objective evidence, historical and prospective, with greater weight given to historical evidence, management
is not able to determine that it is more likely than not that all of its deferred tax assets will be realized and, therefore, has
recorded an a valuation allowance of $17.9 million and $4.9 million against its net federal deferred tax assets and
F-9
Table of Contents
state deferred tax assets (net of the federal tax benefit), respectively, during the six months ended June 30, 2016. The
Company will continue to assess the valuation allowance against deferred tax assets considering all available information
obtained in future reporting periods.
The following is an analysis of consolidated income tax expense (benefit):
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
Current provision
Deferred provision (benefit)
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes
June 30,
2016
June 30,
2016
2015
$
 
 
$
15     
73     
    
88
(In thousands)
$
 
   
$
420    
(73,094)   
    
(72,674)
$
29    
  4,519    
   
    
$4,548
2015
$
483  
  (114,785) 
   
 
$ (114,302)
The  difference  between  the  Company’s  effective  tax  rate  and  the  35%  federal  statutory  rate  is  caused  by  valuation
allowances on deferred taxes and state taxes. The impact of these items varies based upon the Company’s projected full
year loss and the jurisdictions that are expected to generate the projected losses. The difference between the Company’s
customary rate of 35% and the effective tax rate on the loss before income taxes is due to the following:
Tax at statutory rate
Tax effect of:
Valuation allowance on deferred tax assets
State income taxes net of federal benefit
Other
Effective tax rate
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
2015
June 30,
2016
2015
35.0%
(2.1) 
2.1  
(0.1)
34.9%
June 30,
2016
35.0%
(22.1) 
(11.8) 
0.7
1.8%
(In thousands)
35.0%  
 
(3.2)   
3.4  
 
(0.2)   
 
35.0%
35.0%
(48.5) 
4.2  
(0.3)
(9.6)%
The Company’s federal income tax returns for the years subsequent to December 31, 2011, remain subject to examination.
The  Company’s  income  tax  returns  in  major  state  income  tax  jurisdictions  remain  subject  to  examination  for  the  year
ended  December  31,  2008  and  for  various  periods  subsequent  to  December  31,  2010.  A  state  tax  return  in  one  state
jurisdiction is currently under review. The Company has evaluated the preliminary findings in this jurisdiction and believes
it is more likely than not that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a material effect on the Company’s
financial statements. The Company currently believes that all other significant filing positions are highly certain and that all
of its other significant income tax positions and deductions would be sustained under audit or the final resolution would
not  have  a  material  effect  on  the  consolidated  financial  statements.  Therefore,  the  Company  has  not  established  any
significant reserves for uncertain tax positions.
Future  use  of  the  Company’s  federal  and  state  net  operating  loss  carryforwards  may  be  limited  in  the  event  that  a
cumulative change in the ownership of Comstock’s common stock by more than 50% occurs within a three-year period.
Such a change in ownership could result in a substantial portion of Comstock’s net operating loss carryforwards being
eliminated or becoming restricted, and the Company may need to recognize an additional valuation allowance reflecting
the restricted use of these net operating loss carryforwards in the period when such an ownership change occurred. In
October 2015, the Company established a rights plan to deter ownership changes that would trigger this limitation.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company holds or has held certain items that are required to be measured at fair value. These include cash and cash
equivalents  held  in  bank  accounts  and  derivative  financial  instruments  in  the  form  of  oil  and  natural  gas  price  swap
agreements. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or
F-10
Table of Contents
paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants on the measurement date. A three-level hierarchy is followed for disclosure to
show the extent and level of judgment used to estimate fair value measurements:
Level  1  —  Inputs  used  to  measure  fair  value  are  unadjusted  quoted  prices  that  are  available  in  active  markets  for  the
identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Level 2 — Inputs used to measure fair value, other than quoted prices included in Level 1, are either directly or indirectly
observable as of the reporting date through correlation with market data, including quoted prices for similar assets and
liabilities in active markets and quoted prices in markets that are not active. Level 2 also includes assets and liabilities that
are  valued  using  models  or  other  pricing  methodologies  that  do  not  require  significant  judgment  since  the  input
assumptions used in the models, such as interest rates and volatility factors, are corroborated by readily observable data
from actively quoted markets for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
Level 3 — Inputs used to measure fair value are unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and
reflect  the  use  of  significant  management  judgment.  These  values  are  generally  determined  using  pricing  models  for
which the assumptions utilize management’s estimates of market participant assumptions.
The Company’s valuation of cash and cash equivalents is a Level 1 measurement. The Company’s natural gas price swap
agreements are not traded on a public exchange. Their value is determined utilizing a discounted cash flow model based
on  inputs  that  are  readily  available  in  public  markets  and,  accordingly,  the  valuation  of  these  swap  agreements  is
categorized as a Level 2 measurement. There were no price swap agreements outstanding as of June 30, 2016.
As of June 30, 2016, the Company’s financial assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value consisted of cash and cash
equivalents  of  $67.4  million,  a  Level  1  measurement.  As  of  June  30,  2016,  the  Company’s  other  financial  instruments,
comprised solely of its fixed rate debt, had a carrying value of $1.1 billion and a fair value of $730.2 million. The fair market
value of the Company’s fixed rate debt was based on quoted prices as of June 30, 2016, a Level 2 measurement.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is determined without the effect of any outstanding potentially dilutive stock options or PSUs
and diluted earnings per share is determined with the effect of outstanding stock options and PSUs that are potentially
dilutive.  Unvested  share-based  payment  awards  containing  nonforfeitable  rights  to  dividends  are  considered  to  be
participatory securities and are included in the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share pursuant to the two-
class method. PSUs represent the right to receive a number of shares of the Company’s common stock that may range
from  zero  to  up  to  two  times  the  number  of  PSUs  granted  on  the  award  date  based  on  the  achievement  of  certain
performance measures during a performance period. The number of potentially dilutive shares related to PSUs is based
on the number of shares, if any, which would be issuable at the end of the respective period, assuming that date was the
end  of  the  contingency  period.  The  treasury  stock  method  is  used  to  measure  the  dilutive  effect  of  PSUs.  Basic  and
diluted income (loss) per share for the three months and six ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 were determined as follows:
2016
Income    Shares    
  
   $ 4,852   
(143)
$(135,068)  
—
Net income (loss)
Income allocable to unvested stock grants
Basic and diluted net income (loss) attributable to common
stock
Table of Contents
Three Months Ended June 30,
Per
Share
2015
Loss     Shares
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
Per
Share
11,557     $ 0.41     $(135,068)
9,224     $(14.64)
$ 4,709
F-11
Six Months Ended June 30,
2016
Loss     Shares
Per
Share
2015
Loss     Shares
Per
Share
Basic and Diluted net loss attributable to common stock
$(51,725)
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
 10,729     $(4.82)   $(213,570)
9,215     $(23.18)
At June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015, 354,974 and 314,060 shares of restricted stock, respectively, are included in
common  stock  outstanding  as  such  shares  have  a  nonforfeitable  right  to  participate  in  any  dividends  that  might  be
declared and have the right to vote on matters submitted to the Company’s stockholders. Weighted average shares of
unvested restricted stock outstanding during the three months and six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 were as
follows:
Unvested restricted stock
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2016
2015
June 30,
2016
350
(In thousands)
309
332
2015  
 
271
Options  to  purchase  common  stock  and  PSUs  that  were  outstanding  and  that  were  excluded  as  anti-dilutive  from  the
determination of diluted earnings per share are as follows:
Weighted average stock options
Weighted average exercise price per share
Weighted average performance share units
Weighted average grant date fair value per unit
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2016
2015
June 30,
2016
(In thousands except per share/unit data)
 
12    
$ 166.10    
135    
 
$
22.10
21    
$ 164.75    
 
134    
45.65    
$
12    
$ 166.10    
 
138    
$ 22.10
2015  
 
 
22  
$ 164.75  
 
122  
$ 45.65
For the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, the excluded options that were anti-dilutive were at exercise
prices in excess of the average stock price. Except for the three months ended June 30, 2016, all unvested PSUs were
anti-dilutive to earnings and excluded from weighted average shares used in the computation of earnings per share in the
periods presented due to the net loss in those periods.
Supplementary Information With Respect to the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For  the  purpose  of  the  consolidated  statements  of  cash  flows,  the  Company  considers  all  highly  liquid  investments
purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
The following is a summary of cash payments made for interest and income taxes:
Interest payments
Income tax payments
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2016
(In thousands)
2015  
 
$31,836  
$
11
$58,476    
$ —
The  Company  capitalizes  interest  on  its  unevaluated  oil  and  gas  property  costs  during  periods  when  it  is  conducting
exploration activity on this acreage. No interest was capitalized during the six months ended June 30, 2016. The Company
capitalized interest of $0.9 million for the six months ended June 30, 2015 which reduced interest expense.
F-12
Table of Contents
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09,
Revenue  from  Contracts  with  Customers  (Topic  606) (“ASU  2014-09”),  which  supersedes  nearly  all  existing  revenue
recognition  guidance  under  existing  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  This  new  standard  is  based  upon  the
principal that revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the
consideration  to  which  the  entity  expects  to  be  entitled  in  exchange  for  those  goods  or  services.  ASU  2014-09  also
requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from
customer  contracts.  ASU  2014-09  is  effective  for  annual  and  interim  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2017.  Early
adoption is permitted beginning with periods after December 15, 2016 and entities have the option of using either a full
retrospective or modified approach to adopt ASU 2014-09. The Company is currently evaluating the new guidance and
has  not  determined  the  impact  this  standard  may  have  on  its  financial  statements  or  decided  upon  the  method  of
adoption.
In August 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements — Going Concern (Subtopic 205-
40): Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern (“ASU 2014-15”). ASU 2014-15
provides guidance about management’s responsibility to evaluate whether there is substantial doubt about an entity’s
ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern  and  sets  rules  for  how  this  information  should  be  disclosed  in  the  financial
statements. ASU 2014-15 is effective for annual periods ending after December 15, 2016 and interim periods thereafter.
Early adoption is permitted. The Company has elected to not adopt ASU 2014-15 early and does not expect adoption of
ASU 2014-15 to have any impact on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases, (“ASU 2016-02”). ASU 2016-02 requires lessees to put most
leases on their balance sheets, but recognize lease costs in their financial statements in a manner similar to accounting for
leases  prior  to  ASC  2016-02.  ASU  2016-02  is  effective  for  annual  periods  ending  after  December  15,  2018  and  interim
periods  thereafter.  Early  adoption  is  permitted.  The  Company  is  currently  evaluating  the  new  guidance  and  has  not
determined the impact this standard may have on its financial statements or decided upon the method of adoption.
In March 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-09, Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, (“ASU
2016-09”).  ASU  2016-09  will  change  how  companies  account  for  certain  aspects  of  share-based  payments,  including
recognizing the income tax effects of awards in the income statement when the awards vest or are settled. ASC 2016-09
revises guidance on employers’ accounting for employee’s use of shares to satisfy the employer’s statutory income tax
withholding  obligation  and  the  treatment  of  forfeitures.  ASU  2016-09  is  effective  for  annual  periods  ending  after
December 15, 2016 and interim periods thereafter. Early adoption is permitted, but all guidance must be adopted in the
same period. The Company is currently evaluating the new guidance and has not determined the impact this standard
may have on its financial statements or decided upon the method of adoption.
(2) STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY —
On March 24, 2016, the Company received a notification from the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) notifying the
Company that it was not in compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing standards. The Company is considered below
criteria established by the NYSE as a result of the Company’s average stock price trading below $1.00 per share and its
average market capitalization being less than $50.0 million, in each case over a consecutive 30 trading-day period. The
Company has submitted and the NYSE has accepted a business plan to regain compliance with the NYSE’s continued
listing standards. Comstock may regain compliance with the NYSE’s stock price standard at any time during a six-month
cure period commencing on receipt of the NYSE notification if its common stock has a closing stock price of at least $1.00
and an average closing stock price of at least $1.00 over the 30 trading-day period ending on the last trading day of that
month  or  the  last  trading  day  of  the  cure  period.  The  Company  must  regain  compliance  with  respect  to  its  market
capitalization within eighteen months of receipt of the NYSE notification. Failure to regain compliance with the NYSE’s
continued listing
Table of Contents
F-13
standards within the applicable time periods will result in the commencement of suspension and delisting procedures. On
July 29, 2016, Comstock completed a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of its common stock to address the minimum stock
price requirement.
At  the  Company’s  2016  annual  meeting  of  stockholders,  the  stockholders  approved  an  amendment  to  the  Company’s
restated articles of incorporation to increase the authorized shares of common stock to 50 million shares (such number
adjusted for the one-for-five (1:5) reverse stock split).
(3) LONG-TERM DEBT —
At June 30, 2016, long-term debt was comprised of:
7 3⁄4 % Senior Notes due 2019:
(In thousands)
7 3⁄4 % Senior Notes due 2019:
Principal
Premium, net of amortization
Debt issue costs, net of amortization
9 1⁄2 % Senior Notes due 2020:
Principal
Discount, net of amortization
Debt issue costs, net of amortization
10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020:
Principal
Debt issue costs, net of amortization
$
$
288,516  
2,325  
(2,464)
174,607  
(4,008) 
(1,913)
700,000  
(11,873) 
 
1,145,190
In  March  2015,  Comstock  issued  $700.0  million  of  10%  senior  secured  notes  (the  “Secured  Notes”)  which  are  due  on
March  15,  2020.  Interest  on  the  Secured  Notes  is  payable  semi-annually  on  each  March  15  and  September  15.  Net
proceeds from the issuance of the Secured Notes of $683.8 million were used to retire the Company’s bank credit facility
and for general corporate purposes. Comstock also has outstanding (i) $288.5 million of 7  3⁄4% senior notes (the “2019
Notes”) which are due on April 1, 2019 and bear interest which is payable semi-annually on each April 1 and October 1 and
(ii) $174.6 million of 9  1⁄2% senior notes (the “2020 Notes”) which are due on June 15, 2020 and bear interest which is
payable semi-annually on each June 15 and December 15. The Secured Notes are secured on a first-priority basis equally
and  ratably  with  the  Company’s  revolving  credit  facility  described  below,  subject  to  payment  priorities  in  favor  of  the
revolving credit facility by the collateral securing the revolving credit facility, which consists of, among other things, at
least 80% of the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ oil and gas properties. The Secured Notes, the 2019 Notes and the 2020
Notes  are  general  obligations  of  Comstock  and  are  guaranteed  by  all  of  Comstock’s  subsidiaries.  Such  subsidiary
guarantors are 100% owned and all of the guarantees are full and unconditional and joint and several obligations. There
are  no  restrictions  on  the  ability  of  Comstock  to  obtain  funds  from  its  subsidiaries  through  dividends  or  loans.  As  of
June 30, 2016, Comstock had no material assets or operations which are independent of its subsidiaries.
During the six months ended June 30, 2016, Comstock has retired $87.5 million in principal amount of the 2019 Notes and
$19.8 million of the 2020 Notes in exchange in the aggregate for the issuance of 2,748,403 shares of common stock and
$3.5 million in cash. A gain of $89.6 million was recognized on the exchanges and purchases of the 2019 Notes and the
2020 Notes during the six months ended June 30, 2016 for the difference between the market value of the stock on the
closing date of the exchanges and sales and the net carrying value of the debt and the related net premium and net debt
issuance costs. The gain is included in the net gain on extinguishment of debt, which is reported as a component of other
income (loss). During the six months ended June 30, 2015, the Company purchased $16.8 million in principal amount of
the  2020  Notes  for  $7.8  million.  The  gain  of  $8.2  million  recognized  on  the  purchase  of  the  2020  Notes  and  the  loss
resulting from the write-off of deferred loan costs associated with the Company’s bank credit facility of $3.7 million are
included in the net gain on extinguishment of debt.
Table of Contents
F-14
Comstock has a $50.0 million revolving credit facility with Bank of Montreal and Bank of America, N.A. The revolving credit
facility is a four year credit commitment that matures on March 4, 2019. Indebtedness under the revolving credit facility is
guaranteed by all of the Company’s subsidiaries and is secured by substantially all of Comstock’s and its subsidiaries’
assets. Borrowings under the revolving credit facility bear interest, at Comstock’s option, at either (1) LIBOR plus 2.5% or
(2) the base rate (which is the higher of the administrative agent’s prime rate, the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or 30 day
LIBOR plus 1.0%) plus 1.5%. A commitment fee of 0.5% per annum is payable quarterly on the unused credit line. The
revolving  credit  facility  contains  covenants  that,  among  other  things,  restrict  the  payment  of  cash  dividends  and
repurchases  of  common  stock,  limit  the  amount  of  additional  debt  that  Comstock  may  incur  and  limit  the  Company’s
ability to make certain loans, investments and divestitures. The only financial covenants are the maintenance of a current
ratio  of  at  least  1.0  to  1.0  and  the  maintenance  of  an  asset  coverage  ratio  of  proved  developed  reserves  to  total  debt
outstanding under the revolving credit facility of at least 2.5 to 1.0. The Company was in compliance with these covenants
as of June 30, 2016.
(4) COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES —
From  time  to  time,  Comstock  is  involved  in  certain  litigation  that  arises  in  the  normal  course  of  its  operations.  The
Company  records  a  loss  contingency  for  these  matters  when  it  is  probable  that  a  liability  has  been  incurred  and  the
amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company does not believe the resolution of these matters will have a
material effect on the Company’s financial position or results of operations.
The  Company  has  entered  into  natural  gas  transportation  and  treating  agreements  through  July  2019.  Maximum
commitments under these transportation agreements as of June 30, 2016 totaled $5.3 million.
(5) SUBSEQUENT EVENTS —
On August 1, 2016 the Company filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission a registration statement on Form S-4
and commenced an exchange offer (the “Exchange Offer”) of new secured notes, and in certain instances warrants, in
exchange for all of the Company’s Secured Notes, 2019 Notes and 2020 Notes. The Company is offering to exchange
(i) new senior secured notes and warrants for the $700.0 million principal amount of the Secured Notes and (ii) second lien
convertible notes for $463.1 million principal amount of the 2019 Notes and 2020 Notes. The new notes would contain the
same  interest  rates  and  maturity  dates  as  the  existing  notes  but  would  in  certain  circumstances  and  terms  allow  the
Company to pay the interest in-kind and with respect to the new second lien notes, subject to the Company obtaining
stockholder approval, be convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock.
Table of Contents
F-15
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
Comstock Resources, Inc.
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  balance  sheets  of  Comstock  Resources,  Inc.  and  subsidiaries  as  of
December  31,  2014  and  2015,  and  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  operations,  comprehensive  income  (loss),
stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2015. These
financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on
these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used
and  significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall  financial  statement  presentation.  We
believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial
position of Comstock Resources, Inc. and subsidiaries at December 31, 2014 and 2015, and the consolidated results of
their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2015, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
We  also  have  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United
States), Comstock Resources, Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, based on criteria
established  in  Internal  Control-Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the
Treadway  Commission  (2013  framework)  and  our  report  dated  February  26,  2016  expressed  an  unqualified  opinion
thereon.
/s/ ERNST & YOUNG LLP
Dallas, Texas
February 26, 2016,
except for Notes 1, 6, 7 and 11 as to the effect of
the reverse stock split, as to which the date is August 1, 2016.
Table of Contents
F-16
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
As of December 31, 2014 and 2015
ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Accounts Receivable:
Oil and gas sales
Joint interest operations
Derivative Financial Instruments
Other Current Assets
Total current assets
Property and Equipment:
Unevaluated oil and gas properties
Oil and gas properties, successful efforts method
Other
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Net property and equipment
Other Assets
December 31,
2014
(In thousands)
$
2,071   
 
32,849   
16,192   
—     
10,105   
   
61,217   
 
201,459   
 
  4,282,088   
 
19,630   
  (2,305,008)  
   
   
  2,198,169   
5,160   
 
   
   
$ 2,264,546
2015
134,006
15,241  
3,552  
1,446  
1,993  
 
156,238
$
84,144  
 
  4,332,222  
 
19,521  
  (3,397,467) 
   
 
  1,038,420  
1,192  
 
   
 
$ 1,195,850
57,276  
$
38,444  
 
 
   
 
95,720  
  1,249,330  
1,965  
 
20,093  
 
—    
 
   
 
  1,367,108
4,772  
 
504,670  
 
(680,700) 
 
 
   
(171,258) 
 
   
 
$ 1,195,850
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
Accounts Payable
Accrued Expenses
Total current liabilities
Long-term Debt
Deferred Income Taxes Payable
Reserve for Future Abandonment Costs
Other Non-Current Liabilities
Total liabilities
Commitments and Contingencies
Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit):
Common stock—$0.50 par, 15,000,000 shares authorized, 9,371,683 and 9,544,035 shares
issued and outstanding at December 31, 2014 and 2015, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated earnings (deficit)
Total stockholders’ equity (deficit)
117,329   
$
44,842   
 
   
   
 
162,171   
  1,060,654   
154,547   
 
14,900   
 
2,002   
 
   
   
  1,394,274
4,686   
 
499,177   
 
366,409   
 
   
   
870,272   
 
   
   
$ 2,264,546
Table of Contents
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-17
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Natural gas sales
Oil sales
Total oil and gas sales
Operating expenses:
Production taxes
Gathering and transportation
Lease operating
Exploration
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
General and administrative, net
Impairment of oil and gas properties
Loss on sale of oil and gas properties
Total operating expenses
Operating loss
Other income (expenses):
Gain on sale of marketable securities
Gain (loss) from derivative financial instruments
Net gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt
Other income
Interest expense
Total other income (expenses)
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes
Benefit from income taxes
Loss from continuing operations
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per share:
Basic and diluted  —loss from continuing operations
  —income from discontinued operations
—net income (loss)
Dividends per common share
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding
$
 
  
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
   $
  
   
  
   $
 
  
  
   
   $
  
   
   $
2013
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
2015
2014
188,453    
231,837    
   
420,290    
 
14,524    
17,245    
52,844    
33,423    
337,134    
34,767    
652    
2,033    
   
492,622    
   
(72,332)  
 
7,877    
(8,388)  
(17,854)  
1,059    
(73,242)  
   
(90,548)  
   
(162,880)  
56,157    
   
(106,723)  
147,752    
   
41,029    
   
 
(11.09)  
15.36    
   
4.27    
   
1.88    
   
9,311
$ 165,461    
389,770    
 
   
   
555,231    
 
 
23,797    
12,897    
60,283    
19,403    
378,275    
32,379    
60,268    
—      
   
587,302    
   
(32,071)  
 
—      
8,175    
—      
727    
(58,631)  
   
(49,729)  
   
(81,800)  
24,689    
   
(57,111)  
—      
   
(57,111)  
   
 
(6.20)  
—      
   
(6.20)  
   
2.50    
   
9,309
$
$
 
   
$
   
$
$
$
$
 
   
$
   
$
109,753  
142,669  
 
252,422
10,286  
14,298  
64,502  
70,694  
321,323  
23,541  
801,347  
112,085  
 
1,418,076  
 
(1,165,654)
—    
2,676  
78,741  
1,275  
(118,592) 
 
(35,900) 
 
(1,201,554) 
154,445  
 
(1,047,109) 
—    
 
(1,047,109)
(113.53) 
—    
 
(113.53) 
 
—    
 
9,223
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-18
Table of Contents
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Net income (loss)
Other comprehensive income (loss):
Realized gains on marketable securities reclassified to gain on sale of marketable
securities, net of a benefit from income taxes of $2,757 in 2013
Unrealized gains on marketable securities, net of a provision for income taxes of $377
in 2013
Other comprehensive loss
Total comprehensive income (loss)
2013
$41,029
2014
(In thousands)
$(57,111)
2015
$(1,047,109)
(5,120)
—
—
702   
  
   
   
  
  (4,418)  
  
  
   
   
   $36,611
—     
 
   
   
—     
 
   
   
$(57,111)
—    
 
 
   
—    
 
   
 
$(1,047,109)
Table of Contents
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-19
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Balance at December 31, 2012
Stock-based compensation
Tax withholdings related to stock
grants
Excess income taxes from stock-
based compensation
Repurchases of common stock
Net income
Other comprehensive loss
Dividends paid
Balance at December 31, 2013
Stock-based compensation
Tax withholdings related to stock
grants
Excess income taxes from stock-
based compensation
Repurchases of common stock
Net loss
Dividends paid
Balance at December 31, 2014
Common
Stock-
Par Value
Additional
Accumulated
Paid-in
Capital
Earnings
(Deficit)
   
(In thousands)
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Income
9,682    $
3
4,841    $ 499,958    $
12,783
2
424,317    $
—
4,418    $
—
Common
Shares
Total
933,534  
12,785
(22)
(11)
(1,669)
—
—
(1,680)
—       
(127)    
—       
—       
—
—       
(64)    
—       
—       
—
(2,016)    
(9,168)    
—       
—       
—
—       
—       
41,029     
—       
(17,997)
9,536     
62
4,768      499,888     
10,666
31
447,349     
—
(26)
(13)
(2,336)
—
—       
(200)    
—       
—
—       
(100)    
—       
—
(1,055)    
(7,986)    
—       
—
—       
—       
(57,111)    
(23,829)
—       
—       
—       
(4,418)    
—
(2,016) 
(9,232) 
41,029  
(4,418) 
(17,997)
—       
—
952,005  
10,697
—
(2,349)
—       
—       
—       
—
(1,055) 
(8,086) 
(57,111) 
(23,829)
Balance at December 31, 2014
Stock-based compensation
Tax withholdings related to stock
grants
Excess income taxes from stock-
based compensation
Net loss
Balance at December 31, 2015
9,372     
188
4,686      499,177     
8,055
94
366,409     
—
—       
—
870,272  
8,149
(16)
(8)
(518)
—
—
(526)
—       
—
9,544    $
—       
—
(2,044)    
—
4,772    $ 504,670    $
—       
(1,047,109)    
     
(680,700)   $
—       
(2,044) 
—        (1,047,109) 
 
—      $ (171,258)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-20
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015
Table of Contents
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
Net income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities:
Income from discontinued operations
Loss (gain) on sale of assets
Deferred income taxes
Dry hole costs, leasehold impairments and other exploration costs
Impairment of oil and gas properties
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
(Gain) loss on derivative financial instruments
Cash settlements of derivative financial instruments
Net loss (gain) on extinguishment of debt
Amortization of debt discount, premium and issuance costs
Stock-based compensation
Excess income taxes from stock-based compensation
Decrease (increase) in accounts receivable
Decrease (increase) in other current assets
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued expenses
Net cash provided by continuing operations
Net cash used for discontinued operations
Net cash provided by operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
Capital expenditures
Proceeds from sales of oil and gas properties
Proceeds from sales of marketable securities
Net cash used for continuing operations
Cash flow from investing activities of discontinued operations:
Capital expenditures
Proceeds from sale of oil and gas properties
Net cash provided by discontinued operations
Net cash provided by (used for) investing activities
2014
2015
2013
(In thousands)
$ 41,029    $ (57,111)   $(1,047,109)
(147,752)  
(5,844)  
 
(56,291)  
 
 
32,984   
 
652   
  337,134   
8,388   
 
 
2,293   
17,854   
 
6,074   
 
12,785   
 
2,016   
 
 
(12,674)  
3,459   
 
26,887   
 
   
   
  268,994   
(7,715)  
 
   
   
  261,279   
   
   
 
  (422,244)  
174   
 
 
13,392   
   
   
  (408,678)  
 
  (101,037)
—     
 
—     
 
(24,677)  
 
19,003   
 
 
60,268   
  378,275   
(8,175)  
 
 
9,145   
—     
 
4,097   
 
10,697   
 
1,055   
 
 
2,221   
(7,366)  
 
13,552   
 
   
   
  400,984   
—     
 
   
   
  400,984   
   
   
 
  (634,787)  
—     
 
 
—     
   
   
  (634,787)  
 
—
—    
112,085  
(155,249) 
70,694  
801,347  
321,323  
(2,676) 
1,230  
(78,741) 
5,144  
8,149  
2,044  
30,248  
8,112  
(46,515) 
 
30,086  
—    
 
30,086
(264,210) 
102,485  
—    
 
(161,725)
—
823,072
722,035   
   
   
  313,357
—
—     
 
   
   
  (634,787)
—
—    
 
(161,725)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Borrowings
Principal payments on debt
Costs related to extinguishment of debt
Debt issuance costs
Tax withholding related to stock grants
Repurchases of common stock
Excess income taxes from stock-based compensation
Dividends paid
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of the year
Cash and cash equivalents, end of the year
305,000   
 
  (835,000)  
 
 
(12,471)  
 
(2,744)  
 
 
(1,680)  
 
 
(9,232)  
 
 
 
(2,016)  
 
(17,997)  
 
 
   
   
 
  (576,140)  
 
   
   
 
(1,504)  
 
 
4,471   
 
 
 
   
   
  $
370,750   
  (100,000)  
 
—     
(2,524)  
 
(2,349)  
 
(8,086)  
 
 
(1,055)  
(23,829)  
 
   
   
  232,907   
   
   
(896)  
 
2,967   
 
   
   
2,967    $
2,071    $
790,000  
(507,655) 
—    
(16,201) 
(526) 
—    
(2,044) 
—    
 
263,574  
 
131,935  
2,071  
 
134,006
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.
F-21
Table of Contents
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Accounting policies used by Comstock Resources, Inc. and subsidiaries reflect oil and natural gas industry practices and
conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis of Presentation and Principles of Consolidation
Comstock  Resources,  Inc.  and  its  subsidiaries  are  engaged  in  oil  and  natural  gas  exploration,  development  and
production,  and  the  acquisition  of  producing  oil  and  natural  gas  properties.  The  Company’s  operations  are  primarily
focused in Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi. The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Comstock
Resources,  Inc.  and  its  wholly  owned  or  controlled  subsidiaries  (collectively,  “Comstock”  or  the  “Company”).  All
significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. The Company accounts for its
undivided interest in oil and gas properties using the proportionate consolidation method, whereby its share of assets,
liabilities, revenues and expenses are included in its financial statements.
The Company’s Board of Directors has authorized a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of its issued and outstanding common
stock which became effective on July 29, 2016. All amounts disclosed in these financial statements have been adjusted to
give effect to the effect of this reverse stock split in all periods.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to prior periods’ financial statements, consisting primarily of reclassifications of
the presentation of debt issuance costs as a reduction in long term debt and presentation of current deferred income
taxes as non-current due to the early adoption of new accounting standards.
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management
to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent
assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during
the reporting period. Actual amounts could differ from those estimates. Changes in the future estimated oil and natural
gas reserves or the estimated future cash flows attributable to the reserves that are utilized for impairment analyses could
have a significant impact on the future results of operations.
Concentration of Credit Risk and Accounts Receivable
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to a concentration of credit risk consist principally of cash and
cash equivalents, accounts receivable and derivative financial instruments. The Company places its cash with high credit
quality  financial  institutions  and  its  derivative  financial  instruments  with  financial  institutions  and  other  firms  that
management believes have high credit ratings. Substantially all of the Company’s accounts receivable are due from either
purchasers of oil and gas or participants in oil and gas wells for which the Company serves as the operator. Generally,
operators of oil and gas wells have the right to offset future revenues against unpaid charges related to operated wells. Oil
and gas sales are generally unsecured. The Company’s policy is to assess the collectability of its receivables based upon
their age, the credit quality of the purchaser or participant and the potential for revenue offset. The Company has not had
any  significant  credit  losses  in  the  past  and  believes  its  accounts  receivable  are  fully  collectible.  Accordingly,  no
allowance for doubtful accounts has been provided.
Table of Contents
Marketable Securities
F-22
During 2013, the Company sold 600,000 shares of Stone Energy Corporation common stock for proceeds of $13.4 million.
Realized gains before income taxes of $7.9 million on these sales during 2013 are included in gain on sale of marketable
securities in the consolidated statements of operations.
Other Current Assets
Other current assets at December 31, 2014 and 2015 consist of the following:
Settlements receivable on derivative financial instruments
Pipe and oil field equipment inventory
Other
As of December
31,
2014    
(In thousands)
2015  
 
$ —    
  1,198  
  795  
   
 
$1,993
$ 7,890   
  1,379   
 
836   
   
   
$10,105
Fair Value Measurements
Certain  accounts  within  the  Company’s  consolidated  balance  sheets  are  required  to  be  measured  at  fair  value  on  a
recurring basis. These include cash equivalents held in bank accounts and derivative financial instruments in the form of
oil and natural gas price swap agreements. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid
to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants on the measurement date. A three-level hierarchy is followed for disclosure to
show the extent and level of judgment used to estimate fair value measurements:
Level  1  –  Inputs  used  to  measure  fair  value  are  unadjusted  quoted  prices  that  are  available  in  active  markets  for  the
identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Level 2 – Inputs used to measure fair value, other than quoted prices included in Level 1, are either directly or indirectly
observable as of the reporting date through correlation with market data, including quoted prices for similar assets and
liabilities in active markets and quoted prices in markets that are not active. Level 2 also includes assets and liabilities that
are  valued  using  models  or  other  pricing  methodologies  that  do  not  require  significant  judgment  since  the  input
assumptions used in the models, such as interest rates and volatility factors, are corroborated by readily observable data
from actively quoted markets for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
Level 3 – Inputs used to measure fair value are unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and
reflect  the  use  of  significant  management  judgment.  These  values  are  generally  determined  using  pricing  models  for
which the assumptions utilize management’s estimates of market participant assumptions.
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents valuation is based on Level 1 measurements. The Company’s oil and natural
gas price swap agreements were not traded on a public exchange, and their value is determined utilizing a discounted
cash flow model based on inputs that are readily available in public markets and, accordingly, the valuation of these swap
agreements is categorized as a Level 2 measurement.
Table of Contents
F-23
The following table summarizes financial assets accounted for at fair value as of December 31, 2015:
Carrying
Value
Measured at
Fair Value at
December 31,
Assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis:
Cash and cash equivalents
Derivative financial instruments
Total assets
$
 
   
$
2015
Level 1
(In thousands)
  
134,006    
1,446    
    
135,452
$134,006    
—      
 
   
    
$134,006
Level 2
$ —    
  1,446  
   
 
$ 1,446
At December 31, 2015, the Company had natural gas price swap agreements covering approximately 1.8 Bcf of natural gas
to be produced in 2016 with a fair value of $1.4 million. The Company has recognized an asset for this amount and has
recognized a corresponding gain representing the change in fair value of its natural gas swaps as a component of other
income (expense). The Company had no derivative financial instruments outstanding at December 31, 2014.
The  following  table  presents  the  carrying  amounts  and  estimated  fair  value  of  the  Company’s  long-term  debt  as  of
December 31, 2014 and 2015:
Fixed rate debt:
Principal amount
Discount or premium
Carrying value
Fair Value
Variable rate debt:
Carrying value
Fair value
2014
2015
(In thousands)
$700,000    
 
(4,555)   
   
    
$695,445    
   
    
$453,000    
    
   
  
$375,000    
   
    
$375,000
$1,270,457  
 
(1,457) 
   
 
$1,269,000  
   
 
$ 428,767
$
   
$
—    
 
—
The fair market value of the Company’s fixed rate debt was based on quoted prices as of December 31, 2014 and 2015, a
Level 2 measurement. The fair value of the floating rate debt outstanding at December 31, 2014 approximated its carrying
value, a Level 2 measurement.
Property and Equipment
The Company follows the successful efforts method of accounting for its oil and gas properties. Costs incurred to acquire
oil and gas leasehold are capitalized. Acquisition costs for proved oil and gas properties, costs of drilling and equipping
productive wells, and costs of unsuccessful development wells are capitalized and amortized on an equivalent unit-of-
production basis over the life of the remaining related oil and gas reserves. Equivalent units are determined by converting
oil to natural gas at the ratio of one barrel of oil for six thousand cubic feet of natural gas. This conversion ratio is not
based on the price of oil or natural gas, and there may be a significant difference in price between an equivalent volume of
oil  versus  natural  gas.  Amortization  is  calculated  at  the  field  level.  The  estimated  future  costs  of  dismantlement,
restoration, plugging and abandonment of oil and gas properties and related facilities disposal are capitalized when asset
retirement obligations are incurred and amortized as part of depreciation, depletion and amortization expense. The costs
of  unproved  properties  which  are  determined  to  be  productive  are  transferred  to  proved  oil  and  gas  properties  and
amortized on an equivalent
Table of Contents
F-24
unit-of-production  basis.  Exploratory  expenses,  including  geological  and  geophysical  expenses  and  delay  rentals  for
unevaluated oil and gas properties, are charged to expense as incurred. Unproved oil and gas properties are periodically
assessed for impairment on a property by property basis, and any impairment in value is charged to exploration expense.
During  2013,  2014  and  2015,  impairment  charges  of  $33.0  million,  $0.5  million  and  $68.9  million,  respectively,  were
recognized in exploration expense related to certain leases that the Company no longer expects to drill on. Exploratory
drilling costs are initially capitalized as unproved property but charged to expense if and when the well is determined not
to have found commercial quantities of proved oil and gas reserves. Exploratory drilling costs are evaluated within a one-
year period after the completion of drilling.
its
impairment  analysis  given
The  Company  periodically  assesses  the  need  for  an  impairment  of  the  costs  capitalized  for  its  evaluated  oil  and  gas
properties on a property or cost center basis. If impairment is indicated based on undiscounted expected future cash
flows attributable to the property, then a provision for impairment is recognized to the extent that net capitalized costs
exceed the estimated fair value of the property. The Company determines the fair values of its oil and gas properties using
a  discounted  cash  flow  model  and  proved  and  risk-adjusted  probable  reserves.  Undrilled  acreage  is  valued  based  on
sales transactions in comparable areas. At December 31, 2015, the Company excluded probable undeveloped reserves
from 
future  drilling
activities. Significant Level 3 assumptions associated with the calculation of discounted future cash flows included in the
cash flow model include management’s outlook for oil and natural gas prices, production costs, capital expenditures, and
future production as well as estimated proved reserves and risk-adjusted probable reserves. Management’s oil and natural
gas  price  outlook  is  developed  based  on  third-party  longer-term  price  forecasts  as  of  each  measurement  date.  The
expected  future  net  cash  flows  are  discounted  using  an  appropriate  discount  rate  in  determining  a  property’s  fair
value. The oil and natural gas prices used for determining asset impairments will generally differ from those used in the
standardized  measure  of  discounted  future  net  cash  flows  because  the  standardized  measure  requires  the  use  of  an
average price based on the first day of each month of the preceding year and is limited to proved reserves.
limited  capital  resources  available
the  Company’s
for
In  2015,  reductions  to  management’s  oil  and  natural  gas  price  outlook  resulted  in  indications  of  impairment  of  the
Company’s  oil  properties  in  South  Texas  and  Mississippi,  and  certain  of  its  natural  gas  properties  in  Texas  and
Louisiana. The following table presents the fair value and impairments recorded by the Company in the third quarter and
fourth quarter of 2015, as well as the average oil price per barrel and gas price per thousand cubic feet over the life of the
properties and the applicable discount rates utilized in the Company’s assessments:
Impairments recorded at September 30, 2015:
Oil properties
Natural gas properties
Impairments recorded at December 31, 2015:
Oil properties
Natural gas properties
Impairment
(In thousands)
Fair
Value
$330,257    $
  $ 61,625    $
  
  
  $
3,030    $
  $123,926    $
(Per Mcf)
Oil
Management’s Price Outlook    
             Gas             
  
     
     (Per barrel)     
  
  
  
4.04    
73.70    $
405,308    $
139,406    $
75.91    $
3.91    
  
  
  
  
73.48    
16,036    $
238,210    $
70.76    $
3.74
Annual
Discount Rate
10%-20%
10%-20%
10%-20%
10%-20%
In the aggregate we recognized impairments of $801.3 million related to our evaluated oil and gas properties in 2015. In
2014, the Company recognized impairment charges of $60.3 million on certain of its oil and gas properties which had a fair
value of $18.0 million.
It is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimates of undiscounted future net cash flows attributable to its oil and gas
properties  may  change  in  the  future.  The  primary  factors  that  may  affect  estimates  of  future  cash  flows  include  future
adjustments,  both  positive  and  negative,  to  proved  and  appropriate  risk-adjusted  probable  and  possible  oil  and  gas
reserves, results of future drilling activities, future prices for oil and natural gas, and increases or decreases in production
and capital costs. As a result of these changes, there may be further
F-25
Table of Contents
impairments in the carrying values of these or other properties. Specifically, as part of the impairment review performed at
December  31,  2015,  the  Company  observed  that  a  decline  in  excess  of  30%  in  its  future  cash  flow  estimates  for  its
Eagleville field in South Texas could result in an additional impairment being recorded in an amount that could be at least
$130.0 million.
Other property and equipment consists primarily of gas gathering systems, computer equipment, furniture and fixtures
and an airplane which are depreciated over estimated useful  lives  ranging  from  three  to  31  1⁄2  years  on  a  straight-line
basis. In January 2015, the Company purchased a 20% interest in an airplane that previously had been owned 80% by the
Company and 20% by two executive officers of the Company. The purchase price for the 20% interest of $1.7 million was
based  on  the  then  fair  market  value  of  the  airplane  determined  by  a  third  party.  This  related  party  transaction  was
approved by the Company’s audit committee and board of directors.
Other Assets
Other  assets  primarily  consist  of  deferred  costs  associated  with  the  Company’s  bank  credit  facility.  These  costs  are
amortized over the life of the bank credit facility on a straight-line basis which approximates the amortization that would be
calculated using an effective interest rate method.
Accrued Expenses
Accrued expenses at December 31, 2014 and 2015 consist of the following:
Accrued drilling costs
Accrued interest payable
Accrued rig termination fees
Other
(In thousands)
As of December 31,  
2015  
2014     
 
$ 5,306  
  29,075  
  —    
  4,063  
   
 
$38,444
$26,269    
  9,011    
  2,600    
  6,962    
   
    
$44,842
Reserve for Future Abandonment Costs
The Company’s asset retirement obligations relate to future plugging and abandonment costs of its oil and gas properties
and  related  facilities  disposal.  The  Company  records  a  liability  in  the  period  in  which  an  asset  retirement  obligation  is
incurred,  in  an  amount  equal  to  the  estimated  fair  value  of  the  obligation  that  is  capitalized.  Thereafter,  this  liability  is
accreted  up  to  the  final  retirement  cost.  Accretion  of  the  discount  is  included  as  part  of  depreciation,  depletion  and
amortization in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
The following table summarizes the changes in the Company’s total estimated liability:
Reserve for Future Abandonment Costs at beginning of the year
New wells placed on production
Changes in estimates and timing
Liabilities settled and assets disposed of
Accretion expense
Reserve for Future Abandonment Costs at end of the year
F-26
Table of Contents
Stock-based Compensation
2014
(In thousands)
2015  
 
$14,900  
 
310  
  4,927  
(717) 
 
673  
 
   
 
$20,093
$14,534    
  1,480    
  (1,796)   
(153)   
 
835    
 
   
    
$14,900
The Company has stock-based employee compensation plans under which stock awards, comprised of restricted stock
and performance share units, are issued to employees and non-employee directors. The Company follows the fair value
based method in accounting for equity-based compensation. Under the fair value based method, compensation cost is
measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the award
vesting period. Excess taxes on stock-based compensation are recognized as an adjustment to additional paid-in capital
and as a part of cash flows from financing activities.
Segment Reporting
The Company presently operates in one business segment, the exploration and production of oil and natural gas.
Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities
The Company accounts for derivative financial instruments (including certain derivative instruments embedded in other
contracts) as either an asset or liability measured at its fair value. Changes in the fair value of derivatives are recognized
currently in earnings unless specific hedge accounting criteria are met. The Company estimates fair value based on a
discounted cash flow model. The fair value of derivative contracts that expire in less than one year are recognized as
current assets or liabilities. Those that expire in more than one year are recognized as long-term assets or liabilities. If the
derivative is designated as a cash flow hedge, changes in fair value are recognized in other comprehensive income until
the hedged item is recognized in earnings.
Major Purchasers
The Company has one major purchaser of its oil production that represented 36%, 35% and 25% of its total oil and gas
sales in 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively. The Company also has one major purchaser of its natural gas production that
represented 51%, 53% and 52% of its total oil and gas sales in 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively. The loss of any of these
purchasers would not have a material adverse effect on the Company as there is an available market for its oil and natural
gas production from other purchasers.
Revenue Recognition and Gas Balancing
Comstock utilizes the sales method of accounting for oil and natural gas revenues whereby revenues are recognized at
the time of delivery based on the amount of oil or natural gas sold to purchasers. Revenue is typically recorded in the
month of production based on an estimate of the Company’s share of volumes produced and prices realized. The amount
of oil or natural gas sold may differ from the amount to which the Company is entitled based on its revenue interests in the
properties. The Company did not have any significant imbalance positions at December 31, 2014 or 2015. Sales of oil and
natural gas generally occur at the wellhead. When sales of oil and gas occur at locations other than the wellhead, the
Company accounts for costs incurred to transport the production to the delivery point as operating expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General  and  administrative  expenses  are  reported  net  of  reimbursements  of  overhead  costs  that  are  received  from
working interest owners of the oil and gas properties operated by the Company of $11.9 million, $13.2 million and $13.9
million in 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities
are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial
Table of Contents
F-27
statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, as well as the future tax consequences
attributable to the future utilization of existing tax net operating loss and other types of carryforwards. Deferred tax assets
and  liabilities  are  measured  using  enacted  tax  rates  expected  to  apply  to  taxable  income  in  the  years  in  which  those
temporary differences and carryforwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and
liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that the change in rate is enacted.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is determined without the effect of any outstanding potentially dilutive stock options and diluted
earnings per share is determined with the effect of outstanding stock options that are potentially dilutive. Unvested share-
based  payment  awards  containing  nonforfeitable  rights  to  dividends  are  considered  to  be  participatory  securities  and
included in the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share pursuant to the two-class method. Performance share
units (“PSUs”) represent the right to receive a number of shares of the Company’s common stock that may range from
zero to up to three times the number of PSUs granted on the award date based on the achievement of certain performance
measures during a performance period. The number of potentially dilutive shares related to PSUs is based on the number
of  shares,  if  any,  which  would  be  issuable  at  the  end  of  the  respective  period,  assuming  that  date  was  the  end  of  the
contingency period. The treasury stock method is used to measure the dilutive effect of PSUs.
Basic and diluted earnings per share for 2013, 2014 and 2015 were determined as follows:
2013
2014
2015
Shares   Per Share    Loss    Shares   Per Share
Loss
(In thousands except per share data)
Shares   Per Share
Income
(Loss)
Net Loss From Continuing
Operations
Loss (Income) Allocable
to Unvested Stock Grants
$(106,723)
3,424
$(57,111)
(595)
$(1,047,109)
—
Basic and Diluted Net
Loss From Continuing
Operations Attributable to
Common Stock
$(103,299)    9,311   $
(11.09)  $(57,706)    9,309   $
(6.20)  $(1,047,109)    9,223   $ (113.53)
Net Income From
Discontinued Operations  $ 147,752   
Income Allocable to
Unvested Stock Grants
(4,742)
Basic and Diluted Net
Income From
Discontinued Operations
Attributable to Common
Stock
$ 143,010     9,311   $
15.36
Basic and diluted per share amounts are the same for each of the years ended December 31, 2013, 2014, and 2015 due to
the net loss from continuing operations reported during each of those years.
Table of Contents
F-28
At December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, 303,178, 241,505 and 314,060 shares of unvested restricted stock, respectively, are
included in common stock outstanding as such shares have a nonforfeitable right to participate in any dividends that
might be declared and have the right to vote. Weighted average shares of unvested restricted stock included in common
stock outstanding were as follows:
Unvested restricted stock
2013
2014
(In thousands)
2015
309
238
293
All  stock  options  and  PSUs  were  anti-dilutive  to  earnings  and  excluded  from  weighted  average  shares  used  in  the
computation of earnings per share due to the net loss from continuing operations in each period.
Options  to  purchase  common  stock  and  PSUs  that  were  outstanding  and  that  were  excluded  as  anti-dilutive  from
determination of diluted earnings per share were as follows:
Weighted average anti-dilutive stock options
2013
2014
2015
(In thousands except per share data)
Weighted average anti-dilutive stock options
Weighted average exercise price
Weighted average performance share units
Weighted average grant date fair value per unit
26
51
$164.50   
  
$104.60
23
100
$164.50
$99.40
$164.75
20
136
$35.35
Supplementary Information With Respect to the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For  the  purpose  of  the  consolidated  statements  of  cash  flows,  the  Company  considers  all  highly  liquid  investments
purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Cash payments made for interest and income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively,
were as follows:
Cash Payments:
Interest payments
Income tax payments
2013
$83,560    
769    
$
2014     
(In thousands)
  
$62,812    
682    
$
2015
$94,177  
77  
$
The  Company  capitalizes  interest  on  its  unevaluated  oil  and  gas  property  costs  during  periods  when  it  is  conducting
exploration activity on this acreage. The Company capitalized interest of $4.7 million, $10.2 million and $0.9 million in 2013,
2014 and 2015, respectively, which reduced interest expense and increased the carrying value of its unevaluated oil and
gas properties.
Discontinued West Texas Operations
In May 2013, the Company sold its oil and gas properties in the Delaware Basin located in Reeves County in West Texas
which it acquired in December 2011 and certain other undeveloped leases in West Texas (the “West Texas Properties”) to
a third party. The Company received proceeds of $823.1 million and realized a gain of $230.0 million which is reflected as a
component  of  income  from  discontinued  operations  in  2013.  As  a  result  of  this  divestiture,  the  consolidated  financial
statements and the related notes thereto present the results of the Company’s West Texas Properties as discontinued
operations. No general and administrative cost incurred by Comstock was allocated to discontinued operations during the
periods presented. Unless indicated otherwise, the amounts presented in the accompanying notes to the consolidated
financial statements relate to the Company’s continuing operations.
Table of Contents
F-29
Income from discontinued operations is comprised of the following:
Revenues:
Oil and gas sales
Costs and expenses:
Production taxes
Gathering and transportation
Lease operating
Depletion, depreciation and amortization
Interest expense(1)
Total costs and expenses
Gain on sale
Income from discontinued operations before income taxes
Income tax expense:
Year Ended
December 31,
2013
(In
thousands)
$
25,125
1,120  
501  
9,853  
8,649  
6,346  
 
26,469
230,008  
 
228,664
Income tax expense:
Current
Deferred
Total income tax expense
Net income from discontinued operations
$
(2,218) 
(78,694) 
 
(80,912) 
 
147,752
(1) Interest expense was allocated to discontinued operations based on the ratio of the net assets of discontinued operations to our
consolidated  net  assets  plus  long-term  debt.  Interest  expense  is  net  of  capitalized  interest  of  $2,010  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2013.
Recent accounting pronouncements
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09,
Revenue  from  Contracts  with  Customers  (Topic  606) (“ASU  2014-09”),  which  supersedes  nearly  all  existing  revenue
recognition  guidance  under  existing  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  This  new  standard  is  based  upon  the
principal that revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the
consideration  to  which  the  entity  expects  to  be  entitled  in  exchange  for  those  goods  or  services.  ASU  2014-09  also
requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from
customer  contracts.  ASU  2014-09  is  effective  for  annual  and  interim  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2017.  Early
adoption is permitted beginning with periods after December 15, 2016 and entities have the option of using either a full
retrospective or modified approach to adopt ASU 2014-09. The Company is currently evaluating the new guidance and
has  not  determined  the  impact  this  standard  may  have  on  its  financial  statements  or  decided  upon  the  method  of
adoption.
In August 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements—Going Concern (Subtopic 205-
40): Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern (“ASU 2014-15”). ASU 2014-15
provides guidance about management’s responsibility to evaluate whether there is substantial doubt about an entity’s
ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern  and  sets  rules  for  how  this  information  should  be  disclosed  in  the  financial
statements. ASU 2014-15 is effective for annual periods ending after December 15, 2016 and interim periods thereafter.
Early  adoption  is  permitted.  The  Company  does  not  expect  adoption  of  ASU  2014-15  to  have  any  impact  on  its
consolidated financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Table of Contents
F-30
In  April  2015,  the  FASB  issued  ASU  No.  2015-03, Interest-Imputation  of  Interest,  Simplifying  the  Presentation  of  Debt
Issuance Costs (“ASU 2015-03”). ASU 2015-03 requires that debt issuance costs related to a recognized debt liability be
presented  in  the  balance  sheet  as  a  direct  deduction  from  the  carrying  amount  of  that  debt  liability.  ASU  2015-03  is
effective  for  annual  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2015  and  interim  periods  thereafter.  Early  adoption  is
permitted. The Company has elected to early adopt ASU 2015-03 and accordingly $9.8 million of debt issuance costs have
been reclassified from long term assets to long term debt in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2014.
In  November  2015,  the  FASB  issued  ASU  No.  2015-17, Balance  Sheet  Classification  of  Deferred  Taxes  (“ASU  2015-
17”).  ASU  2015-17  requires  that  all  deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  be  classified  as  non-current.  ASU  2015-17  also
discontinues allocation of valuation allowances between current and noncurrent tax assets. ASU 2015-17 is effective for
annual  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2016  and  interim  periods  thereafter.  Early  adoption  is  permitted.  The
Company has elected to retrospectively early adopt ASU 2015-17. The effect of this change did not have a material impact
on the Company’s consolidated financial condition.
Subsequent Events
In January 2016, the Company completed an acreage swap with another operator which increased its Haynesville shale
acreage by 3,637 net acres in DeSoto Parish, Louisiana including four producing wells (3.5 net). The Company exchanged
2,547  net  acres  in  Atascosa  County,  Texas  including  seven  producing  wells  (5.3  net)  for  the  Haynesville  shale
properties. The swap was an equal value exchange that required no cash outlays.
In February 2016, the Company issued approximately 0.9 million shares of common stock in exchange for $40.0 million in
principal amount of the Company’s 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019.
(2) Acquisitions and Dispositions of Oil and Gas Properties
During 2013, the Company acquired oil and gas leases in Burleson County, Texas for $67.4 million. The Burleson County,
Texas acquisition included one producing well and approximately 21,000 net acres which are prospective for oil in the
Eagle Ford shale formation. During 2014, the Company commenced drilling operations on these properties and acquired
additional interests in certain leases in Burleson County, Texas for approximately $33.9 million. The acquisition included
approximately 9,000 net undeveloped acres and an additional 30% working interest in one producing well. Prior to the sale,
during 2015, the Company acquired additional acreage, drilled an additional four wells and completed a total of 8 wells on
this acreage at a cost of $77.0 million. In 2015, the Company completed the sale of these properties for net proceeds of
$102.5  million  and  recognized  a  net  loss  on  sale  of  $112.1  million.  Results  of  operations  for  these  properties  were  as
follows:
Total oil and gas sales
Total operating expenses(1)
Operating loss
Year Ended
December 31,
2014
(In thousands)
2015  
 
$ 18,036  
  (66,251) 
   
 
$(48,215)
$ 10,542    
  (23,260)   
   
    
$(12,718)
(1) Includes  direct  operating  expenses,  depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization  and  exploration  expense.  Excludes  interest
expense and general and administrative expenses.
During 2013, the Company acquired oil and gas leases in Mississippi and Louisiana for $53.3 million. The Mississippi and
Louisiana acquisition included approximately 51,000 net acres that are prospective for oil in the Tuscaloosa Marine shale
formation.
In 2012, the Company entered into a participation agreement with Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co L.P. (together with its
affiliates, “KKR”) providing for the participation of KKR in Comstock’s future development of
Table of Contents
F-31
certain of its Eagle Ford shale properties in South Texas. Under the terms of the participation agreement, KKR has the
right to participate for one-third of Comstock’s working interest in wells drilled on the Company’s acreage comprising its
Eagleville field in exchange for KKR paying $25,000 per acre for the net acreage being acquired and one-third of the wells
costs.  Each  well  that  KKR  participates  in  is  intended  to  earn  KKR  approximately  one-third  of  the  Company’s  working
interest in approximately 80 acres. The Company received $51.5 million and $28.7 million for acreage and facility costs for
new wells drilled subsequent to the closing in 2013 and 2014, respectively. There were no wells drilled under the joint
venture in 2015.
In  connection  with  acquisitions  of  producing  oil  and  gas  properties,  the  Company  estimates  the  value  of  proved
properties based on estimated future net cash flows and discounts them using a market-based rate that the Company
determined appropriate at the acquisition date for the various proved reserve categories. Due to the unobservable nature
of the inputs, the fair values of the proved oil and gas properties are considered Level 3 fair value measurements.
(3) Oil and Gas Producing Activities
Set  forth  below  is  certain  information  regarding  the  aggregate  capitalized  costs  of  oil  and  gas  properties  and  costs
incurred by the Company for its oil and gas property acquisition, development and exploration activities:
Capitalized Costs
Unproved properties
As of December 31,
2014
2015
(In thousands)
Unproved properties
Proved properties:
Leasehold costs
Wells and related equipment and facilities
Accumulated depreciation depletion and amortization
$
201,459   
 
  1,006,839   
  3,275,249   
  (2,298,450)  
   
   
$ 2,185,097
84,144  
$
 
982,915  
  3,349,307  
  (3,389,786) 
   
 
$ 1,026,580
F-32
Costs Incurred
Property Acquisitions:
Unproved property acquisitions
Proved property acquisitions
Development costs
Exploration costs
Table of Contents
(4) Long-term Debt
Long-term debt is comprised of the following:
Bank credit facility
7 3⁄4% senior notes due 2019:
Principal
Premium, net of amortization
Debt issuance costs, net of amortization
9 1⁄2% senior notes due 2020:
Principal
Discount, net of amortization
Debt issuance costs, net of amortization
10% senior secured notes due 2020:
Principal
Debt issuance costs, net of amortization
2014
(In thousands)
For the Years Ended December 31,
2013
2015
91,960     $
   $  130,113     $
12,972  
  
 
2,400    
 
—    
  221,265  
  440,848    
  
12,265  
 
52,080    
 
  
  
   
    
   
 
   $ 478,993     $  587,288     $  246,502
6,471    
  341,970    
439
As of December 31,
2014
2015
(In thousands)
$ 375,000    
  
  400,000    
4,984    
 
(5,266)   
 
  
  300,000    
(9,539)   
 
(4,525)   
 
  
—      
 
—      
 
   
    
$1,060,654
$
—
376,090  
3,583  
 
 
(3,787)
194,367  
(5,040) 
 
 
(2,396)
700,000  
(13,487) 
 
   
 
$1,249,330
The premium and discount on the senior notes are being amortized over the life of the senior notes using the effective
interest  rate  method.  Issuance  costs  are  amortized  over  the  life  of  the  senior  notes  on  a  straight-line  basis  which
approximates the amortization that would be calculated using an effective interest rate method.
The following table summarizes Comstock’s principal amount of debt as of December 31, 2015 by year of maturity:
Bank credit facility
2016                  2017                  2018                  2019                  2020             Thereafter
(In thousands)
Total
Bank credit facility
7 3⁄4% senior notes
9 1⁄2% senior notes
10% senior secured
notes
$
$
—      $
—       
—
—
—      $
—       
—
—
—      $
—      $
—      $
—       
—
—
—      $
376,090     
—
—      $
—       
194,367
—      $
—    
—        376,090  
—        194,367
—      $    376,090    $    894,367    $
—
700,000
—        700,000  
 
          —      $1,270,457
In  March  2015,  Comstock  issued  $700.0  million  of  10%  senior  secured  notes  (the  “Secured  Notes”)  which  are  due  on
March  15,  2020.  Interest  on  the  Secured  Notes  is  payable  semi-annually  on  each  March  15  and  September  15.  Net
proceeds from the issuance of the Secured Notes of $683.8 million were used to retire the Company’s bank credit facility
and for general corporate purposes. Comstock also has outstanding (i) $376.1 million of 7  3⁄4% senior notes (the “2019
Notes”) which are due on April 1, 2019 and bear interest which is payable semi-annually on each April 1 and October 1 and
(ii) $194.4 million of 9  1⁄2% senior notes (the “2020 Notes”) which are due on June 15, 2020 and bear interest which is
payable semi-annually on each June 15 and December 15. The Secured Notes are secured on a first priority basis equally
and  ratably  with  the  Company’s  revolving  credit  facility  described  below,  subject  to  payment  priorities  in  favor  of  the
revolving credit facility by the collateral securing the revolving credit facility, which consists of, among other things, at
least 80% of the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ oil and gas properties. The Secured Notes, the 2019 Notes and 2020
Notes  are  general  obligations  of  Comstock  and  are  guaranteed  by  all  of  Comstock’s  subsidiaries.  Such  subsidiary
guarantors are 100% owned and all of the guarantees are full and unconditional and joint and several obligations.
Table of Contents
F-33
There are no restrictions on the Company’s ability to obtain funds from its subsidiaries through dividends or loans. As of
December 31, 2015, the Company had no material assets or operations which are independent of its subsidiaries.
During  2015,  Comstock  purchased  $23.9  million  in  principal  amount  of  the  2019  Notes  and  $105.6  million  in  principal
amount of the 2020 Notes for an aggregate purchase price of $42.7 million. The gain of $82.4 million recognized on the
purchase of the 2019 Notes and 2020 Notes and the loss resulting from the write-off of deferred loan costs associated with
Comstock’s  prior  bank  credit  facility  of  $3.7  million  are  included  in  the  net  gain  on  extinguishment  of  debt,  which  is
reported as a component of other income (expense).
In connection with the issuance of the Secured Notes, Comstock entered into a $50.0 million revolving credit facility with
Bank of Montreal and Bank of America, N.A. The revolving credit facility is a four year commitment that matures on March
4,  2019.  Indebtedness  under  the  revolving  credit  facility  is  secured  by  substantially  all  of  the  Company’s  and  its
subsidiaries’ assets and is guaranteed by all of its subsidiaries. Borrowings under the revolving credit facility bear interest
at Comstock’s option at either (1) LIBOR plus 2.5% or (2) the base rate (which is the higher of the administrative agent’s
prime rate, the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or 30 day LIBOR plus 1.0%) plus 1.5%. A commitment fee of 0.5% per annum is
payable  quarterly  on  the  unused  credit  line.  The  revolving  credit  facility  contains  covenants  that,  among  other  things,
restrict the payment of cash dividends and repurchases of common stock, limit the amount of consolidated debt that we
may  incur  and  limit  the  Company’s  ability  to  make  certain  loans,  investments  and  divestitures.  The  only  financial
covenants are the maintenance of a current ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0 and the maintenance of an asset coverage ratio of
proved developed reserves to debt outstanding under the revolving credit facility of at least 2.5 to 1.0. The Company was
in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2015.
(5) Commitments and Contingencies
Commitments
The Company rents office space and other facilities under noncancelable operating leases. Rent expense for the years
ended  December  31,  2013,  2014  and  2015  was  $1.4  million,  $1.5  million  and  $1.5  million,  respectively.  Minimum  future
payments under the leases at December 31, 2015 are as follows:
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
(In thousands) 
1,994  
 
2,021  
 
 
2,060
1,560
2020
Thereafter
$
1,560  
1,560  
 
10,755
As of December 31, 2015, the Company had commitments for contracted drilling rigs of $1.6 million through May 2016.
The  Company  has  entered  into  natural  gas  transportation  and  treating  agreements  through  July  2019.  Maximum
commitments under these transportation agreements as of December 31, 2015 totaled $6.4 million.
Contingencies
From time to time, the Company is involved in certain litigation that arises in the normal course of its operations. The
Company  records  a  loss  contingency  for  these  matters  when  it  is  probable  that  a  liability  has  been  incurred  and  the
amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company does not believe the
Table of Contents
F-34
resolution of these matters will have a material effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash
flows and no material amounts are accrued relative to these matters at December 31, 2014 or 2015.
(6) Stockholders’ Equity
The authorized capital stock of Comstock consists of 15 million shares of common stock, $0.50 par value per share, and 5
million shares of preferred stock, $10.00 par value per share. The preferred stock may be issued in one or more series, and
the terms and rights of such stock will be determined by the Board of Directors. There were no shares of preferred stock
outstanding at December 31, 2014 or 2015.
The  Company  paid  dividends  to  its  common  stockholders  of  $18.0  million  and  $23.8  million  in  2013  and  2014,
respectively. During 2013, the Board of Directors also approved an open market share repurchase plan to repurchase up
to $100.0 million of its common stock on the open market. The Company made open market purchases of 126,219 shares
and 200,000 shares with an aggregate cost of $9.2 million and $8.1 million in 2013 and 2014, respectively. The Company
did not purchase any shares of its common stock in 2015.
On October 1, 2015, the Company entered into a net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) rights plan (the “Rights Plan”)
with American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC, as rights agent. In connection with the adoption of the Rights Plan,
the  board  of  directors  of  the  Company  declared  a  dividend  of  one  preferred  share  purchase  right  (“Right”)  for  each
outstanding share of the Company’s common stock. The dividend was payable on October 16, 2015 to stockholders of
record as of the close of business on October 12, 2015. In addition, one Right automatically attached to each share of
common stock issued between the record date and the date when the Rights become exercisable.
The  Rights  Plan  was  adopted  in  an  effort  to  prevent  potential  significant  limitations  under  Section  382  of  the  Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), on Comstock’s ability to utilize its current NOLs to reduce its future tax
liabilities. If Comstock experiences an “ownership change,” as defined in Section 382 of the Code, the Company’s ability
to fully utilize its NOLs on an annual basis will be substantially limited, and the timing of the usage of the NOLs could be
substantially delayed, which could accordingly significantly impair the value of those benefits. The Rights Plan works by
imposing  a  significant  penalty  upon  any  person  or  group  that  acquires  4.9%  or  more  of  the  Company’s  outstanding
common  stock  without  the  approval  of  the  board  of  directors  (an  “Acquiring  Person”).  The  Rights  Plan  also  gives
discretion to the Board to determine that someone is an Acquiring Person even if they do not own 4.9% or more of the
outstanding  common  stock  but  do  own  4.9%  or  more  in  value  of  the  Company’s  outstanding  stock,  as  determined
pursuant to Section 382 of the Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder. Stockholders who currently own 4.9%
or  more  of  the  Company’s  common  stock  will  not  trigger  the  Rights  unless  they  acquire  additional  shares,  subject  to
certain exceptions set forth in the Rights Plan. In addition, the Board has established procedures to consider requests to
exempt certain acquisitions of the Company’s securities from the Rights Plan if the board of directors determines that
doing so would not limit or impair the availability of the NOLs or is otherwise in the best interests of the Company.
(7) Stock-based Compensation
The Company grants restricted shares of common stock and performance share units to key employees and directors as
part  of  their  compensation  under  the  2009  Long-term  Incentive  Plan.  Future  awards  of  stock  options,  restricted  stock
grants or other equity awards under the 2009 Long-term Incentive Plan are available with up to 191,569 shares of common
stock.
During 2013, 2014 and 2015, the Company had $12.8 million, $10.7 million and $8.1 million, respectively, in stock-based
compensation expense which is included in general and administrative expenses. The excess income taxes associated
with stock-based compensation recognized in additional paid in capital were $2.0 million, $1.1 million and $2.0 million for
the years ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively.
Table of Contents
Stock Options
F-35
At December 31, 2015, the Company had options outstanding to purchase 11,730 shares of common stock at $166.10 per
share. The stock options have a weighted average life of 1 year.
The following table summarizes information related to stock option activity under the Company’s incentive plans for the
year ended December 31, 2015:
Outstanding at January 1, 2015
Expired or forfeited
Outstanding at December 31, 2015
Exercisable at December 31, 2015
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price  
$ 164.50  
$ 162.90
$ 166.10
$ 166.10
Number of
Options     
23,030    
(11,300)   
    
11,730    
    
11,730
There  were  no  stock  option  exercises  in  2013,  2014  or  2015.  No  stock  option  has  been  granted  since  2008  and  all
compensation cost related to stock options has been recognized. Stock options outstanding at December 31, 2014 and
2015 had no intrinsic value based on the closing price for the Company’s common stock at those dates.
Restricted Stock
The  fair  value  of  restricted  stock  grants  is  amortized  over  the  vesting  period,  generally  one  to  four  years,  using  the
straight-line method. Total compensation expense recognized for restricted stock grants was $9.8 million, $7.3 million and
$6.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively. The fair value of each restricted share on
the date of grant is equal to the fair market price of a share of the Company’s stock.
A summary of restricted stock activity for the year ended December 31, 2015 is presented below:
Outstanding at January 1, 2015
Granted
Vested
Forfeitures
Outstanding at December 31, 2015
Number of
Restricted
Shares     
  241,505    
  202,074    
(115,349)   
 
(14,170)   
 
  
    
  314,060
Weighted
Average
Grant Price 
99.55  
$
$
26.70  
111.15  
$
$
74.25
$
49.55
The  per  share  weighted  average  fair  value  of  restricted  stock  grants  in  2013,  2014  and  2015  was  $82.20,  $101.20  and
$26.70,  respectively.  Total  unrecognized  compensation  cost  related  to  unvested  restricted  stock  of  $5.1  million  as  of
December 31, 2015 is expected to be recognized over a period of 1.8 years. The fair value of restricted stock which vested
in 2013, 2014 and 2015 was $7.0 million, $10.0 million and $3.7 million, respectively.
Performance Share Units
The Company issues PSUs as part of its long-term equity incentive compensation. PSU awards can result in the issuance
of  common  stock  to  the  holder  if  certain  performance  criteria  is  met  during  a  performance  period.  The  performance
periods consist of one year, two years and three years, respectively. The performance criteria
Table of Contents
F-36
for  the  PSUs  are  based  on  the  Company’s  annualized  total  stockholder  return  (“TSR”)  for  the  performance  period  as
compared  with  the  TSR  of  certain  peer  companies  for  the  performance  period.  The  costs  associated  with  PSUs  are
recognized as general and administrative expense over the performance periods of the awards.
The  fair  value  of  PSUs  was  measured  at  the  grant  date  using  a  stochastic  process  method  utilizing  the  Geometric
Brownian Motion Model (“GBM Model”). A stochastic process is a mathematically defined equation that can create a series
of  outcomes  over  time.  These  outcomes  are  not  deterministic  in  nature,  which  means  that  by  iterating  the  equations
multiple times, different results will be obtained for those iterations. In the case of the Company’s PSUs, the Company
cannot predict with certainty the path its stock price or the stock prices of its peers will take over the future performance
periods. By using a stochastic simulation, the Company can create multiple prospective total return pathways, statistically
analyze  these  simulations,  and  ultimately  make  inferences  to  the  most  likely  path  the  total  return  will  take.  As  such,
because  future  stock  returns  are  stochastic,  or  probabilistic  with  some  direction  in  nature,  the  stochastic  method,
specifically the GBM Model, is deemed an appropriate method by which to determine the fair value of the PSUs. Significant
assumptions used in this simulation include the Company’s expected volatility and a risk-free interest rate based on U.S.
Treasury yield curve rates with maturities consistent with the vesting periods, as well as the volatilities for each of the
Company’s  peers.  Assumptions  regarding  volatility  included  the  historical  volatility  of  each  company’s  stock  and  the
implied volatilities of publicly traded stock options. For the PSUs granted in 2014, the valuation inputs included a risk free
interest rate of 0.6% and a range of volatilities of 38% to 70%. For the PSUs granted in 2015, the valuation inputs included a
risk free rate of 1.1% and a range of volatilities of 37% to 65%.
In  2014,  the  Company  granted  37,792  PSUs  with  a  grant  date  fair  value  of  $3.7  million,  or  $99.05  per  unit.  In  2015,  the
Company granted 94,250 PSUs with a grant date fair value of $0.7 million, or $7.30 per unit. No PSUs were awarded in
2013. The fair value of PSUs is amortized over the vesting period of one to three years, using the straight-line method.
Total  compensation  expense  recognized  for  PSUs  was  $3.0  million,  $3.4  million  and  $2.1  million  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively.
A summary of PSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2015 is presented below:
Outstanding at January 1, 2015
Granted
Unearned or forfeited
Outstanding at December 31, 2015
Number
of
PSUs     
  74,614    
  94,250    
  (34,943)   
  
    
 133,921
Weighted
Average
Grant
Price  
99.40  
7.30  
96.35
35.35
$
$
$
$
The number of awards assumes a one multiplier. The final number of shares of common stock issued may vary depending
upon the performance multiplier, and can result in the issuance of zero to 280,035 shares of common stock based on the
achieved performance ranges from zero to two. As of December 31, 2015, there was $2.0 million of total unrecognized
expense related to PSUs, which is being amortized through December 31, 2017.
(8) Retirement Plan
The Company has a 401(k) profit sharing plan which covers all of its employees. At its discretion, Comstock may match
the employees’ contributions to the plan. Matching contributions to the plan were $702,000, $834,000 and $888,000 for the
years ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively.
Table of Contents
F-37
(9) Income Taxes
The following is an analysis of the consolidated income tax benefit from continuing operations:
Current
Deferred
2013
2014
(In thousands)
$
134    
  (56,291)   
   
    
$(56,157)
$
(12)   
  (24,677)   
   
    
$(24,689)
2015
$
804  
  (155,249) 
   
 
$(154,445)
Deferred income taxes are provided to reflect the future tax consequences or benefits of differences between the tax basis
of  assets  and  liabilities  and  their  reported  amounts  in  the  financial  statements  using  enacted  tax  rates.  The  difference
between  the  Company’s  effective  tax  rate  and  the  35%  federal  statutory  rate  is  caused  by  non-deductible  stock
compensation, state taxes and the establishment of a valuation allowance on deferred taxes. The impact of these items
varies based upon the Company’s full year loss and the jurisdictions that are expected to generate the projected losses.
In recording deferred income tax assets, the Company considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all
of its deferred income tax assets will be realized in the future. The ultimate realization of deferred income tax assets is
dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those deferred income tax assets
would  be  deductible.  The  Company  believes  that  after  considering  all  the  available  objective  evidence,  historical  and
prospective, with greater weight given to historical evidence, management is not able to determine that it is more likely
than  not  that  all  of  its  deferred  tax  assets  will  be  realized.  As  a  result,  in  2015  the  Company  established  an  additional
valuation allowance of $775.3 million, with a tax effect of $271.4 million for its estimated U.S. federal net operating loss
carryforwards and other U.S. federal tax assets and an additional valuation allowance of $215.5 million, with a tax effect of
$11.2 million, for its estimated Louisiana state net operating loss carryforwards that are not expected be utilized due to
uncertainty of generating taxable income prior to the expiration of the respective U.S. federal and Louisiana state carry-
over periods.
The  difference  between  the  Company’s  customary  rate  of  35%  and  the  effective  tax  rate  on  income  from  continuing
operations is due to the following:
Tax benefit at statutory rate
Tax effect of:
Nondeductible compensation
State taxes, net of federal tax benefit
Valuation allowance on deferred tax assets
Other
Total
Statutory rate
Tax effect of:
Nondeductible compensation
State taxes, net of federal tax benefit
Valuation allowance on deferred tax assets
Other
Effective tax rate
F-38
2013
1,545
$(57,008)   
 
 
 
  (10,902)   
  10,103  
 
 
105  
 
   
 
 
$(56,157)
756
2014
(In thousands)
$(28,630)   
 
 
 
(5,108)   
 
8,086  
 
 
 
207  
 
   
 
 
$(24,689)
2013
35.0%  
 
(0.9)   
6.7  
 
(6.2)   
(0.1)   
 
34.5%
2014
35.0%  
 
(0.9)   
6.2  
 
(9.9)   
(0.2)   
 
30.2%
2015
$(420,544)
539  
 
 
(17,502) 
  282,869  
193  
 
   
 
$(154,445)
2015
35.0%
—    
1.4  
(23.5) 
—
12.9%
Table of Contents
The tax effects of significant temporary differences representing the net deferred tax liability at December 31, 2014 and
2015 were as follows:
Deferred tax assets:
Property and equipment
Net operating loss carryforwards
Alternative minimum tax carryforward
Other
Valuation allowance on deferred tax assets
Deferred tax assets
Deferred tax liabilities:
Property and equipment
Unrealized hedging income
Other
Deferred tax liabilities
Net deferred tax liability
2014
2015
(In thousands)
$
—      
  126,026    
20,435    
 
7,854    
 
   
    
  154,315    
 
(46,639)   
   
    
  107,676    
    
   
  
  (259,222)   
—      
 
(3,001)   
 
   
    
  (262,223)   
   
    
$(154,547)
$ 49,116  
  255,231  
20,435  
 
8,201  
 
   
 
  332,983  
  (329,508) 
   
 
3,475
$
—    
(506) 
(4,934) 
 
(5,440) 
 
(1,965)
At December 31, 2015, Comstock had the following carryforwards available to reduce future income taxes:
Types of Carryforward
 
Net operating loss—U.S. federal
Net operating loss—Louisiana
Alternative minimum tax credits
Years of
Expiration
Carryforward    
 
    
  2017 – 2035    
  2020 – 2035    
  Unlimited
Amount
(In thousands) 
558,718  
$
1,147,689  
$
$
20,435
As of December 31, 2015, the Company had $558.7 million in U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards. The utilization
of $34.7 million of the U.S. federal net operating loss carryforward is limited to approximately $1.1 million per year pursuant
to a prior change of control of an acquired company. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2014, a valuation allowance of $23.0
million,  with  a  tax  effect  of  $8.0  million,  has  been  established  for  the  estimated  U.S.  federal  net  operating  loss
carryforwards that will not be utilized as a result of the change in control. As of December 31, 2015, the Company had also
established a valuation allowance of $775.3 million, with a tax effect of $271.4 million, against its other U.S. federal net
operating  loss  carryforwards  that  are  not  subject  to  a  change  in  control  and  other  U.S.  federal  tax  assets  due  to  the
uncertainty of generating future taxable income prior to the expiration of the carry-over period. In addition, as of December
31, 2015, the Company established a valuation allowance of $957.7 million, with a tax effect of $49.8 million, against its
Louisiana state net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty of generating taxable income in the state of Louisiana prior
to the expiration of the carry-over period. As of December 31, 2014, the Company had a valuation allowance of $742.2
million, with a tax effect of $38.6 million, against its Louisiana state deferred tax assets.
Future  use  of  the  Company’s  federal  and  state  net  operating  loss  carryforwards  may  be  limited  in  the  event  that  a
cumulative  change  in  the  ownership  of  Comstock’s  common  stock  by  more  than  50%  occurs  within  a  three-year
period. Such a change in ownership could result in a substantial portion of Comstock’s net operating loss carryforwards
being  eliminated  or  becoming  restricted,  and  the  Company  may  need  to  recognize  an  additional  valuation  allowance
reflecting  the  restricted  use  of  the  net  operating  loss  carryforwards  in  the  period  when  such  an  ownership  change
occurred. The Company established a rights plan on October 1, 2015 to deter ownership changes that would trigger this
limitation.
Table of Contents
F-39
The Company’s federal income tax returns for the years subsequent to December 31, 2011 remain subject to examination.
The  Company’s  income  tax  returns  in  major  state  income  tax  jurisdictions  remain  subject  to  examination  for  the  year
ended  December  31,  2008  and  various  periods  subsequent  to  December  31,  2010.  State  tax  returns  in  one  state
jurisdiction are currently under review. The Company currently believes that resolution of these matters will not have a
material impact on its financial statements. The Company currently believes that its significant filing positions are highly
certain and that all of its other significant income tax filing positions and deductions would be sustained upon audit or the
final resolution would not have a material effect on the consolidated financial statements. Therefore, the Company has not
established  any  significant  reserves  for  uncertain  tax  positions.  Interest  and  penalties  resulting  from  audits  by  tax
authorities have been immaterial and are included in the provision for income taxes in the consolidated statements of
operations.
(10) Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities
Comstock periodically uses swaps, floors and collars to hedge oil and natural gas prices and interest rates. Swaps are
settled monthly based on differences between the prices specified in the instruments and the settlement prices of futures
contracts.  Generally,  when  the  applicable  settlement  price  is  less  than  the  price  specified  in  the  contract,  Comstock
receives  a  settlement  from  the  counterparty  based  on  the  difference  multiplied  by  the  volume  or  amounts  hedged.
Similarly,  when  the  applicable  settlement  price  exceeds  the  price  specified  in  the  contract,  Comstock  pays  the
counterparty based on the difference. Comstock generally receives a settlement from the counterparty for floors when the
applicable settlement price is less than the price specified in the contract, which is based on the difference multiplied by
the volumes hedged. For collars, generally Comstock receives a settlement from the counterparty when the settlement
price  is  below  the  floor  and  pays  a  settlement  to  the  counterparty  when  the  settlement  price  exceeds  the  cap.  No
settlement occurs when the settlement price falls between the floor and cap.
All of the Company’s derivative financial instruments are used for risk management purposes and by policy none are held
for  trading  or  speculative  purposes.  Comstock  minimizes  credit  risk  to  counterparties  of  its  derivative  financial
instruments  through  formal  credit  policies,  monitoring  procedures,  and  diversification.  All  of  Comstock’s  derivative
financial instruments are with parties that are lenders under its bank credit facility. The Company is not required to provide
any  credit  support  to  its  counterparties  other  than  cross  collateralization  with  the  assets  securing  its  bank  credit
facility. None of the Company’s derivative financial instruments involve payment or receipt of premiums.
During 2013 and 2014, the Company hedged 2,160,000 barrels and 2,438,000 barrels, respectively, of its oil production at
an average NYMEX West Texas Intermediate oil price of $98.67 per barrel and $96.56 per barrel, respectively. During 2015,
the Company hedged 1,800,000 Mmbtu of its gas production at an average NYMEX Henry Hub natural gas price of $3.20
per Mmbtu.
As of December 31, 2015, the Company had the following outstanding commodity derivatives:
Commodity and Derivative Type
Contract Price
(Mmbtu)
Contract Period
Weighted-Average
Contract Volume
Natural Gas Swap Agreements
$
3.20 per Mmbtu
1,800,000
Jan. 2016 – June 2016
None of the derivative contracts were designated as cash flow hedges. The Company recognizes cash settlements and
changes in the fair value of its derivative financial instruments as a single component of other income (expenses).
The gain (loss) on derivative financial instruments was a loss of $8.4 million, a gain of $8.2 million and a gain of $2.7 million
for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively. Cash settlements received on derivative financial
instruments were $2.3 million, $9.1 million and $1.2 million for the years ended
Table of Contents
F-40
December  31,  2013,  2014  and  2015,  respectively.  The  estimated  fair  value  of  the  Company’s  derivative  financial
instruments, which equaled their carrying value, was an asset of $1.4 million as of December 31, 2015 which was reflected
as a current asset based on estimated settlement dates.
(11) Supplementary Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Total
2014
Total oil and gas sales
Operating income (loss)
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per share:
Basic and diluted
Total oil and gas sales
Operating loss
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per share:
Basic and diluted
(In thousands, except per share data)
$141,909    $ 155,723    $ 144,983    $ 112,616    $
263    $ (80,291)   $
   $ 20,228    $ 27,729    $
   $
1,898    $
(1,903)   $ (58,271)   $
1,165    $
555,231  
(32,071) 
(57,111)
$
0.11    $
0.19    $
(0.22)   $
(6.31)   $
(6.20)
2015
First
Second
Fourth    
(In thousands, except per share data)
$ 66,522    $ 77,312    $ 61,360    $ 47,228    $
252,422  
   $ (96,928)   $(182,185)   $(596,026)   $(290,515)   $(1,165,654) 
   $ (78,502)   $(135,068)   $(544,996)   $(288,543)   $(1,047,109)
Third
Total
$
(8.53)   $
(14.64)   $
(59.05)   $
(31.26)   $
(113.53)
Basic and diluted per share amounts are the same for each of the quarters and for the years ended where a net loss was
reported.
Results of operations include the following non-routine items of income (expense), which are presented before the effect
of income taxes:
Impairments of unproved oil and gas properties
Impairments of proved oil and gas properties
Gain (loss) on sale of oil and gas properties
Net gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt
Impairments of unproved oil and gas properties
Impairments of proved oil and gas properties
Table of Contents
Second
First
$ —      $
   $ —      $
(In thousands)
2014
Third
Fourth
—      $
(487) 
(15)   $ (59,997)   $ (60,268)
(487)   $
Total
—      $
(256)   $
First
Second
2015
Third
$ —      $(111,830)   $
   $ (2,735)   $
   $(40,432)   $ (23,040)   $
   $
(307)   $(112,085) 
7,267    $ 51,054    $ 23,155    $ 78,741  
(385)   $ (68,947) 
(1,984)   $(544,714)   $(254,246)   $(801,347)
(In thousands)
(5,090)   $
Fourth
(403)   $
52    $
Total
F-41
(12) Oil and Gas Reserves Information (Unaudited)
Set forth below is a summary of the changes in Comstock’s net quantities of oil and natural gas reserves for its continuing
operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2015:
Proved Reserves:
Beginning of year
Revisions of previous estimates
Extensions and discoveries
Sales of minerals in place
Production
End of year
Proved Developed Reserves:
2013
Natural
2014
Natural
2015
Natural
Oil
Oil
Gas
(MMcf)
Gas
(MMcf)
Oil
Gas
(MMcf)
(MBbls)
(MBbls)
(MBbls)
18,899     437,445      21,976     452,653      20,854     495,266  
28      23,321      (2,182)     3,998      (5,096)     (41,437) 
   
    5,363      47,581      5,373      78,383     
231     168,539  
    —       
(5,096) 
    (2,314)     (55,694)     (4,313)     (39,768)     (3,089)     (47,676) 
    
 
    21,976     452,653      20,854     495,266      9,229     569,596
—        (3,671)
—        —
Proved Developed Reserves:
Beginning of year
End of year
8,389     362,426      13,914     344,278      16,247     324,598
13,914     344,278      16,247     324,598      9,229     311,130
The downward revisions in 2015 were primarily related to the decline in oil and natural gas prices. In 2015 price-related
revisions were downward revisions of 4,958 MBbls of oil and 77,659 MMcf of natural gas.
The proved oil and gas reserves utilized in the preparation of the financial statements were estimated by Lee Keeling and
Associates,  independent  petroleum  consultants,  in  accordance  with  guidelines  established  by  the  Securities  and
Exchange Commission and the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which require that reserve reports be prepared
under existing economic and operating conditions with no provision for price and cost escalation except by contractual
agreement. All of the Company’s reserves are located onshore in the continental United States of America.
The following table sets forth the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved reserves at
December 31, 2014 and 2015:
Cash Flows Relating to Proved Reserves:
Future Cash Flows
Future Costs:
Production
Development and Abandonment
Future Income Taxes
Future Net Cash Flows
10% Discount Factor
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
2014
2015
(In thousands)
$ 3,891,953    
  
  (1,260,580)   
 
(571,200)   
(192,600)   
 
   
    
  1,867,573    
 
(776,913)   
   
    
$ 1,090,660
$1,763,146
(705,146) 
 
(362,874) 
 
(1,231) 
 
   
 
  693,895  
 
(321,756) 
   
 
$ 372,139
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows at the end of 2014 and 2015 was determined based on the
simple average of the first of month market prices for oil and natural gas for each year. Prices were $92.55 per barrel of oil
and $3.96 per Mcf of natural gas for 2014 and $46.88 per barrel of oil and $2.34 per Mcf of natural gas for 2015. Prices used
in  determining  quantities  of  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves  and  future  cash  inflows  from  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves
represent prices received at the Company’s sales point. These prices
Table of Contents
F-42
have  been  adjusted  from  posted  or  index  prices  for  both  location  and  quality  differences.  Future  development  and
production costs are computed by estimating the expenditures to be incurred in developing and producing proved oil and
gas reserves at the end of the year, based on year end costs and assuming continuation of existing economic conditions.
Future income tax expenses are computed by applying the appropriate statutory tax rates to the future pre-tax net cash
flows relating to proved reserves, net of the tax basis of the properties involved. The future income tax expenses give
effect to permanent differences and tax credits, but do not reflect the impact of future operations.
The following table sets forth the changes in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to
proved reserves for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2014 and 2015:
Standardized Measure, Beginning of Year
Net change in sales price, net of production costs
Development costs incurred during the year which were previously estimated
Revisions of quantity estimates
Accretion of discount
Changes in future development and abandonment costs
2013
$ 641,325   
 
  
43,117   
  187,643   
  
  
 
48,411
2014
(In thousands)
$ 807,217   
 
5,911   
  344,590   
 
(40,993)
2015
$1,090,660  
 
(751,774) 
  157,390  
 
(111,454)
81,434
105,400
114,427
Changes in future development and abandonment costs
Changes in timing and other
Extensions and discoveries
Sales of minerals in place
Sales, net of production costs
Net changes in income taxes
Standardized Measure, End of Year
Table of Contents
F-43
(157,207)  
  
 
80,348   
  
  291,582   
  
 
—     
  
  (335,677)  
  
 
(73,759)  
  
  
   
   
   $ 807,217
(10,909)  
 
(19,028)  
  163,559   
—     
 
 
(458,254)  
  193,167   
   
   
$1,090,660
14,901  
 
(44,439) 
 
56,216  
 
(43,694) 
 
(163,336) 
 
53,242  
 
   
 
$ 372,139
Comstock Resources, Inc.
OFFER TO EXCHANGE AND CONSENT SOLICITATION
Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020 and
Warrants For Shares of Common Stock
for
Any and All 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020
(CUSIP Nos. 205768 AK0 and U2038J AC1)
and
7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019
for
Any and All 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019
(CUSIP No. 205768 AH7)
and
9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020
for
Any and All 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020
(CUSIP No. 205768 AJ3)
PROSPECTUS
, 2016
We have not authorized any dealer, salesperson or other person to give any information or represent anything to you
other than the information contained in this prospectus. You may not rely on unauthorized information or representations.
This prospectus does not offer to sell or ask for offers to buy any of the securities in any jurisdiction where it is unlawful,
where the person making the offer is not qualified to do so, or to any person who can not legally be offered the securities.
The information in this prospectus is current only as of the date on its cover, and may change after that date. For any time
after  the  cover  date  of  this  prospectus,  we  do  not  represent  that  our  affairs  are  the  same  as  described  or  that  the
information in this prospectus is correct, nor do we imply those things by delivering this prospectus or selling securities
to you.
Until                  ,          all dealers that effect transactions in these securities, whether or not participating in the Exchange
Offer may be required to deliver a prospectus.
Requests for assistance in connection with the tender of your old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer may be directed
to the Information and Exchange Agent:
D.F. King & Co., Inc.
48 Wall Street, 22nd Floor | New York, New York 10005
Banks and Brokers Call: (212) 269-5550 | All Others Call Toll-Free: (877) 732-3619
Email: crk@dfking.com
Attention: Peter Aymar
The Dealer Manager for the Exchange Offer is:
BofA Merrill Lynch
Attention: Debt Advisory
The Hearst Building
214 North Tryon Street, 14th Floor
Charlotte, North Carolina 28255
Toll-Free: (888) 292-0070
Collect: (980) 388-4813 and (646) 855-2464
Table of Contents
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 20. Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Section  78.7502  of  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes  permits  a  corporation  to  indemnify  any  person  who  was,  is  or  is
threatened to be made a party in a completed, pending or threatened proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or
investigative (except an action by or in the right of the corporation), by reason of being or having been an officer, director,
employee or agent of the corporation or serving in certain capacities at the request of the corporation. Indemnification
may include attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement. The person to be indemnified must have
acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation
and, with respect to any criminal action, such person must have had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was
unlawful.
With respect to actions by or in the right of the corporation, indemnification may not be made for any claim, issue or matter
as to which such a person has been finally adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be liable to the corporation or
for amounts paid in settlement to the corporation, unless and only to the extent that the court in which the action was
brought or other court of competent jurisdiction determines upon application that in view of all circumstances the person
is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such expenses as the court deems proper.
Unless indemnification is ordered by a court, the determination to pay indemnification must be made by the stockholders,
by a majority vote of a quorum of the Board of Directors who were not parties to the action, suit or proceeding, or in certain
circumstances by independent legal counsel in a written opinion. Section 78.751 of the Nevada Revised Statutes permits
the articles of incorporation or bylaws to provide for payment to an indemnified person of the expenses of defending an
action as incurred upon receipt of an undertaking to repay the amount if it is ultimately determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction that the person is not entitled to indemnification.
Section 78.7502 also provides that to the extent a director, officer, employee or agent has been successful on the merits or
otherwise  in  the  defense  of  any  such  action,  he  must  be  indemnified  by  the  corporation  against  expenses,  including
attorneys’ fees, actually and reasonably incurred in connection with the defense.
Article  VI,  “Indemnification  of  Directors,  Officers,  Employees  and  Agents,”  of  the  Company’s  Amended  and  Restated
Bylaws provides as follows with respect to indemnification of the Company’s directors, officers, employees and agents:
Section 1.   To the fullest extent allowed by Nevada law, any director of the Company shall not be liable to the Company or
its shareholders for monetary damages for an act or omission in the director’s capacity as a director, except that this
Article VI does not eliminate or limit the liability of a director for:
(a)   an act or omission which involves intentional misconduct, fraud or a knowing violation of law; or
(b)   the payment of dividends in violation of N.R.S. 78.300.
Section  2.      The  Company  shall  indemnify  each  director,  officer,  employee  and  agent,  now  or  hereafter  serving  the
Company, each former director, officer, employee and agent, and each person who may now or hereafter serve or who
may have heretofore served at the Company’s request as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation or
other business enterprise, and the respective heirs, executors, administrators and personal representatives of each of
them against all expenses actually and reasonably incurred by, or imposed upon, him in connection with the defense of
any claim, action, suit
Table of Contents
II-1
or proceeding, civil or criminal, against him by reason of his being or having been such director, officer, employee or
agent,  except  in  relation  to  such  matters  as  to  which  he  shall  be  adjudged  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  after
exhaustion  of  all  appeals  therefrom  in  such  action,  suit  or  proceeding  to  be  liable  for  gross  negligence  or  willful
misconduct in the performance of duty. For purposes hereof, the term “expenses” shall include but not be limited to all
expenses, costs, attorneys’ fees, judgments (including adjudications other than on the merits), fines, penalties, arbitration
awards, costs of arbitration and sums paid out and liabilities actually and reasonably incurred or imposed in connection
with any suit, claim, action or proceeding, and any settlement or compromise thereof approved by the Board of Directors
as being in the best interests of the Company. However, in any case in which there is no disinterested majority of the
Board of Directors available, the indemnification shall be made: (1) only if the Company shall be advised in writing by
counsel that in the opinion of counsel (a) such officer, director, employee or agent was not adjudged or found liable for
gross  negligence  or  willful  misconduct  in  the  performance  of  duty  as  such  director,  officer,  employee  or  agent  or  the
indemnification provided is only in connection with such matters as to which the person to be indemnified was not so
liable,  and  in  the  case  of  settlement  or  compromise,  the  same  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  Company;  and
(b) indemnification under the circumstances is lawful and falls within the provisions of these Bylaws; and (2) only in such
amount  as  counsel  shall  advise  the  Company  in  writing  is,  in  his  opinion,  proper.  In  making  or  refusing  to  make  any
payment under this or any other provision of these Bylaws, the Company, its directors, officers, employees and agents
shall be fully protected if they rely upon the written opinion of counsel selected by, or in the manner designated by, the
Board of Directors.
Section 3.   Expenses incurred in defending a civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding may be paid by the Company in
advance of the final disposition of such action, suit or proceeding as authorized by the Board of Directors upon receipt of
an undertaking by or on behalf of the director, officer, employee, representative or agent to repay such amount unless it
shall ultimately be determined that he is entitled to be indemnified by the Company as authorized in these Bylaws.
Section 4.   The Company may indemnify each person, though he is not or was not a director, officer, employee or agent of
the Company, who served at the request of the Company on a committee created by the Board of Directors to consider
and report to it in respect of any matter. Any such indemnification may be made under the provisions hereof and shall be
subject to the limitations hereof, except that (as indicated) any such committee member need not be nor have been a
director, officer, employee or agent of the Company.
Section 5.   The provisions hereof shall be applicable to actions, suits or proceedings (including appeals) commenced
after the adoption hereof, whether arising from acts or omissions to act occurring before or after the adoption hereof.
Section 6.   The indemnification provisions herein provided shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which
those  indemnified  may  be  entitled  under  any  bylaw,  agreement,  vote  of  stockholders  or  disinterested  directors  or
otherwise, or by law or statute, both as to action in his official capacity and as to action in another capacity while holding
such office, and shall continue as to a person who has ceased to be a director, officer, employee or agent and shall inure
to the benefit of the heirs, executors and administrators of such a person.
Section 7.   The Company may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a director, officer,
employee or agent of the Company, or is or was serving at the request of the Company as a director, officer, employee or
agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, or other enterprise, and persons described in Section 4 of
this Article above, against any liability asserted against him and incurred by him in any such capacity or arising out of his
status,  as  such,  whether  or  not  the  Company  would  have  the  power  to  indemnify  him  against  such  liability  under  the
provisions of these Bylaws.
Table of Contents
II-2
Item 21. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
A list of exhibits filed with this registration statement on Form S-4 is set forth on the Exhibit Index and is incorporated
herein by reference.
Item 22. Undertakings.
The undersigned registrants hereby undertake:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration statement:
(1)
to include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act;
(2)
to reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or the
most  recent  post-effective  amendment  thereof)  which  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  represent  a  fundamental
change in the information set forth in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or
decrease in the volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that
which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be
reflected  in  the  form  of  prospectus  filed  with  the  Commission  pursuant  to  Rule  424(b)  if,  in  the  aggregate,  the
changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20 percent change in the maximum aggregate offering
price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement; and
(3)
to  include  any  material  information  with  respect  to  the  plan  of  distribution  not  previously  disclosed  in  the
registration statement or any material change to such information in the registration statement.
That,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  liability  under  the  Securities  Act,  each  such  post-effective  amendment  shall  be
deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that
time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
To remove from the registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which remain
unsold at the termination of the offering.
That, for purposes of determining liability under the Securities Act to any purchaser, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule
424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or
other  than  prospectuses  filed  in  reliance  on  Rule  430A,  shall  be  deemed  to  be  part  of  and  included  in  the  registration
statement  as  of  the  date  it  is  first  used  after  effectiveness.  Provided,  however,  that  no  statement  made  in  a  registration
statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated
by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with
a  time  of  contract  of  sale  prior  to  such  first  use,  supersede  or  modify  any  statement  that  was  made  in  the  registration
statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such
date of first use.
That,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  liability  of  the  registrants  under  the  Securities  Act  to  any  purchaser  in  the  initial
distribution of the securities, the undersigned registrants undertake that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned
registrants pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the
purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold to such
Table of Contents
II-3
purchaser  by  means  of  any  of  the  following  communications,  the  undersigned  registrants  will  each  be  a  seller  to  the
purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(1)
(2)
(3)
any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrants relating to the offering required to be filed
pursuant to Rule 424;
any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or
referred to by the undersigned registrants;
the portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the
undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned registrants; and
(4)
any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrants to the purchaser.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers and controlling
persons of the registrants pursuant to the provisions described in Item 20, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that
in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore,
unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of
expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action,
suit  or  proceeding)  is  asserted  by  such  director,  officer  or  controlling  person  in  connection  with  the  securities  being
registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit
to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in
the Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
To respond to requests for information that is incorporated by reference into the prospectus pursuant to Items 4, 10(b), or 11
or 13 of this form, within one business day of receipt of such request, and to send the incorporated documents by first class
mail or other equally prompt means. This includes information contained in documents filed subsequent to the date of the
registration statement through the date of responding to the request.
(vi)
(vii)
(viii) To  supply  by  means  of  a  post-effective  amendment  all  information  concerning  a  transaction,  and  the  company  being
acquired involved therein, that was not the subject of and included in the registration statement when it became effective.
Table of Contents
II-4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Frisco, State of Texas, on August 1, 2016.
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC.
COMSTOCK RESOURCES, INC.
By:      /s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints M. Jay Allison and Roland O. Burns, and each of
them singly, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for
him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all (i) amendments (including
post-effective  amendments)  and  additions  to  this  registration  statement  and  (ii)  any  and  all  additional  registration
statements pursuant to Rule 462(b) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto
and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto each said
attorney-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents or either of them or their or his or her substitute or substitutes may
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
/s/ ROLAND O. BURNS
Roland O. Burns
/s/ ELIZABETH B. DAVIS
Elizabeth B. Davis
/s/ DAVID K. LOCKETT
David K. Lockett
/s/ CECIL E. MARTIN, JR.
Cecil E. Martin, Jr.
/s/ FREDERIC D. SEWELL
Frederic D. Sewell
/s/ DAVID W. SLEDGE
David W. Sledge
/s/ JIM L. TURNER
Jim L. Turner
Title
Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of
the Board of Directors
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date
August 1, 2016
President, Chief Financial Officer,
August 1, 2016
Secretary and Director
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
August 1, 2016
August 1, 2016
August 1, 2016
August 1, 2016
August 1, 2016
August 1, 2016
Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Frisco, State of Texas, on August 1, 2016.
COMSTOCK OIL & GAS, LP
By:
Comstock Oil and Gas GP, LLC,
general partner
By:      /s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
Manager (Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints M. Jay Allison and Roland O. Burns, and each of
them singly, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for
him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all (i) amendments (including
post-effective  amendments)  and  additions  to  this  registration  statement  and  (ii)  any  and  all  additional  registration
statements pursuant to Rule 462(b) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto
and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto each said
attorney-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents or either of them or their or his or her substitute or substitutes may
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
/s/ ROLAND O. BURNS
Roland O. Burns
Table of Contents
Title
Manager of General Partner
(Principal Executive Officer)
Manager of General Partner
(Principal Financial Officer and
Principal Accounting Officer
Date
August 1, 2016
August 1, 2016
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Frisco, State of Texas, on August 1, 2016.
SIGNATURES
COMSTOCK OIL & GAS – LOUISIANA, LLC
By:      /s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints M. Jay Allison and Roland O. Burns, and each of
them singly, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for
him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all (i) amendments (including
post-effective  amendments)  and  additions  to  this  registration  statement  and  (ii)  any  and  all  additional  registration
statements pursuant to Rule 462(b) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto
and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto each said
attorney-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents or either of them or their or his or her substitute or substitutes may
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
/s/ ROLAND O. BURNS
Roland O. Burns
Table of Contents
Title
Chief Executive Officer and Manager
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date
August 1, 2016
President, Chief Financial Officer,
August 1, 2016
Secretary and Manager
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Frisco, State of Texas, on August 1, 2016.
SIGNATURES
COMSTOCK OIL & GAS GP, LLC
By:      /s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints M. Jay Allison and Roland O. Burns, and each of
them singly, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for
him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all (i) amendments (including
post-effective  amendments)  and  additions  to  this  registration  statement  and  (ii)  any  and  all  additional  registration
statements pursuant to Rule 462(b) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto
and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto each said
attorney-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents or either of them or their or his or her substitute or substitutes may
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
/s/ ROLAND O. BURNS
Roland O. Burns
Table of Contents
Title
Manager
(Principal Executive Officer)
Manager
(Principal Financial Officer and
Principal Accounting Officer)
Date
August 1, 2016
August 1, 2016
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Frisco, State of Texas, on August 1, 2016.
SIGNATURES
COMSTOCK OIL & GAS INVESTMENTS, LLC
By:      /s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints M. Jay Allison and Roland O. Burns, and each of
them singly, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for
him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all (i) amendments (including
post-effective  amendments)  and  additions  to  this  registration  statement  and  (ii)  any  and  all  additional  registration
statements pursuant to Rule 462(b) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto
and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto each said
attorney-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents or either of them or their or his or her substitute or substitutes may
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
/s/ ROLAND O. BURNS
Roland O. Burns
Table of Contents
Title
Chief Executive Officer and Manager
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date
August 1, 2016
President, Chief Financial Officer,
August 1, 2016
Secretary and Manager
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Frisco, State of Texas, on August 1, 2016.
SIGNATURES
COMSTOCK OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
By:      /s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints M. Jay Allison and Roland O. Burns, and each of
them singly, his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for
him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all (i) amendments (including
post-effective  amendments)  and  additions  to  this  registration  statement  and  (ii)  any  and  all  additional  registration
statements pursuant to Rule 462(b) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto
and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto each said
attorney-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents or either of them or their or his or her substitute or substitutes may
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following
persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ M. JAY ALLISON
M. Jay Allison
Title
Chief Executive Officer and Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date
August 1, 2016
/s/ ROLAND O. BURNS
President, Chief Financial Officer, Secretary
August 1, 2016
Roland O. Burns
Table of Contents
and Director
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description
Exhibit No.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7*
4.8*
4.9*
Restated Articles of Incorporation (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 1995).
Certificate of Amendment to the Restated Articles of Incorporation dated July 1, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 3.1 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 1997).
Certificate of Amendment to the Restated Articles of Incorporation dated May 19, 2009 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 3.1 to our Registration Statement on Form S-3 dated October 5, 2009).
Certificate of Designation of Series C Junior Participating Preferred Stock of Comstock Resources, Inc.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 1, 2015).
Certificate of Amendment to the Restated Articles of Incorporation dated June 1, 2016 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 3.2 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated July 22, 2016).
Certificate of Change dated July 20, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-
K dated July 22, 2016).
Amended and Restated Bylaws (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated
August 21, 2014).
Specimen Stock Certificate for Common Stock (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Comstock’s
Registration Statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC on December 16, 2003).
Indenture dated October 9, 2009 between Comstock, the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto, and The Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for debt securities (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1
to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on October 14, 2009).
Third Supplemental Indenture dated March 14, 2011 between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary
Guarantors party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., for the 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due
2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated March 14, 2011).
Fourth Supplemental Indenture dated June 5, 2012 between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors
party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., for the 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated June 7, 2012).
Indenture dated March 13, 2015 between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto and
The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for the 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated March 13, 2015).
Rights Agreement dated October 1, 2015 between Comstock Resources, Inc. and American Stock Transfer & Trust
Company LLC, as rights agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated
October 1, 2015).
Form of First Supplemental Indenture between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto
and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for the 10% Senior Secured Notes due 2020.
Form of Fifth Supplemental Indenture between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto
and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for the 7 3⁄4% Senior Notes due 2019.
Form of Sixth Supplemental Indenture between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto
and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for the 9 1⁄2% Senior Notes due 2020.
Form of Warrant Agreement between Comstock Resources and American Stock Transfer & Trust Company LLC, as
warrant agent.
Form of Indenture between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto and The Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for the Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020.
Form of Indenture between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto and The Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for the 7¾% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019.
Form of Indenture between Comstock Resources, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto and The Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee for the 9½% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020.
Opinion of Locke Lord LLP.
  Opinion of Woodburn and Wedge.
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement dated February 24, 2014 by and between Comstock Resources,
Inc. and M. Jay Allison (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2013).
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement dated February 24, 2014 by and between Comstock Resources,
Inc. and Roland O. Burns (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2013).
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description
Employment Agreement dated February 23, 2015 by and between Comstock Resources, Inc. and Mack D. Good
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015).
Comstock  Resources,  Inc.  2009  Long-term  Incentive  Plan  Amended  and  Restated  Effective  as  of  May  7,  2015
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015).
Credit Agreement dated March 4, 2015 among Comstock Resources, Inc., as the borrower, the lenders from time to
time thereto, and Bank of Montreal as administrative agent and issuing bank (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.2 to our Current Report on Form 8-K dated March 4, 2015).
Lease between Stonebriar I Office Partners, Ltd. and Comstock Resources, Inc. dated May 6, 2004 (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.24 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004).
First Amendment to the Lease Agreement dated August 25, 2005, between Stonebriar I Office Partners, Ltd. and
Comstock Resources, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2005).
Second Amendment to the Lease Agreement dated October 15, 2007 between Stonebriar I Office Partners, Ltd. and
Comstock Resources, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.10 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2008).
Third Amendment to the Lease Agreement dated September 30, 2008 between Stonebriar I Office Partners, Ltd.
and Comstock Resources, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2008).
Fourth  Amendment  to  the  Lease  Agreement  dated  May  8,  2009  between  Stonebriar  I  Office  Partners,  Ltd.  and
Comstock Resources, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended June 30, 2009).
Fifth  Amendment  to  the  Lease  Agreement  dated  June  15,  2011  between  Stonebriar  I  Office  Partners,  Ltd.  and
Comstock Resources, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended June 30, 2011).
Base Contract for Sale and Purchase of Natural Gas between Comstock Oil & Gas-Louisiana, LLC and BP Energy
Company  dated  November  7,  2008,  as  amended  by  Third  Amended  and  Restated  Special  Provisions  dated
January 5, 2010 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2009).
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
  Subsidiaries of Comstock Resources, Inc.
4.10*
4.11**
4.12**
4.13**
5.1*
5.2*
10.1
10.2
Table of Contents
Exhibit No.
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
12.1*
21.1*
23.1*
23.1*
23.2*
23.3*
23.4*
24.1*
25.1*
25.2*
25.3*
99.1*
101.INS*
101.SCH*
101.CAL*
101.LAB*
101.PRE*
101.DEF*
Consent of Locke Lord LLP (Included in Exhibit 5.1).
  Consent of Woodburn and Wedge (Included in Exhibit 5.2)
  Consent of Ernst & Young LLP.
  Consent of Lee Keeling and Associates, Inc.
  Power of Attorney (Included on the Signature Pages to the this Form S-4).
  Statement on Form T-1 of eligibility of Trustee for the Senior Secured Toggle Notes due 2020.
  Statement on Form T-1 of eligibility of Trustee for the 7 3⁄4% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2019.
  Statement on Form T-1 of eligibility of Trustee for the 9 1⁄2% Convertible Secured PIK Notes due 2020.
  Form of Letter of Transmittal and Consent
  XBRL Instance Document
  XBRL Schema Document
  XBRL Calculation Linkbase Document
  XBRL Labels Linkbase Document
  XBRL Presentation Linkbase Document
  XBRL Definition Linkbase Document
*
**
Filed herewith.
To be filed by amendment.
EXHIBIT INDEX