
4 August 2016
GRANT OF ASX WAIVERS
Voyager  Global  Group  Limited  (“Voyager”  or  “the  Company”)  is  pleased  to  advise  that  it  has  received 
approval from ASX for waivers to ASX Listing Rules 2.1 condition 2, 7.3.2 and 10.13.3 and a confirmation 
in respect of ASX Listing Rule 6.1.
The terms of the waiver are set out in italics below:
1.  Waiver  from  listing  rule  2.1  condition  2  to  the  extent  necessary  to  permit  the  issue  price  of  at 
least  125,000,000  and  up  to  250,000,000  ordinary  shares  (“Shares”)  proposed  to  be  issued 
pursuant  to  a  prospectus  as  part  of  the  proposed  capital  raising  of  between  $2,500,000  and 
$5,000,000  (“Capital  Raising”)  not  to  be  at  least  $0.20  per  Share,  subject  to  the  following 
conditions:
a)  Issue price of the Capital Raising Shares is at least $0.02 per Share.
b)  The terms of this waiver are immediately disclosed to the market and are clearly disclosed 
in  the  notice  of  meeting  pursuant  to  which  the  Company  will  seek  the  approval  required 
under listing rule 11.1.2 in respect of the Acquisition (“Notice”) and in the prospectus to be 
issued in respect of the Capital Raising (“Prospectus”).
c)  The  Company’s  shareholders  approve  the  issue  price  of  the  Capital  Raising  Shares  in 
conjunction  with  the  approval  obtained  under  listing  rule  11.1.2  in  respect  of  the 
Acquisition.
d)  The  terms  of  the  Acquisition  and  Capital  Raising  have  not  materially  changed  (as 
determined by ASX in its absolute discretion) from those as announced by the Company on 
10 May 2016.
2.  Grants a waiver from listing rule 7.3.2 to the extent necessary to permit the Notice seeking
shareholder approval for the issue of no more than 220,000,000 Shares and 10,000,000 
Performance Shares to unrelated parties as consideration under the Acquisition (“Consideration 
Securities”), 155,000,000 Shares to be issued to unrelated parties on conversion of convertible 
notes issued by Cycliq (“Noteholder Shares”), and no more than 250,000,000 Capital Raising 
Shares to be issued to unrelated parties (together “Unrelated Securities”), to state that the 
Unrelated Securities may be issued later than three months after the date of the Meeting, on the 
following conditions.
a)  The  Unrelated  Securities  must  be  issued  no  later  than  five  months  from  the  date  of  the
Meeting, subject to shareholder approval having been obtained.
3722-06/1543167_1
1
b)  The Unrelated Securities are issued pursuant to the relevant terms and conditions set out in
the Notice.
c)  The circumstances of the Company have not changed materially since the holders of Shares
approved the issue of the Unrelated Securities.
d)  The terms of this waiver are immediately disclosed to the market and are clearly disclosed
in the Notice and the Prospectus.
3.  Grants a waiver from listing rule 10.13.3 to the extent necessary to permit the Company’s Notice
seeking approval for the issue of no more than 6,500,000 Shares (a maximum of 1,000,000 
Shares to Piers Lewis, 5,000,000 Shares to Roderick Corps and 500,000 Shares to Gary Roper, or 
their nominee/s) to related parties under the Capital Raising (“Related Securities”), to state that 
the Related Securities will be issued at the same time as other securities to be issued under the 
Prospectus, rather than within one month after the date of the Meeting, on the following 
conditions.
a)  The  Related  Securities  must  be  issued  no  later  than  five  months  from  the  date  of  the
Meeting, subject to shareholder approval having been obtained.
b)  The Related Securities are issued pursuant to the relevant terms and conditions set out in 
the Notice, and on the same terms and conditions as other Shares issued under the Capital 
Raising.
c)  The circumstances of the Company have not changed materially since the holders of Shares
approved the issue of the Related Securities.
d)  The terms of this waiver are immediately disclosed to the market and are clearly disclosed
in the Notice and in the Prospectus.
4.  Additionally, the ASX has confirmed that the terms of the 10,000,000 performance shares
(“Performance Shares”) proposed to be issued by the Company as part consideration for the 
Acquisition are appropriate and equitable for the purposes of listing rule 6.1, subject to the 
following conditions.
includes  sufficient
a)  The  Company  obtains  shareholder  approval  for  the  issue  of  the  Performance  Shares,  and 
information  about  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
the  Notice 
Performance  Shares  including,  if  applicable,  approval  for  the  issue  of  the  Performance 
Shares which are to be held by a related party pursuant to Chapter 2E of the Corporations 
Act 2001 (Cth).
b)  The Performance Shares are not quoted.
c)  The Performance Shares are not transferable.
d)  The Performance Shares do not have voting rights, subject to those required by law.
e)  The  Performance  Shares  do  not  permit  the  holder  to  participate  in  new  issues  of  capital
such as bonus issues and entitlement issues.
f)  The Performance Shares do not carry an entitlement to a dividend.
g)  Each Performance Share is converted into no more than twenty Shares on achievement of
the relevant performance milestone.
3722-06/1543167_1
2
h)  The  VWAP  aspect  of  the  conversion  ratio  formula  of  the  Performance  Shares  into  Shares 
upon achievement of a performance milestone is to be calculated over the 20 trading days 
on which trades in the Company’s shares were recorded immediately before a performance 
milestone is satisfied.
i)  Whether or not a performance milestone applicable to each Performance Share is achieved 
is determined by reference to the assets of Cycliq, and not by reference to the assets of the 
Company as a whole.
j)
If a Performance Share has not converted into a Share by the relevant expiry date, each of 
the  Performance  Shares  will  be  automatically  redeemed  by  the  Company  for  a  sum  of 
$0.0000001 per Performance Share.
k)  The  Company  makes  an  announcement
immediately  upon  the  conversion  of  any
Performance Shares.
l)  The  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Performance  Shares,  including  without  limitation  the 
relevant  vesting  conditions  that  have  to  be  satisfied  before  each  class  of  Performance 
Shares  is  converted  into  Shares,  are  not to  be  changed  without  the  prior  approval  of  ASX 
and the Company's shareholders.
m)  Upon conversion of the Performance Shares into Shares, the Company will apply to the ASX
for quotation of the shares within the requisite time period.
n)  The Company discloses the following in each annual report, annual audited accounts, half-
yearly report and quarterly cashflow report issued by the Company in respect of any period 
during  which  any  of  the  Performance  Shares  remain  on  issue  or  were  converted  or 
cancelled:
i.
ii.
The number of Performance Shares on issue during the relevant period.
A  summary  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Performance  Shares,  including 
without  limitation the number of Shares into which they are convertible and the 
relevant performance milestones.
iii.  Whether any of the Performance Shares were converted or cancelled during that
period.
iv.  Whether any vesting conditions were met during the period.
v.
A  note  that  each Performance  Share  may  convert  into  a  maximum  of 20 Shares 
upon  achievement  of  a  performance  milestone,  and disclosure  of  the  conversion 
ratio  formula  of  the  Performance  Shares  into  Shares  upon  achievement  of  a 
performance milestone.
o)  The Company discloses the following in item 9 of each Appendix 3B lodged by the Company
while any of the Performance Shares remain on issue:
i.
The  number  of  Performance  Shares  on  issue  at  the  time  of  lodgement  of  the 
Appendix 3B.
3722-06/1543167_1
3
ii.
iii.
A  note  that  each Performance  Share  may  convert  into  a  maximum  of 20 Shares 
upon achievement of a milestone.
The  conversion  ratio  formula  of  the  Performance  Shares  into  Shares  upon 
achievement of a performance milestone.
p)  The terms of this waiver are immediately disclosed to the market and are clearly disclosed
in the Notice and in the Prospectus.
q)  The ASX has considered listing rules 2.1 condition 2, 6.1, 7.3.2 and 10.13.3 only and makes
no statement as to the Company’s compliance with other listing rules.
Piers Lewis 
Non-Executive Chairman & Company Secretary 
For and on behalf of 
VOYAGER GLOBAL GROUP LTD
3722-06/1543167_1
4