
NT 10-Q 1 a16-16522_1nt10q.htm NOTICE OF INABILITY TO TIMELY FILE A FORM 10-Q
(Check one):
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 12b-25
NOTIFICATION OF LATE FILING
SEC FILE NUMBER: 001-35912
CUSIP NUMBER: 29102H108
o Form 11-K
x Form 10-Q
o Form 10-D
o Form 20-F
o Form N-CSR
o Form 10-K
  o Form N-SAR
 
  For Period Ended: June 30, 2016
  o Transition Report on Form 10-K
  o Transition Report on Form 20-F
  o Transition Report on Form 11-K
  o Transition Report on Form 10-Q
  o Transition Report on Form N-SAR
  For the Transition Period Ended:
Nothing in this form shall be construed to imply that the Commission has verified any information contained
Read Instructions (on back page) Before Preparing Form. Please Print or Type.
herein.
If the notification relates to a portion of the filing checked above, identify the Item(s) to which the notification relates:
N/A
PART I — REGISTRANT INFORMATION
Emerge Energy Services LP
Full Name of Registrant
 
N/A
Former Name if Applicable
 
180 State Street, Suite 225
Address of Principal Executive Office (Street and Number)
Southlake, Texas 76092
City, State and Zip Code
PART II — RULES 12b-25(b) AND (c)
If the subject report could not be filed without unreasonable effort or expense and the registrant seeks relief pursuant
to Rule 12b-25(b), the following should be completed. (Check box if appropriate)
o
(a) The reason described in reasonable detail in Part III of this form could not be eliminated without unreasonable
effort or expense
(b) The subject annual report, semi-annual report, transition report on Form 10-K, Form 20-F, Form 11-K, Form N-
SAR or Form N-CSR, or portion thereof, will be filed on or before the fifteenth calendar day following the
prescribed due date; or the subject quarterly report or transition report on Form 10-Q or subject distribution
report on Form 10-D, or portion thereof, will be filed on or before the fifth calendar day following the prescribed
due date; and
(c) The accountant’s statement or other exhibit required by Rule 12b-25(c) has been attached if applicable.
PART III — NARRATIVE
State below in reasonable detail why Forms 10-K, 20-F, 11-K, 10-Q, 10-D, N-SAR, N-CSR, or the transition report or
portion thereof, could not be filed within the prescribed time period.
Over the past several months, our management has been, and continues to be, focused on addressing Emerge
Energy Services LP’s (the “Partnership’s”) compliance with its Amended and Restated Revolving Credit and Security
Agreement, dated June 27, 2014, as amended (the “Credit Agreement”).  As previously reported, on April 20, 2016,
the Partnership notified PNC Bank, National Association of an event of default under the Credit Agreement as a result
of the Partnership’s failure to maintain compliance with the financial covenants under its revolving credit facility. Our
management is in advanced discussions to obtain an amendment to restructure the Credit Agreement which would
allow us to regain and maintain compliance with the financial covenants thereunder and provide us with sufficient long-
term liquidity.  The Partnership expects to have this amendment in place upon closing the sale of our fuel business in
the third quarter of 2016.  The terms of the amendment to the Credit Agreement or, in its absence, an acceleration of
the outstanding amounts under the Credit Agreement would materially affect the financial statements presented in the
Quarterly Report and the disclosures set forth in the Quarterly Report. The issues described above, which have
caused the Partnership to be unable to timely file the Quarterly Report, could not be eliminated without unreasonable
effort or expense.
Forward-Looking Statements
This notification contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform
Act of 1995.  Such statements reflect management’s current expectations based on currently available operating,
financial and competitive information, but are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those anticipated in or implied by the forward-looking statements.  Our forward-looking
statements are generally identified with words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “could,” “may”
and similar expressions.  Risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could affect our forward-looking statements
include, among other things:
·      the risk that we may not obtain a waiver, amendment or other arrangement with our lender;
·      the risk that, if we do not enter into an amendment to the Credit Agreement, our lenders may exercise their
remedies under the Credit Agreement, including declaring all outstanding debt thereunder to be immediately due and
payable and exercising their remedies against our assets and our subsidiaries’ assets
·      the risk that we may not complete the sale of our fuel business in a timely manner or at all; and
·      the other factors detailed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included in the Partnership’s periodic reports filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2015.
All forward-looking statements included in this notification should be considered in the context of these risk factors. 
Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Investors and prospective investors are cautioned
not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
PART IV — OTHER INFORMATION
(1) Name and telephone number of person to contact in regard to this notification
 
 
 
 
(2) Have all other periodic reports required under Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 or
Deborah Deibert
(Area Code)
865-5830
(Name)
(817)
(Telephone Number)
Section 30 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to file such report(s) been filed? If answer is no, identify report(s).
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended March 31,
o Yes    x No
2016.
(3) Is it anticipated that any significant change in results of operations from the corresponding period for the last fiscal
year will be reflected by the earnings statements to be included in the subject report or portion thereof?
x Yes    o No
If so, attach an explanation of the anticipated change, both narratively and quantitatively, and, if appropriate, state
the reasons why a reasonable estimate of the results cannot be made.
The Partnership reported net loss of $(22.9) million, or $(0.95) per diluted unit, for the three months ended June 30,
2016. Net income and net income per unit for the three months ended June 30, 2015, were $2.9 million and $0.12 per
diluted unit, respectively. As of March 31, 2016, the results of operations of the fuel business have been classified as
discontinued operations for all periods presented and we now operate our continuing business in a single sand
segment. Net loss and net loss per diluted unit for continuing operations for the three months ended June 30, 2016
were $(28.2) million and $(1.17) per diluted unit, compared to net income and net income per diluted unit for continuing
operations for the three months ended June 30, 2015 of $0.7 million and $0.03 per diluted unit. This change in the
Partnership’s results of operations is primarily due to significant decreases in price and total volume sold by our sand
segment as a result of the downturn in market demand for frac sand.
Emerge Energy Services LP
(Name of Registrant as Specified in Charter)
has caused this notification to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
DateAugust 10, 2016
Emerge Energy Services GP LLC, its general
partner
By
 
  By:
  Name: Deborah Deibert
Title:
/s/ Deborah Deibert
Chief Financial Officer
INSTRUCTION: The form may be signed by an executive officer of the registrant or by any other duly authorized
representative. The name and title of the person signing the form shall be typed or printed beneath the signature. If
the statement is signed on behalf of the registrant by an authorized representative (other than an executive officer),
evidence of the representative’s authority to sign on behalf of the registrant shall be filed with the form.
ATTENTION
Intentional misstatements or omissions of fact constitute Federal Criminal Violations (See 18 U.S.C. 1001).