
SOLARA EXPLORATION LTD.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
Dear Shareholder:
The Board of Directors of Solara Exploration Ltd. (the "Corporation") invites you to attend the 
Annual and Special Meeting (the "Meeting") of holders of Class A Shares and Class B Shares of the 
Corporation  to  be  held  in the  Viking  A  Room  of  the  Calgary  Petroleum  Club,  located  at  319  –  5th 
Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada, on Monday, June 29, 2009 at 10:00 a.m. (Calgary time) for 
the following purposes:
1.  To  present  the  annual  report  to  Shareholders,  including  the  audited  financial  statements  of  the
Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2008, together with the auditors’ report thereon;
2.  To appoint auditors for the ensuing year and authorize the directors to set their remuneration;
3.  To set the number of directors to be elected at the Meeting at four (4) members and to elect four
(4) directors to hold office until the next annual meeting;
4.  To approve the Option Plan of the Corporation; and
5.  To transact such other business as may properly come before the Meeting.
All holders of Class A Shares and Class B Shares are invited to attend the Meeting.  Only 
Shareholders of record at the close of business on May 29, 2009, are entitled to vote at the Meeting.  
The  Information  Circular  accompanying  this  Notice  provides  additional  information  relating  to  the 
matters to be dealt with at the Meeting and is incorporated into and forms part of this Notice. If you 
are unable to attend the Meeting in person, please complete, date and sign the enclosed form of 
proxy  and  return  it,  in  the  envelope  provided  to  Olympia  Trust  Company,  2300,  125  –  9th 
Avenue SE, Calgary, Alberta, T2G 0P6, so that it is received no later than 4:30 p.m. (Calgary 
time) on Thursday, June 25, 2009 or by 4:30 p.m. (Calgary time) on the second business day 
prior  to  the  date  on  which  any  adjournment  of  the  Meeting  is  held.  We  thank  you  for  your 
participation as a shareholder of the Corporation.
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
June 1, 2009.
By Order of the Board of Directors
(Signed) "Donald R. Holding" 
Donald R. Holding 
President and Chief Executive Officer