
424B3 1 f424b3120914_arabella.htm PROSPECTUS
Filed Pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3)
Registration No. 333-198942
14,197,104 Shares (for resale)
 
4,906,500 Shares (for issuance) 
400,000 Units (for issuance)
 
400,000 Warrants (for issuance)
Arabella Exploration, Inc.
This prospectus relates to the public offering of up to 14,197,104 ordinary shares, par value $0.001 per
share, of Arabella Exploration, Inc., by the selling stockholders. The total amount of shares consists of
4,342,102 ordinary shares, up to 1,705,002 ordinary shares issuable pursuant to our earnout obligation
related to our acquisition of Arabella Exploration, Limited Liability Company, 250,000 ordinary shares
underlying our director options and 7,900,000 ordinary shares underlying warrants.
This prospectus also relates to the issuance of: (i) 4,106,500 ordinary shares underlying outstanding
warrants issued in our initial public offering pursuant to a prospectus dated March 16, 2011, and (ii)
400,000 units underlying a unit purchase option issued to the underwriters in our initial public offering,
400,000 ordinary shares and 400,000 warrants underlying such units, and 400,000 ordinary shares
underlying such warrants.
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of ordinary shares by the selling stockholders.
However, we could receive up to $20,532,500 from the exercise of the warrants for up to 4,106,500
ordinary shares that are presently offered under this prospectus. We could receive up to $3,520,000 upon
the exercise of the unit purchase option issued to the underwriters in our IPO, up to $2,000,000 upon the
exercise of the warrants issuable upon exercise of such unit purchase option, up to $33,000,000 upon the
exercise of 6,600,000 warrants issued to our founders in connection with our initial public offering and up
to $6,500,000 upon the exercise of 1,300,000 warrants issued in conjunction with the sale of our Senior
Secured Notes. We intend to use any proceeds received from the exercise, as the case may be, for
working capital and other general corporate purposes. We, however, cannot assure you that any of the
warrants will be exercised. The selling stockholders may sell the shares as set forth herein under “Plan of
Distribution.”
Arabella’s shares, warrants and units (defined as consisting of one share and one warrant to purchase
one share) are traded on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board under the symbols AXPLF, AXLWF and
AXPUF, respectively. On November 21, 2014, the closing sale price of the shares, warrants and units was
$4.50, $0.97 and $8.15, respectively. You are urged to obtain current market quotations of Arabella’s
shares before purchasing any of the shares being offered for sale pursuant to this prospectus.
INVESTING IN OUR SHARES IS HIGHLY RISKY. YOU SHOULD INVEST IN OUR SHARES ONLY IF
YOU CAN AFFORD TO LOSE YOUR ENTIRE INVESTMENT. FOR A DISCUSSION OF SOME OF
THE RISKS INVOLVED, SEE “RISK FACTORS” BEGINNING ON PAGE 8 OF THIS PROSPECTUS.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of the prospectus. Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is December 9, 2014.
This prospectus is not an offer to sell any securities other than the shares offered hereby. This prospectus
is not an offer to sell securities in any circumstances in which such an offer is unlawful.
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. We have not authorized anyone to
provide you with different information. We are not making an offer of these securities in any state where
the offer is not permitted. You should not assume that the information contained in this prospectus is
accurate as of any date other than the date on the front of this prospectus.
We obtained statistical data, market data and other industry data and forecasts used throughout this
prospectus from publicly available information.
ENFORCEABILITY OF CIVIL LIABILITIES
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
SUMMARY UNAUDITED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
RISK FACTORS
THE OFFERING
PER SHARE MARKET INFORMATION
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
USE OF PROCEEDS
EXPENSES RELATED TO THIS OFFERING
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
BUSINESS
DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDERS
SHARES ELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE SALE
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
SELLING SHAREHOLDERS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
TAXATION
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
3
4
7
8
18
19
20
21
21
27
38
62
66
68
69
71
75
78
79
83
83
83
2
Table of Contents
ENFORCEABILITY OF CIVIL LIABILITIES
Arabella Exploration, Inc. is a Cayman Islands company. As a result, you may have difficulty serving legal
process within the United States upon Arabella Exploration, Inc. You may also have difficulty enforcing,
both in and outside the United States, judgments you may obtain in U.S. courts against Arabella
Exploration, Inc. in any action, including actions based upon the civil liability provisions of U.S. federal or
state securities laws.
Furthermore, there is substantial doubt that the courts of the Cayman Islands would enter judgments in
original actions brought in those courts predicated on U.S. federal or state securities laws.
3
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights key information contained elsewhere in this prospectus and is qualified in its
entirety by the more detailed information and financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus. It
may not contain all of the information that is important to you. You should read the entire prospectus,
including “Risk Factors,” our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and
condensed consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto, and the other documents to
which this prospectus refers, before making an investment decision.
Unless otherwise stated in this prospectus,
●references to “we,” “us”, “our company” or “Arabella” refer to Arabella Exploration, Inc.;
    
●references to “Arabella LLC” refer to Arabella Exploration, Limited Liability Company (together with its
subsidiaries and affiliated entities), which we acquired in our business combination;
●
references to “founding shareholders” refer collectively to Berke Bakay, BBS Capital Fund, LP, Hauser
Holdings LLC, William B. Heyn, James R. Preissler, John V. Calce, Baris Merzeci and Can Aydinoglu,
each of whom purchased Arabella shares and warrants prior to our initial public offering;
●references to “public shareholders” refer to the holders of shares purchased in our initial public offering;
and
    
●references to “business combination” refer to our acquisition of Arabella Exploration, Limited Liability
Company on December 24, 2013.
Overview
We are an independent oil and natural gas company focused on the acquisition, development and
exploration of unconventional, long life, onshore oil and natural gas reserves in the Southern Delaware
Basin in West Texas. We have an experienced management team with experience drilling multi-lateral
wells and are primarily focused on the formations that the industry refers to as the Wolfbone play, which
includes the Wolfcamp and Bone Spring shales. The Wolfbone play is characterized by high oil content
and liquids rich natural gas, multiple vertical and horizontal target horizons, extensive production history,
long-lived reserves and high drilling success rates.
We were organized on June 17, 2010 as an exempted company under the laws of the Cayman Islands.
We were a blank check company formed to acquire through a merger, capital stock exchange, asset
acquisition, stock purchase or similar business combination, or control through contractual arrangements,
one or more operating businesses. On December 24, 2013, we consummated the merger with Arabella
LLC, as more fully described below and, on February 4, 2013, we changed our name from Lone Oak
Acquisition Corporation to Arabella Exploration, Inc.
Arabella’s principal executive office is located at 500 W. Texas Avenue, Suite 1450, Midland, Texas
79701. Its telephone number is (432) 897-4755.
Recent Developments
Between September 29, 2014 and November 7, 2014, over a series of five separate transactions, we
acquired additional working interests in all of our producing wells, Locker State #1H (18.0%), Graham
#1H (18.0%), Woods #1H (10.0%), Vastar State #1V (5.0%), Jackson #1H (7.1%) and Emily Bell #1H
(1.5%), as well as the drilled, but yet to be completed, Woods #2H (4.5%) and the completed, but currently
shut in, SM Prewitt #1H (18.0%). Additionally, we acquired an additional 18.0% of all of the remaining
undrilled working interests in the SM Prewitt, Locker State and Graham leases, 16.5% of the undrilled
Johnson 103 and 138 leases as well as 5.0% of all of the remaining undrilled working interests in the
Woods, Vastar State, Jackson and Emily Bell leases. Across the five transactions, we will pay, in the
aggregate, approximately $2.2 million and will issue 112,250 ordinary shares.
On October 23, 2014 we backed into a 1.371% working interest in 15,000 gross, 11,773 net, acres held by
Brigham Resources Operating, LLC in the Delaware Basin. Our interest amounts to 206 gross and 161
net acres. There are currently two vertical wells, one horizontal well and one extended reach horizontal
well producing on this project.
On October 8, 2014 we backed into a 0.5333% working interest in 6,166 gross, 5,505 net, acres held by
Energen Resources Corporation in the Delaware Basin. Our interest amounts to 33 gross and 29 net
acres. There is currently one horizontal well producing on this project and one permitted well.
On October 1, 2014 we completed the transfer of operations of our wells from Arabella Petroleum, LLC to
AEX Operating, LLC, our wholly owned subsidiary.
On September 9, 2014 George P. Bush and Malachi Boyuls resigned from our board in advance of the
November 2014 elections where Mr. Bush is running for Land Commissioner in Texas.
On September 4, 2014 we repaid our loans from BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, LLC with
accrued interest for total repayment of $512,500 and $828,222, respectively.
On September 2, 2014 we entered into a $45,000,000 Senior Secured Note Facility (the “Notes”) with a
New York based investor (the “Investor”). The initial sale of $16,000,000 in Notes occurred on September
2, 2014 with further sales to be based upon reserve based performance hurdles. The Notes bear interest
at an annual rate of 15%, of which six months was prepaid at close. The Notes are due one year from the
issuance date and can be redeemed by us at any time without penalty. We paid a 3% origination fee to
the Investor and a 5% cash commission to our advisors on the transaction. In conjunction with the sale of
the Notes, we issued warrants to purchase 1,300,000 of our ordinary shares at a price of $5.00. The
warrants expire in five years.
4
Table of Contents
On July 1, 2014 we sold a gross 160, net 107, acres in Reeves County – otherwise known as our Cannon
lease. The Company purchased this acreage at $2,000/acre and was sold at $2,750/acre, grossing
$293,333, with a gross profit of approximately $80,250 for us.
On June 26, 2014 our Chief Executive Officer Jason Hoisager purchased 190,477 of our ordinary shares
for $10.50 a share in a private transaction from us.
On June 25, 2014 we sold various non-contiguous acreage positions, gross 350, net 39, acres in Reeves
County – otherwise known as our Johnson 6 and Johnson 20 leases. This acreage was purchased at
$1,187/acre and was sold at $1,500/acre, grossing $58,454, with a gross profit of $12,172 for us.
On June 24, 2014 we sold our gross 640, net 640, acres in Ward County – otherwise known as our Roark
lease. This acreage was purchased at $351/acre and was sold at $3,500/acre, grossing $2,240,000, with
a gross profit of $2,015,276 for us.
On June 12, 2014 we sold our gross 320, net 10, acres in the Midland Basin – otherwise known as our
Topo Chico lease. This acreage was producing but the Company 1/32nd interest was non-operated. We
received gross proceeds of $327,734 for this property.
On June 10, 2014 we received a loan from BBS Capital Fund, LP, an affiliate of Berke Bakay, one of our
directors. The $500,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per annum.
We hired SDS Petroleum Consultants, L.L.C., the company that successfully drilled the Emily Bell #1H
and Woods #2H under budget, to drill its wells on an ongoing basis. On June 4, 2014, Chad D. Elliott
resigned as our Chief Operating Officer.
On June 2, 2014 the Emily Bell #1H began production reaching a 24-hour peak production rate of 1,125
BOE/Day.
On May 5, 2014 we granted each non-employee director 30,000 options to purchase our ordinary shares
for joining the board and 20,000 options to purchase our ordinary shares for each year of service
commencing from January 30, 2014. The options have an exercise price of $6.15 per share which
represents the closing price of our ordinary shares the day prior to the grant.
On May 1, 2014 we successfully drilled to the total depth of 14,896 on the Woods #2H. This well is
currently awaiting completion.
On May 1, 2014 we received a loan from Hauser Holdings, LLC, an affiliate of Richard Hauser, one of our
directors. The $800,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per annum.
On April 23, 2014 we sold our gross 640, net 313, acres in Pecos County – otherwise known as our
Weatherby lease. This acreage was purchased at $1,500/acre and was sold at $2,250/acre, grossing
$704,700, which consisted of $624,400 in current cash payments and $78,300 in contingent payments,
with a net profit of $234,900 for us. In the event that the contingency occurs additional profits may be
recorded.
Risks Affecting Arabella
In evaluating the resale of the shares of Arabella’s shares, you should carefully read this prospectus and
especially consider the factors discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” commencing on page 8.
5
Table of Contents
The Offering
Shares
offered by
selling
shareholders
 
Shares
issuable
upon
14,197,104  ordinary shares
4,906,500 ordinary shares
AXPLF
AXLWF
AXPUF
exercise or
conversion
of securities
issued in our
initial public
offering
 
OTC BB
Symbol:
Shares
Warrants
Units
Use of
proceeds:
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of ordinary shares by the selling
stockholders. However, we could receive up to $20,532,500 from the exercise of the
warrants for up to 4,106,500 ordinary shares that are presently offered under this
prospectus. We could received up to $3,520,000 upon the exercise of the unit purchase
option issued to the underwriters in our IPO, up to $2,000,000 upon the exercise of the
warrants issuable upon exercise of such unit purchase option, up to $33,000,000 upon the
exercise of 6,600,000 warrants issued to our founders in connection with our initial public
offering and up to $6,500,000 upon the exercise of 1,300,000 warrants issued in
conjunction with the sale of our Senior Secured Notes. We intend to use any proceeds
received from the exercise, as the case may be, for working capital and other general
corporate purposes. We, however, cannot assure you that any of the warrants will be
exercised.
5,020,303 shares
Shares
outstanding
as of
November
21, 2014:
 
Warrants
outstanding
as of
November
21, 2014:
 
Risk factors: Prospective investors should carefully consider the Risk Factors beginning on page 8
12,006,500 warrants
before buying the shares and warrants offered hereby.
6
Table of Contents
SUMMARY UNAUDITED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The following summary consolidated financial data have been derived from the consolidated financial
statements of the Company and of Arabella LLC, our predecessor. The consolidated financial statements
are prepared and presented in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles,
or GAAP. The audited financial statements for the Company for the year ended December 31, 2013 and
unaudited financial statements for the Company for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 as well
as the audited financial statements for Arabella LLC for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011
are included elsewhere in this prospectus. The results of operations of the Company in any period may
not necessarily be indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period. See “Risk Factors”
included elsewhere in this prospectus. The summary consolidated financial information for those periods
and as of those dates should be read in conjunction with those consolidated financial statements and the
accompanying notes and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” included elsewhere in this prospectus.
As of 
 
June 30,
As of 
  
December 31,
  2013
As of December 31,  As of December 31,
Balance Sheet Data:  2014
 
Working capital deficit $(12,475,198) $(1,240,656 ) $ (41,660
   29,498,001     15,852,807     1,756,309
Total assets
    1,307,897
Total liabilities
   17,734,562     6,847,437
Shareholders’ equity    11,763,439     9,005,370
    448,412
2012
2011
   
) $ (6,270
    197,293
    168,757
    28,536
)
For the 
three
 
months
ended 
June 30,
For the
three
  
months
ended 
June 30,
For the six
months
  
ended 
June 30,
For the
six
  
months
ended 
June 30,
For
For the 
For the 
the year
  
  
  
year ended 
year ended 
ended
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
2014
2013
2014
2013
2013
2012
2011
$2,744,894  $43,725   $4,766,918  $114,444   $ 1,421,915
$ 468,782
$ 51,010
2,129,475    74,025     3,820,711    133,383     1,230,196
147,466
52,475
615,419     (30,300 )   946,207     (18,939 )   191,719
321,316
(1,465
)
Selected
statement of
operations
data:
 
Total
Revenues
Total costs
and
operating
expenses
Net income
(loss) before
taxes
7
Table of Contents
RISK FACTORS
You should carefully consider the following risk factors, together with all of the other information included
in this prospectus.
An investment in our securities involves a high degree of risk. You should consider carefully all of the
risks described below, together with the other information contained in this annual report before making a
decision to invest in our securities. If any of the following events occur, our business, financial condition
and operating results may be materially adversely affected. In that event, the trading price of our securities
could decline and you could lose all or part of your investment.
Risks Related to our Business
A substantial or extended decline in oil and natural gas prices may adversely affect our business,
financial condition or results of operations and our ability to meet our capital expenditure
obligations and financial commitments.
The prices we receive for our oil and natural gas production heavily influence our revenue, profitability,
access to capital and future rate of growth. Oil and natural gas are commodities and, therefore, their prices
are subject to wide fluctuations in response to relatively minor changes in supply and demand.
Historically, the markets for oil and natural gas have been volatile. These markets may be volatile in the
future. The prices we receive for our production, and the levels of our production, depend on numerous
factors beyond our control. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
●changes in global supply and demand for oil and natural gas;
    
 ●the actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC;
    
 ●the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas;
    
 ●political conditions, including embargoes, in or affecting other oil-producing activity;
 
 ●the level of global oil and natural gas exploration and production activity;
    
 ●the level of global oil and natural gas inventories;
 
 ●weather conditions;
    
 ●technological advances affecting energy consumption; and
    
 ●the price and availability of alternative fuels.
Lower oil and natural gas prices may not only decrease our revenues on a per unit basis but also may
reduce the amount of oil and natural gas that we can produce economically. Lower prices will also
negatively impact the value of our proved reserves. A substantial or extended decline in oil or natural gas
prices may materially and adversely affect our future business, financial condition, results of operations,
liquidity or ability to finance planned capital expenditures.
A substantial percentage of our proven properties are undeveloped; therefore the risk associated
with our success is greater than would be the case if the majority of our properties were
categorized as proved developed producing.
Because a substantial percentage of our proven properties are proved undeveloped (approximately 82%)
we will require significant additional capital to develop such properties before they may become
productive. Please see the section entitled “Oil and Gas Production Prices and Production Costs” below.
Further, because of the inherent uncertainties associated with drilling for oil and gas, some of these
properties may never be developed to the extent that they result in positive cash flow. Even if we are
successful in our development efforts, it could take several years for a significant portion of our
undeveloped properties to be developed and to create positive cash flow.
8
Table of Contents
In order to fund our development costs, we may be forced to seek alternative sources for cash, through the
issuance of additional equity or debt securities, increased borrowings or other means.
Drilling for and producing oil and natural gas are high risk activities with many uncertainties that
could adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations.
Our future success will depend on the success of our exploitation, exploration, development and
production activities. Our oil and natural gas exploration and production activities are subject to numerous
risks beyond our control; including the risk that drilling will not result in commercially viable oil or natural
gas production. Our decisions to purchase, explore, develop or otherwise exploit prospects or properties
will depend in part on the evaluation of data obtained through geophysical and geological analyses,
production data and engineering studies, the results of which are often inconclusive or subject to varying
interpretations. Please read “—Reserve estimates depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be
inaccurate” (below) for a discussion of the uncertainty involved in these processes. Our cost of drilling,
completing and operating wells is often uncertain before drilling commences. Overruns in budgeted
expenditures are common risks that can make a particular project uneconomical. Further, many factors
may curtail, delay or cancel drilling, including the following:
●delays imposed by or resulting from compliance with regulatory requirements;
    
 ●pressure or irregularities in geological formations;
    
 ●shortages of or delays in obtaining equipment and qualified personnel;
    
 ●equipment failures or accidents;
    
 ●adverse weather conditions;
    
 ●reductions in oil and natural gas prices;
    
 ●title problems; and
    
 ●limitations in the market for oil and natural gas.
If our assessments of recently purchased properties are materially inaccurate, it could have
significant impact on future operations and earnings.
We have aggressively expanded our base of producing properties. The successful acquisition of
properties requires assessments of many factors, which are inherently inexact and may be inaccurate,
including the following:
●the amount of recoverable reserves;
    
 ●future oil and natural gas prices;
    
 ●estimates of operating costs;
    
 ●estimates of future development costs;
    
 ●estimates of the costs and timing of plugging and abandonment; and
    
 ●potential environmental and other liabilities.
9
Table of Contents
Our assessment will not reveal all existing or potential problems, nor will it permit us to become familiar
enough with the properties to assess fully their capabilities and deficiencies. As noted previously, we plan
to undertake further development of our properties through the use of cash flow from existing production.
Therefore, a material deviation in our assessments of these factors could result in less cash flow being
available for such purposes than we presently anticipate, which could either delay future development
operations (and delay the anticipated conversion of reserves into cash), or cause us to seek alternative
sources to finance development activities.
Decreases in oil and natural gas prices may require us to take write-downs of the carrying values
of our oil and natural gas properties, potentially requiring earlier than anticipated debt repayment
and negatively impacting the trading value of our securities.
Accounting rules require that we review periodically the carrying value of our oil and natural gas
properties for possible impairment. Based on specific market factors and circumstances at the time of
prospective impairment reviews, and the continuing evaluation of development plans, production data,
economics and other factors, we may be required to write down the carrying value of our oil and natural
gas properties. In the future, our properties may serve as collateral for advances under our prospective
credit facilities, a write-down in the carrying values of our properties could require us to repay debt earlier
than we would otherwise be required. A write-down could also constitute a non-cash charge to earnings. It
is likely the cumulative effect of a write-down could also negatively impact the trading price of our
securities.
We sell our natural gas to a limited number of buyers, and if one of our buyers was unable to pay
us for our natural gas products, our financial results could be adversely affected.
We sell the majority of our natural gas to a small number of natural gas purchasing companies. There is
often consolidation in this market and it is possible that we might be faced with a significant concentration
of our natural gas buyers. In the event that one of our natural gas buyers was unable to make payment to
us for its purchases of natural gas, our financial results could be adversely affected
We sell our oil to many different buyers and believe that we have many primary and secondary buyers to
choose from.
Reserve estimates depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate. Any material
inaccuracies in these reserve estimates or underlying assumptions will materially affect the
quantities and present value of our reserves.
The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is complex. It requires interpretations of available
technical data and many assumptions, including assumptions relating to economic factors. Any significant
inaccuracies in these interpretations or assumptions could materially affect the estimated quantities and
present value of our reported reserves.
In order to prepare our estimates, we must project production rates and timing of development
expenditures. We must also analyze available geological, geophysical, production and engineering data.
The extent, quality and reliability of this data can vary. The process also requires economic assumptions
about matters such as oil and natural gas prices, drilling and operating expenses, capital expenditures,
taxes and availability of funds. Therefore, estimates of oil and natural gas reserves may be inherently
imprecise.
Actual future production, oil and natural gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating
expenses and quantities of recoverable oil and natural gas reserves most likely will vary from our
estimates. Any significant variance could materially affect the estimated quantities and present value of
our reported reserves. In addition, we may adjust estimates of proved reserves to reflect production
history, results of exploration and development, prevailing oil and natural gas prices and other factors,
many of which are beyond our control.
10
Table of Contents
You should not assume that the present value of future net revenues from our reported proved reserves is
the current market value of our estimated oil and natural gas reserves. In accordance with SEC
requirements, we base the estimated discounted future net cash flows from our proved reserves on the
average price during the 12-month period prior to the ending date of the period covered by the report.
Actual future prices and costs may differ materially from those used in the present value estimate. If future
values decline or costs increase it could negatively impact our ability to finance operations, and individual
properties could cease being commercially viable, affecting our decision to continue operations on
producing properties or to attempt to develop properties. All of these factors would have a negative impact
on earnings and net income, and most likely the trading price of our securities. These factors could also
result in the acceleration of debt repayment and a reduction in our borrowing base under any prospective
credit facilities.
We have limited experience drilling and operating wells and this experience may lead to variances,
positive or negative, in our operations.
We have a limited history of operating wells. This lack of experience could result in errors in the methods
we use for drilling and maintaining our wells, which could result in poorer than expected operating results.
In addition, the lack of experience operating wells could result in inefficiencies in its operations that result
in greater expenditures than are required under the circumstances.
Prospects that we decide to drill may not yield oil or natural gas in commercially viable quantities.
Our prospects are in various stages of evaluation, ranging from prospects that are currently being drilled,
to prospects that will require substantial additional seismic data processing and interpretation. There is no
way to predict in advance of drilling and testing whether any particular prospect will yield oil or natural gas
in sufficient quantities to recover drilling or completion costs or to be economically viable. This risk may be
enhanced in our situation, due to the fact that a significant percentage (82%) of our proved reserves is
currently proved undeveloped reserves. The use of seismic data and other technologies and the study of
producing fields in the same area will not enable us to know conclusively prior to drilling whether oil or
natural gas will be present or, if present, whether oil or natural gas will be present in commercial
quantities. We cannot assure you that the analogies we draw from available data from other wells, more
fully explored prospects or producing fields will be applicable to our drilling prospects.
We may incur substantial losses and be subject to substantial liability claims as a result of our oil
and natural gas operations.
We are not insured against all risks. Losses and liabilities arising from uninsured and underinsured
events could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations. Our
oil and natural gas exploration and production activities are subject to all of the operating risks associated
with drilling for and producing oil and natural gas, including the possibility of:
●environmental hazards, such as uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas, brine, well fluids, toxic gas or
other pollution into the environment, including groundwater and shoreline contamination;
    
 ●abnormally pressured formations;
    
 ●mechanical difficulties such as stuck oil field drilling and service tools and casing collapse;
    
 ●fires and explosions;
●personal injuries and death; and
    
 ●natural disasters.
Any of these risks could adversely affect our ability to conduct operations or result in substantial losses to
us. We may elect not to obtain insurance if we believe that the cost of available insurance is excessive
relative to the risks presented. In addition, pollution and environmental risks generally are not fully
insurable. If a significant accident or other event occurs and is not fully covered by insurance, then it could
adversely affect us.
11
Table of Contents
We are subject to complex laws that can affect the cost, manner or feasibility of doing business.
Exploration, development, production and sale of oil and natural gas are subject to extensive federal,
state, local and international regulation. We may be required to make large expenditures to comply with
governmental regulations. Matters subject to regulation include:
●discharge permits for drilling operations;
    
 ●drilling bonds;
    
 ●reports concerning operations;
    
 ●the spacing of wells;
    
 ●unitization and pooling of properties; and
    
 ●taxation.
Under these laws, we could be liable for personal injuries, property damage and other damages. Failure
to comply with these laws also may result in the suspension or termination of our operations and subject
us to administrative, civil and criminal penalties. Moreover, these laws could change in ways that
substantially increase our costs. Any such liabilities, penalties, suspensions, terminations or regulatory
changes could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Our operations may incur substantial liabilities to comply with the environmental laws and
regulations.
Our oil and natural gas operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations
relating to the release or disposal of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental
protection. These laws and regulations may require the acquisition of a permit before drilling commences,
restrict the types, quantities and concentration of substances that can be released into the environment in
connection with drilling and production activities, limit or prohibit drilling activities on certain lands lying
within wilderness, wetlands and other protected areas, and impose substantial liabilities for pollution
resulting from our operations. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in the
assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties, incurrence of investigatory or remedial
obligations or the imposition of injunctive relief. Changes in environmental laws and regulations occur
frequently, and any changes that result in more stringent or costly waste handling, storage, transport,
disposal or cleanup requirements could require us to make significant expenditures to maintain
compliance, and may otherwise have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, competitive
position or financial condition as well as the industry in general. Under these environmental laws and
regulations, we could be held strictly liable for the removal or remediation of previously released materials
or property contamination regardless of whether we were responsible for the release or if our operations
were standard in the industry at the time they were performed.
If our indebtedness increases, it could reduce our financial flexibility.
As of June 30, 2014, we had no third party debt.  However, on September 2, 2014 we entered into a
Senior Secured Note facility (see section entitled “Senior Secured Note Facility”). If in the future we sell
additional Senior Secured Notes under the existing facility or raise funds through another debt facility, the
level of our indebtedness could affect our operations in several ways, including the following:
●a significant portion of our cash flow could be used to service the indebtedness,
    
 ●a high level of debt would increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry
conditions,
    
 ●the covenants contained in a prospective credit facility may limit our ability to borrow additional funds,
dispose of assets, pay dividends and make certain investments,
    
 ●a high level of debt could impair our ability to obtain additional financing in the future for working capital,
capital expenditures, acquisitions, general corporate or other purposes.
12
Table of Contents
Unless we replace our oil and natural gas reserves, our reserves and production will decline,
which would adversely affect our cash flows and income.
Unless we conduct successful development, exploitation and exploration activities or acquire properties
containing proved reserves, our proved reserves will decline as those reserves are produced. Producing
oil and natural gas reservoirs generally are characterized by declining production rates that vary
depending upon reservoir characteristics and other factors. Our future oil and natural gas reserves and
production, and, therefore our cash flow and income, are highly dependent on our success in efficiently
developing and exploiting our current reserves and economically finding or acquiring additional
recoverable reserves. If we are unable to develop, exploit, find or acquire additional reserves to replace
our current and future production, our cash flow and income will decline as production declines, until our
existing properties would be incapable of sustaining commercial production.
If our access to markets is restricted, it could negatively impact our production, our income and
ultimately our ability to retain our leases.
Market conditions or the unavailability of satisfactory oil and natural gas transportation arrangements may
hinder our access to oil and natural gas markets or delay our production. The availability of a ready
market for our oil and natural gas production depends on a number of factors, including the demand for
and supply of oil and natural gas and the proximity of reserves to pipelines and terminal facilities. Our
ability to market our production depends in substantial part on the availability and capacity of gathering
systems, pipelines and processing facilities owned and operated by third parties. Our failure to obtain
such services on acceptable terms could materially harm our business.
Currently, the majority of our production is sold to marketers and other purchasers that have access to
nearby pipeline facilities. However, as Arabella begins to further develop our properties, we may find
production in areas with limited or no access to pipelines or compression facilities. Such restrictions on
our ability to sell our oil or natural gas have several adverse effects, including higher transportation costs,
fewer potential purchasers (thereby potentially resulting in a lower selling price) or, in the event we were
unable to market and sustain production from a particular lease for an extended time, possibly causing us
to lose a lease due to lack of production.
Hedging transactions may limit our potential gains.
In order to reduce commodity price uncertainty and increase cash flow predictability relating to the
marketing of our crude oil and natural gas, we may enter into crude oil and natural gas price hedging
arrangements with respect to a portion of our expected production. While intended to reduce the effects of
volatile crude oil and natural gas prices, such transactions may limit our potential gains if crude oil and
natural gas prices rise over the price established by the arrangements.
All of our properties are located in the same major geographic area.
Because substantially all of the properties leased by us are located in the Delaware Basin in Texas, we
face geographic concentration risk. If the properties leased by us prove to be unable to produce profitable
oil and natural gas, it may force us to seek properties in other regions. This could require us to make
significant expenditures or cease operations, and may otherwise have a material adverse effect on our
results of operations, competitive position or financial condition.
13
Table of Contents
Risks Related to Our Being a Foreign Private Issuer
As a foreign private issuer, we are exempt from certain rules that are applicable to U.S. public
companies, and while we have agreed with the underwriters in our IPO to comply with certain of
these requirements, such agreement can be waived without your consent and you may receive
less information about us and our operations than you would receive if such agreements were not
waived or we were a U.S. company.
As a foreign private issuer, we are exempt from the rules of the Exchange Act prescribing the furnishing
and content of proxy statements to shareholders, and our executive officers, directors and principal
shareholders are exempt from certain of the reporting and short-swing profit recovery provisions contained
in Section 16 of the Exchange Act. In addition, we are not required under the Exchange Act to file periodic
reports and financial statements with the SEC as frequently or as promptly as U.S. companies whose
securities are registered under the Exchange Act. Therefore you may receive less information about us
than you would receive if we were a U.S. company. We did not meet the requirements of a foreign private
issuer as of the measurement period June 30, 2014, as a result of the Business Combination with
Arabella LLC. We will begin filing as a U.S. company with our annual report for the year ending December
31, 2014 in 2015.
Because we are incorporated under the laws of the Cayman Islands, you may face difficulty
protecting your interests, and your ability to protect your rights through the U.S. federal courts
may be limited.
We are a company incorporated under the laws of the Cayman Islands, and certain of our assets may in
the future be located outside the United States. As a result, it may be difficult for investors to effect service
of process within the United States in a way that will permit a U.S. court to have jurisdiction over us.
We are incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company. A Cayman Islands exempted company:
●is a company that conducts its business outside the Cayman Islands;
●is exempted from certain requirements of the Cayman Companies Law, including the
    
 ●filing of an annual return of its shareholders with the Registrar of Companies;
    
 ●does not have to make its register of shareholders open to inspection; and
    
 ●may obtain an undertaking against the imposition of any future taxation.
Our corporate affairs are governed by our Amended and Restated Articles of Association, the Companies
Law of the Cayman Islands, as the same may be supplemented or amended from time to time, which we
refer to herein as the Companies Law, and the common law of the Cayman Islands. The rights of
shareholders to take action against the directors, actions by minority shareholders and the fiduciary
responsibilities of our directors to us under Cayman Islands law are to a large extent governed by the
common law of the Cayman Islands. The common law of the Cayman Islands is derived in part from
comparatively limited judicial precedent in the Cayman Islands, as well as from English common law, the
decisions of whose courts are of persuasive authority, but are not binding on a court in the Cayman
Islands. The rights of our shareholders and the fiduciary responsibilities of our directors under Cayman
Islands law are not as clearly established as they would be under statutes or judicial precedent in some
jurisdictions in the United States. In particular, the Cayman Islands has a less developed body of
securities laws as compared to the United States, and some states, such as Delaware, have more fully
developed and judicially interpreted bodies of corporate law. In addition, Cayman Islands companies may
not have standing to initiate a shareholder derivative action in a federal court of the United States.
The Cayman Islands courts are also unlikely:
●to recognize or enforce against us judgments of courts of the United States based on certain civil liability
provisions of U.S. securities laws; and
    
 ●to impose liabilities against us, in original actions brought in the Cayman Islands, based on certain civil
liability provisions of U.S. securities laws that are penal in nature.
14
Table of Contents
There is no statutory recognition in the Cayman Islands of judgments obtained in the United States. We
have been advised by Conyers Dill & Pearman, our counsel as to Cayman Islands law, that (i) they are
unaware of any proceedings that have been brought in the Cayman Islands to enforce judgments of the
courts in the United States or to impose liabilities based on the civil liability provisions of the securities
laws of the United States or any state in the United States; (ii) a final and conclusive judgment in the
federal or state courts of the United States under which a sum of money is payable, other than a sum
payable in respect of taxes, fines, penalties or similar charges, may be subject to enforcement
proceedings as a debt in the courts of the Cayman Islands under the common law doctrine of obligation;
and (iii) because it is uncertain whether a Cayman Islands court would determine that a judgment of a
United States court based on the civil liability provisions of the securities laws of the United States or any
state in the United States is in the nature of a penalty, it is uncertain whether such a liability judgment
would be enforceable in the Cayman Islands. The Grand Court of the Cayman Islands may stay
proceedings if concurrent proceedings are being brought elsewhere.
There is a risk that we will be classified as a passive foreign investment company, or “PFIC,” which
could result in adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences to U.S. holders of our securities.
In general, we will be treated as a PFIC for any taxable year in which either (1) at least 75% of our gross
income (including our pro rata share of the gross income of our 25% or more-owned corporate
subsidiaries) is passive income or (2) at least 50% of the average value (or, in certain cases, adjusted
bases) of our assets (including our pro rata share of the assets of our 25% or more-owned corporate
subsidiaries) produce, or are held for the production of, passive income. Passive income generally
includes dividends, interest, rents, royalties, and gains from the disposition of passive assets. If we are
determined to be a PFIC for any taxable year (or portion thereof) that is included in the holding period of a
U.S. Holder (as defined in the section entitled “Taxation—United States Federal Income Taxation—
General”) of its securities, the U.S. Holder may be subject to increased U.S. federal income tax liability
upon a sale or other disposition of our securities or the receipt of certain excess distributions from us and
may be subject to additional reporting requirements. Based on the composition (and estimated values and
adjusted bases) of the assets and nature of the income of us and our subsidiaries during our 2013 taxable
year, we believe that we may be a PFIC for such year. However, because we have not performed a
definitive analysis as to our PFIC status for our 2013 taxable year, there can be no assurance in respect to
our PFIC status for such year or any future taxable year. U.S. Holders of our securities are urged to
consult their own tax advisors regarding the possible application of the PFIC rules. See the discussion in
the section entitled “Taxation—United States Federal Income Taxation—U.S. Holders—Passive Foreign
Investment Company Rules.”
Risks Related to Our Securities
Our outstanding warrants may adversely affect the market price of our ordinary shares.
We have outstanding warrants to purchase 12,006,500 ordinary shares. We also issued an option to
purchase 400,000 units to the representative of the underwriters of our IPO which, if exercised, could
result in the issuance of 400,000 ordinary shares and 400,000 warrants. The sale, or even the possibility
of sale, of the shares underlying the warrants and option could have an adverse effect on the market price
for our securities or on our ability to obtain future financing. If and to the extent these warrants and option
are exercised, you may experience dilution to your holdings.
If our ordinary shares become subject to the SEC’s penny stock rules, broker-dealers may
experience difficulty in completing customer transactions and trading activity in our securities may
be adversely affected.
If at any time we have net tangible assets of $5,000,000 or less and our ordinary shares have a market
price per share of less than $5.00, transactions in our ordinary shares may be subject to the “penny stock”
rules promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Under these rules, broker-dealers who
recommend such securities to persons other than institutional accredited investors must:
●make a special written suitability determination for the purchaser;
    
 ●receive the purchaser’s written agreement to the transaction prior to sale;
15
Table of Contents
●
provide the purchaser with risk disclosure documents which identify certain risks associated with
investing in “penny stocks” and which describe the market for these “penny stocks” as well as a
purchaser’s legal remedies; and
obtain a signed and dated acknowledgment from the purchaser demonstrating that the purchaser has
actually received the required risk disclosure document before a transaction in a “penny stock” can be
●
completed.
If our ordinary shares become subject to these rules, broker-dealers may find it difficult to effectuate
customer transactions and trading activity in our securities may be adversely affected. As a result, the
market price of our securities may be depressed, and you may find it more difficult to sell our securities.
We have no plans to pay dividends on our ordinary shares. Shareholders may not receive funds
without selling their shares.
We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our ordinary shares in the foreseeable future. We
currently intend to retain future earnings, if any, to finance the expansion of our business. Our future
dividend policy is within the discretion of our board of directors and will depend upon various factors,
including our business, financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements and investment
opportunities.
Our board of directors can, without shareholder approval, cause preferred stock to be issued on
terms that adversely affect ordinary shareholders.
Under our Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association, our board of directors is
authorized to issue up to 5,000,000 shares of preferred stock, of which none are issued and outstanding
as of the date of this annual report. Also, our board of directors, without shareholder approval, may
determine the price, rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions, including voting rights, of those
shares. If the board causes shares of preferred stock to be issued, the rights of the holders of ordinary
shares could be adversely affected. The board’s ability to determine the terms of preferred stock and to
cause its issuance, while providing desirable flexibility in connection with possible acquisitions and other
corporate purposes, could have the effect of making it more difficult for a third party to acquire a majority of
our outstanding voting stock. Preferred shares issued by the board of directors could include voting rights,
or even super voting rights, which could shift the ability to control the company to the holders of the
preferred stock. Preferred shares could also have conversion rights into ordinary shares at a discount to
the market price of the ordinary shares which could negatively affect the market for our ordinary shares. In
addition, preferred shares would have preference in the event of liquidation of the corporation, which
means that the holders of preferred shares would be entitled to receive the net assets of the corporation
distributed in liquidation before the ordinary shareholders receive any distribution of the liquidated assets.
We have no current plans to issue any preferred shares.
An effective registration statement may not be in place when an investor desires to exercise
warrants, thus precluding such investor from being able to exercise his, her or its warrants for
cash.
Holders of our warrants will be able to exercise the warrants for cash only if we have an effective
registration statement covering the ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants and a current
prospectus relating to such ordinary shares and, even in the case of a cashless exercise which is
permitted in certain circumstances, such ordinary shares are qualified for sale or exempt from qualification
under the applicable securities laws of the states in which the various holders of warrants reside. Under
the terms of the warrant agreement, we have agreed to use our best efforts to meet these conditions and to
maintain a current prospectus relating to the ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants until
the expiration of the warrants. However, we cannot assure you that we will be able to do so, and if we do
not maintain a current prospectus related to the ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants,
holders will only be able to exercise their warrants on a cashless basis.
16
Table of Contents
An investor will only be able to exercise a warrant if the issuance of ordinary shares upon such
exercise has been registered or qualified or is deemed exempt under the securities laws of the
state of residence of the holder of the warrants.
No public warrants will be exercisable and we will not be obligated to issue ordinary shares unless the
ordinary shares issuable upon such exercise has been registered or qualified or deemed to be exempt
under the securities laws of the state of residence of the holder of the warrants. Because the exemptions
from qualification in certain states for resales of warrants and for issuances of ordinary shares by the
issuer upon exercise of a warrant may be different, a warrant may be held by a holder in a state where an
exemption is not available for issuance of ordinary shares upon exercise of the warrant and the holder will
be precluded from exercising of the warrant. As a result, the warrants may be deprived of any value, the
market for the warrants may be limited and the holders of warrants may not be able to exercise their
warrants if the ordinary shares issuable upon such exercise are not qualified or exempt from qualification
in the jurisdictions in which the holders of the warrants reside.
We may amend the terms of the warrants that may be adverse to holders with the approval by the
holders of a majority of the then outstanding warrants.
Our warrants were issued in registered form under a warrant agreement between Continental Stock
Transfer & Trust Company as warrant agent and us. The warrant agreement provides that the terms of the
warrants may be amended without the consent of any holder to cure any ambiguity or correct any
defective provision, but requires the approval by the holders of a majority of the then outstanding warrants
(including the 6,600,000 warrants sold to certain of our insiders in a private placement that occurred
simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering), in order to make any change that adversely
affects the interests of the registered holders. Accordingly, we may amend the terms of the warrants in an
adverse way to a holder if a majority of the holders approve of such amendment.
17
Table of Contents
THE OFFERING
This prospectus relates to the public offering of up to 14,197,104 ordinary shares, par value $0.001 per
share, of Arabella Exploration, Inc., by the selling stockholders. The total amount of shares consists of
4,342,102 ordinary shares outstanding, up to 1,705,002 ordinary shares issuable pursuant to our earnout
obligation related to our acquisition of Arabella Exploration, Limited Liability Company, 250,000 ordinary
shares underlying our director options and 7,900,000 ordinary shares underlying warrants.
This prospectus also relates to the issuance of: (i) 4,106,500 ordinary shares underlying outstanding
warrants issued in our initial public offering pursuant to a prospectus dated March 16, 2011, (ii) 400,000
units underlying a unit purchase option issued to the underwriters in our initial public offering, 400,000
ordinary shares and 400,000 warrants underlying such units, and 400,000 ordinary shares underlying
such warrants.
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of ordinary shares by the selling stockholders.
However, we could receive up to $20,532,500 from the exercise of the warrants for up to 4,106,500
ordinary shares that are presently offered under this prospectus. We could received up to $3,520,000
upon the exercise of the unit purchase option issued to the underwriters in our IPO, up to $2,000,000 upon
the exercise of the warrants issuable upon exercise of such unit purchase option, up to $33,000,000 upon
the exercise of 6,600,000 warrants issued to our founders in connection with our initial public offering and
up to $6,500,000 upon the exercise of 1,300,000 warrants issued in conjunction with the sale of our
Senior Secured Notes. We intend to use any proceeds received from the exercise, as the case may be, for
working capital and other general corporate purposes. We, however, cannot assure you that any of the
warrants will be exercised. The selling stockholders may sell the shares as set forth herein under “Plan of
Distribution.”
The prices at which the Selling Shareholders may sell their shares will be determined by the prevailing
market price for the shares or pursuant to privately negotiated transactions. Information regarding the
Selling Shareholders and the times and manner in which they may offer and sell the shares under this
prospectus is provided under “Selling Shareholders” in this prospectus.
Arabella is authorized to issue 50,000,000 ordinary shares, $0.001 par value and 5,000,000 preferred
shares, $0.001 par value. As of the date of this registration statement, 5,020,303 ordinary shares are
outstanding, held by 19 holders of record.
18
Table of Contents
PER SHARE MARKET INFORMATION
Our shares, warrants and units are quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board under the symbols AXPLF, AXLWF
and AXPUF, respectively. The units have been quoted on the Bulletin Board since March 21, 2011. Our
ordinary shares and warrants commenced to trade separately from our units on June 15, 2011.
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated and through November 21, 2014, the high and low
sale prices for our units, ordinary shares and warrants, respectively, as reported on the Over-the-Counter
Bulletin Board.
--
   --
--
   --
--
   --
Units
 High  Low   High   Low
Ordinary Shares  Warrants  
 
  High  Low  
 
Annual Highs and Lows
   
 
Year ended December 31, 2011(from March 21)  8.20   7.98   7.75    7.75    0.39   0.27 
Year ended December 31, 2012
  8.20   8.10   8.00    7.75    0.37   0.10 
  8.35   8.17   8.25    7.25    0.85   0.06 
Year ended December 31, 2013
  8.25   8.25   9.00    4.50    2.46   0.60 
Year ended December 31, 2014*
    
 
   
 
 
   
Fiscal Quarterly Highs and Lows 2011
    
 
  8.03   7.98   --
First Quarter (from March 21)
Second Quarter
  8.05   7.98   --
 
  8.05   8.05   7.75    7.75    0.39   0.38 
Third Quarter
  8.20   8.07   7.75    7.75    0.30   0.27 
Fourth Quarter
   
 
 
Fiscal Quarterly Highs and Lows 2012
   
 
  8.20   8.20   7.75    7.75    0.36   0.25 
First Quarter
  8.20   8.10   7.85    7.75    0.37   0.20 
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
  8.20   8.10   7.90    7.77    0.30   0.20 
  8.20   8.20   8.00    7.89    0.33   0.10 
Fourth Quarter
 
   
 
Fiscal Quarterly Highs and Lows 2013
   
 
  8.35   8.17   8.18    8.18    0.22   0.06 
First Quarter
  8.30   8.17   8.08    8.08    0.55   0.23 
Second Quarter
  8.25   8.25   8.13    8.08    0.45   0.11 
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
  8.25   8.25   8.25    7.25    0.85   0.22 
 
   
 
   
Fiscal Quarterly Highs and Lows 2014
 
First Quarter
  8.25   8.25   8.28    6.01    1.30   0.60 
  8.25   8.25   9.00    4.50    2.46   0.75 
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
  8.25   8.25   9.00    5.62    2.41   1.55
Fourth Quarter*
 
Monthly Highs and Lows
January 2014
February 2014
March 2014
April 2014
May 2014
June 2014
July 2014
August 2014
September 2014
October 2014
November 2014*
* Through November 21, 2014
8.25   8.25   6.49    4.50    1.60   0.95 
 
   
   
 
  8.25   8.25   7.85    6.51    0.92   0.60 
  8.25   8.25   7.20    6.51    0.95   0.70 
  8.25   8.25   8.28    6.01    1.30   0.87
8.25   8.25   7.05    5.71    1.25   0.98 
  8.25   8.25   6.15    4.50    1.00   0.80 
  8.25   8.25   9.00    4.50    2.46   0.75 
  8.25   8.25   9.00    7.29    2.25   1.85 
  8.25   8.25   8.25    7.30    2.41   2.03 
  8.25   8.25   7.25    5.62    2.09   1.55 
  8.25   8.25   6.49    4.60    1.60   1.19 
  8.25   8.25   5.51    4.50    1.30   0.95
The closing bid for our ordinary shares on November 21, 2014 was $4.50.
19
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The statements contained in this prospectus that are not purely historical are forward-looking statements.
Our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our or our
management’s expectations, hopes, beliefs, intentions or strategies regarding the future. In addition, any
statements that refer to projections, forecasts or other characterizations of future events or circumstances,
including any underlying assumptions, are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipates,” “believe,”
“continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intends,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predicts,”
“project,” “should,” “would” and similar expressions may identify forward-looking statements, but the
absence of these words does not mean that a statement is not forward-looking.
●Forward-looking statements in this report may include, for example, statements about our:
    
●Continued compliance with government regulations;
    
●Changing legislation or regulatory environments;
    
●Requirements or changes affecting the businesses in which we are engaged;
    
●Industry trends, including factors affecting supply and demand;
    
●Labor and personnel relations;
    
●Credit risks affecting our revenue and profitability;
    
●Changes in the oil and gas industry in general and oil and gas prices specifically;
    
●The ability of our management to effectively manage our growth, including implementing effective
controls and procedures and attracting and retaining key management and personnel;
●Changing interpretations of generally accepted accounting principles;
    
●Our public securities’ limited liquidity and trading;
    
●General economic conditions; and
    
●Other relevant risks detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are based on our current expectations and
beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us. There can be no assurance that
future developments affecting us will be those that we have anticipated. These forward-looking statements
involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other assumptions that
may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by
these forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, those
factors described under the heading “Risk Factors.” Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties
materialize, or should any of our assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary in material respects
from those projected in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise
any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except
as may be required under applicable securities laws and/or if and when management knows or has a
reasonable basis on which to conclude that previously disclosed projections are no longer reasonably
attainable.
20
Table of Contents
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of ordinary shares by the selling stockholders.
However, we could receive up to $20,532,500 from the exercise of the warrants for up to 4,106,500
ordinary shares that are presently offered under this prospectus. We could received up to $3,520,000
upon the exercise of the unit purchase option issued to the underwriters in our IPO, up to $2,000,000 upon
the exercise of the warrants issuable upon exercise of such unit purchase option, up to $33,000,000 upon
the exercise of 6,600,000 warrants issued to our founders in connection with our initial public offering and
up to $6,500,000 upon the exercise of 1,300,000 warrants issued in conjunction with the sale of our
Senior Secured Notes. We intend to use any proceeds received from the exercise, as the case may be, for
working capital and other general corporate purposes. We, however, cannot assure you that any of the
warrants will be exercised.
EXPENSES RELATED TO THIS OFFERING
Set forth below is an itemization of the total expenses that we expect to incur in connection with this
distribution.
$11,191 
SEC registration fee
Legal fees and expenses
 $20,000 
Accounting fees and expenses $10,000 
Miscellaneous
 $5,000  
 $45,000 
Total
21
Table of Contents
GLOSSARY OF OIL AND NATURAL GAS TERMS:
The following is a description of the meanings of some of the oil and natural gas industry terms used
throughout this report:
3-D seismic. Geophysical data that depict the subsurface strata in three dimensions. 3-D seismic typically
provides a more detailed and accurate interpretation of the subsurface strata than 2-D, or two-
dimensional, seismic.
Basin. A large natural depression on the earth’s surface in which sediments generally brought by water
accumulate.
Bbl. Stock tank barrel, or 42 U.S. gallons liquid volume, used in this report in reference to crude oil or
other liquid hydrocarbons.
Bbls/d. Bbls per day.
Bcf. One billion cubic feet of natural gas.
BOE. Barrels of oil equivalent, with six thousand cubic feet of natural gas being equivalent to one barrel of
oil. BOE is commonly used by oil and gas companies in their financial statements as a way of combining
oil and natural gas reserves and production into a single measure.
BOE/d. BOE per day.
Btu or British thermal unit. The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of a one pound mass of
water from 58.5 to 59.5 degrees Fahrenheit.
Completion. The process of treating a drilled well followed by the installation of permanent equipment for
the production of natural gas or oil, or in the case of a dry hole, the reporting of abandonment to the
appropriate agency.
Condensate. A mixture of hydrocarbons that exists in the gaseous phase at original reservoir temperature
and pressure, but that, when produced, is in the liquid phase at surface temperature and pressure.
Developed acreage. The number of acres that are allocated or assignable to productive wells or wells
capable of production.
Development capital. Expenditures to obtain access to proved reserves and to construct facilities for
producing, treating, and storing hydrocarbons.
Development well. A well drilled within the proved area of a natural gas or oil reservoir to the depth of a
stratigraphic horizon known to be productive.
Deviated well. A well purposely deviated from the vertical using controlled angles to reach an objective
location other than directly below the surface location.
Dry hole. A well found to be incapable of producing hydrocarbons in sufficient quantities such that
proceeds from the sale of such production exceed production expenses and taxes.
Economically producible. A resource that generates revenue that exceeds, or is reasonably expected to
exceed, the costs of operation. For a complete definition of “economically producible”, refer to the SEC’s
Regulation S- X, Rule 4,- 10(a)(10).
22
Table of Contents
EUR. Estimated ultimate recovery, the sum of gross reserves remaining as of a given date and the
cumulative production as of that date.
Exploratory well. A well drilled to find and produce natural gas or oil reserves not classified as proved, to
find a new reservoir in a field previously found to be productive of natural gas or oil in another reservoir or
to extend a known reservoir.
F&D Costs. Finding and development costs, capital costs incurred in the acquisition, exploitation and
exploration of proved oil and natural gas reserves divided by proved reserve additions and revisions to
proved reserves.
Field. An area consisting of either a single reservoir or multiple reservoirs, all grouped on or related to the
same individual geological structural feature and/or stratigraphic condition. The field name refers to the
surface area, although it may refer to both the surface area and the underground productive formations.
For a complete definition of “field”, refer to the SEC’s Regulation S- X, Rule 4,- 10(a)(15).
Formation. A layer of rock that has distinct characteristics that differ from nearby rock.
Fracturing or fracing. The process of creating and preserving a fracture or system of fractures in a
reservoir rock typically by injecting a fluid under pressure through a wellbore and into the targeted
formation.
GAAP. Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
Gross acres or gross wells. The total acres or wells, as the case may be, in which a working interest is
owned.
Held by production acreage. Acreage covered by a mineral lease that perpetuates a company’s right to
operate a property as long as the property produces a minimum paying quantity of oil or gas.
Horizontal drilling. A drilling technique used in certain formations where a well is drilled vertically to a
certain depth and then drilled at a right angle with a specified interval.
LOE. Lease operating expense, all direct and allocated indirect costs of lifting hydrocarbons from a
producing formation to the surface constituting part of the current operating expenses of a working interest.
Such costs include labor, superintendence, supplies, repairs, maintenance, allocated overhead charges,
workover, insurance, and other expenses incidental to production, but exclude lease acquisition or drilling
or completion expenses.
MBbls. One thousand barrels.
MBO. One thousand barrels of crude oil, condensate or NGLs.
Mcf. One thousand cubic feet of natural gas.
Mcf/d. Mcf per day.
MBOE. One thousand barrels of oil equivalent.
MMBtu. One million British Thermal Units.
MMcf. One million cubic feet of natural gas.
NGLs. Natural gas liquids, the combination of ethane, butane, isobutene and natural gasolines that when
removed from natural gas become liquid under various levels of higher pressure and lower temperature.
23
Table of Contents
Net acres or net wells. The sum of the fractional working interest owned in gross acres or gross wells, as
the case may be. For example, an owner who has 50% interest in 100 gross acres owns 50 net acres.
Net revenue interest. An owner’s interest in the revenues of a well after deducting proceeds allocated to
royalty and overriding interests.
NYMEX. The New York Mercantile Exchange.
Play. A set of discovered or prospective oil and/or natural gas accumulations sharing similar geologic,
geographic and temporal properties, such as source rock, reservoir structure, timing, trapping mechanism
and hydrocarbon type.
Plugging and abandonment. Refers to the sealing off of fluids in the strata penetrated by a well so that
the fluids from one stratum will not escape into another or to the surface. Regulations of all states require
plugging of abandoned wells.
Productive well. A well that is found to be capable of producing hydrocarbons in sufficient quantities such
that proceeds from the sale of the production exceed production expenses and taxes.
PDNP Reserves. Proved developed non-producing reserves. Hydrocarbons in a potentially producing
horizon penetrated by a well bore, the production of which has been postponed pending installation of
surface equipment or gathering facilities, or pending the production of hydrocarbons from another
formation penetrated by the well bore. The hydrocarbons are classified as proved, but non-producing
reserves.
PDP. Proved developed producing.
PDP Reserves. Proved developed producing reserves. Reserves that are being recovered through
existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods.
Prospect. A specific geographic area which, based on supporting geological, geophysical or other data
and also preliminary economic analysis using reasonably anticipated prices and costs, is deemed to have
potential for the discovery of commercial hydrocarbons.
Proved reserves. Those quantities of oil and natural gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and
engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible - from a given
date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods and
government regulations – prior to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless
evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic
methods are used for the estimation. The project to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced or
the operator must be reasonably certain that it will commence the project within a reasonable time. For a
complete definition of “proved oil and natural gas reserves”, refer to the SEC’s Regulation S- X, Rule 4,-
10(a)(22).
PUD. Proved undeveloped reserve.
PUD Reserves. Proved undeveloped reserves , proved reserves that are expected to be recovered from
new wells on undrilled acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for
recompletion.
Reserves on undrilled acreage shall be limited to those directly offsetting development spacing areas that
are reasonably certain of production when drilled, unless evidence using reliable technology exists that
establishes reasonable certainly of economic productivity at greater distances.
Undrilled locations can be classified as having undeveloped reserves only if a development plan has
been adopted indicating that they are scheduled to be drilled within five years, unless the specific
circumstances justify a longer time.
24
Table of Contents
Under no circumstances shall estimates for proved undeveloped reserves be attributable to any acreage
for which an application of fluid injection or other improved recovery technique is contemplated, unless
such techniques have been proved effective by actual projects in the same reservoir or an analogous
reservoir, or by other evidence using reliable technology establishing reasonable certainty.
PV-10. Present value of future net revenues.
Reasonable certainty. A high degree of confidence. For a complete definition of reasonable certainty,
refer to the SEC’s Regulation S- X, Rule 4- 10(a)(24).
Recompletion. The process of re-entering an existing wellbore that is either producing or not producing
and completing new reservoirs in an attempt to establish or increase existing production.
Reserves. Estimated remaining quantities of oil and natural gas and related substances anticipated to be
economically producible, as of a given date, by application of development projects to known
accumulations. In addition, there must exist, or there must be a reasonable expectation that there will
exist, the legal right to produce or a revenue interest in the production, installed means of delivering oil
and natural gas or related substances to market and all permits and financing required to implement the
project.
Reservoir. A porous and permeable underground formation containing a natural accumulation of
producible hydrocarbons that is confined by impermeable rock or water barriers and is separate from other
reservoirs.
Royalty. An interest in an oil and natural gas lease that gives the owner the right to receive a portion of
the production from the leased acreage (or of the proceeds from the sale thereof), but does not require the
owner to pay any portion of the production or development costs on the leased acreage. Royalties may be
either landowner’s royalties, which are reserved by the owner of the leased acreage at the time the lease
is granted, or overriding royalties, which are usually reserved by an owner of the leasehold in connection
with a transfer to a subsequent owner.
Spacing. The distance between wells producing from the same reservoir. Spacing is often expressed in
terms of acres, e.g., 40- acre spacing, and is often established by regulatory agencies.
Stacked pay. Multiple geological zones that potentially contain hydrocarbons and are arranged in a
vertical stack.
Stratigraphic play. An oil or natural gas formation contained within an area created by permeability and
porosity changes characteristic of the alternating rock layer that result from the sedimentation process.
Structural play. An oil or natural gas formation contained within an area created by earth movements that
deform or rupture (such as folding or faulting) rock strata.
TD. Total Depth.
Tight formation. A formation with low permeability that produces natural gas with very low flow rates for
long periods of time.
Undeveloped acreage. Lease acreage on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that
would permit the production of commercial quantities of oil and natural gas regardless of whether such
acreage contains proved reserves.
WTI. West Texas Intermediate crude oil, which is a light, sweet crude oil, characterized by an American
Petroleum Institute gravity, or API gravity, 39 and 41, and a sulphur content of approximately 0.4 weight
percent that is used as a benchmark for other crude oils.
25
Table of Contents
Wellbore. The hole drilled by the bit that is equipped for oil or gas production on a completed well. Also
called well or borehole.
Working interest. The operating interest that gives the owner the right to drill, produce and conduct
operating activities on the property and receive a share of production and requires the owner to pay a
share of the costs of drilling and production operations.
Workover. The repair or stimulation of an existing production well for the purpose of restoring, prolonging
or enhancing the production of hydrocarbons.
26
Table of Contents
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
Overview
We are an independent oil and natural gas company focused on the acquisition, development, exploration
and exploitation of unconventional, long-life, onshore oil and natural gas reserves in the Delaware Basin
in West Texas, which is a part of the Permian Basin. Our activities are primarily directed at the Avalon,
Bone Springs, and Wolfcamp formations, which we refer to collectively as the Wolfbone play.
We were organized on June 17, 2010 as an exempted company under the laws of the Cayman Islands.
We were a blank check company formed to acquire through a merger, capital stock exchange, asset
acquisition, stock purchase or similar business combination, or control through contractual arrangements,
one or more operating businesses. On October 23, 2013, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of
Merger and Reorganization to acquire Arabella Exploration, Limited Liability Company, a Texas limited
liability company (the “Acquisition”). On December 24, 2013, we consummated the Acquisition with
Arabella Exploration Limited Liability Company, as more fully described in our Annual Report on Form 20-
F for the year ended December 31, 2013 filed on May 15, 2014. On February 4, 2013, we changed our
name from Lone Oak Acquisition Corporation to Arabella Exploration, Inc.
We intend to grow our reserves and production through development drilling, exploitation and exploration
activities on our multi-year inventory of identified potential drilling locations and through acquisitions that
meet our strategic and financial objectives, targeting oil-weighted reserves. Substantially all of our
revenues are generated through the sale of oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas production, though we
do on occasion sell parcels of our land when the opportunity to generate profit presents itself. Our
production was approximately 84% oil, no natural gas liquids and 16% natural gas for the three months
ended June 30, 2014, and was approximately 85% oil, no natural gas liquids and 15% natural gas for the
three months ended June 30, 2013. Our production was approximately 85% oil, no natural gas liquids and
15% natural gas for the six months ended June 30, 2014, and was approximately 83% oil, no natural gas
liquids and 17% natural gas for the six months ended June 30, 2013.Our production was approximately
95% oil, no natural gas liquids and 5% natural gas for the year ended December 31, 2013, and was
approximately 85% oil, no natural gas liquids and 15% natural gas for the year ended December 31,
2012. In 2011, our production was insignificant. On June 30, 2014, our net acreage position in the
Delaware Basin was approximately 4,232 net acres. On June 30, 2013, our net acreage position in the
Delaware Basin was approximately 4,721 net acres. On December 31, 2013, our net acreage position in
the Delaware Basin was approximately 5,037 net acres. On December 31, 2012, our net acreage position
in the Delaware Basin was approximately 1,601 net acres.
Recent Events
Between September 29, 2014 and November 7, 2014, over a series of five separate transactions, we
acquired additional working interests in all of our producing wells, Locker State #1H (18.0%), Graham
#1H (18.0%), Woods #1H (10.0%), Vastar State #1V (5.0%), Jackson #1H (7.1%) and Emily Bell #1H
(1.5%), as well as the drilled, but yet to be completed, Woods #2H (4.5%) and the completed, but currently
shut in, SM Prewitt #1H (18.0%). Additionally, we acquired an additional 18.0% of all of the remaining
undrilled working interests in the SM Prewitt, Locker State and Graham leases, 16.5% of the undrilled
Johnson 103 and 138 leases as well as 5.0% of all of the remaining undrilled working interests in the
Woods, Vastar State, Jackson and Emily Bell leases. Across the five transactions, we will pay, in the
aggregate, approximately $2.2 million and will issue 112,250 ordinary shares.
On October 23, 2014 we backed into a 1.371% working interest in 15,000 gross, 11,773 net, acres held by
Brigham Resources Operating, LLC in the Delaware Basin. Our interest amounts to 206 gross and 161
net acres. There are currently two vertical wells, one horizontal well and one extended reach horizontal
well producing on this project.
On October 8, 2014 we backed into a 0.5333% working interest in 6,166 gross, 5,505 net, acres held by
Energen Resources Corporation in the Delaware Basin. Our interest amounts to 33 gross and 29 net
acres. There is currently one horizontal well producing on this project and one permitted well.
On October 1, 2014 we completed the transfer of operations of our wells from Arabella Petroleum, LLC to
AEX Operating, LLC, our wholly owned subsidiary.
On September 9, 2014 George P. Bush and Malachi Boyuls resigned from our board in advance of the
November 2014 elections where Mr. Bush is running for Land Commissioner in Texas.
On September 4, 2014 we repaid our loans from BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, LLC with
accrued interest for total repayment of $512,500 and $828,222, respectively.
On September 2, 2014 we entered into a $45,000,000 Senior Secured Note Facility (the “Notes”) with a
New York based investor (the “Investor”). The initial sale of $16,000,000 in Notes occurred on September
2, 2014 with further sales to be based upon reserve based performance hurdles. The Notes bear interest
at an annual rate of 15%, of which six months was prepaid at close. The Notes are due one year from the
issuance date and can be redeemed by us at any time without penalty. We paid a 3% origination fee to
the Investor and a 5% cash commission to our advisors on the transaction. In conjunction with the sale of
the Notes, we issued warrants to purchase 1,300,000 of our ordinary shares at a price of $5.00. The
warrants expire in five years.
On July 1, 2014 we sold a gross 160, net 107, acres in Reeves County – otherwise known as our Cannon
lease. The Company purchased this acreage at $2,000/acre and was sold at $2,750/acre, grossing
$293,333, with a gross profit of approximately $80,250 for us.
27
Table of Contents
On June 26, 2014 our Chief Executive Officer Jason Hoisager purchased 190,477 of our ordinary shares
for $10.50 a share in a private transaction from us.
On June 25, 2014 we sold various non-contiguous acreage positions, gross 350, net 39, acres in Reeves
County – otherwise known as our Johnson 6 and Johnson 20 leases. This acreage was purchased at
$1,187/acre and was sold at $1,500/acre, grossing $58,454, with a gross profit of $12,172 for us.
On June 24, 2014 we sold our gross 640, net 640, acres in Ward County – otherwise known as our Roark
lease. This acreage was purchased at $351/acre and was sold at $3,500/acre, grossing $2,240,000, with
a gross profit of $2,015,276 for us.
On June 12, 2014 we sold our gross 320, net 10, acres in the Midland Basin – otherwise known as our
Topo Chico lease. This acreage was producing but our 1/32nd interest was non-operated. We received
gross proceeds of $327,734 for this property.
On June 10, 2014 we received a loan from BBS Capital Fund, LP, an affiliate of Berke Bakay, one of our
directors. The $500,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per annum.
We hired SDS Petroleum Consultants, L.L.C., the company that successfully drilled the Emily Bell #1H
and Woods #2H under budget, to drill its wells on an ongoing basis. On June 4, 2014, Chad D. Elliott
resigned as our Chief Operating Officer.
On June 2, 2014 the Emily Bell #1H began production reaching a 24-hour peak production rate of 1,125
BOE/Day.
On May 5, 2014 we granted each non-employee director 30,000 options to purchase our ordinary shares
for joining the board and 20,000 options to purchase our ordinary shares for each year of service
commencing from January 30, 2014. The options have an exercise price of $6.15 per share which
represents the closing price of our ordinary shares the day prior to the grant.
On May 1, 2014 we successfully drilled to the total depth of 14,896 on the Woods #2H. This well is
currently awaiting completion.
On May 1, 2014 we received a loan from Hauser Holdings, LLC, an affiliate of Richard Hauser, one of our
directors. The $800,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per annum.
On April 23, 2014 we sold our gross 640, net 313, acres in Pecos County – otherwise known as our
Weatherby lease. This acreage was purchased at $1,500/acre and was sold at $2,250/acre, grossing
$704,700, which consisted of $626,400 in current cash payments and $78,300 in contingent payments,
with a net profit of $234,900 for us. In the event that the contingency occurs additional profits may be
recorded.
Operating Results Overview
During the three months ended June 30, 2014, our average daily production was approximately 128.6
BOE, consisting of 108.7 Bbls/d of oil, 127.6 Mcf/d of natural gas and no natural gas liquids. This is a
significant increase from the three months ended June 30, 2013, when our average daily production was
approximately 5.8 BOE, consisting of 5.0 Bbls/d of oil, 5.4 Mcf/d of natural gas and no natural gas liquids.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, our average daily production was approximately 114.2 BOE,
consisting of 97.2 Bbls/d of oil, 102.1 Mcf/d of natural gas and no natural gas liquids. This is a significant
increase from the six months ended June 30, 2013, when our average daily production was approximately
8.3 BOE, consisting of 6.9 Bbls/d of oil, 8.5 Mcf/d of natural gas and no natural gas liquids.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, our average daily production was approximately 43 BOE,
consisting of 38 Bbls/d of oil, 30 Mcf/d of natural gas and no natural gas liquids, this is a significant
increase for the years ending December 31, 2012 and 2011, wherein there was virtually no production.
Through the three month period ended June 30, 2014, we had participated in 7 gross (2.58 net) operated
wells in the Delaware Basin.
28
Table of Contents
Reserves and pricing
In the table below, WPC estimated all of Arabella’s proved reserves at June 15, 2014, December 31, 2013
and December 31, 2012. The prices used to estimate proved reserves for all periods were held constant
throughout the life of the properties and have been adjusted for quality, transportation fees, geographical
differentials, marketing bonuses or deductions and other factors affecting the price received at the
wellhead.
Estimated Net Proved Reserves:
December 31, 2013  December 31, 2012
June 15,
2014(1)
  
  1,939.3     1,540.4
  4,074.8     3,197.3
  2,618.4     2,073.3
166.3
    377.2
    229.2
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Total (MBOE)
December 31, 
December 31, 
June 15, 
  
  
 
 
2014
2013
2012
Unweighted Arithmetic Average 
 
First-Day-of-the-Month Prices
Oil (Bbls)
  99.41
Natural gas (Mcf)  4.06
$ 89.14
    7.23
$ 91.24
    6.06
(1)June 15, 2014 numbers are based on a preliminary reserve review performed by WPC.
Sources of our revenue
Our revenues are derived from the sale of oil and natural gas production, as well as the sale of natural gas
liquids that are extracted from our natural gas during processing. For the three months ended June 30,
2014 and June 30, 2013, our revenues were derived 93% and 94%, respectively, from oil sales, 0% and
0%, respectively, from natural gas liquids sales and 7% and 6% respectively, from natural gas sales. For
the six months ended June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2013, our revenues were derived 93% and 93%,
respectively, from oil sales, 0% and 0%, respectively, from natural gas liquids sales and 7% and 7%
respectively, from natural gas sales. For the years ended December 31, 2013 and December 31, 2012,
our revenues were derived 95% and 85%, respectively, from oil sales, 0% and 0%, respectively, from
natural gas liquids sales and 5% and 15%, respectively, from natural gas sales. Our revenues may vary
significantly from period to period as a result of changes in volumes of production sold or changes in
commodity prices. Oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas prices have historically been volatile. During
2013, West Texas Intermediate posted prices ranged from $86.65 to $110.62 per Bbl and the Henry Hub
spot market price of natural gas ranged from $3.08 to $4.52 per MMBtu. On December 31, 2013, the West
Texas Intermediate posted price for crude oil was $98.17 per Bbl and the Henry Hub spot market price of
natural gas was $4.31 per MMBtu.
During the period ended June 30, 2014 and the years ended December 31, 2012 and December 31,
2011, we had other revenue from the gain on sale of oil and gas properties. Though we do on occasion
sell parcels of our land when the opportunity to generate significant profit for less core acreage presents
itself, we do not expect gains or losses on sales of oil and gas properties to be a regular portion of our
business on an ongoing basis.
Principal components of our cost structure
Lease operating expenses. These are daily costs incurred to bring oil and natural gas out of the ground
and to the market, together with the daily costs incurred to maintain our producing properties. Such costs
also include maintenance, repairs and workover expenses related to our oil and natural gas properties.
Ad valorem and production taxes. Production taxes are paid on produced oil and natural gas based on a
percentage of revenues from products sold at fixed rates established by federal, state or local taxing
authorities. Arabella is also subject to ad valorem taxes in the counties where our production is located.
Ad valorem taxes are generally based on the valuation of our oil and gas properties.
29
Table of Contents
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. We follow the successful efforts method for oil and gas
properties, whereby costs of productive wells, developmental dry holes and productive leases are
capitalized into appropriate groups of properties based on geographical and geological similarities. These
capitalized costs are amortized on a field by field basis using the unit-of-production method based on
estimated proved reserves. Additionally, gain or loss is generally recognized on all sales of natural gas
and oil properties under the successful efforts method.
Exploration expense. Exploration costs, including geological and geophysical expenses and delay
rentals, are charged to expense as incurred. Exploratory drilling costs, including the cost of stratigraphic
test wells, are initially capitalized but charged to exploration expense if and when the well is determined
to be nonproductive. The determination of an exploratory well’s ability to produce must be made within
one year from the completion of drilling activities. The acquisition costs of unproved acreage are initially
capitalized and are carried at cost, net of accumulated impairment provisions, until such leases are
transferred to proved properties or charged to exploration expense as impairments of unproved
properties.
General and administrative. These are costs incurred for overhead, including payroll and benefits for our
corporate staff, costs of maintaining our headquarters, costs of managing our production and development
operations, franchise taxes, audit and other fees for professional services and legal compliance.
General and administrative expenses allocated from Arabella Petroleum Company. These are general
and administrative costs that were subject to a cost sharing agreement with Arabella Petroleum Company,
which is owned and controlled by Jason Hoisager. These include a portion of the rent for office space,
office equipment and administrative services.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected historical operating data for the periods indicated.
Three Months Ended   Six Months Ended
June 30, 
 
2014
June 30, 
  
2014
June 30,
  
2013
June 30,
  
2013
Year Ended
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
  
  
 
2011
2012
2013
$976,373   $43,725   $1,762,197  $114,444   $ 1,421,915
$ 65,881
$ 16,543
Revenues:
Oil and gas
revenue
Other
operating
revenue –
gain on sale
of oil and gas
properties
Total
revenues
Costs and
expenses:
Lease
operating
expenses
Ad valorem
and
production
taxes
Depreciation,
depletion and
amortization
Accretion of
asset
retirement
obligation
General and
administrative
expenses
General and
administrative
expenses
allocated
from Arabella
Petroleum
Company
Total costs
and
expenses
Income (loss)
from
operations
Other income
(expense)
Interest
expense
Total other
income
(expense)
Net income
(loss) before
taxes
Provision for
income taxes
Net income
(loss)
1,768,521    --
3,004,721    --
--
402,901
34,467
2,744,894    43,725     4,766,918    114,444     1,421,915
468,782
51,010
438,652     7,861     552,352     11,004      152,052
12,526
5,753
46,878
3,617     79,017
5,493
64,033
3,174
819
331,731     24,481     571,374     45,697      469,230
27,696
5,724
180
98
810
198
663
215
97
1,295,961    4,991     2,601,085    5,036
412,268
10,010
10,011
--
32,977     --
65,955      131,950
93,845
30,071
2,113,402    74,025     3,804,638    133,383     1,230,196
147,466
52,475
631,492     (30,300)   962,280     (18,939 )    191,719
321,316
(1,465
(16,073 )   --
(16,073 )   --
--
(16,073 )
(16,073 )
--
--
615,419     (30,300)   946,207     (18,939 )    191,719
321,316
(1,465
(215,417 )   --
(327,885 )   --
--
--
--
$400,002   $(30,300) $618,322   $(18,939 )  $ 191,719
$ 321,316
$ (1,465
)
)
)
30
Table of Contents
Production
Data:
Oil (Bbls)
Natural gas
(Mcf)
Combined
volumes
(BOE)
Daily
combined
volumes
(BOE/d)
Average
Prices(1):
Oil (per Bbl)
Natural gas
(per Mcf)
Combined
(per BOE)
Average
Costs (per
BOE):
Lease
operating
expense
Production
Taxes
Production
Taxes as a %
of sales
Depreciation,
depletion and
amortization
General and
Administrative
Three Months
 
Ended
 June 30,
 2014
2013
June 30,
 2014
Six Months Ended
2013
Year Ended
December 31,  December 31,  December 31, 
 
 2013
2011
2012
9,785.0
452.9
17,598.1
1,244.8
13,915
678
11,487.3
489.6
18,485.1
1,540.1
11,048
1,338
145
392
11,699.6
534.5
20,679.0
1,501.5
15,756
901
210
128.6
$93.10
5.69
83.45
$37.49
4.01
5.9
114.2
90.29
$93.52
5.79
6.30
81.81
85.22
14.71
$26.71
6.77
3.82
8.3
43.2
2.5
0.6
$85.38
$ 96.45
5.30
6.88
$ 86.78
5.26
$ 89.56
9.07
76.22
90.01
73.11
78.77
$7.33
3.66
$ 9.65
$ 13.90
$ 27.25
4.06
3.52
3.90
4.8
%   8.3 %   4.5
%   4.8
%   4.5
4.8
4.9
$28.35
$45.80
27.63
30.43
29.78
41.80
33.50
104.80
71.03
125.78
47.28
34.54
142.50
79.10
Three Months ended June 30, 2014 Compared to the Three Months ended June 30, 2013
Oil and Natural Gas Revenues. Our oil and natural gas revenues increased by $932,648, or 2,133%, to
$976,373 for the three months ended June 30, 2014, as compared to $43,725 for the three months ended
June 30, 2013. Our revenues are a function of oil and natural gas production volumes sold and average
sales prices received for those volumes. The increase in revenues is due to increased sales of oil and
natural gas due to the production from wells completed after the second quarter of 2013. The Topo Chico
#4, Graham #1H, Locker State #1H and the Woods #1H all began production after the second quarter of
2013. During the first and second quarters of 2014 the Vastar State #1V, Jackson #1H and Emily Bell #1H
began production. Production from these wells, combined with slightly higher prices for oil and natural
gas, and the fact that we did not have meaningful production until after the second quarter of 2013,
accounted for the increase in revenue.
Other Operating Revenue. Other operating revenue in the three months ended June 30, 2014 relates to
oil and gas property sales. In the three months ended June 30, 2014, we sold three non-producing
properties for $2,924,854, with a net profit of $1,722,123, and one non-operated, producing property for
$327,734 with a net profit of $46,398. Contingent conditions on the sale of the Weatherby acreage may
result in an additional $78,300 of revenue. We did not have any property sales in the three months ending
June 30, 2013. Other operating revenue from the sale of oil and gas properties fluctuates due to market
demand and preparation of the land. We do not expect property sales to be a focus of our business on a
continuing basis but we will continue to consider property sales on a case by case basis when the
opportunity for profits presents itself.
Lease Operating Expense. Lease operating expenses increased from $7,861 in the three months ended
June 30, 2013 to $438,652 in the three months ended June, 2014. This increase is the direct result of new
wells that were completed in second half of 2013 and the six months ended June 30, 2014 as described
under revenues, above. Lease operating expenses can vary based upon conditions at the well site and
well productivity and our experience in operating the newly completed producing wells in 2014 was better
than in 2013.
Ad Valorem and Production Tax Expense. Ad valorem and production taxes as a percentage of oil and
natural gas revenues increased for the three months ended June 30, 2014, as compared to the three
months ended June 30, 2013. There was an overall increase in taxes due to the revenue increase
discussed above. Ad valorem and production taxes are primarily based on the market value of our
production at the wellhead and may vary across the different counties in which we operate.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased
from $24,481 in the three months ended June 30, 2013 to $331,731 in the three months ended June 30,
2014. The increase is related to increased production from the new wells discussed under revenue,
above.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased from $4,991 in the three
months ended June 30, 2013 to $1,295,961 in the three months ended June 30, 2014. These expenses
relate primarily to salaries and wages, investor relations costs and professional and consulting fees.  The
increase is related to additional general and administrative costs relating to increased drilling and
production activity, as well as increased legal, accounting and salary expenses, for the three months
ended June 30, 2014, as compared to the three months ended June 30, 2013.
General and Administrative expenses allocated from Arabella Petroleum Company. There was no
general and administrative expense allocated from Arabella Petroleum Company, which is owned and
controlled by Jason Hoisager, our Chief Executive Officer and a Director, in the three months ended June
30, 2014, down from $32,977 in the three months ended June 30, 2013. These fees were based upon a
cost sharing arrangement with Arabella Petroleum Company which was in place in 2013 but not in 2014.
31
Table of Contents
Six Months ended June 30, 2014 Compared to the Six Months ended June 30, 2013
Oil and Natural Gas Revenues. Our oil and natural gas revenues increased by $1,647,753, or 1,440%, to
$1,762,197 for the six months ended June 30, 2014, as compared to $114,444 for the six months ended
June 30, 2013. Our revenues are a function of oil and natural gas production volumes sold and average
sales prices received for those volumes. The increase in revenues is due to increased sales of oil and
natural gas due to the production from wells completed after the second quarter of 2013. The Topo Chico
#4, Graham #1H, Locker State #1H and the Woods #1H began production after the second quarter of
2013. During the first and second quarter 2014 the Vastar State #1V, Jackson #1H and Emily Bell #1H
began production. Production from these wells, combined with slightly higher prices for oil and natural gas
and the fact that we did not have meaningful production until after the second quarter of 2013, accounted
for the increase in revenue.
Other Operating Revenue. Other operating revenue in the six months ended June 30, 2014 relates to oil
and gas property sales. In the six months ended June 30, 2014, we sold four non-producing properties for
$5,044,054 with a net profit of $2,958,323 and one non-operated, producing property for $327,734 with a
net profit of $46,398. Contingent conditions on the sale of the Weatherby acreage may result in an
additional $78,300 of revenue. We did not have any property sales in the six months ending June 30,
2013. Other operating revenue from the sale of oil and gas properties fluctuates due to market demand
and preparation of the land. We do not expect property sales to be a focus of our business on a continuing
basis but we will continue to consider property sales on a case by case basis when the opportunity for
profits presents itself.
Lease Operating Expense. Lease operating expenses increased from $11,004 in the six months ended
June 30, 2013 to $552,352 in the six months ended June, 2014. This increase is the direct result of new
wells that were completed in second half of 2013 and the six months ended June 30, 2014 as described
under revenues, above. Lease operating expenses can vary based upon conditions at the well site and
well productivity and our experience in operating the newly completed producing wells in 2014 was better
than in 2013.
Ad Valorem and Production Tax Expense. Ad valorem and production taxes as a percentage of oil and
natural gas revenues for the six months ended June 30, 2014, are similar to the six months ended June
30, 2013. There was an overall increase in taxes due to the revenue increase discussed above. Ad
valorem and production taxes are primarily based on the market value of our production at the wellhead
and may vary across the different counties in which we operate.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased
from $45,697 in the six months ended June 30, 2013 to $571,374 in the six months ended June 30, 2014.
The increase is related to increased production from the new wells discussed under revenue, above.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased from $5,036 in the six
months ended June 30, 2013 to $2,601,085 in the six months ended June 30, 2014. These expenses
relate primarily to salaries and wages, investor relations costs and professional and consulting fees.  The
increase is related to additional general and administrative costs relating to increased drilling and
production activity, as well as increased legal, accounting and salary expenses, for the six months ended
June 30, 2014, as compared to the six months ended June 30, 2013.
General and Administrative expenses allocated from Arabella Petroleum Company. There was no
general and administrative expense allocated from Arabella Petroleum Company, which is owned and
controlled by Jason Hoisager in the six months ended June 30, 2014 down from $65,955 in the six
months ended June 30, 2013. These fees were based upon a cost sharing arrangement with Arabella
Petroleum Company which was in place in 2013 but not in 2014.
Comparison of Years ended December 31, 2013 and December 31, 2012
Oil and Natural Gas Revenues. Our oil and natural gas revenues increased by $1,356,034, or 2,058%, to
$1,421,915 for the year ended December 31, 2013, as compared to $65,881 for the year ended December
31, 2012. Our revenues are a function of oil and natural gas production volumes sold and average sales
prices received for those volumes. The reason for the increase in revenues is due to increased sales of oil
and natural gas due to the completion of wells in the second half of 2013. In the second half of 2013, the
Topo Chico #4, Graham #1H, Locker State #1H and the Woods #1H began production. Production from
these wells combined with relatively consistent prices for oil and natural gas and the fact that we did not
have meaningful production until the second quarter of 2013 accounted for the increase in revenue.
Other Operating Revenue. Other operating revenue in 2012 relates to oil and gas property sales. In
2012, a major field in which we held an interest was sold and substantially all of the $402,901 other
income relates to the gain on that sale. We had a small property sale during 2011 which provided a gain
of $34,467. Other operating revenue from the sale of oil and gas properties fluctuates due to market
demand and preparation of the land. We do on occasion sell parcels of our land when the opportunity to
generate significant profit for less core acreage presents itself but we do not expect property sales to be a
focus of our business on a continuing basis.
Lease Operating Expense. Lease operating expenses increased from $12,526 in 2012 to $152,052 in
2013. This increase is the direct result of new wells that were completed in second half of 2013 as
described under revenues, above. Lease operating expenses can vary based upon conditions at the well
site and well productivity and our experience in operating the newly completed producing wells in 2013
was better than in 2012.
Ad Valorem and Production Tax Expense. Ad valorem and production taxes as a percentage of oil and
natural gas revenues improved slightly for 2013 and 2012. There was an overall increase in taxes due to
the revenue increase discussed above. Ad valorem and production taxes are primarily based on the
market value of our production at the wellhead and may vary across the different counties in which we
operate.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased
from $27,696 in 2012 to $469,230 in 2013. The increase is related to increased production from the new
wells discussed under revenue, above.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased from $10,010 in 2012 to
$412,268 in 2013. These expenses relate primarily to salaries and wages, legal fees and professional
fees.  The increase is related to additional general and administrative costs relating to increased drilling
and production activity in 2013.
32
Table of Contents
Comparison of Years ended December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011
Oil and Natural Gas Revenues. Our oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas revenues increased by
$49,338, or 298%, to $65,881 for the year ended December 31, 2012, as compared to $16,543 for the year
ended December 31, 2011. Our revenues are a function of oil and natural gas production volumes sold
and average sales prices received for those volumes. The reason for the increase in revenues is due to
increased sales of oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas due to the completion of wells in the second half
of 2012. In the second half of 2012, the SM Prewitt #1H and the Topo Chico #1 began production.
Production from these wells combined with relatively consistent prices for oil and natural gas and the fact
that we did not have meaningful production until the second quarter of 2012 accounted for the increase in
revenue.
Other Operating Revenue. Other operating revenue in 2012 and 2011 relates to oil and gas property
sales. In 2012, a major field in which Arabella held an interest was sold and substantially all of the
$402,901 other revenue relates to the gain on that sale. We had a small property sale during 2011 which
provided a gain of $34,467. Other operating revenue from the sale of oil and gas properties fluctuates due
to market demand and preparation of the land. We do on occasion sell parcels of our land when the
opportunity to generate significant profit for less core acreage presents itself but we do not expect property
sales to be a focus of our business on a continuing basis.
Lease Operating Expense. Lease operating expenses increased from $5,753 in 2011 to $12,526 in
2012. This increase is the direct result of new wells that were completed in second half of 2012 as
described under revenues, above. Lease operating expenses can vary based upon conditions at the well
site and well productivity and Arabella’s experience in operating the newly completed producing wells in
2012 was better than in 2011.
Ad Valorem and Production Tax Expense. Ad valorem and production taxes as a percentage of oil and
natural gas revenues were consistent for 2012 and 2011. There was an overall increase in taxes due to
the revenue increase discussed above. Ad valorem and production taxes are primarily based on the
market value of our production at the wellhead and may vary across the different counties in which
Arabella operates.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased
from $5,724 in 2011 to $27,696 in 2012. The increase is related to increased production from the new
wells discussed under revenue, above.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses were consistent from 2011 to 2012.
These expenses relate primarily to outside accounting fees.
General and Administrative expenses allocated from Arabella Petroleum Company. General and
administrative expense allocated from Arabella Petroleum Company, which is owned and controlled by
Jason Hoisager, increased to $93,845 in 2012 from $30,071 in 2011. These fees are based upon a cost
sharing arrangement with Arabella Petroleum Company and the increase was expected with greater
drilling activity in 2012 compared to 2011.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of liquidity has been a substantial increase in oil and gas sales revenue and the sales
of certain properties as well as equity contributions from the Acquisition and equity and loans from our
founder Jason Hoisager. Going forward, we expect that a major source of our liquidity will be the Senior
Secured Note Facility entered into on September 2, 2014. Our primary uses of capital have been the
acquisition, development and exploration of oil and natural gas properties. As we pursue reserves and
production growth, we regularly consider which capital resources, including equity and debt financings,
are available to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditure activities and liquidity
requirements. Our future ability to grow proved reserves and production will be highly dependent on the
capital resources available to us.
33
Table of Contents
Liquidity and cash flow
We commenced oil and gas exploration activities in 2011 and had a working capital deficit of $12,475,198
as of June 30, 2014 largely consisting of accrued joint interest billings payable. Our net cash flow for the
six months ended June 30, 2014 was a decrease of $1,570,274, the components of which are described
below. Our cash flow for the six months ended June 30, 2013 was a decrease of $39.
We had a working capital deficit of $1,240,656 as of December 31, 2013. Our net cash flow for the year
ended December 31, 2013 was an increase of $2,105,543, the components of which are described below.
Our cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011 were increases of
$12,975 and $15, respectively.
We expect that we will need approximately $40 million to fund our operations during the next twelve
months, which will include minimum annual property lease payments, well expenditures and operating
costs and expenses.
On September 2, 2014 we sold the first $16,000,000 of Notes under our $45,000,000 Senior Secured
Note Facility. Future sales of Notes are subject to certain funding conditions. We expect that the proceeds
from the first and future sales of these Notes will sustain our base drilling operations for the next twelve
months, assuming we meet the conditions for future Notes sales. There can be no assurance that we will
meet these conditions. In the event that we accelerate our planned drilling schedule or do not meet the
conditions for future note sales we may require additional funding in 2015.
Additionally, in the event we are able to redeem our offering warrants, they would likely be exercised
resulting in the receipt of proceeds up to $20,532,500. There can be no assurance we will redeem the
offering warrants.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,217,988 for the six months ended June 30, 2014, as
compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $48,970 for the six months ended June 30, 2013.
The decrease in operating cash flows is largely a result of the loss from operations in the 2014 period,
excluding the $3,004,721 in gains related to sale of undeveloped and developed oil and gas properties in
the six months ended June 30, 2014.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $380,934 for the year ended December 31, 2013, as
compared to $88,536 for the year ended December 31, 2012. The increase in operating cash flows is
largely a result of an increase in the noncash expenses such as depreciation, depletion and amortization
and allocated general and administrative expenses offset by an increase in accounts receivable which
increased $441,534 and $38,105, respectively, from the 2012 period to the 2013 period.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $88,536 for the year ended December 31, 2012, as
compared to $6,245 for the year ended December 31, 2011. The increase in operating cash flows is
primarily due to an increase of $63,774 relating to the contribution of the sole member for general and
administrative expenses from Arabella Petroleum Company, which is owned and controlled by Jason
Hoisager.  Net cash provided by operating activities was reduced by $402,901 and $34,467 in 2012 and
2011, respectively, by gains related to sales of undeveloped oil and gas properties.
Our operating cash flow is sensitive to many variables, the most significant of which is the volatility of
prices for the oil and natural gas we produces. Prices for these commodities are determined primarily by
prevailing market conditions. Regional and worldwide economic activity, weather and other substantially
variable factors influence market conditions for these products. These factors are beyond our control and
are difficult to predict.
34
Table of Contents
Investing Activities
The purchase and development of oil and natural gas properties accounted for the majority of our cash
outlays for investing activities.
We used net cash for investing activities of $3,652,295 and $71,009 for the six months ended June 30,
2014 and June 30, 2013, respectively. During the six months ended June 30, 2014 we received proceeds
of $5,371,788 from sales of oil and gas properties. We used cash for investing in oil and natural gas
properties in the amounts of $8,529,034 and $71,009 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and June
30, 2013, respectively.  We used cash for investing in property and equipment in the amounts of $495,049
and $0 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2013, respectively.
We used net cash for investing activities of $3,498,808, $89,117 and $98,422 for the years ended
December 31, 2013, December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively. During the years ended
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, we received proceeds of $592,702 and $34,667 from sales
of oil and gas properties, respectively. We used cash for investing in oil and natural gas properties in the
amounts of $3,718,303, $526,642 and $68,771, respectively.  In 2013, we used $219,495 in prepaid
drilling costs against actual drilling costs and in 2012 and 2011 we used cash in the amounts of $155,177
and $64,318, respectively to prepay drilling costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the sole member, Jason Hoisager, transferred a carrying
value of $6,014,340 in oil and gas properties from Arabella Petroleum Company, in exchange for a
$3,007,170 non-interest bearing, unsecured loan to Jason Hoisager and an equity contribution in the
amount of $3,007,170.
Financing Activities
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 we received $1,300,000 in loans from affiliates of two of our
directors, which were subsequently repaid.
On June 26, 2014 our Chief Executive Officer Jason Hoisager purchased 190,477 of our ordinary shares
for $10.50 a share in a private transaction from us.
During 2013, Arabella received $5,183,417 of cash related to the Acquisition.  During the years ended
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, Arabella received net amounts of $13,556 and $92,192,
respectively, in shareholder loans.
Senior Secured Note Facility
On September 2, 2014 we entered into a $45,000,000 Senior Secured Note Facility (the “Notes”) with a
New York based investor (the “Investor”). The initial sale of $16,000,000 in Notes occurred on September
2, 2014 with further sales to be based upon reserve based performance hurdles. The Notes bear interest
at an annual rate of 15%, of which six months was prepaid at close. The Notes are due one year from the
issuance date and can be redeemed by us at any time without penalty. We paid a 3% origination fee to
the Investor and a 5% cash commission to our advisors on the transaction. In conjunction with the sale of
the Notes, we issued warrants to purchase 1,300,000 of our ordinary shares at a price of $5.00. The
warrants expire on September 2, 2019.
Within sixty (60) days of the first sale of the Notes we can submit to the Investor a revised engineering
report. If that report demonstrates that we have increased the PV10 value of our proved, developed,
producing (“PDP”) reserves by at least $6,000,000 to an aggregate of over $21,500,000, the Investor will
purchase an additional $5,000,000 in Notes.
Within ninety (90) days of the first sale (or less if mutually agreed upon) we can submit further reserve
reports to the Investor, and if, in their discretion, the PV10 of our PDP has increased from the most
recently submitted previous reserve report, they will acquire additional Notes in principal amounts on a
dollar-for-dollar basis equal to said increase. The maximum amount of the Notes shall be $45,000,000 of
total commitment and successive sales under this process shall be at least $500,000 unless a lesser
amount would constitute the entire remaining availability.
The Notes are the senior secured obligations of the Company and, with certain exceptions, are secured
by first lien positions on all of the Company’s assets and property.
35
Table of Contents
Capital Requirements and Sources of Liquidity
We currently expect to drill an estimated three additional gross horizontal wells on our acreage for
the remainder of 2014. We expect that we will need approximately $40 million to fund our
operations during the next twelve months (which we expect to be funded in large part by the
Senior Secured Note Facility), which will include minimum annual property lease payments, well
expenditures and operating costs and expenses. We do not have a specific acquisition budget
since the timing and size of acquisitions cannot be accurately forecasted. We anticipate that while
some of these expenditures will be funded by operations, the majority will come from outside
funding sources.
However, the amount and timing of these capital expenditures is largely discretionary and within
our control. We could choose to defer a portion of these planned remaining 2014 capital
expenditures depending on a variety of factors, including but not limited to raising of outside
capital, the success of our drilling activities, prevailing and anticipated prices for oil and natural
gas, the availability of necessary equipment, infrastructure and capital, the receipt and timing of
required regulatory permits and approvals, seasonal conditions, drilling and acquisition costs and
the level of participation by other interest owners.
Additionally, while some of our capital expenditures will be financed through operations, the
majority of these costs will require outside financing.
Critical Accounting Policies
Readers of this report and users of the information contained in it should be aware that certain
events may impact our financial results based on the accounting policies in place. The policies we
consider to be the most significant are discussed below.
The process of preparing financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We
believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, actual results may differ
materially from such estimates.
The selection and application of accounting policies are an important process that changes as our
business changes and as accounting rules are developed. Accounting rules generally do not
involve a selection among alternatives, but involve an implementation and interpretation of
existing rules and the use of judgment to the specific set of circumstances existing in our
business.
We review our proved oil and natural gas properties for impairment whenever events and
circumstances indicate that a decline in the recoverability of their carrying value may have
occurred. We estimate the expected undiscounted future cash flows of its oil and natural gas
properties and compare such undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying amount of the oil and
natural gas properties to determine if the carrying amount is recoverable. If the carrying amount
exceeds the estimated undiscounted future cash flows, we will adjust the carrying amount of the
oil and natural gas properties to fair value.
The factors used to determine fair value are subject to management’s judgment and expertise and
include, but are not limited to, recent sales prices of comparable properties, the present value of
future cash flows, net of estimated operating and development costs using estimates of proved
reserves, future commodity pricing, future production estimates, anticipated capital expenditures
and various discount rates commensurate with the risk and current market conditions associated
with realizing the expected cash flows projected. No impairment of proved oil and natural gas
properties was recorded for three months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 and the years ended
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
36
Table of Contents
Oil and Gas Properties
The accounting for our business is subject to accounting rules that are unique to the oil and
natural gas industry. There are two allowable methods of accounting for oil and natural gas
business activities: the successful efforts method and the full cost method. We follow the
successful efforts method that requires that geological and geophysical costs and costs of
carrying and retaining undeveloped properties are charged to expense as incurred. Costs of
drilling exploratory wells that do not result in proved reserves are charged to expense.
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment of oil and gas properties are generally
calculated on a well by well in a field by field basis versus the aggregated “full cost” pool basis
under the full cost method. Additionally, gain or loss is generally recognized on all sales of natural
gas and oil properties under the successful efforts method. As a result, our financial statements
will differ from those of companies that apply the full cost method since we will generally reflect a
lower level of capitalized costs as well as a lower oil and gas depreciation, depletion and
amortization rate, and we may have exploration expenses that full cost companies do not have.
Under the full cost method, capitalized costs are amortized on a composite unit-of-production
method based on proved natural gas and oil reserves. Under the full cost method, a company that
maintains the same level of production year over year may report significantly different the
depreciation, depletion and amortization expense if estimated remaining reserves or future
development costs change significantly. Proceeds from the sale of properties are accounted for as
reductions of capitalized costs unless such sales involve a significant change in proved reserves
and significantly alter the relationship between costs and proved reserves, in which case a gain or
loss is recognized. The costs of unproved properties are excluded from amortization until the
properties are evaluated.
Revenue
We utilize the sales method of accounting for oil and natural gas revenues whereby revenues, net
of royalties, are recognized as the production is received by purchasers. The amount of gas sold
may differ from the amount to which we are entitled based on our revenue interests in the
properties. We did not have any significant gas imbalance positions at June 30, 2014, December
31, 2013 or December 31, 2012.
Income Taxes
During 2013, 2012 and 2011, we were not a taxable entity for federal income tax purposes.
Accordingly, we did not directly pay federal income tax. Our taxable income or loss, which may
vary substantially from the net income or net loss we report in our consolidated statement of
income because of the differences in the tax deductions for drilling wells. Subsequent to the
Acquisition, we are subject to Federal income taxes for 2014.
We are subject to federal and state income based taxes and we use the asset and liability method
to account for income taxes. Under this method of accounting for income taxes, deferred tax
assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences
between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities
and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax
rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are
expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in
enacted tax rates is recognized in the statements of operations in the period that includes the
enactment date. We had no deferred state income taxes for the years 2013 and 2012.
37
Table of Contents
BUSINESS
Business
Our wholly-owned subsidiary, Arabella LLC, was established in the State of Texas on December
15, 2008 but did not conduct any material business operations until 2011 with the acquisition of
properties in the Permian Basin. Our principal executive offices are located at 500 W. Texas
Avenue, Suite 1450, Midland, Texas 79701, and our telephone number is (432) 897-4755. Our
Internet website can be found at www.arabellaexploration.com.
As with most oil and gas companies, Arabella has had separate property and management
companies. Arabella is the owner of the leases and wells and operates its wells through a wholly
owned subsidiary, AEX Operating, LLC. Operations were transferred to AEX Operating, LLC on
October 1, 2014 from Arabella Petroleum Company, LLC, an entity owned by Jason Hoisager, our
Chief Executive Officer. Arabella Petroleum Company, LLC has ceased its affiliation with Arabella.
Arabella Petroleum Company, LLC is the management company that had historically maintained
the general and administrative and other costs of Arabella LLC, prior to the transfer to AEX
Operating, LLC.
Overview
We are an independent oil and natural gas company currently focused on the acquisition,
development, exploration and exploitation of unconventional, onshore oil and natural gas
reserves in the Delaware Basin portion of the Permian Basin in West Texas. The Delaware Basin,
which is one of the major producing basins in the United States, is characterized by an extensive
production history, a favorable operating environment, mature infrastructure, long reserve life,
multiple producing horizons, enhanced recovery potential and a relatively large number of
operators.
We began assembly of our core properties in the spring of 2011 with the acquisition of 1,600 gross
acres. Subsequently, we acquired approximately 9,282 additional gross acres, which brought our
total gross acreage position in the Delaware Basin to 10,882 gross acres, or 5,426 net acres, at
December 31, 2013. At the time of these acquisitions, none of the acquired acreage had existing
production. During the six months ended June 30, 2014 we sold gross 2,750, net 1,462, of our
acres under lease – otherwise known as the Johnson 44, Weatherby, Topo Chico, Roark, Johnson
6, Johnson 20 and Cannon leases. This acreage was sold for $5,371,788 with recognized gain of
$3,004,721. Taking into account this sale and the return of certain of our working interests, on June
30, 2014, our net acreage position in the Delaware Basin was approximately 4,232 net acres. AEX
Operating, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Arabella, is the operator of record for this acreage.
As of June 30, 2014, we had participated in seven gross, 2.58 net, wells, in the Delaware Basin. Of
these seven gross wells, all were completed as producing wells.  Additionally, as of June 30, 2014
we drilled our Woods #2H well which is awaiting completion.
Our activities are primarily focused on the Wolfcamp and Bone Spring formations, which we refer
to collectively as the Wolfbone play. The Wolfbone play is characterized by high oil content and
liquids rich natural gas, multiple vertical and horizontal target horizons, extensive production
history, long-lived reserves and high drilling success rates.
38
Table of Contents
As of June 15, 2014, our estimated net proved oil reserves were 1,939.3 MBbls and natural gas
reserves were 4,074.8 MMcf, based on a preliminary interim reserve report prepared by Williamson
Petroleum Consultants, Inc., or WPC, independent reserve engineers. Of the proved oil reserves,
approximately 17.6% are classified as proved developed producing, or PDP, the remaining 82.4%
are classified as proved undeveloped, or PUD. Of the proved gas reserves, approximately 17.7%
are classified as PDP and the remaining 82.3% are classified as PUD. PUD reserves included in
this estimate are from thirteen gross horizontal well locations. As of June 15, 2014, these proved
reserves were approximately 74.1% oil and 25.9% natural gas.
Additionally, we had 207.2 MBbls, of probable and 2,752.3 MBbls of possible oil reserves as well as
435.1 MMcf of probable and 5,779.9 MMcf of possible gas reserves.
In 2012, we began testing the horizontal well potential of our Delaware Basin acreage. Our first
horizontal well was the SM Prewitt #1H in Reeves County with an approximate 4,200 foot lateral in
the Wolfcamp C interval. We had a 14.6% working interest in this well. It was completed in
December 2012 and had a 24-hour initial production rate of 283 BOE/d and a 30-day average initial
production rate of 146 BOE/d, of which 89.0% was oil. Through the end of March 31, 2014, the SM
Prewitt #1H had produced a total of 13.5 MBbls of oil and 15.7 MMcf of natural gas. We began a
dual lateral completion in our SM Prewitt #1H well by drilling a second lateral stage off of the
original vertical well bore in the Wolfcamp A interval but have not completed that lateral. In 2014 we
acquired additional working interests in this well, bringing our total working interest to 36.6%.
Our second horizontal well was the Locker State #1H, in which we had a 14.6% working interest,
which was completed in March of 2013. It was completed in the Wolfcamp D with an approximately
4,200 foot lateral. The production was a peak 24 hour rate of 350 BOE/d and peak 30 day rate of 109
BOE/d, of which 85.0% was oil. Through the end of June 30, 2014, the Locker State #1H had
produced a total of 20.4 MBbls of oil and 61.1 MMcf of natural gas. In 2014 we acquired additional
working interests in this well, bringing our total working interest to 36.6%.
Our third horizontal well was the Graham #1H, in which we had a 15.6% working interest, which was
completed in May 2013. It was completed in the Wolfcamp D with an approximately 4,200 foot
lateral. The production was a peak 24 hour rate of 634 BOE/d and a peak 30 day rate of 383 BOE/d,
of which 83.0% was oil. Through June 30, 2014, the Graham #1H had produced a total of 42.0
MBbls of oil and 127.4 MMcf of natural gas. In 2014 we acquired additional working interests in this
well, bringing our total working interest to 37.6%.
Our fourth horizontal well was the Woods #1H, in which we have a 23.2% working interest, which
was completed in August 2013. It was completed in the Wolfcamp B with an approximately 4,200
foot lateral. The production was a peak 24 hour rate of 1,221 BOE/d and a peak 30 day rate of 634
BOE/d, of which 87.0% was oil. Through June 30, 2014, the Woods #1H had produced a total of
59.1 MBbls of oil and 87.9 MMcf of natural gas.  In 2014 we acquired additional working interests in
this well, bringing our total working interest to 33.2%.
We drilled one vertical well, the Vastar State #1V, in which we have a 60.1% working interest, which
was completed in December 2013.  Through June 30, 2014, the Vastar State #1V had produced a
total of 3.4 MBbls of oil and 6.2 MMcf of natural gas.  In 2014 we acquired additional working
interests in this well, bringing our total working interest to 66.1%.
Our fifth horizontal well was the Jackson #1H, in which we have a 60.2% working interest, which
was completed in August 2013. It was completed in the Wolfcamp B with an approximately 4,200
foot lateral. The production was a peak 24 hour rate of 875 BOE/d and a peak 30 day rate of 402
BOE/d, of which 82.0% was oil. Through June 30, 2014, the Jackson #1H had produced a total of
18.4 MBbls of oil and 27.1 MMcf of natural gas. In 2014 we acquired additional working interests in
this well, bringing our total working interest to 67.3%.
Our sixth horizontal well was the Emily Bell #1H, in which we have a 56.9% working interest, which
was completed in June 2014. It was completed in the Wolfcamp A with an approximately 4,200 foot
lateral. The production was a peak 24 hour rate of 1,125 BOE/d and a peak 30 day rate of 482
BOE/d, of which 85.0% was oil. Through June 30, 2014, the Emily Bell #1H had produced a total of
10.2 MBbls of oil and 11.2 MMcf of natural gas. In 2014 we acquired additional working interests in
this well, bringing our total working interest to 58.4%.
39
Table of Contents
Based on the Williamson Reserve Report from current production, EURs for each of the horizontal
wells will be in the range of 100 to 600 MBOE.  The table below summarizes our current working
interest and each well’s performance.
Working
 
 Interest
Lateral
  
 Length(ft)
Completed
  
 Formation
Peak Rate  24-
 
hr
Well
SM Prewitt
#1H
Locker
State #1H
Graham
#1H
36.5500
4,200
Wolfcamp C
36.5500
4,200
Wolfcamp D
37.5500
4,200
Wolfcamp D
283 BOE/day
350 BOE/day
634 BOE/day
Peak Rate
 
 30-day
 146
BOE/day
 109
BOE/day
 383
BOE/day
634
 
BOE/day
Percent
 
 
 Oil
EUR
 
 BOE
89
85
83
82
%  100,000
%  186,000
%  250,000
%  600,000
Woods #1H   33.1563
4,200
Wolfcamp B
1,221 BOE/day
Vastar
State #1V
Jackson
#1H
Emily Bell
#1H
66.1375
Vertical
Wolfcamp A-D   TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
67.2647
4,200
Wolfcamp B
58.3750
4,200
Wolfcamp A
875 BOE/day
1,125 BOE/day
402
BOE/day
482
 
BOE/day
82
85
%  530,000
%   TBD
All of our wells are currently operated by AEX Operating, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Arabella.
The production results from the wells in Reeves and Ward Counties, along with the basin wide
geoscience and engineering data that Arabella has gathered and analyzed, give us confidence
that its acreage in Reeves, and Ward is prospective in the Wolfcamp A, B, C and D intervals. The
data and offset well performance also indicate that all of our other Delaware Basin acreage is
highly prospective for horizontal drilling and in multiple formations. The formations include not
only the Wolfcamp A, B, C and D intervals, but other intervals in the Avalon and Bone Spring
formations. However, further testing of these areas and other intervals is necessary to determine
their economic potential.
Recent Developments
Between September 29, 2014 and November 7, 2014, over a series of five separate transactions, we
acquired additional working interests in all of our producing wells, Locker State #1H (18.0%),
Graham #1H (18.0%), Woods #1H (10.0%), Vastar State #1V (5.0%), Jackson #1H (7.1%) and Emily
Bell #1H (1.5%), as well as the drilled, but yet to be completed, Woods #2H (4.5%) and the
completed, but currently shut in, SM Prewitt #1H (18.0%). Additionally, we acquired an additional
18.0% of all of the remaining undrilled working interests in the SM Prewitt, Locker State and
Graham leases, 16.5% of the undrilled Johnson 103 and 138 leases as well as 5.0% of all of the
remaining undrilled working interests in the Woods, Vastar State, Jackson and Emily Bell leases.
Across the five transactions, we will pay, in the aggregate, approximately $2.2 million and will issue
112,250 ordinary shares.
On October 23, 2014 we backed into a 1.371% working interest in 15,000 gross, 11,773 net, acres
held by Brigham Resources Operating, LLC in the Delaware Basin. Our interest amounts to 206
gross and 161 net acres. There are currently two vertical wells, one horizontal well and one
extended reach horizontal well producing on this project.
On October 8, 2014 we backed into a 0.5333% working interest in 6,166 gross, 5,505 net, acres held
by Energen Resources Corporation in the Delaware Basin. Our interest amounts to 33 gross and
29 net acres. There is currently one horizontal well producing on this project and one permitted
well.
On October 1, 2014 we completed the transfer of operations of our wells from Arabella Petroleum,
LLC to AEX Operating, LLC, our wholly owned subsidiary.
On September 9, 2014 George P. Bush and Malachi Boyuls resigned from our board in advance of
the November 2014 elections where Mr. Bush is running for Land Commissioner in Texas.
On September 4, 2014 we repaid our loans from BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, LLC
with accrued interest for total repayment of $512,500 and $828,222, respectively.
On September 2, 2014 we entered into a $45,000,000 Senior Secured Note Facility (the “Notes”)
with a New York based investor (the “Investor”). The initial sale of $16,000,000 in Notes occurred
on September 2, 2014 with further sales to be based upon reserve based performance hurdles.
The Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 15%, of which six months was prepaid at close. The
Notes are due one year from the issuance date and can be redeemed by us at any time without
penalty. We paid a 3% origination fee to the Investor and a 5% cash commission to our advisors on
the transaction. In conjunction with the sale of the Notes, we issued warrants to purchase
1,300,000 of our ordinary shares at a price of $5.00. The warrants expire in five years.
On July 1, 2014 we sold a gross 160, net 107, acres in Reeves County – otherwise known as our
Cannon lease. The Company purchased this acreage at $2,000/acre and was sold at $2,750/acre,
grossing $293,333, with a gross profit of approximately $80,250 for us.
On June 26, 2014 our Chief Executive Officer Jason Hoisager purchased 190,477 of our ordinary
shares for $10.50 a share in a private transaction from us.
On June 25, 2014 we sold various non-contiguous acreage positions, gross 350, net 39, acres in
Reeves County – otherwise known as our Johnson 6 and Johnson 20 leases. This acreage was
purchased at $1,187/acre and was sold at $1,500/acre, grossing $58,454, with a gross profit of
$12,172 for us.
40
Table of Contents
On June 24, 2014 we sold our gross 640, net 640, acres in Ward County – otherwise known as our
Roark lease. This acreage was purchased at $351/acre and was sold at $3,500/acre, grossing
$2,240,000, with a gross profit of $2,015,276 for us.
On June 12, 2014 we sold our gross 320, net 10, acres in the Midland Basin – otherwise known as
our Topo Chico lease. This acreage was producing but the Company 1/32nd interest was non-
operated. We received gross proceeds of $327,734 for this property.
On June 10, 2014 we received a loan from BBS Capital Fund, LP, an affiliate of Berke Bakay, one of
our directors. The $500,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per
annum.
We hired SDS Petroleum Consultants, L.L.C., the company that successfully drilled the Emily Bell
#1H and Woods #2H under budget, to drill its wells on an ongoing basis. On June 4, 2014, Chad D.
Elliott resigned as our Chief Operating Officer.
On June 2, 2014 the Emily Bell #1H began production reaching a 24-hour peak production rate of
1,125 BOE/Day.
On May 5, 2014 granted each non-employee director 30,000 options to purchase our ordinary
shares for joining the board and 20,000 options to purchase our ordinary shares for each year of
service commencing from January 30, 2014. The options have an exercise price of $6.15 per share
which represents the closing price of our ordinary shares the day prior to the grant.
On May 1, 2014 we successfully drilled to the total depth of 14,896 on the Woods #2H. This well is
currently awaiting completion.
On May 1, 2014 we received a loan from Hauser Holdings, LLC, an affiliate of Richard Hauser, one
of our directors. The $800,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per
annum.
On April 23, 2014 we sold our gross 640, net 313, acres in Pecos County – otherwise known as our
Weatherby lease. This acreage was purchased at $1,500/acre and was sold at $2,250/acre,
grossing $704,700, which consisted of $624,400 in current cash payments and $78,300 in
contingent payments, with a net profit of $234,900 for us. In the event that the contingency occurs
additional profits may be recorded.
Our Business Strategy
Our business strategy is to increase stockholder value through the following:
Grow production and reserves by developing our oil-rich resource base. We intend to actively drill
and develop our acreage base in an effort to maximize its value and resource potential. Through the
conversion of its undeveloped reserves to developed reserves, we will seek to increase our production,
reserves and cash flow while generating favorable returns on invested capital. As of June 15, 2014, we
●
have identified 360 - 600 potential horizontal drilling locations on our acreage in the Delaware Basin
based on an industry standard 160-acre spacing. We were operating one horizontal drilling rig as of
June 15, 2014.
Optimize hydrocarbon recovery through horizontal drilling and increased well density. We closely
monitor industry trends with respect to higher well density, which could increase the recovery factor per
section and enhance returns since infrastructure is typically in place. Further, we believe there are
opportunities to target various intervals in the Wolfbone play with horizontal wells. Our initial horizontal
focus has been on the Wolfcamp A, B, C and D intervals in Reeves and Ward Counties. Our first six
horizontal wells were completed in 2012, 2013 and 2014 and had lateral lengths of approximately 4,200
feet. We did drill a dual lateral horizontal, which involved reentering a well with the original lateral being
in the Wolfcamp C, and then adding an additional lateral in the Wolfcamp A above it, with the goal of
comingling production. While the second lateral was successfully drilled, it has not been completed. We
expect that the “stacked” lateral wells will result in higher per well recoveries and lower development
costs per BOE. Our future horizontal drilling program is designed to further capture the upside potential
that may exist on our properties. We also believe that “stacked” horizontal drilling program may
significantly increase our recoveries per section as compared to drilling a single horizontal well per
vertical wellbore. Horizontal drilling may also be economical in areas where vertical drilling is currently
not economical or logistically viable. In addition, we believe increased well density opportunities may
exist across our acreage base.
●
41
Table of Contents
●
Leverage our experience operating in the Permian Basin. Our executive team, which has an
average of approximately 11 years of industry experience per person and significant experience in the
Permian Basin, intends to continue to seek ways to maximize hydrocarbon recovery by refining and
enhancing our drilling and completion techniques. Our focus on efficient drilling and completion
techniques, and the reduction in time to market with our product, is an important part of the continuous
drilling program we have planned for our significant inventory of identified potential drilling locations. In
addition, we believe that the experience of our executive team in deviated and horizontal drilling and
completions should help reduce the execution risk normally associated with these complex well paths.
Additionally, our completion techniques are continually evolving as we evaluate hydraulic fracturing
practices that may potentially increase recovery and reduce completion costs. Our executive team
regularly evaluates our operating results against those of other operators in the area in an effort to
benchmark our performance against the best performing operators and evaluate and adopt best
practices.
●
Pursue strategic acquisitions with exceptional resource potential. We have a proven history of
acquiring leasehold positions in the Delaware Basin that have substantial oil-weighted resource
potential and can achieve attractive returns on invested capital. Our executive team, with its extensive
experience in the Permian Basin, has what we believes is a competitive advantage in identifying
acquisition targets and a proven ability to evaluate resource potential. We intend to continue to pursue
acquisitions that meet our strategic and financial targets.
●
Pursue additional drilling/development financing to accelerate additional drilling operations. We
have engaged investment banks to assist us in raising debt to accelerate our drilling operations. We
have received substantially positive initial feedback from private capital providers. We closed on
additional drilling/development financing on September 2, 2014.
Acquire additional development acreage through “farm in” opportunities. Because of our
management team’s strong drilling and development track record and its deep knowledge of the
Delaware Basin, we believe that we will be able to increase our acreage position at a better than market
cost through “farm in” arrangement with other leaseholders in the Delaware Basin. There are a number
of individuals and entities that have leased acreage in the Delaware Basin that do not have the
technical or capital capacity to drill and develop their acreage. Our demonstrated technical ability to drill
complicated horizontal wells, manage multi-rig drilling programs, design and execute hydraulic fracture
stimulation, and optimize production and capital efficiency enhances our position amongst our peers in
the Delaware Basin. In many leasehold positions, if the current leaseholder does not drill a well on the
acreage within the term of the lease (typically within the next two and one half years), the current
leaseholder will be contractually compelled to surrender the lease. It is more advantageous to the
current holder of the lease, assuming they do not have the ability for whatever reason to drill or develop
the lease, to allow us to drill and develop a portion of their lease as the operator through a structured
transaction wherein the current holder receives a carried interest in the lease instead of paying a large
cash sum to renew the lease. Our research indicates in excess of 100,000 acres of potential “farm in”
opportunities in its target area.
●
Our Strengths
We believe that the following strengths will help us achieve our business goals:
Oil rich resource base in one of North America’s leading resource plays. All of our leasehold
acreage is located in one of the most prolific oil plays in North America, the Delaware Basin portion of
the Permian Basin in West Texas. The majority of our current properties are well positioned in the core
of the Wolfbone play. We believe that our historical horizontal development success will be
complemented with our “stacked” horizontal drilling locations that could ultimately translate into an
increased recovery factor on a per section basis. Our production was approximately 85% oil and 15%
natural gas for the six months ended June 30, 2014. This oil exposure allows us to benefit from their
currently more favorable prices as compared to natural gas.
●
42
Table of Contents
●
Multi-year drilling inventory in one of North America’s leading oil resource plays. We have
identified a multi-year inventory of potential drilling locations for our oil-weighted reserves that we
believe provides attractive growth and return opportunities. As of June 30, 2014, based on our initial
results and those of other operators in the area to date, combined with our interpretation of various
geologic and engineering data, we have identified 360 – 600 potential horizontal locations on our
acreage. Of the potential 360 – 600 horizontal locations, thirteen of them are horizontal PUD's. These
locations exist across most of our acreage blocks and in multiple horizons. Of the 360 – 600 potential
horizontal locations, 60 are in the Wolfcamp A horizon, 60 are in the Wolfcamp B horizon, 60 are in the
Wolfcamp C and 60 are in the Wolfcamp D and the remainder in the various Bone Spring horizons. We
have not assigned any horizontal locations to the Delaware interval but believe that it may also have
development potential. Our current horizontal location count is based on 1,320 foot spacing between
wells. The ultimate inter-well spacing may be closer than 1,320 feet, which would result in a higher
location count.
Experienced, and proven management team. Our executive team has an average of approximately
11 years of industry experience per person, most of which is focused on resource play development.
●This team has a track record of executing on multi-rig development drilling programs and extensive
experience in the Permian Basin. In addition, our executive team has significant experience with both
drilling and completing horizontal wells as well as horizontal well reservoir and geologic expertise,
which will be of strategic importance as we expand our horizontal drilling activity.
●
Favorable and stable operating environment. We have focused its drilling and development
operations in the Permian Basin, one of the oldest hydrocarbon basins in the United States, with a long
and well-established production history and developed infrastructure. With approximately 380,000 wells
drilled in the Permian Basin since the 1940s, we believe that the geological and regulatory environment
is more stable and predictable, and that we are faced with fewer operational risks in the Permian Basin
as compared to emerging hydrocarbon basins.
●
High degree of operational control. We are the operator of all of our Permian Basin acreage. This
operating control allows us to better execute on its strategies of enhancing returns through operational
and cost efficiencies and increasing ultimate hydrocarbon recovery by seeking to continually improve its
drilling techniques, completion methodologies and reservoir evaluation processes. Additionally, as the
operator of substantially all of our acreage, we retain the ability to adjust its capital expenditure program
based on commodity price outlooks. This operating control also enables us to obtain data needed for
efficient exploration of horizontal prospects.
●
Financial flexibility to fund expansion. We will seek to maintain financial flexibility to allow us to
actively develop our drilling, exploitation and exploration activities in the Wolfbone play and maximize
the present value of our oil-weighted resource potential.
Review of Exploration, Exploitation and Development Activities
Area History
Location and Land – Delaware Basin Located in the Western half of the Permian Basin
The Permian Basin area covers a significant portion of western Texas and eastern New Mexico
and is considered one of the major producing basins in the United States. We acquired
approximately 1,600 gross acres directly from mineral owners in West Texas (near Pecos, Texas)
in the Delaware Basin portion of the Permian Basin in 2011. Subsequently, we acquired
approximately 9,282 additional gross acres, which brought our total gross acreage position in the
Delaware Basin to approximately 11,190 gross acres at December 31, 2013. Following recent sales
of leases and changes in our working interest, our current gross acreage is 8,972. Since our initial
acquisition, and through June 30, 2014, we have drilled seven gross horizontal wells (with one of
these wells being a dual lateral horizontal well) on our leasehold in this area, exclusively targeting
the Wolfbone play of the Delaware Basin. Through Arabella Petroleum we are the operator of
approximately all of our acreage.
43
Table of Contents
Delaware Basin Development History
Our proven reserves are located in the Permian Basin of West Texas and focused on the Delaware
Basin of West Texas and Southeast New Mexico. We believe Arabella has been instrumental in the
development of the Wolfbone unconventional play. For example, we have leased more 125,000
acres in the play beginning in 2006 and Rich Masterson, our geologist, worked with a number of
development companies in the early years of the play. The Wolfbone consists of Wolfcampian age
rocks deposited in the deep Delaware trench, which continued to fill into Leonardian time in the
Bone Spring Formations. The play was initiated when geologists identified that well samples and
mudlog oil and gas shows were in rocks not known for reservoir characteristics, but were
consistent and correlative over expansive portions of the Delaware Basin. The rock information
was from older deeper gas wells drilled for Devonian, Silurian and Ordovician age structural
entrapment. During drilling for the deeper target formations, the wells would regularly encounter oil
on the pits and high gas readings that indicated oil and gas saturation with high bottom hole
pressures. These shows were present in the 4,000 feet of silty shales in the Basin fill above the
deeper targeted formations. This shallower rock was considered at the time to be another non-
productive localized lens and only occasionally would be completed with a small acid treatment to
hold acreage over the conventional deeper gas plays. A few fields were found where very tight
sandstones were deposited, incased in the silty shales. The Gomez Wolfcamp Field was
discovered in 1976 and the wells produced at far higher productive rates than the sandstone
reservoir had capacity and capability. The poor fracture stimulations during the 1970s still drained
a portion of the surrounding siltstones. Shell Oil, Texaco and later Tenneco tried and successfully
extended the Wolfcamp sand play. Most of the area was condemned as a reservoir as being too
tight and argillaceous but most geologists recognized the Wolfcamp as being the thickest source
rock for the Basin.
In 2004, the Barnett Shale formation was being developed using large slick water fracture
stimulation to extract gas from this extremely tight shale. Chesapeake, Petrohunt, EOG and others
attempted to establish production from the Barnett in the Delaware Basin, where they encountered
good gas shows. After several attempts, the Barnett in the Delaware Basin was found to be too
tight to produce economically. However, these operators did bring the large frac jobs and
horizontal drilling to West Texas. Zones like the 3rd, or basal, Bone Spring initially was attempted in
the War-Wink West Field northwest of Pyote, Texas. In 2005, Cimarex reentered conventionally
produced thin silty sandstones and drilled out horizontally in small hole sizes and had some
economic success, completing the horizontal with multi-stage frac jobs. This developed into an
extensive expansion of the Upper 3rd Bone Spring, but the understanding of the relationship
between the 3rd Bone Spring sand reservoir and the organic rich silts of the 2nd Bone Spring and
Wolfcamp was still very limited.
In late 2009, J Cleo Thompson and Eagle Oil & Gas began to test the Bone Spring in vertical wells
in Reeves County and found it productive. Later that year J. Cleo Thompson tested only the
Wolfcampian silts, tight limes, shales and sandstones in the Floyd 43 well eight miles southeast of
Pecos, Texas. This well proved that the entire Upper Wolfcampian section of approximately 1,000
feet in thickness was productive for oil and gas, and that it was overpressured. Further,
development and denser spacing of the vertical multi-stage frac designs improved the productivity
of the wells. New frac designs with higher pump rates have also improved production.
Petrophysical information from production tests, mudlogs, cores and new electric log
combinations (CMR, Triple Combo, Sonic Scanner, Imaging tools and Lithoscanner) helped to
evaluate and segregate the better rock from the poorer and identify true frac boundaries. Recipes
for proper reservoir characteristics are now better understood. The better horizontal targets are
selected for reservoir quality and capability of staying in the objective zones while drilling
horizontally. Future study to understand the frac geometries will help determine vertical distances
between the horizontals. At least 6 separate horizontal targets per 160 acre spacing have been
identified in most of the central Delaware Basin and with at least four targets identified on the
Basin fringes.
Geology
Intense plate tectonics created the deep trench of the Delaware Basin during late Mississippian
through Pennsylvanian time. Left lateral faulting and resulting subsidence in the Delaware Basin
filling during late Pennsylvanian and Early Wolfcampian time set the stage for the deposition of the
Wolfbone play.
44
Table of Contents
The Delaware Basin has produced oil and gas from the Permian through Ellenberger age rocks. To
the east is the abrupt facies change into the shelf edge carbonates in the Bone Spring and the
6,000 feet of abrupt structural relief and facies change of the Wolfcamp. To the west of Pecos,
Texas is the northwest striking and gently eastern dipping monocline of the very asymmetrical
Delaware Basin.
The Wolfcampian age portion of the Wolfbone was deposited predominately in a starved trench
with little to no sunlight or oxygen. Having little tectonic or depositional influences during
deposition preserved this reducing environment. Most of the basinal fill is windblown silts and fine
silts caught in off shore currents. Whole core data has backed this interpretation. Pelagic algal and
other organic skeletal debris form the makeup of the thin limes that are interbedded with the silts.
Occasionally near the shelf edges, short periods of carbonate breccia and conglomerates occur
locally. Often the breccias consist of deep water Crinoid fragments. The Basin filled like a bowl with
a thick center, an abrupt eastern rim and a gently rising western flank. The geochemistry of the
organic matter within the reducing environment and depth of burial created a thick succession of
bitumen rich rock that reached a thermal maturity for oil. Interbedded with the silts are high clay
rich shales and siliceous limestones that are impermeable and create seals that help concentrate
pressure and high TOC intervals below the seals. The intervals are over pressured (pg=0.71 to
0.80). The seals are thin and are breached if near high-energy depositional facies or intense
fracturing due to deeper-seated faulting. The better wells are in the down thrown fault blocks or
grabens.
The siltstones that exhibit the best reservoir quality have low clay content, calcite cement for
brittleness, high TOCs, and larger pore throat sizes. These qualities can be recognized in the
Schlumberger logging suite.
Mudlog shows on the gas chromatograph combined with oil cuts and insoluble residues also
corroborate the electric log suite. Sidewall coring and whole core analysis tied to the logging
suites also better define cut offs for reservoir parameters. Multiple horizontal targets are selected
from these studies. All the four horizontal targets attempted to date are successful oil and gas
completions. Arabella is currently drilling in or producing from all four of the horizontal targets at
depths of 10,000 to 10,700 feet.
The Bone Spring deposition is similar to the Wolfcampian although at a shallower (8,000 to 11,100
feet) depth. The Bone Spring is divided into three Geological Formations. The deepest and oldest
is the 3rd Bone Spring deposited above the Wolfcamp. It has been extensively horizontalled
throughout the Delaware Basin with some production communication with the Upper Wolfcampian
producing horizon. The top of the 3rd Bone Spring has an ash fall structural marker that occurs in
all the basinal wells. The 3rd Bone Spring produces from a series of dolomite cemented silty sands
and vertically adjoining silty shales. It is slightly overpressured (pg. of 0.68 to 0.72).
The 2nd Bone Spring Siltstone overlies the Third Bone Spring marker. It is 300 feet thick and
mostly overpressured (pg. = 0.70). It has been tested vertically and horizontally from New Mexico to
Balmorhea, Texas. Some of the most productive tests in this zone lie near Arabella acreage
located southeast of Pecos. Horizontal wells have initially produced at rates of over 1,200
BOE/day.
The 1st Bone Spring produces from sandy siltstones and carbonate detrital interbedded with
organic rich shales. It is being extensively developed from two intervals that are locally named the
Upper and Lower Avalon. The upper pay is about 150 feet below the top of the 1st Bone Spring
Lime. The Lower Avalon is 500 feet below the top of the 1st Bone Spring Lime and appears to date
to be the better producer. A majority of the wells seem to be producing from a gas condensate
reservoir. The two zones are present throughout the Delaware Basin. A good cement job is needed
so that frac communication doesn’t occur with overlying Brushy Canyon sands, which can
contain water. These zones have higher porosities and permeabilities than the lower Bone Spring
zones and also have lower frac gradients.
Production Status
As of June 30, 2014, there was production from the SM Prewitt #1H, Locker State #1H, Graham #1H,
Woods #1H, Vastar State #1V, Jackson #1H and Emily Bell #1H wells.  We currently have seven
producing wells and have completed drilling an eighth which is waiting on completion.
45
Table of Contents
Facilities
Our land oil and gas processing facilities are typical of those found in the Permian Basin. Our
facilities located at well locations include storage tank batteries, oil/gas/water separation
equipment and pumping units.
Future Activity
During the remainder of 2014, we expect to drill an estimated three additional gross horizontal
wells on our acreage. We estimate that our capital expenditures for the next twelve months will be
approximately $40 million, which includes costs for infrastructure and non-operated wells, but
does not include the cost of any land acquisitions.
Oil and Gas Data
Proved Reserves
SEC Rule-Making Activity
In December 2008, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, released its final rule for
“Modernization of Oil and Gas Reporting.” These rules require disclosure of oil and gas proved
reserves by significant geographic area, using the arithmetic 12-month average beginning-of-the-
month price for the year, as opposed to year-end prices as had previously been required, unless
contractual arrangements designate the price to be used. Other significant amendments included
the following:
●Disclosure of unproved reserves: probable and possible reserves may be disclosed separately on a
voluntary basis.
●
Proved undeveloped reserve guidelines: reserves may be classified as proved undeveloped if there is a
high degree of confidence that the quantities will be recovered and they are scheduled to be drilled
within the next five years, unless the specific circumstances justify a longer time. Please see Regulation
S-X Rule 4-10(a)(22) (“Proved Oil and Gas Reserves”) and Rule 4-10(a)(31) (“Undeveloped Oil and
Gas Reserves”) for further information on these guidelines.
●Reserves estimation using new technologies: reserves may be estimated through the use of reliable
technology in addition to flow tests and production history.
●
Reserves personnel and estimation process: additional disclosure is required regarding the
qualifications of the chief technical person who oversees the reserves estimation process. We are also
required to provide a general discussion of our internal controls used to assure the objectivity of the
reserves estimate.
●Non-traditional resources: the definition of oil and gas producing activities has expanded and focuses
on the marketable product rather than the method of extraction.
We adopted the rules effective December 31, 2009, as required by the SEC.
Evaluation and Review of Reserves
Our historical reserve estimates were prepared by Williamson Petroleum Consultants, Inc. (“WPC”)
as of December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2013, in each case with respect to our assets in the
Permian Basin. The proportion of our total reserves covered by the reports is 100%. The
assumptions, data, methods and procedures employed by WPC are appropriate for the purpose
served by the reports and WPC has used all methods and procedures as it considered necessary
under the circumstances to prepare the reports.
WPC is an independent petroleum engineering firm registered in the state of Texas. The technical
persons responsible for preparing our proved reserve estimates meet the requirements with
regards to qualifications, independence, objectivity and confidentiality set forth in the Standards
Pertaining to the Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Gas Reserves Information promulgated by the
Society of Petroleum Engineers. WPC is an independent third-party engineering firm and owns no
interest in any of our properties or is employed by us on a contingent basis.
46
Table of Contents
Roy C. Williamson, Jr. is the Chief Executive Officer and President of WPC and is the technical
person primarily responsible for evaluating the proved reserves covered by this report. Mr.
Williamson has 57 years’ experience in evaluating oil and gas reserves, including 46 years’
experience as a consulting reservoir engineer. Mr. Williamson holds a Bachelor of Science
Degrees in Petroleum Engineering and Geological Engineering from the University of Oklahoma.
He is a Registered Professional Engineer in the States of Texas and Colorado. He is a member of
the Society of Petroleum Engineers, the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers, the Society of
Independent Professional Earth Scientists, and the Society of Petrophysicists and Well Log
Analysts.
Under SEC rules, proved reserves are those quantities of oil and natural gas, which, by analysis of
geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically
producible—from a given date forward, from known reservoirs and under existing economic
conditions, operating methods and government regulations—prior to the time at which contracts
providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain,
regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic methods are used for the estimation. If
deterministic methods are used, the SEC has defined reasonable certainty for proved reserves as
a “high degree of confidence that the quantities will be recovered.” All of our 2012 and 2013
proved reserves were estimated using a deterministic method. The estimation of reserves involves
two distinct determinations. The first determination results in the estimation of the quantities of
recoverable oil and gas and the second determination results in the estimation of the uncertainty
associated with those estimated quantities in accordance with the definitions established under
SEC rules. The process of estimating the quantities of recoverable oil and gas reserves relies on
the use of certain generally accepted analytical procedures. These analytical procedures fall into
three broad categories or methods: (1) performance-based methods, (2) volumetric-based
methods and (3) analogy. These methods may be used singularly or in combination by the reserve
evaluator in the process of estimating the quantities of reserves. The proved reserves for our
properties were estimated by performance methods, analogy or a combination of both methods.
Approximately 85% of the proved producing reserves attributable to producing wells were
estimated by performance methods. These performance methods include, but may not be limited
to, decline curve analysis, which utilized extrapolations of available historical production and
pressure data. The remaining 15% of the proved producing reserves were estimated by analogy, or
a combination of performance and analogy methods. The analogy method was used where there
were inadequate historical performance data to establish a definitive trend and where the use of
production performance data as a basis for the reserve estimates was considered to be
inappropriate. All proved developed non-producing and undeveloped reserves were estimated by
the analogy method.
To estimate economically recoverable proved reserves and related future net cash flows, WPC
considered many factors and assumptions, including the use of reservoir parameters derived from
geological, geophysical and engineering data which cannot be measured directly, economic
criteria based on current costs and the SEC pricing requirements and forecasts of future
production rates. To establish reasonable certainty with respect to our estimated proved reserves,
the technologies and economic data used in the estimation of our proved reserves included
production and well test data, downhole completion information, geologic data, electrical logs,
radioactivity logs, core analyses, available seismic data and historical well cost and operating
expense data.
Arabella maintains a staff of geoscience professionals who worked closely with our independent
reserve engineers to ensure the integrity, accuracy and timeliness of the data used to calculate our
proved reserves relating to our assets in the Permian Basin. Our internal technical team members
met with our independent reserve engineers periodically during the period covered by the reserve
report to discuss the assumptions and methods used in the proved reserve estimation process.
Arabella provides historical information to the independent reserve engineers for our properties
such as ownership interest, oil and gas production, well test data, commodity prices and operating
and development costs. Our geoscience staff has an average of approximately 39 years of
industry experience per person. Our technical staff uses historical information for our properties
such as ownership interest, oil and gas production, well test data, commodity prices and operating
and development costs.
47
Table of Contents
The preparation of our proved reserve estimates are completed in accordance with our internal
control procedures. These procedures, which are intended to ensure reliability of reserve
estimations, include the following:
●review and verification of historical production data, which data is based on actual production as
reported by Arabella;
    
 ●preparation of reserve estimates by our management team or under their direct supervision;
    
 ●direct reporting responsibilities by our management team to our Chief Executive Officer;
●verification of property ownership by our land department; and
    
 ●no employee’s compensation is tied to the amount of reserves booked.
The following table presents our estimated net proved oil and natural gas reserves and the present
value of our reserves as of December 31, 2011, December 31, 2012, December 31, 2013 and June
15, 2014, based on the reserve reports prepared by WPC, and such reserve reports have been
prepared in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC. Although a specific lease may
not have proved reserves, probable and possible reserves were assigned on the leases based on
the interpretation of geologic and engineering data of the widespread productive area of the
formations. Reserves assigned as probable or possible reflect the reduced certainty of the wells to
be drilled. Probable and possible reserves assigned were estimated using SEC rules 4-10(a)(17)
and (18) of Regulation S-X. All our proved reserves included in the reserve reports are located in
North America.
December 31, 
 
 
2013
December 31, 
 
 
2012
December 31, 
 
 
2011
Historical(1)
June 15,
 
 
2014(2)
  
  
  341.5
  719.4
  -
  461.4
Estimated proved developed reserves:
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
Estimated proved undeveloped reserves:   
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
Estimated net proved reserves:
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
Percent proved developed
Probable developed reserves
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
Probable undeveloped reserves
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
Possible developed reserves
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
1,597.8  
  3,355.4  
  -
 
  2,157.0  
   
 
  1,939.3  
  4,074.8  
  -
 
  2,618.4  
  17.6
   
  -
  -
  -
  -
   
  207.1
  435.1
  -
  279.7
   
  -
  -
  -
  -
118.5
   211.4
   -
   153.7
    
   1,421.9
   2,986.0
   -
   1,919.6
    
   1,540.4
   3,197.3
   -
   2,073.2
%   7.4
-
   -
   -
   -
    
   2,961.5
   6,219.1
   -
   3,998.0
    
   -
   -
   -
   -
7.7
   6.4
   -
   8.8
    
   158.6
   370.8
   -
   222.1
    
   166.3
   377.2
   -
   229.2
%   3.8
-
   -
   -
   -
    
   1,414.8
   1,980.7
   -
   1,744.9
    
   -
   -
   -
   -
-
   -
   -
   -
    
   13.7
   -
   -
   13.7
    
   13.7
   -
   -
   13.7
%   -
 
    
   -
 
   -
 
 
   -
   -
 
    
 
   -
 
 
   -
   -
 
   -
 
 
    
   -
 
   -
 
 
   -
   -
Possible undeveloped reserves
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
48
Table of Contents
2,752.3  
  5,779.9  
  -
 
  3,715.7
4,092.8
   8,594.9
   -
   5,525.3
297.9
   417.1
   -
   367.4
149.8
   208.5
   -
   183.6
(1)
Estimates of reserves as of June 15, 2014, December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 were prepared using
an average price equal to the unweighted arithmetic average of hydrocarbon prices received on a field-
by-field basis on the first day of each month within the 12-month periods ended June 15, 2014,
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 respectively, in accordance with revised SEC guidelines
applicable to reserves estimates as of the end of such periods. Reserve estimates do not include any
value for probable or possible reserves that may exist, nor do they include any value for undeveloped
acreage. The reserve estimates represent our net revenue interest in our properties. Although we
believes these estimates are reasonable, actual future production, cash flows, taxes, development
expenditures, operating expenses and quantities of recoverable oil and natural gas reserves may vary
substantially from these estimates.
(2)June 15, 2014 numbers are based on a preliminary reserve review performed by WPC.
The foregoing reserves are all located within the continental United States. Reserve engineering is
a subjective process of estimating volumes of economically recoverable oil and natural gas that
cannot be measured in an exact manner. The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the
quality of available data and of engineering and geological interpretation. As a result, the estimates
of different engineers often vary. In addition, the results of drilling, testing and production may
justify revisions of such estimates. Accordingly, reserve estimates often differ from the quantities
of oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered. Estimates of economically recoverable oil and
natural gas and of future net revenues are based on a number of variables and assumptions, all of
which may vary from actual results, including geologic interpretation, prices and future production
rates and costs. We has not filed any estimates of total, proved net oil or natural gas reserves with
any federal authority or agency other than the SEC.
Proved Undeveloped Reserves (PUDs)
As of June 15, 2014, our proved undeveloped reserves totaled 1,597.8 MBbls of oil and 3,355.4
MMcf of natural gas for a total of 2,157.0 MBOE. As of December 31, 2013, our proved undeveloped
reserves totaled 1,421.9 MBbls of oil and 2,986.0 MMcf of natural gas for a total of 1,919.6 MBOE.
PUDs will be converted from undeveloped to developed as the applicable wells begin production.
Changes in PUDs that occurred during 2013 were primarily due to:
●additions of 1,618.4 MBOE attributable to extensions resulting from strategic drilling of wells by Arabella
to delineate Arabella’s acreage position; and
    
 ●the conversion of approximately 144.9 MBOE from PUDs into proved developed reserves from drilling
of wells.
Costs incurred relating to the development of PUDs were approximately $12.2 million during 2013.
Estimated future development costs relating to the development of PUDs, including existing PUDs
and future PUDs developed from drilling or acquired, are projected to be approximately $40 million
over the next twelve months, $100 million in 2015, $150 million in 2016 and $150 million in 2017. As
we continue to develop our properties and have more well production and completion data, we
believe we will continue to realize cost savings and experience lower relative drilling and
completion costs as we convert PUDs into proved developed reserves in upcoming years. These
anticipated lower drilling and completion costs are not incorporated into our proved reserve
estimates as of December 31, 2013.
49
Table of Contents
The following table shows how our total net proved reserves increased from December 31, 2012 to
December 31, 2013.
Method of Increase (Decrease)
Amount of increase (decrease) 
Oil
 
(Bbls)
  (13,915
Natural Gas (Mcf)
Production
Purchase and discoveries of minerals in place  1,216,611    2,521,015
Revisions
171,385    310,181
)  (11,048
)
All of our PUD drilling locations are scheduled to be drilled prior to the end of 2017. As of
December 31, 2013, none of our total proved reserves were classified as proved developed non-
producing.
Oil and Gas Production Prices and Production Costs
Production and Price History
The following table sets forth information regarding our net production of oil, natural gas and
natural gas liquids, all of which is from the Permian Basin in West Texas, and certain price and
cost information for each of the periods indicated.
Production Data:
Oil (Bbls)
Natural gas (Mcf)
Combined volumes (BOE)
Daily combined volumes (BOE/d)
Average Prices(1):
Oil (per Bbl)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
Combined (per BOE)
Average Costs (per BOE):
Lease operating expense
Production Taxes
Production Taxes as a % of sales
Depreciation, depletion and amortization   29.78
General and Administrative
   34.54
Historical
 
December 31, 
December 31, 
December 31, 
  
  
 
 
2011
2012
2013
  
   
   
    145
    678
   13,915
    392
    1,338
   11,048
    210
    901
   15,756
   43.2
    2.5
    0.6
   
   
  
  $ 89.56
  $ 86.78
 $ 96.45
   6.88
    5.26
    9.07
    78.77
    73.11
   90.01
   
   
  
 $ 9.65
  $ 13.90
  $ 27.25
    3.90
    3.52
   4.06
    4.9
    4.8
   4.5
    33.50
    41.80
    142.50
    79.10
The average prices per barrel of oil and per BOE were $89.56 and $78.77, respectively, during the
year ended December 31, 2011, $86.78 and $73.11, respectively, during the year ended December
(1)
31, 2012, and $96.45 and $90.01, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2013.
Productive Wells
As of June 30, 2014, we owned an average 37% working interest in seven gross (2.58 net)
productive wells. Productive wells consist of producing wells and wells capable of production,
including oil wells awaiting connection to production facilities. Gross wells are the total number of
producing wells in which we have an interest, and net wells are the sum of our fractional working
interests owned in gross wells.
50
Table of Contents
Acreage
The following table sets forth information as of December 31, 2013 relating to Arabella’s leasehold
acreage:
Developed Acreage(1)  Undeveloped Acreage(2)  Total Acreage
 
  Gross(3)  
Basin
Permian  1,920.00
Gross(3)
 
   11,190.93   5,426.38
Net(4)
  Gross(3)
   570.18    9,270.93
Net(4)
   4,856.20
Net(4)
(2)
(1)Developed acres are acres spaced or assigned to productive wells and do not include undrilled
acreage held by production under the terms of the lease.
 
Undeveloped acres are acres on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would
permit the production of commercial quantities of oil or natural gas, regardless of whether such acreage
contains proved reserves.
(3)A gross acre is an acre in which a working interest is owned. The number of gross acres is the total
number of acres in which a working interest is owned.
 
A net acre is deemed to exist when the sum of the fractional ownership working interests in gross acres
equals one. The number of net acres is the sum of the fractional working interests owned in gross acres
expressed as whole numbers and fractions thereof.
(4)
Our current gross and net acreage figures are as follows for each of the following counties:
County
Reeves County  8,331.9
Ward County
Gross Acreage Net Acreage
3,810.0
    356.0
640.0
Undeveloped acreage expirations
Leases comprising the undeveloped acreage set forth in the table above will expire at the end of
their respective primary terms unless production from the leasehold acreage has been established
prior to such date, in which event the lease will remain in effect until the cessation of production.
The following table sets forth the gross and net undeveloped acreage, as of December 31, 2013,
that will expire over the next five years unless production is established within the spacing units
covering the acreage or the lease is renewed or extended under continuous drilling provisions
prior to the primary term expiration dates. No PUD reserves were scheduled in our December 31,
2013 reserve report to be drilled after the lease expiration.
Permian Basin
December 31, 2013  2,840.0   1,833.1   4030.9   2,107.0   160.0    160.0   640.0    287.6
2016
  Gross  Net
2017
  Gross  Net
2014
 Gross   Net
2015
  Gross   Net
2018
 
  Gross  Net
51
Table of Contents
Drilling Results
The following table sets forth information with respect to the number of wells completed during the
periods indicated. Each of these wells was drilled in the Delaware Basin of West Texas. The
information should not be considered indicative of future performance, nor should it be assumed
that there is necessarily any correlation between the number of productive wells drilled, quantities
of reserves found or economic value. Productive wells are those that produce commercial
quantities of hydrocarbons, whether or not they produce a reasonable rate of return.
December 31, 2013  December 31, 2012  December 31, 2011 
 
 
 Gross
 
 
 
  
 
Development:  
Productive
 
 
Dry
 
Exploratory:
Productive
 
 
Dry
 
Total:
 
Productive
Dry
Gross
   
   
    -
    -
     
    2.0
    -
     
    2.0
    -
Net
     
     
      -
      -
       
      1.3
      -
       
      1.3
      -
Gross
-
-
 
-
-
 
-
-
Net
     
     
      -
      -
       
      0.2
      -
       
      0.2
      -
Net
-
-
 
-
-
 
-
-
-
   -
    
   5.0
   -
    
   5.0
   -
As of December 31, 2013, we had 1 gross (0.53 net) well in the process of drilling, completing or
dewatering or shut in awaiting infrastructure that is not reflected in the above table.
Title to Properties
As is customary in the oil and gas industry, we initially conduct only a cursory review of the title to
our properties. At such time as we determine to conduct drilling operations on those properties,
we conduct a thorough title examination and perform curative work with respect to significant
defects prior to commencement of drilling operations. To the extent title opinions or other
investigations reflect title defects on those properties, we are typically responsible for curing any
title defects at its own expense. We generally will not commence drilling operations on a property
until we have cured any material title defects on such property. We have obtained title opinions on
all of our producing properties and believe that we have satisfactory title to our producing
properties in accordance with standards generally accepted in the oil and gas industry. Prior to
completing an acquisition of producing oil and natural gas leases, we perform title reviews on the
most significant leases and, depending on the materiality of properties, we may obtain a title
opinion, obtain an updated title review or opinion or review previously obtained title opinions. Our
oil and natural gas properties are subject to customary royalty and other interests, liens for current
taxes and other burdens which we believe do not materially interfere with the use of or affect our
carrying value of the properties.
Marketing and Customers
We market our oil and natural gas production from properties we own. We sell our oil and natural
gas to purchasers at market prices. Some of our natural gas contracts have terms of greater than
twelve months and all of our oil contracts have terms of twelve months or less.
We normally sell production to a relatively small number of customers, as is customary in the
exploration, development and production business. For 2013, two purchasers accounted for a
significant amount of our revenue: Sunoco Partners (78%) and Enterprise Crude Oil, LLC (10%). If
a major customer decided to stop purchasing oil and natural gas from us, revenue could decline
and our operating results and financial condition could be harmed in the applicable period.
However, based on the current demand for oil and natural gas, and the availability of other
purchasers, we believe that the loss of any one or all of our major purchasers would not have a
material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations, as crude oil and
natural gas are fungible products with well-established markets and numerous purchasers.
Competition
The oil and natural gas industry is intensely competitive, and we compete with other companies
that have greater resources. Many of these companies not only explore for and produce oil and
natural gas, but also carry on midstream and refining operations and market petroleum and other
products on a regional, national or worldwide basis. These companies may be able to pay more for
productive oil and natural gas properties and exploratory prospects or to define, evaluate, bid for
and purchase a greater number of properties and prospects than our financial or human
resources permit. In addition, these companies may have a greater ability to continue exploration
activities during periods of low oil and natural gas market prices. Our larger or more integrated
competitors may be able to absorb the burden of existing, and any changes to, federal, state and
local laws and regulations more easily than Arabella can, which would adversely affect our
competitive position. Our ability to acquire additional properties and to discover reserves in the
future will be dependent upon our ability to evaluate and select suitable properties and to
consummate transactions in a highly competitive environment. In addition, because Arabella has
fewer financial and human resources than many companies in our industry, we may be at a
disadvantage in bidding for exploratory prospects and producing oil and natural gas properties.
Further, oil and natural gas compete with other forms of energy available to customers, primarily
based on price. These alternate forms of energy include electricity, coal and fuel oils. Changes in
the availability or price of oil and natural gas or other forms of energy, as well as business
conditions, conservation, legislation, regulations and the ability to convert to alternate fuels and
other forms of energy may affect the demand for oil and natural gas.
52
Table of Contents
Transportation
During the initial development of our fields, we consider all gathering and delivery infrastructure in
the areas of our production. Our oil is transported from the wellhead to our tank batteries by our
gathering systems. The oil is then transported by the purchaser by truck to a tank farm where it is
further transported by pipeline. Our natural gas is generally transported from the wellhead to the
purchaser’s pipeline interconnection point through our gathering system.
Oil and Natural Gas Leases
The typical oil and natural gas lease agreement covering our properties provides for the payment
of royalties to the mineral owner for all oil and natural gas produced from any wells drilled on the
leased premises. The lessor royalties and other leasehold burdens on our properties are currently
25.00%, resulting in a net revenue to working interest owners of 75.00%.
Seasonal Nature of Business
Generally, demand for oil and natural gas decreases during the summer months and increases
during the winter months. Certain natural gas users utilize natural gas storage facilities and
purchase some of their anticipated winter requirements during the summer, which can lessen
seasonal demand fluctuations. Seasonal weather conditions and lease stipulations can limit our
drilling and producing activities and other oil and natural gas operations in a portion of our
operating areas. These seasonal anomalies can pose challenges for meeting our well drilling
objectives and can increase competition for equipment, supplies and personnel during the spring
and summer months, which could lead to shortages and increase costs or delay operations.
Regulation
Oil and natural gas operations such as ours are subject to various types of legislation, regulation
and other legal requirements enacted by governmental authorities. This legislation and regulation
affecting the oil and natural gas industry is under constant review for amendment or expansion.
Some of these requirements carry substantial penalties for failure to comply. The regulatory
burden on the oil and natural gas industry increases our cost of doing business and,
consequently, affects our profitability.
Environmental Matters and Regulation
Our oil and natural gas exploration, development and production operations are subject to
stringent laws and regulations governing the discharge of materials into the environment or
otherwise relating to environmental protection. Numerous governmental agencies, such as the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or the EPA, issue regulations which often require difficult
and costly compliance measures that carry substantial administrative, civil and criminal penalties
and may result in injunctive obligations for non-compliance. These laws and regulations may
require the acquisition of a permit before drilling commences, restrict the types, quantities and
concentrations of various substances that can be released into the environment in connection
with drilling and production activities, limit or prohibit construction or drilling activities on certain
lands lying within wilderness, wetlands, ecologically sensitive and other protected areas, require
action to prevent or remediate pollution from current or former operations, such as plugging
abandoned wells or closing pits, result in the suspension or revocation of necessary permits,
licenses and authorizations, require that additional pollution controls be installed and impose
substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from our operations or relate to our owned or operated
facilities. The strict and joint and several liability nature of such laws and regulations could impose
liability upon us regardless of fault. Moreover, it is not uncommon for neighboring landowners and
other third parties to file claims for personal injury and property damage allegedly caused by the
release of hazardous substances, hydrocarbons or other waste products into the environment.
Changes in environmental laws and regulations occur frequently, and any changes that result in
more stringent and costly pollution control or waste handling, storage, transport, disposal or
cleanup requirements could materially adversely affect our operations and financial position, as
well as the oil and natural gas industry in general. Our management believes that we are in
substantial compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations and we have not
experienced any material adverse effect from compliance with these environmental requirements.
This trend, however, may not continue in the future.
53
Table of Contents
Waste Handling
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, or RCRA, and comparable state
statutes and regulations promulgated thereunder, affect oil and natural gas exploration,
development and production activities by imposing requirements regarding the generation,
transportation, treatment, storage, disposal and cleanup of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes.
With federal approval, the individual states administer some or all of the provisions of RCRA,
sometimes in conjunction with their own, more stringent requirements. Although most wastes
associated with the exploration, development and production of crude oil and natural gas are
exempt from regulation as hazardous wastes under RCRA, such wastes may constitute “solid
wastes” that are subject to the less stringent requirements of nonhazardous waste provisions.
However, we cannot assure you that the EPA or state or local governments will not adopt more
stringent requirements for the handling of non-hazardous wastes or categorize some non-
hazardous wastes as hazardous for future regulation. Indeed, legislation has been proposed from
time to time in Congress to re-categorize certain oil and natural gas exploration, development and
production wastes as “hazardous wastes.” Any such changes in the laws and regulations could
have a material adverse effect on our capital expenditures and operating expenses.
Administrative, civil and criminal penalties can be imposed for failure to comply with waste
handling requirements. We believe that we are in substantial compliance with applicable
requirements related to waste handling, and that we hold all necessary and up-to-date permits,
registrations and other authorizations to the extent that our operations require them under such
laws and regulations. Although we does not believe the current costs of managing our wastes, as
presently classified, to be significant, any legislative or regulatory reclassification of oil and natural
gas exploration and production wastes could increase our costs to manage and dispose of such
wastes.
Remediation of Hazardous Substances
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as amended, also
known as CERCLA or the “Superfund” law, and analogous state laws, generally imposes strict
and joint and several liability, without regard to fault or legality of the original conduct, on classes
of persons who are considered to be responsible for the release of a “hazardous substance” into
the environment. These persons include the current owner or operator of a contaminated facility, a
former owner or operator of the facility at the time of contamination, and those persons that
disposed or arranged for the disposal of the hazardous substance at the facility. Under CERCLA
and comparable state statutes, persons deemed “responsible parties” may be subject to strict and
joint and several liability for the costs of removing or remediating previously disposed wastes
(including wastes disposed of or released by prior owners or operators) or property contamination
(including groundwater contamination), for damages to natural resources and for the costs of
certain health studies. In addition, it is not uncommon for neighboring landowners and other third
parties to file claims for personal injury and property damage allegedly caused by the hazardous
substances released into the environment. In the course of our operations, we use materials that, if
released, would be subject to CERCLA and comparable state statutes. Therefore, governmental
agencies or third parties may seek to hold us responsible under CERCLA and comparable state
statutes for all or part of the costs to clean up sites at which such “hazardous substances” have
been released.
54
Table of Contents
Water Discharges
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, as amended, also known as the “Clean Water
Act,” the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Oil Pollution Act, or OPA, and analogous state laws and
regulations promulgated thereunder impose restrictions and strict controls regarding the
unauthorized discharge of pollutants, including produced waters and other gas and oil wastes,
into navigable waters of the United States, as well as state waters. The discharge of pollutants into
regulated waters is prohibited, except in accordance with the terms of a permit issued by the EPA
or the state. The Clean Water Act and regulations implemented thereunder also prohibit the
discharge of dredge and fill material into regulated waters, including jurisdictional wetlands, unless
authorized by an appropriately issued permit. Spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan
requirements under federal law require appropriate containment berms and similar structures to
help prevent the contamination of navigable waters in the event of a petroleum hydrocarbon tank
spill, rupture or leak. These laws and regulations also prohibit certain activity in wetlands unless
authorized by a permit issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The EPA has also adopted
regulations requiring certain oil and natural gas exploration and production facilities to obtain
individual permits or coverage under general permits for storm water discharges. In addition, on
October 20, 2011, the EPA announced a schedule to develop pre-treatment standards for
wastewater discharges produced by natural gas extraction from underground coalbed and shale
formations. The EPA stated that it will gather data, consult with stakeholders, including ongoing
consultation with industry, and solicit public comment on a proposed rule for shale gas in 2014.
Costs may be associated with the treatment of wastewater or developing and implementing storm
water pollution prevention plans, as well as for monitoring and sampling the storm water runoff
from certain of Arabella’s facilities. Some states also maintain groundwater protection programs
that require permits for discharges or operations that may impact groundwater conditions.
The Oil Pollution Act is the primary federal law for oil spill liability. The OPA contains numerous
requirements relating to the prevention of and response to petroleum releases into waters of the
United States, including the requirement that operators of offshore facilities and certain onshore
facilities near or crossing waterways must develop and maintain facility response contingency
plans and maintain certain significant levels of financial assurance to cover potential
environmental cleanup and restoration costs. The OPA subjects owners of facilities to strict, joint
and several liability for all containment and cleanup costs and certain other damages arising from
a release, including, but not limited to, the costs of responding to a release of oil to surface waters.
Noncompliance with the Clean Water Act or OPA may result in substantial administrative, civil and
criminal penalties, as well as injunctive obligations. We believes we are in material compliance with
the requirements of each of these laws.
Air Emissions
The Federal Clean Air Act, as amended, and comparable state laws and regulations, regulate
emissions of various air pollutants through the issuance of permits and the imposition of other
requirements. The EPA has developed, and continues to develop, stringent regulations governing
emissions of air pollutants at specified sources. New facilities may be required to obtain permits
before work can begin, and existing facilities may be required to obtain additional permits and
incur capital costs in order to remain in compliance. For example, on April 17, 2012, the EPA
approved final regulations under the federal Clean Air Act that establish new emission controls for
oil and natural gas production and processing operations, which regulations are discussed in
more detail below in “ Regulation of Hydraulic Fracturing .” These laws and regulations may
increase the costs of compliance for some facilities we own or operate, and federal and state
regulatory agencies can impose administrative, civil and criminal penalties for noncompliance with
air permits or other requirements of the federal Clean Air Act and associated state laws and
regulations. We believe that we are in substantial compliance with all applicable air emissions
regulations and that we hold all necessary and valid construction and operating permits for our
operations. Obtaining or renewing permits has the potential to delay the development of oil and
natural gas projects.
55
Table of Contents
Climate Change
Many nations have agreed to limit emissions of “greenhouse gases” pursuant to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, also known as the “Kyoto Protocol.”
Methane, a primary component of natural gas, and carbon dioxide, a byproduct of the burning of
oil, natural gas and refined petroleum products, are “greenhouse gases,” or GHGs, regulated by
the Kyoto Protocol. Although the United States is not participating in the Kyoto Protocol at this
time, several states or geographic regions have adopted legislation and regulations to reduce
emissions of GHGs. Additionally, on April 2, 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled, in Massachusetts,
et al. v. EPA, that the EPA has the authority to regulate the emission of carbon dioxide from
automobiles as an “air pollutant” under the federal Clean Air Act. Thereafter, in December 2009,
the EPA issued an Endangerment Finding that determined that emissions of carbon dioxide,
methane and other GHGs present an endangerment to public health and the environment
because, according to the EPA, emissions of such gases contribute to warming of the earth’s
atmosphere and other climatic changes. These findings by the EPA allowed the agency to proceed
with the adoption and implementation of regulations that would restrict emissions of GHGs under
existing provisions of the federal Clean Air Act. Subsequently, the EPA adopted two sets of related
rules, one of which purports to regulate emissions of GHGs from motor vehicles and the other of
which regulates emissions of GHGs from certain large stationary sources of emissions such as
power plants or industrial facilities. The EPA finalized the motor vehicle rule, which purports to limit
emissions of GHGs from motor vehicles manufactured in model years 2012-2016, in April 2010 and
it became effective in January 2011, although it does not require immediate reductions in GHG
emissions. A recent rulemaking proposal by the EPA and the Department of Transportation’s
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration seeks to expand the motor vehicle rule to include
16 vehicles manufactured in model years 2017-2025. The EPA adopted the stationary source rule,
also known as the “Tailoring Rule,” in May 2010, and it also became effective in January 2011,
although it remains subject of several pending lawsuits filed by industry groups. The Tailoring
Rule establishes new GHG emissions thresholds that determine when stationary sources must
obtain permits under the Prevention of Significant Deterioration, or PSD, and Title V programs of
the Clean Air Act. The permitting requirements of the PSD program apply only to newly
constructed or modified major sources. Obtaining a PSD permit requires a source to install best
available control technology, or BACT, for those regulated pollutants that are emitted in certain
quantities. Phase I of the Tailoring Rule, which became effective on January 2, 2011, requires
projects already triggering PSD permitting that are also increasing GHG emissions by more than
75,000 tons per year to comply with BACT rules for their GHG emissions. Phase II of the Tailoring
Rule, which became effective on July 1, 2011, requires preconstruction permits using BACT for
new projects that emit 100,000 tons of GHG emissions per year or existing facilities that make
major modifications increasing GHG emissions by more than 75,000 tons per year. Phase III of the
Tailoring Rule, which is expected to go into effect in 2013, will seek to streamline the permitting
process and permanently exclude smaller sources from the permitting process. Additionally, in
September 2009, the EPA issued a final rule requiring the reporting of GHG emissions from
specified large GHG emission sources in the U.S., including natural gas liquids fractionators and
local natural gas/distribution companies, beginning in 2011 for emissions occurring in 2010. In
November 2010, the EPA expanded its existing GHG reporting rule to include onshore and
offshore oil and natural gas production and onshore processing, transmission, storage and
distribution facilities, which may include certain of Arabella’s facilities, beginning in 2012 for
emissions occurring in 2011. The EPA is also under a legal obligation pursuant to a consent
decree with certain environmental groups to issue new source performance standards for
refineries. The EPA has also adopted regulations imposing best available control technology
requirements on the largest greenhouse gas stationary sources, regulations requiring reporting of
greenhouse gas emissions from certain facilities, and it is considering additional regulation of
greenhouse gases as “air pollutants.” As a result of this continued regulatory focus, future GHG
regulations of the oil and gas industry remain a possibility.
In addition, the U.S. Congress has from time to time considered adopting legislation to reduce
emissions of greenhouse gases and almost one-half of the states have already taken legal
measures to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases primarily through the planned development
of greenhouse gas emission inventories and/or regional greenhouse gas cap and trade programs.
Although the U.S. Congress has not adopted such legislation at this time, it may do so in the future
and many states continue to pursue regulations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Most of
these cap and trade programs work by requiring major sources of emissions, such as electric
power plants or major producers of fuels, such as refineries and gas processing plants, to acquire
and surrender emission allowances that correspond to their annual emissions of GHGs. The
number of allowances available for purchase is reduced each year until the overall GHG emission
reduction goal is achieved. As the number of GHG emission allowances declines each year, the
cost or value of such allowances is expected to escalate significantly.
Regulation of Hydraulic Fracturing
Hydraulic fracturing is an important common practice that is used to stimulate production of
hydrocarbons, particularly natural gas, from tight formations, including shales. The process
involves the injection of water, sand and chemicals under pressure into formations to fracture the
surrounding rock and stimulate production. The federal Safe Drinking Water Act, or SDWA,
regulates the underground injection of substances through the Underground Injection Control, or
UIC, program. Hydraulic fracturing generally is exempt from regulation under the UIC program, and
the hydraulic fracturing process is typically regulated by state oil and gas commissions. The EPA,
however, has recently taken the position that hydraulic fracturing with fluids containing diesel fuel
is subject to regulation under the UIC program, specifically as “Class II” UIC wells. At the same
time, the White House Council on Environmental Quality is coordinating an administration–wide
review of hydraulic fracturing practices and the EPA has commenced a study of the potential
environmental impacts of hydraulic fracturing activities. Moreover, the EPA announced on October
20, 2011 that it is also launching a study regarding wastewater resulting from hydraulic fracturing
activities and currently plans to propose standards by 2014 that such wastewater must meet
before being transported to a treatment plant. As part of these studies, the EPA has requested that
certain companies provide them with information concerning the chemicals used in the hydraulic
fracturing process. These studies, depending on their results, could spur initiatives to regulate
hydraulic fracturing under the SDWA or otherwise.
56
Table of Contents
Legislation to amend the SDWA to repeal the exemption for hydraulic fracturing from the definition
of “underground injection” and require federal permitting and regulatory control of hydraulic
fracturing, as well as legislative proposals to require disclosure of the chemical constituents of the
fluids used in the fracturing process, were proposed in recent sessions of Congress. The U.S.
Congress continues to consider legislation to amend the SDWA.
On April 17, 2012, the EPA approved final regulations under the federal Clean Air Act that establish
new air emission controls for oil and natural gas production and natural gas processing
operations. Specifically, the EPA’s rule package includes New Source Performance Standards to
address emissions of sulfur dioxide and volatile organic compounds, or VOCs, and a separate set
of emission standards to address hazardous air pollutants frequently associated with oil and
natural gas production and processing activities. The final rule seeks to achieve a 95% reduction
in VOCs emitted by requiring the use of reduced emission completions or “green completions” on
all hydraulically-fractured wells constructed or refractured after January 1, 2015. The rules also
establish specific new requirements regarding emissions from compressors, controllers,
dehydrators, storage tanks and other production equipment. These rules will require a number of
modifications to our operations, including the installation of new equipment to control emissions
from our wells by January 1, 2015. Compliance with such rules could result in significant costs,
including increased capital expenditures and operating costs, and could adversely impact our
business.
In addition, there are certain governmental reviews either underway or being proposed that focus
on environmental aspects of hydraulic fracturing practices. The federal government is currently
undertaking several studies of hydraulic fracturing’s potential impacts, the results of which are
expected in 2014. These ongoing or proposed studies, depending on their degree of pursuit and
whether any meaningful results are obtained, could spur initiatives to further regulate hydraulic
fracturing under the SDWA or other regulatory authorities. The U.S. Department of Energy is
conducting an investigation into practices the agency could recommend to better protect the
environment from drilling using hydraulic-fracturing completion methods. Additionally, certain
members of Congress have called upon the U.S. Government Accountability Office to investigate
how hydraulic fracturing might adversely affect water resources, the SEC to investigate the
natural-gas industry and any possible misleading of investors or the public regarding the
economic feasibility of pursuing natural gas deposits in shale formations by means of hydraulic
fracturing, and the U.S. Energy Information Administration to provide a better understanding of
that agency’s estimates regarding natural gas reserves, including reserves from shale formations,
as well as uncertainties associated with those estimates.
Several states, including Texas, and the Department of the Interior, in a May 4, 2012 proposed rule
covering federal lands, have adopted, or are considering adopting, regulations that could restrict
or prohibit hydraulic fracturing in certain circumstances and/or require the disclosure of the
composition of hydraulic fracturing fluids. On May 31, 2011, the Texas Legislature adopted new
legislation requiring oil and gas operators to publicly disclose the chemicals used in the hydraulic
fracturing process. It was signed into law on June 17, 2011, effective as of September 1, 2011. The
Texas Railroad Commission has adopted rules and regulations implementing this legislation that
will apply to all wells for which the Railroad Commission issues an initial drilling permit on or after
February 1, 2012. The new law requires that the well operator disclose the list of chemical
ingredients subject to the requirements of the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA)
for disclosure on an internet website and also file the list of chemicals with the Texas Railroad
Commission with the well completion report. The total volume of water used to hydraulically
fracture a well must also be disclosed to the public and filed with the Texas Railroad Commission.
57
Table of Contents
There has been increasing public controversy regarding hydraulic fracturing with regard to the
use of fracturing fluids, impacts on drinking water supplies, use of water and the potential for
impacts to surface water, groundwater and the environment generally. A number of lawsuits and
enforcement actions have been initiated across the country implicating hydraulic fracturing
practices. If new laws or regulations that significantly restrict hydraulic fracturing are adopted,
such laws could make it more difficult or costly for us to perform fracturing to stimulate production
from tight formations as well as make it easier for third parties opposing the hydraulic fracturing
process to initiate legal proceedings based on allegations that specific chemicals used in the
fracturing process could adversely affect groundwater. In addition, if hydraulic fracturing is further
regulated at the federal or state level, our fracturing activities could become subject to additional
permitting and financial assurance requirements, more stringent construction specifications,
increased monitoring, reporting and recordkeeping obligations, plugging and abandonment
requirements and also to attendant permitting delays and potential increases in costs. Such
legislative changes could cause us to incur substantial compliance costs, and compliance or the
consequences of any failure to comply by us could have a material adverse effect on our financial
condition and results of operations. At this time, it is not possible to estimate the impact on our
business of newly enacted or potential federal or state legislation governing hydraulic fracturing.
Other Regulation of the Oil and Natural Gas Industry
The oil and natural gas industry is extensively regulated by numerous federal, state and local
authorities. Legislation affecting the oil and natural gas industry is under constant review for
amendment or expansion, frequently increasing the regulatory burden. Also, numerous
departments and agencies, both federal and state, are authorized by statute to issue rules and
regulations that are binding on the oil and natural gas industry and its individual members, some
of which carry substantial penalties for failure to comply. Although the regulatory burden on the oil
and natural gas industry increases our cost of doing business and, consequently, affects our
profitability, these burdens generally do not affect us any differently or to any greater or lesser
extent than they affect other companies in the industry with similar types, quantities and locations
of production.
The availability, terms and cost of transportation significantly affect sales of oil and natural gas.
The interstate transportation and sale for resale of oil and natural gas is subject to federal
regulation, including regulation of the terms, conditions and rates for interstate transportation,
storage and various other matters, primarily by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or
FERC. Federal and state regulations govern the price and terms for access to oil and natural gas
pipeline transportation. FERC’s regulations for interstate oil and natural gas transmission in some
circumstances may also affect the intrastate transportation of oil and natural gas.
Although oil and natural gas prices are currently unregulated, Congress historically has been
active in the area of oil and natural gas regulation. We cannot predict whether new legislation to
regulate oil and natural gas might be proposed, what proposals, if any, might actually be enacted
by Congress or the various state legislatures, and what effect, if any, the proposals might have on
our operations. Sales of condensate and oil and natural gas liquids are not currently regulated and
are made at market prices.
Drilling and Production
Our operations are subject to various types of regulation at the federal, state and local level. These
types of regulation include requiring permits for the drilling of wells, drilling bonds and reports
concerning operations. The state, and some counties and municipalities, in which Arabella
operates, also regulate one or more of the following:
●the location of wells;
    
●the method of drilling and casing wells;
    
●the timing of construction or drilling activities, including seasonal wildlife closures;
    
●the rates of production or “allowables”;
    
●the surface use and restoration of properties upon which wells are drilled;
●the plugging and abandoning of wells; and
    
●notice to, and consultation with, surface owners and other third parties.
58
Table of Contents
State laws regulate the size and shape of drilling and spacing units or proration units governing
the pooling of oil and natural gas properties. Some states allow forced pooling or integration of
tracts to facilitate exploration while other states rely on voluntary pooling of lands and leases. In
some instances, forced pooling or unitization may be implemented by third parties and may
reduce our interest in the unitized properties. In addition, state conservation laws establish
maximum rates of production from oil and natural gas wells, generally prohibit the venting or
flaring of natural gas and impose requirements regarding the ratability of production. These laws
and regulations may limit the amount of oil and natural gas we can produce from our wells or limit
the number of wells or the locations at which we can drill. Moreover, each state generally imposes
a production or severance tax with respect to the production and sale of oil, natural gas and
natural gas liquids within its jurisdiction. States do not regulate wellhead prices or engage in other
similar direct regulation, but we cannot assure you that they will not do so in the future. The effect
of such future regulations may be to limit the amounts of oil and natural gas that may be produced
from our wells, negatively affect the economics of production from these wells or to limit the
number of locations we can drill.
Federal, state and local regulations provide detailed requirements for the abandonment of wells,
closure or decommissioning of production facilities and pipelines and for site restoration in areas
where we operate. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and many other state and local authorities
also have regulations for plugging and abandonment, decommissioning and site restoration.
Although the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers does not require bonds or other financial assurances,
some state agencies and municipalities do have such requirements.
Natural Gas Sales and Transportation
Historically, federal legislation and regulatory controls have affected the price of the natural gas we
produce and the manner in which we market our production. FERC has jurisdiction over the
transportation and sale for resale of natural gas in interstate commerce by natural gas companies
under the Natural Gas Act of 1938 and the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978. Since 1978, various
federal laws have been enacted which have resulted in the complete removal of all price and non-
price controls for sales of domestic natural gas sold in “first sales,” which include all of our sales
of our own production. Under the Energy Policy Act of 2005, FERC has substantial enforcement
authority to prohibit the manipulation of natural gas markets and enforce its rules and orders,
including the ability to assess substantial civil penalties.
FERC also regulates interstate natural gas transportation rates and service conditions and
establishes the terms under which we may use interstate natural gas pipeline capacity, which
affects the marketing of natural gas that we produce, as well as the revenues we receive for sales
of our natural gas and release of our natural gas pipeline capacity. Commencing in 1985, FERC
promulgated a series of orders, regulations and rule makings that significantly fostered
competition in the business of transporting and marketing gas. Today, interstate pipeline
companies are required to provide nondiscriminatory transportation services to producers,
marketers and other shippers, regardless of whether such shippers are affiliated with an interstate
pipeline company. FERC’s initiatives have led to the development of a competitive, open access
market for natural gas purchases and sales that permits all purchasers of natural gas to buy gas
directly from third-party sellers other than pipelines. However, the natural gas industry historically
has been very heavily regulated; therefore, we cannot guarantee that the less stringent regulatory
approach currently pursued by FERC and Congress will continue indefinitely into the future nor
can we determine what effect, if any, future regulatory changes might have on our natural gas
related activities.
Under FERC’s current regulatory regime, transmission services must be provided on an open-
access, nondiscriminatory basis at cost-based rates or at market-based rates if the transportation
market at issue is sufficiently competitive. Gathering service, which occurs upstream of
jurisdictional transmission services, is regulated by the states onshore and in state waters.
Although its policy is still in flux, FERC has in the past reclassified certain jurisdictional
transmission facilities as non-jurisdictional gathering facilities, which has the tendency to increase
our costs of transporting gas to point-of-sale locations
59
Table of Contents
Oil Sales and Transportation
Sales of crude oil, condensate and natural gas liquids are not currently regulated and are made at
negotiated prices. Nevertheless, Congress could reenact price controls in the future.
Our crude oil sales are affected by the availability, terms and cost of transportation. The
transportation of oil in common carrier pipelines is also subject to rate regulation. FERC regulates
interstate oil pipeline transportation rates under the Interstate Commerce Act and intrastate oil
pipeline transportation rates are subject to regulation by state regulatory commissions. The basis
for intrastate oil pipeline regulation, and the degree of regulatory oversight and scrutiny given to
intrastate oil pipeline rates, varies from state to state. Insofar as effective interstate and intrastate
rates are equally applicable to all comparable shippers, Arabella believes that the regulation of oil
transportation rates will not affect our operations in any materially different way than such
regulation will affect the operations of our competitors.
Further, interstate and intrastate common carrier oil pipelines must provide service on a non-
discriminatory basis. Under this open access standard, common carriers must offer service to all
shippers requesting service on the same terms and under the same rates. When oil pipelines
operate at full capacity, access is governed by portioning provisions set forth in the pipelines’
published tariffs. Accordingly, we believes that access to oil pipeline transportation services
generally will be available to us to the same extent as to our competitors.
State Regulation
Texas regulates the drilling for, and the production, gathering and sale of, oil and natural gas,
including imposing severance taxes and requirements for obtaining drilling permits. Texas
currently imposes a 4.6% severance tax on oil production and a 7.5% severance tax on natural gas
production. States also regulate the method of developing new fields, the spacing and operation of
wells and the prevention of waste of oil and natural gas resources. States may regulate rates of
production and may establish maximum daily production allowables from 20 oil and natural gas
wells based on market demand or resource conservation, or both. States do not regulate wellhead
prices or engage in other similar direct economic regulation, but we cannot assure you that they
will not do so in the future. The effect of these regulations may be to limit the amount of oil and
natural gas that may be produced from our wells and to limit the number of wells or locations we
can drill.
The petroleum industry is also subject to compliance with various other federal, state and local
regulations and laws. Some of those laws relate to resource conservation and equal employment
opportunity. We do not believe that compliance with these laws will have a material adverse effect
on us.
Operational Hazards and Insurance
The oil business involves a variety of operating risks, including the risk of fire, explosions, blow
outs, pipe failures and, in some cases, abnormally high pressure formations which could lead to
environmental hazards such as oil spills, natural gas leaks and the discharge of toxic gases. If any
of these should occur, we could incur legal defense costs and could be required to pay amounts
due to injury, loss of life, damage or destruction to property, natural resources and equipment,
pollution or environmental damage, regulatory investigation and penalties and suspension of
operations.
In accordance with what we believe to be industry practice, we maintain insurance against some,
but not all, of the operating risks to which our business is exposed. We currently have insurance
policies for onshore property (oil lease property/production equipment) for selected locations, rig
physical damage protection, control of well protection for selected wells, comprehensive general
liability, commercial automobile, workers compensation, pollution liability (claims made coverage
with a policy retroactive date), excess umbrella liability and other coverage.
Our insurance is subject to exclusion and limitations, and there is no assurance that such
coverage will fully or adequately protect us against liability from all potential consequences,
damages and losses. Any of these operational hazards could cause a significant disruption to our
business. A loss not fully covered by insurance could have a material adverse effect on our
financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
60
Table of Contents
We reevaluate the purchase of insurance, policy terms and limits annually. Future insurance
coverage for our industry could increase in cost and may include higher deductibles or retentions.
In addition, some forms of insurance may become unavailable in the future or unavailable on terms
that we believe are economically acceptable. No assurance can be given that we will be able to
maintain insurance in the future at rates that we consider reasonable and we may elect to maintain
minimal or no insurance coverage. We may not be able to secure additional insurance or bonding
that might be required by new governmental regulations. This may cause us to restrict our
operations, which might severely impact our financial position. The occurrence of a significant
event, not fully insured against, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and
results of operations.
Generally, we also require our third party vendors to sign master service agreements in which they
agree to indemnify us for injuries and deaths of the service provider’s employees as well as
contractors and subcontractors hired by the service provider.
Employees
As of June 30, 2014, we had 14 full time employees. None of our employees are represented by
labor unions or covered by any collective bargaining agreements. We also hire independent
contractors and consultants involved in land, technical, regulatory and other disciplines to assist
our full time employees.
Facilities
Our corporate headquarters is located in Midland, Texas. We believe that our facilities are
adequate for our current operations.
61
Table of Contents
DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
Directors and Senior Management
Our current directors and executive officers are as follows:
Age Title
 33  Chief Executive Officer, President and Director
Name
Jason Hoisager
Terry E. Sanford  59  Chief Financial Officer
Berke Bakay
 35  Director
Richard J. Hauser 52  Director
William B. Heyn  43  Director
Jason Hoisager has been our Chief Executive Officer, President and a member of our board of
directors since December 24, 2013. Mr. Hoisager was the founder and President of Arabella LLC, a
company he established in 2008. Mr. Hoisager is also the founder and President of Arabella
Petroleum Company, LLC, which currently is the operator for our properties. He is responsible for
asset acquisition, business planning and the overall management of a growing operating
company. Prior to Arabella LLC, Mr. Hoisager served as an independent landman and was
instrumental in planning strategic land purchases, identifying investment partners, acquiring
leases and marketing to operators seeking entry into the resource plays of North and West Texas.
He began his career in 2005 as an independent landman acquiring leases, maintaining ownership
reports and managing a land crew in Reeves County. Mr. Hoisager attended Texas Tech University
where he studied Finance and Accounting and discovered his interest in the oil and gas industry.
Mr. Hoisager is well qualified to serve as a director of the combined company due to his extensive
experience in oil and gas and in acquiring, developing and operating properties, especially in the
Southern Delaware Basin.
Terry E. Sanford has been our Chief Financial Officer since December 24, 2013. Mr. Sanford has
been the Chief Financial Officer of Arabella LLC since November 2013. Mr. Sanford manages the
Accounting, Finance and Investor Relations departments and roles for Arabella LLC. Mr. Sanford
is a CPA and has a bachelor’s degree in Accounting from Sam Houston State University and a
MBA in Finance from the University of Houston. Mr. Sanford is currently on the Board of Directors
of the Houston, Texas Chapter of Financial Executives International and previously served as the
President of the Chapter. Mr. Sanford has served as the Controller, Chief Accounting Officer,
Treasurer and Chief Financial Officer in various industries including manufacturing, construction,
consumer products, financial services and real estate. Prior to joining Arabella, in 2013, Mr.
Sanford was the Chief Financial Officer for Automation Technology, Inc. a privately owned
company that manufactures actuators for valves on oil and gas pipelines. Mr. Sanford worked for
Carriage Services, Inc. (NYSE: CSV) from 1997 to 2012 where he had substantial experience in
public company financial reporting, investor relations and mergers and acquisitions. Mr. Sanford’s
last position at Carriage Services, Inc. was Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and
Chief Accounting Officer. Prior to Carriage Services, Inc., Mr. Sanford was the Chief Financial
Officer for Enduro Systems, Inc. from 1996 to 1997, a company that manufactured oil and gas
refinery products nationally and internationally. Mr. Sanford worked for Petrolon, Inc., an oil
lubricants company, from 1992 to 1995 as the Corporate Controller. Mr. Sanford also worked in
public accounting from 1982 to 1992, including PricewaterhouseCoopers, in the audit department
where he served various companies in the oil and gas industries, including Exploration and
Production and Drilling Companies. Prior to his public accounting tenure, Mr. Sanford was the
Treasurer for Farr Oil Tool, a privately owned company that manufactured oil and gas completion
equipment.
Berke Bakay has been a member of our board of directors since inception. From inception until
the close of the business combination, Mr. Bakay was the Executive Chairman of our board. Mr.
Bakay has been the President and Chief Executive Officer of Kona Grill, Inc. (NASDAQ: KONA), an
American grill and sushi bar (“Kona”) since January 2012. He has also serves on the board of
directors of Kona. Mr. Bakay founded BBS Capital Management, LP, a Texas limited partnership
that serves as the investment manager to the BBS Capital Fund, LP, in January 2008 and has
served as its managing member since its formation. Prior to forming BBS Capital Management, LP,
Mr. Bakay was the co-founder and co-portfolio manager of Patara Capital, L.P., an investment
management firm based in Dallas, Texas from January 2006 through December 2007. From May
2005 through January 2006, Mr. Bakay was an equity analyst at Southwest Securities, Inc., a
subsidiary of SWS Group, Inc. (NYSE: SWS), a financial services company, where he covered the
specialty retail industry. Mr. Bakay currently serves on the board of directors of Kona Grill, Inc.
(NASDAQ: KONA), an American grill and sushi bar. Mr. Bakay graduated from Boston College,
Carroll School of Management with a Bachelor of Science in finance and from Boston College,
Carroll School of Management with a Master of Science in Finance. Mr. Bakay is well qualified to
serve as our director as a result of his experience with public companies as well as his expertise in
the capital markets.
62
Table of Contents
Richard J. Hauser has been a member of our Board of Directors since December 24, 2013. He had
been a member of our advisory committee from our inception through December 24, 2013. Mr.
Hauser has served as a director of Kona Grill, Inc. (NASDAQ: KONA) since December 2004. Mr.
Hauser serves as the President and owner of Capital Real Estate, Inc., a commercial real estate
development company based in Minneapolis, Minnesota, which he founded in 2001. In addition,
Mr. Hauser is the Manager and owner of Net Lease Development, LLC, which is a controlled
operating company under Capital Real Estate, Inc., as well as a member and managing partner of
several other partnerships formed for real estate and related ventures. Prior to founding Capital
Real Estate, Inc. and Net Lease Development, LLC, Mr. Hauser served as a partner with Reliance
Development Company, LLC from 1992 to 2001, where he was responsible for the management,
development, and sale of retail properties. Mr. Hauser has a strong executive background in
commercial real estate and finance, with extensive experience in business operations and
strategic planning. Mr. Hauser has an undergraduate degree in Business and Liberal Arts from the
University of Minnesota and a graduate degree in Real Estate and Finance from the University of
Denver. Mr. Hauser is well qualified to serve as our director as a result of his experience in
business management and development.
William B. Heyn has been a member of our Board of Directors since December 24, 2013. He had
been a member of our advisory committee from our inception through December 24, 2013. Since
2007, Mr. Heyn has been Chief Executive Officer of Tritaurian Capital, Incorporated, a FINRA
registered broker-dealer. From 2001 to the present, Mr. Heyn has been a Managing Director with
Tritaurian Capital, Incorporated, and its predecessor companies. Tritaurian Capital serves small
and middle market companies with investment banking, specialty financing and mergers and
acquisitions advisory. Additionally, Mr. Heyn is a Managing Partner of Tritaurian Resources,
Incorporated an international commodities broker and advisory firm. From 2004 to the present, Mr.
Heyn has been a partner in E. J. McKay & Co., Inc., an international investment bank based in
Shanghai. Prior to 2001, Mr. Heyn held various investment banking positions in the financial
industry including in the Investment Banking Division of Merrill Lynch, the Mergers and
Acquisitions Group of J. P. Morgan and the Corporate Finance Department of Morgan Stanley. Mr.
Heyn was an advisor to CS China Acquisition Corp., a Specified Purpose Acquisition Corporation
that subsequently merged with a target in China to form Iao Kun Group Holdings Company Limited
(previously known as Asia Entertainment & Resources Ltd.), which is listed on the NASDAQ Stock
Market (NASDAQ: IKGH). Mr. Heyn was an advisor to China Unistone Acquisition Corp., a
Specified Purpose Acquisition Corporation that subsequently merged with a target in China to
form Yucheng Technologies Limited, which is listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market (NASDAQ:
YTEC). Mr. Heyn received a B.A. from Yale University with majors in history and political science
and currently holds Series 7, 24, 63, 79 and 99 securities licenses. Mr. Heyn is well qualified to
serve as our director as a result of his experience in capital markets, mergers and acquisitions and
public company corporate governance and management.
Family relationships
None.
Board Committees
Our board of directors has established an audit committee, a compensation committee and a
nominating committee.
Audit Committee. The audit committee currently consists of William B. Heyn. Additional members
are expected to be appointed in the near future. Mr. Heyn is the chair of the audit committee, and
the board of directors believes that Mr. Heyn qualifies as an “audit committee financial expert”, as
such term is defined in the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission. The board of
directors intends to adopt an audit committee charter in the near future.
63
Table of Contents
Compensation Committee. The compensation committee consists of Berke Bakay. Additional
members are expected to be appointed in the near future. Mr. Bakay is the chair of our
compensation committee. Berke Bakay does not have any direct or indirect material relationship
with us other than as a director. Our board of directors intends to adopt a compensation
committee charter in the near future.
Nominating Committee. The nominating and corporate governance committee consists of Richard
Hauser. Additional members are expected to be appointed in the near future. Mr. Hauser is the
chair of our nominating and corporate governance committee. Richard Hauser does not have any
direct or indirect material relationship with us other than as a director. Our board of directors
intends to adopt a nominating committee charter in the near future
In making nominations, the nominating and corporate governance committee is required to submit
candidates who have the highest personal and professional integrity, who have demonstrated
exceptional ability and judgment and who shall be most effective, in conjunction with the other
nominees to the board, in collectively serving the long-term interests of the shareholders. In
evaluating nominees, the nominating and corporate governance committee is required to take into
consideration the following attributes, which are desirable for a member of the board: leadership,
independence, interpersonal skills, financial acumen, business experiences, industry knowledge,
and diversity of viewpoints.
Director Independence
Our Board of Directors has determined that Messrs. Richard Hauser, Berke Bakay and William B.
Heyn qualify as independent directors under the rules of the Nasdaq Stock Market because they
are not currently employed by us, and do not fall into any of the enumerated categories of people
who cannot be considered independent in the Nasdaq Stock Market Rules.
Compensation
Director Compensation
All of our directors presently receive annual compensation of $30,000 in cash and 20,000 options
to purchase our ordinary shares at an exercise price to be set on January 30th of each fiscal year
after 2014. The directors of the Company are entitled to receive an initial grant of 30,000 options to
purchase our ordinary shares upon joining the board. Since each of our directors joined our board
in 2014, each is entitled to at total of 50,000 options for fiscal 2014 set at the an exercise price of
$6.15, the closing price of our ordinary shares on May 4, 2014, the last close prior to the plan being
adopted. The chairman of the audit committee receives additional annual cash compensation of
$10,000 and the other members of the audit committee each receive additional annual cash
compensation of $5,000. The chairman of the compensation and nominating committees each
receive additional annual cash compensation of $5,000 and the other members of these
committees each receive additional annual cash compensation of $3,000. Each director receives
$1,500 for each board meeting and $1,000 for committee meeting that he or she attends in person
and $500 for each board or committee meeting he or she attends telephonically. Additionally our
board members are reimbursed for all travel and other costs associated with their service on our
board.
Executive Compensation
Overview of our Executive Compensation
Arabella currently pays annual cash compensation to each of Jason Hoisager and Terry E.
Sanford and of $300,000 and $280,000, respectively. Mr. Hoisager did not receive any
compensation in 2012 and Mr. Sanford was not employed by Arabella during this time.
64
Table of Contents
Grants of Plan Based Awards
None of our named executives currently participates in or have account balances in any plan
based award programs. Future bonus plans will be adopted by the board of directors.
Employment Agreements
On December 24, 2013, we entered into an employment agreement with Jason Hoisager pursuant
to which Mr. Hoisager agreed to act as our Chief Executive Officer and President. The employment
agreement has a term of one year and will automatically renew for additional one-year terms after
the end of the initial term if the agreement is not terminated at least 90 days prior to the end of the
applicable term. The employment agreement provides for a base salary of $300,000 a year, with
bonus determined by our board of directors. If the board of directors terminates the agreement
without cause, Mr. Hoisager terminates the employment agreement for good reason, or Mr.
Hoisager’s employment is terminated within six months after a change in control, Mr. Hoisager will
be entitled to severance equal to 24 months of his base salary and an amount equal to his bonus
for the prior year.
Outstanding Equity Awards; Option Exercises and Stock Vested
As of the date hereof, none of our named executives have ever held options to purchase interests
in us or other awards with values based on the value of our interests. Mr. Hoisager is entitled to
receive ordinary shares pursuant to certain earnout provisions contained in the document relating
to our merger.
As more thoroughly described herein, as of the date hereof, a total of 250,000 options to purchase
our ordinary shares had been issued to our directors. As of the date hereof 93,750 of these
options had vested.
Pension Benefits
None of our named executives currently participates in or has account balances in qualified or
nonqualified defined benefit plans sponsored by us.
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation
None of our named executives currently participates in or has account balances in nonqualified
defined contribution plans or other deferred compensation plans maintained by us.
Potential Payments upon Termination or Change in Control
Mr. Hoisager’s employment agreement provides for certain payments in the event of his
termination or a change in control of the company. If the board of directors terminates the
agreement without cause, Mr. Hoisager terminates the employment agreement for good reason, or
Mr. Hoisager’s employment is terminated within six months after a change of control, Mr. Hoisager
will be entitled to severance equal to 24 months of his base salary and an amount equal to his
bonus for the prior year.
Employees
As at June 30, 2014, we had two executive officers and 12 other employees. None of our
employees are represented by labor unions or covered by any collective bargaining agreements.
We also hire independent contractors and consultants involved in land, technical, regulatory and
other disciplines to assist our full time employees.
Principal Legal Advisers
Arabella’s principal legal adviser in the United States is Loeb & Loeb LLP, located at 345 Park
Avenue, New York, NY 10154. Arabella’s principal legal adviser in the Cayman Islands is Conyers
Dill & Pearman, located at Boundary Hall, 2nd Floor, Cricket Square, PO Box 2681, Grand Cayman,
KY1-1111, Cayman Islands.
65
Table of Contents
PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDERS
The following table sets forth information with respect to the beneficial ownership, within the
meaning of Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act, of our ordinary shares, as of November 21, 2014:
●each person known to us to own beneficially more than 5% of our ordinary shares;
    
 ●each of our directors and executive officers; and
    
 ●all of our directors and executive officers as a group.
Beneficial ownership includes voting or investment power with respect to the securities and takes
into consideration options or warrants exercisable by a person within 60 days after the date of this
report. Except as indicated below, and subject to applicable community property laws, the persons
named in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to all securities shown as
beneficially owned by them.
Name and Address (1)
Directors and executive officers:
Berke Bakay(3)
Jason Hoisager
Terry E. Sanford
Richard J. Hauser(4)
William B. Heyn(5)
 
All directors and executive officers as a group (5 individuals)   8,549,186
 
Principal shareholders:
BBS Capital Fund, LP(3)
Hauser Holdings LLC(4)
Greg McCabe
Platinum Long Term Growth VIII, LLC(6)
Legion Partners Holdings, LLC(7)
AQR Capital Management, LLC(8)
John V. Calce(9)
James R. Preissler(10)
3,278,428
   3,278,428
   1,003,597
   1,300,000
   700,434
   384,960
   267,662
   267,662
Number of Shares
 
Beneficially Owned
  
  
   3,306,105
   1,659,489
   0
   3,297,178
   286,414
Percentage of
  
Ownership (2)  
 
   
 
   
 
    41.5
 
    33.1
    *
 
 
    41.4
 
    5.5
     
 
 
    77.0
 
     
     
 
 
    41.2
 
    41.2
    20.0
 
    20.6
 
    12.2
    7.1
    5.2
    5.2
* less than one percent (1%).
(1) Unless otherwise noted, the business address for each of our beneficial owners is 500 W.
Texas Avenue, Suite 1450, Midland, Texas 79701.
(2) Based on 5,020,303 ordinary shares outstanding as of November 21, 2014, excluding treasury
shares. Warrants are deemed to be outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage
ownership of the indicated individual or group, but are not deemed to be outstanding for the
purpose of computing the percentage ownership of any other person shown in the table.
(3) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Bakay consists of (i) 345,928 ordinary
shares beneficially owned by BBS Capital Fund, LP, (ii) 8,927 ordinary shares owned by Mr. Bakay,
(iii) 18,750 options to purchase ordinary shares owned by Mr. Bakay and (iv) warrants exercisable
for 2,932,500 ordinary shares, all of which are owned by BBS Capital Fund, LP. Mr. Bakay and BBS
Capital Fund, LP have sole voting and dispositive power over all such securities. The address of
BBS Management Group is 5524 E. Estrid Avenue, Scottsdale, Arizona 85254. Messrs. Heyn, Calce
and Preissler each have an option to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares (742,500 in
the aggregate) from BBS Capital Fund, LP.
66
(4) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Hauser consists of (i) 345,928
ordinary shares beneficially owned by Hauser Holdings, LLC, (ii) 18,750 options to purchase
ordinary shares owned by Mr. Hauser, and (iii) warrants exercisable for 2,932,500 ordinary shares,
all of which are owned by Hauser Holdings, LLC. Mary Jane Hauser has sole voting and
dispositive power over all securities held by Hauser Holdings LLC. The address of Hauser
Holdings LLC is 50 South Sixth Street, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55402. Ms. Hauser is the wife of
Richard J. Hauser, one of our directors. Messrs. Heyn, Calce and Preissler each have an option to
purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares (742,500 in the aggregate) from Hauser Holdings,
LLC.
(5) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Heyn consists of (i) 102,664 ordinary
shares, (ii) 18,750 options to purchase ordinary shares and (iii) warrants exercisable for 165,000
ordinary shares. Mr. Heyn has an option from each of BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings,
LLC to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares (495,000 in the aggregate).
(6) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Platinum Long Term Growth VIII, LLC
consist of warrants exercisable for 1,300,000 ordinary shares. The business address of Platinum
Long Term Growth VIII, LLC is 152 West 57th Street, 4th Floor, New York, New York 10019.
(7) Based on a Schedule 13G filed on November 12, 2014 by Legion Partners Holdings, LLC. The
number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Legion Partners Holdings, LLC consists of
warrants exercisable for 700,434 ordinary shares. Legion Partners Holdings, LLC is the sole
member of Legion Partners Asset Management, LLC and managing member of Legion Partners,
LLC, each of which may be deemed beneficial owners of these warrants. Legion Partners, LLC
serves as the general partner of each of Legion Partners, L.P. I which owns 584,364 warrants and
Legion Partners, L.P. II, which owns 115,070 warrants. Additionally each of Messrs. Christopher S.
Kiper, Bradley S. Vizi and Raymond White, whom serve as managing directors of Legion Partners
Asset Management, LLC and managing members of Legion Partners Holdings, LLC, may be
deemed the beneficial owners of the aggregate 700,434 warrants owned by Legion Partners, L.P. I
and Legion Partners, L.P. II. The principal business address of each reporting person is 9401
Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 705, Beverly Hills, California 90212.
(8) Based on a Schedule 13G filed on February 7, 2014 by AQR Capital Management, LLC. The
number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by AQR Capital Management, LLC consists of
warrants exercisable for 384,960 ordinary shares. The address of the business office of AQR
Capital Management, LLC is Two Greenwich Plaza, 3rd Floor, Greenwich, Connecticut 06830.
(9) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Calce consists of (i) 102,662 ordinary
shares and (ii) warrants exercisable for 165,000 ordinary shares. The business address of Mr.
Calce is 17950 Preston Road, Suite 1080A Dallas, Texas 75252. Mr. Calce has an option from each
of BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares
(495,000 in the aggregate).
(10) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Preissler consists of (i) 102,662
ordinary shares and (ii) warrants exercisable for 165,000 ordinary shares. The business address of
Mr. Preissler is 50 Old Route 25A Fort Salonga, NY 11768. Mr. Preissler has an option from each of
BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, LLC to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500
shares (495,000 in the aggregate).
As of November 21, 2014, approximately 99% of our outstanding ordinary shares are held by 17
record holders in the United States.
67
SHARES ELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE SALE
We have 5,020,303 shares outstanding as of November 21, 2014. Of these shares, 678,201 are
freely tradable without restriction or further registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended. Additionally, any of these shares held by affiliates, as that term is defined in Rule 144
under the Securities Act, which generally includes officers, directors or 10% shareholders, will also
be restricted from public sale as restricted stock.
There are up to 1,705,002 ordinary shares issuable pursuant to our earnout obligation related to
our acquisition of Arabella LLC.
There are 250,000 director options to purchase ordinary shares.
There are 1,300,000 warrants issued in conjunction with the sale of our Senior Secured Notes.
There are 4,106,500 outstanding warrants that were issued in our initial public offering, each for the
purchase of one share. The shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants will also be freely
tradable, provided that there is a registration statement in effect at the time of their exercise. We
intend to use its best efforts to cause such a registration statement to be in effect at that time that
the warrants become exercisable. The securities underlying the representative’s unit purchase
option and underlying securities have registration rights and may be sold according to Rule 144.
In addition, our founding shareholders own warrants to purchase 6,600,000 shares, which
warrants and the underlying shares are also restricted securities under Rule 144. None of these
restricted securities will be eligible for sale under Rule 144 prior to January 1, 2015 (one year
following the filing of certain information with the SEC (Form 10 information) after the
consummation of our initial business combination).
Also, in connection with our initial public offering, we issued EarlyBirdCapital, Inc., the
representative of the underwriters, a unit purchase option to purchase 400,000 units, each unit
consisting of one ordinary share and one warrant, each to purchase one ordinary share.
Therefore, as of November 21, 2014, there are an aggregate of 13,056,500 shares that may be
issued in the future upon exercise of outstanding warrants and options.
Rule 144. Rule 144 is unavailable for the resale of restricted securities initially issued by a blank-
check or shell company, both before and after an initial business combination, despite technical
compliance with the requirements of Rule 144. Accordingly, such restricted securities can be
resold only through a registered offering or pursuant to another exemption from registration.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person who beneficially owns restricted securities of a company
which:
1.has ceased to qualify as a blank-check or shell company;
    
2.is subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act;
has filed all reports and other materials required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d), as applicable, during
3.the preceding 12 months (or such shorter period that the company was required to file such reports and
materials); and
4.
has filed certain information with the SEC (Form 10 information) reflecting that it is no longer a blank-
check or shell company
may, after one year has elapsed from the filing of the Form 10 information, within any three-month
period resell a number of such restricted securities that does not, with respect to the shares,
exceed the greater of either of the following:
1.1% of the total number of shares then outstanding; or
2.
the average weekly trading volume of the shares during the four calendar weeks preceding the filing of
a notice on Form 144 with respect to the sale.
Sales under Rule 144 are also limited based on the availability of current public information about
us, and, in the case of sales by affiliates, by manner of sale provisions and notice requirements.
68
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
In June 2010, our initial shareholders acquired an aggregate of 1,150,000 initial shares for an
aggregate purchase price of $25,000. Following the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-
allotment option on March 20, 2011, an aggregate of 123,375 initial shares were forfeited for no
consideration. As a result our initial shareholders own an aggregate of 1,026,625 initial shares.
Immediately prior to the consummation of our IPO, certain of our initial shareholders purchased an
aggregate of 6,600,000 warrants for an aggregate purchase price of $2,310,000, or $0.35 per
warrant. We refer to these warrants as the “insider warrants.” The insider warrants are identical to
the warrants underlying the units sold in our IPO, except that the insider warrants may be
exercised on a cashless basis so long as such warrants are held by the purchasers or permitted
assigns.
Concurrently with our IPO, we issued to EarlyBirdCapital, Inc. (“EBC”), the representative of the
underwriters of our IPO as additional compensation, for a purchase price of $100, a unit purchase
option to purchase 400,000 units for $8.80 per unit. The units issuable upon exercise of this option
are identical to those sold in the IPO, with the exception of containing a provision for cashless
exercise by EBC. The unit purchase option is currently exercisable, in whole or in part, and expires
on the March 16, 2016.
The holders of the initial shares, as well as the holders of the insider warrants (and underlying
securities), will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to an agreement that was signed at the
time of our IPO. The holders of our initial shares issued and outstanding on March 16, 2011, as well
as the holders of the insider warrants (and underlying securities), will be entitled to registration
rights pursuant to an agreement that was signed on March 16, 2011. The holders of the majority of
these securities are entitled to make up to two demands that we register such securities. The
holders of the majority of the initial shares can elect to exercise these registration rights at any
time commencing three months prior to the date on which these Ordinary Shares are to be
released from escrow. The holders of a majority of the insider warrants (or underlying securities)
can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time. In addition, the holders have certain
“piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our
consummation of a business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with
the filing of any such registration statements.
Below is a list of companies that Jason Hoisager has had, or currently has, an interest in, along
with a description of the relationship to that company to us:
Arabella Petroleum Company, LLC (APC) was the historical operator of record for properties
owned by us. APC is owned by Jason Hoisager. We owed $11,920,783 and $3,695,119 for joint
interest billings to APC as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, respectively. As of June, 2014
and December 31, 2013, respectively, APC owed us $954,645 and $425,372 in its proportionate
share of revenues from oil and gas sales. During the six months ended June 30, 2014 and the year
ended 2013, respectively, we paid APC $5,855,814 and $3,589,903 in capital costs associated with
our portion of well drilling and maintenance costs incurred by APC.
Trans-Texas Land & Title, LLC (TTLT) has performed mineral ownership reports on lands for us in
the past, and may do so in the future. Mr. Hoisager owns 100% of the equity interests of TTLT.
There was an intercompany transfer of $3,500 in 2011. The funds were transferred into Arabella
Exploration, LLC and then transferred out of Arabella Exploration, LLC less than one week later.
We are indebted to Jason Hoisager for $3,007,170 as of June 30, 2014, which relates to oil and gas
properties that Mr. Hoisager had APC transfer at cost to us. This indebtedness is evidenced by a
subordinated unsecured promissory note, which note bears no interest and matures in 2023.
69
On May 1, 2014 we received a loan from Hauser Holdings, LLC an affiliate of Richard Hauser, one
of our directors. The $800,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per
annum. This loan was repaid on September 4, 2014 along with $28,222 of accrued interest.
On June 10, 2014 we received a loan from BBS Capital Fund, LP an affiliate of Berke Bakay, one of
our directors. The $500,000 loan was due August 31, 2014 and bore an interest rate of 10% per
annum. This loan was repaid on September 4, 2014 along with $12,500 of accrued interest.
On June 26, 2014 our Chief Executive Officer Jason Hoisager has purchased 190,477 of the
Company’s ordinary shares for $10.50 a share in a private subscription. The shares were new
issue shares of the company.
On September 4, 2014 we repaid our loans from BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, LLC
with accrued interest for total repayment of $512,500 and $828,222, respectively.
70
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
The following description of the material terms of our shares and warrants includes a summary of
specified provisions of the Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association. This
description is subject to the relevant provisions of the Companies Law of the Cayman Islands (as
amended) and is qualified by reference to our Memorandum of Association and Articles of
Association, copies of which are incorporated in this registration statement by reference.
General
We are authorized to issue 50,000,000 ordinary shares. As of November 21, 2014, 5,020,303
ordinary shares are outstanding, held by 19 holders of record. No shares of preferred stock are
currently outstanding.
Shares
Our shareholders of record are entitled to one vote for each share held on all matters to be voted
on by shareholders.
Members of our Board of Directors serve for indefinite terms. There is no cumulative voting with
respect to the election of directors, with the result that the holders of more than 50% of the shares
eligible to vote for the election of directors can elect all of the directors.
Our shareholders have no conversion, preemptive or other subscription rights and there are no
sinking fund or redemption provisions applicable to the shares.
Warrants
We have 12,006,500 warrants outstanding as of November 21, 2014, entitling the registered holder
to purchase one share at $5.00 per share. Of these warrants, 6,600,000 are held by our founders
and are not redeemable due to restrictions on the ability of these persons to trade our securities.
Each warrant entitles the registered holder to purchase one share of our ordinary shares at a price
of $5.00 per share, subject to adjustment as discussed below.
4,106,500 of the warrants were issued in conjunction with our initial public offering and will expire
at 5:00 p.m., New York City time on December 24, 2016. We may call these warrants for redemption:
●in whole and not in part;
    
●at a price of $.01 per warrant at any time after the warrants become exercisable;
    
●upon not less than 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption to each warrantholder; and
●
if, and only if, the reported last sale price of the ordinary shares equals or exceeds $10.50 per share, for
any 20 trading days within a 30 trading day period ending on the third business day prior to the notice of
redemption to warrantholders.
The warrants have been issued in registered form under a warrant agreement between Continental
Stock Transfer & Trust Company, as warrant agent, and us.
1,300,000 of the warrants were issued in conjunction with the sale of our Senior Secured Notes on
September 2, 2014 and will expire at 5:00 p.m., New York City time on September 2, 2019. These
warrants are exercisable at $5.00 per share, are not publicly listed and we cannot call them for
redemption.
71
The exercise price and number of shares of ordinary shares issuable on exercise of the warrants
may be adjusted in certain circumstances, including in the event of a stock dividend,
recapitalization, reorganization, stock purchase or consolidation of the company. However, the
warrants will not be adjusted for issuances of ordinary shares at a price below their respective
exercise prices.
The warrants may be exercised upon surrender of the warrant certificate on or prior to the
expiration date at the offices of the warrant agent, with the exercise form on the reverse side of the
warrant certificate completed and executed as indicated, accompanied by full payment of the
exercise price, by certified check payable to us, for the number of warrants being exercised. The
warrantholders do not have the rights or privileges of holders of ordinary shares and any voting
rights until they exercise their warrants and receive ordinary shares. After the issuance of shares
of ordinary shares upon exercise of the warrants, each holder will be entitled to one vote for each
share held of record on all matters to be voted on by stockholders.
With the exception of the Insider Warrants and the warrants issued in connection with our
September 2, 2014 financing, which may currently be exercised, no warrants will be exercisable
unless at the time of exercise a prospectus relating to the ordinary shares issuable upon exercise
of the warrant is current and the ordinary shares has been qualified (or is exempt from
qualification) in the jurisdictions in which the holders of the warrants reside. Under the terms of the
warrant agreement, we have agreed to maintain a current prospectus relating to the ordinary
shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants until the expiration of the warrants. However, there
is no assurance that we will be able to do so. The warrants may be deprived of any value and the
market for the warrants may be limited if the prospectus relating to the ordinary shares issuable
upon exercise of the warrants is not current or if the ordinary shares are not qualified (or exempt
from qualification) in the jurisdictions in which the holders of the warrants reside.
No fractional shares will be issued upon exercise of the warrants. However, if a warrantholder
exercises all warrants then owned of record by him, we will pay to the warrantholder, in lieu of the
issuance of any fractional share which is otherwise issuable to the warrantholder, an amount for
such fractional share in cash based on the market value of the ordinary shares on the last trading
day prior to the exercise date.
Unissued Shares of Capital Stock
Shares. We currently have 5,020,303 shares outstanding with 13,056,500 shares reserved for our
outstanding warrants and options. The remaining authorized and unissued shares will be available
for future issuance without additional shareholder approval. While the additional shares are not
designed to deter or prevent a change of control, under some circumstances we could use them to
create voting impediments or to frustrate persons seeking to effect a takeover or otherwise gain
control, by, for example, issuing shares in private placements to purchasers who might side with
the Board of Directors in opposing a hostile takeover bid.
Markets
Our shares, warrants and units are quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board under the symbols AXPLF,
AXLWF and AXPUF, respectively. The units have been quoted on the Bulletin Board since March
21, 2011. Our ordinary shares and warrants commenced to trade separately from its units on June
15, 2011.
History of Share Capital
For a history of our share capital since our inception, identifying the events during such period
which have changed the amount of the issued capital, please refer to “Business – Arabella’s
History” in this prospectus.
72
Memorandum and Articles of Association
Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association
Summary
Registered Office. Under our Amended and Restated Memorandum of Association, our Registered
Office is located at the offices of Codan Trust Company (Cayman) Limited, Cricket Square,
Hutchins Drive, PO Box 2681, Grand Cayman, KY1-1111, Cayman Islands.
Objects and Purposes. Under Article 3 of our Amended and Restated Memorandum of
Association, the objects for which we are established are unrestricted.
Directors. Under Article 94 of our Articles of Association, no contract or transaction between us
and one or more of our Directors (an “Interested Director”) or officers, or between us and any of
their affiliates (an “Interested Transaction”), will be void or voidable solely for this reason, or solely
because the director or officer is present at or participates in the meeting of our board or
committee which authorizes the contract or transaction, or solely because any such director’s or
officer’s votes are counted for such purpose, if:
●
The material facts as to the director’s or officer’s relationship or interest and as to the contract or
transaction are disclosed or are known to the our board of directors or the committee, and the board or
committee in good faith authorizes the contract or transaction by the affirmative votes of a majority of the
disinterested directors, even though the disinterested directors be less than a quorum; or
●
The material facts as to the director’s or officer’s relationship or interest and as to the contract or
transaction are disclosed or are known to our shareholders entitled to vote thereon, and the contract or
transaction is specifically approved in good faith by vote of our shareholders; or
The contract or transaction is fair as to us as of the time it is authorized, approved or ratified, by the
●board, a committee or the Shareholders.
A majority of independent directors must vote in favor of any Interested Transaction and
determine that the terms of the Interested Transaction are no less favorable to us than those that
would be available to us with respect to such a transaction from unaffiliated third parties.
Rights, Preferences and Restrictions Attaching to Our Ordinary Shares. We are authorized to issue
50,000,000 ordinary shares, par value $0.001 and 5,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value
$0.001 per share. As of the date of this prospectus, 4,829,826 ordinary shares are issued and
outstanding. Each ordinary share has the right to one vote at a meeting of shareholders or on any
resolution of shareholders, the right to an equal share in any dividend paid by us, and the right to
an equal share in the distribution of surplus assets. We may by a resolution of the board of
directors redeem our ordinary shares for such consideration as the board of directors determines.
If, at any time, our share capital is divided into different classes of shares, the rights attached to
any class (unless otherwise provided by the terms of issue of the shares of that class) may,
whether or not we are being wound-up, be varied with the consent in writing of the holders of
three-fourths of the issued shares of that class or with the sanction of a resolution passed by a
majority of the votes cast at a separate general meeting of the holders of the shares of the class at
which meeting the necessary quorum shall be two persons at least holding or representing by
proxy one-third of the issued shares of the class.
Additional information regarding our securities is included under the heading “Description of
Securities” in our registration statement on Form F-1 (File No. 333-172334), initially filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on February 18, 2011, as amended, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
73
Our annual meeting may be held at such time and place as their chairman or any two directors or
any director and the secretary or the board of directors shall appoint. The chairman or any two
directors or any director and the secretary or the board of directors may convene an extraordinary
general meeting whenever in their judgment such a meeting is necessary. At least 10 clear days’
notice of an annual meeting shall be given to each shareholder entitled to attend and vote thereat,
stating the date, place, and time at which the meeting is to be held, and if different, the record date
for determining shareholders entitled to attend and vote at the annual meeting, and, if practicable,
the other business to be conducted at the meeting. At least 10 clear days’ notice of an
extraordinary general meeting shall be given to each shareholder entitled to attend and vote
thereat, stating the date, place, and time at which the meeting is to be held, and the general nature
of the business to be considered at the meeting. A meeting shall, notwithstanding the fact that it is
called on shorter notice than otherwise required, be deemed to have been properly called if it is so
agreed by (i) all of the shareholders entitled to attend and vote thereat in the case of an annual
meeting, and (ii) 75% of the shareholders entitled to attend and vote thereat in the case of an
extraordinary general meeting. The accidental omission to give notice of a meeting to, or the non-
receipt of a notice of a meeting by, any person entitled to receive notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings at that meeting.
There are no limitations on the rights to own our securities, or limitations on the rights of non-
resident or foreign shareholders to hold or exercise voting rights on our securities, contained in
our Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association (or under Cayman Islands
law).
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The Transfer Agent and Registrar for the shares of our shares, warrants and units is Continental
Stock Transfer & Trust Company, 17 Battery Place, New York, NY 10004, (212) 509-4000.
74
SELLING SHAREHOLDERS
The Selling Shareholders may from time to time offer and sell any or all of our shares set forth
below pursuant to this prospectus. When we refer to ‘‘Selling Shareholders” in this prospectus, we
mean the persons listed in the table below, and the pledgees, donees, permitted transferees,
assignees, successors and others who later come to hold any of the Selling Shareholders’
interests Arabella’s shares other than through a public sale.
The following table sets forth, as of November 21, 2014:
●the name of the Selling Shareholders for whom we are registering shares for resale to the public,
    
●the number of shares that the Selling Shareholders beneficially owned prior to the offering for resale of
the shares under this prospectus,
    
●the number of shares that may be offered for resale for the account of the Selling Shareholders pursuant
to this prospectus, and
●
the number and percentage of shares to be beneficially owned by the Selling Shareholders after the
offering of the resale shares (assuming all of the offered resale shares are sold by the Selling
Shareholders).
We cannot advise you as to whether the Selling Shareholders will in fact sell any or all of such
shares. In addition, the Selling Shareholders may have sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of,
or may sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of, at any time and from time to time, the shares in
transactions exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act after the date on
which it provided the information set forth on the table below.
This table is prepared solely based on information supplied to us by the listed Selling
Shareholders, any Schedules 13D or 13G and Forms 3 and 4, and other public documents filed
with the SEC, and assumes the sale of all of the shares offered hereby. Jason Hoisager is an
officer and director of our company. Berke Bakay, Richard Hauser and William B. Heyn are
directors of our company, and BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings LLC are entities
controlled by directors of our company.
Name of Selling
Shareholder (2)
 
Jason Hoisager(4)
Berke Bakay(5)
BBS Capital Fund, LP(5)
Richard J. Hauser(6)
Hauser Holdings LLC(6)
William B. Heyn(7)
George P. Bush(8)
Malachi Boyuls(9)
Greg McCabe(10)
Karl P. Richter(11)
John V. Calce(12)
James R. Preissler(13)
Chad D. Elliott(14)
Bill Elliott(15)
Richard Masterson(16)
Can Aydinoglu(17)
Baris Merzeci(18)
Platinum Long Term Growth
VIII, LLC(19)
Mark G. Avery(20)
Campbell Harrison & Dagley
L.L.P.(21)
Douglas S. Craig, Jr.(22)
Shares Beneficially Owned
 
Before the Offering
Number
1,659,489
  3,306,105
  3,278,428
  3,297,178
  3,278,428
  286,414
  18,750
  18,750
  1,003,597
  211,400
  267,662
  267,662
  130,032
  125,484
  84,375
  148,927
  108,927
Percent (3)
33.1
    41.5
    41.2
    41.4
    41.2
    5.5
    0.4
    0.4
    20.0
    4.2
    5.2
    5.2
    2.6
    2.5
    1.7
    2.9
    2.1
Number of
  
Shares to
  be Sold
(1)
   
   
   2,597,383   
   58,927
   
   3,278,428   
   50,000
   
   3,278,428   
   351,764    
   
   50,000
   50,000
   
   1,551,160   
   211,400    
   267,662    
   267,662    
   200,977    
   193,949    
   130,410    
   148,927    
   108,927
1,300,000
20.6
1,300,000
17,500
51,600
32,000
0.3
1.0
0.6
17,500
51,600
32,000
Shares Beneficially Owned
  
After the Offering
Number
Percent (3)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(1) Includes shares underlying warrants, options and earnout shares owned by the Selling
Shareholders.
75
(2) Unless otherwise indicated, the business address of each of the shareholders is 500 W. Texas
Avenue, Suite 1450, Midland, Texas 79701.
(3) Based on 5,020,303 shares of Arabella issued and outstanding as of November 21, 2014. For
purposes of calculating the percentage ownership, any shares that each selling shareholder has
the right to acquire within 60 days under warrants or options have been included in the total
number of shares outstanding for that person, in accordance with Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange
Act.
(4) Number of shares to be sold includes 801,494 shares that may be issued to the Selling
Shareholder pursuant to earn-outs established at the business combination.
(5) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Bakay consists of (i) 345,928 ordinary
shares beneficially owned by BBS Capital Fund, LP, (ii) 8,927 ordinary shares owned by Mr. Bakay,
(iii) 18,750 options to purchase ordinary shares owned by Mr. Bakay and (iv) warrants exercisable
for 2,932,500 ordinary shares, all of which are owned by BBS Capital Fund, LP. Mr. Bakay and BBS
Capital Fund, LP have sole voting and dispositive power over all such securities. The address of
BBS Management Group is 5524 E. Estrid Avenue, Scottsdale, Arizona 85254. Messrs. Heyn, Calce
and Preissler each have an option to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares (742,500 in
the aggregate) from BBS Capital Fund, LP. Number of shares to be sold includes 31,250 unvested
options.
(6) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Hauser consists of (i) 345,928
ordinary shares beneficially owned by Hauser Holdings, LLC, (ii) 18,750 options to purchase
ordinary shares owned by Mr. Hauser, and (iii) warrants exercisable for 2,932,500 ordinary shares,
all of which are owned by Hauser Holdings, LLC. Mary Jane Hauser has sole voting and
dispositive power over all securities held by Hauser Holdings LLC. The address of Hauser
Holdings LLC is 50 South Sixth Street, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55402. Ms. Hauser is the wife of
Richard J. Hauser, one of our directors. Messrs. Heyn, Calce and Preissler each have an option to
purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares (742,500 in the aggregate) from Hauser Holdings,
LLC. Number of shares to be sold includes 31,250 unvested options.
(7) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Heyn consists of (i) 102,664 ordinary
shares, (ii) 18,750 options to purchase ordinary shares and (iii) warrants exercisable for 165,000
ordinary shares. Mr. Heyn has an option from each of BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings,
LLC to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares (495,000 in the aggregate). Number of
shares to be sold includes 31,250 unvested options.
(8) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Bush consists of 18,750 options to
purchase ordinary shares. Number of shares to be sold includes 31,250 unvested options.
(9) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Boyuls consists of 18,750 options to
purchase ordinary shares. Number of shares to be sold includes 31,250 unvested options.
(10) Number of shares to be sold includes 547,563 shares that may be issued to the Selling
Shareholder pursuant to earn-outs established at the business combination.
(11) The business address of Karl P. Richter is 201 N. I Street, Unit A, Midland, Texas 79701.
(12) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Calce consists of (i) 102,662 ordinary
shares and (ii) warrants exercisable for 165,000 ordinary shares. The business address of Mr.
Calce is 17950 Preston Road, Suite 1080A Dallas, Texas 75252. Mr. Calce has an option from each
of BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500 shares
(495,000 in the aggregate).
(13) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Preissler consists of (i) 102,662
ordinary shares and (ii) warrants exercisable for 165,000 ordinary shares. The business address of
Mr. Preissler is 50 Old Route 25A Fort Salonga, NY 11768. Mr. Preissler has an option from each of
BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser Holdings, LLC to purchase warrants to purchase 247,500
shares (495,000 in the aggregate).
76
(14) Number of shares to be sold includes 70,945 shares that may be issued to the Selling
Shareholder pursuant to earn-outs established at the business combination.
(15) Number of shares to be sold includes 68,465 shares that may be issued to the Selling
Shareholder pursuant to earn-outs established at the business combination.
(16) Number of shares to be sold includes 46,035 shares that may be issued to the Selling
Shareholder pursuant to earn-outs established at the business combination.
(17) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Aydinoglu consists of (i) 8,927
ordinary shares and (ii) warrants exercisable for 140,000 ordinary shares. The business address of
Mr. Aydinoglu is Cemil Topuzlu Cd. İş Bankası Blokları F-9 Fenerbahçe, Kadıköy, İstanbul. Turkey.
(18) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Mr. Merzeci consists of (i) 8,927 ordinary
shares and (ii) warrants exercisable for 100,000 ordinary shares. The business address of Mr.
Merzeci is 1.Levent Karakol Sok. Canfesci Apt. No:12/C Beşiktaş / İstanbul. Turkey.
(19) The number of ordinary shares beneficially owned by Platinum Long Term Growth VIII, LLC
consists of warrants exercisable for 1,300,000 ordinary shares. The business address of Platinum
Long Term Growth VIII, LLC is 152 West 57th Street, 4th Floor, New York, New York 10019. Mark
Nordlicht has sole voting and dispositive power over all warrants shares held by Platinum Long
Term Growth VIII, LLC.
(20) The business address of Mark G. Avery is 712 Main Street, Suite 2100, Houston, Texas 77002
(21) The business address of Campbell Harrison & Dagley L.L.P. is 4000 Two Houston Center, 909
Fannin, Houston, Texas 77010-1031. Robin Harrison has sole has sole voting and dispositive
power over all shares held by Campbell Harrison & Dagley L.L.P.
(22) The business address of Douglas S. Craig, Jr. is 770 South Post Oak Lane, Suite 600,
Houston, Texas 77056.
Half of the shares beneficially owned by our founding shareholders were locked-up for a period of
six (6) months following the consummation of the business combination with the remaining half
remain locked-up for a period of twelve (12) months following the consummation of the business
combination.
77
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
The Selling Shareholders, which also includes donees, pledgees, transferees or other successors-
in-interest selling ordinary shares received after the date of this prospectus from a selling
stockholder as a gift, pledge, partnership distribution or other transfer, may, from time to time, sell,
transfer or otherwise dispose of any or all of their ordinary shares on any stock exchange, market
or trading facility on which the shares are traded or in private transactions. These dispositions
may be at fixed prices, at prevailing market prices at the time of sale, at prices related to the
prevailing market price, at varying prices determined at the time of sale, or at negotiated prices. We
have not been advised of any arrangements by the Selling Shareholders for the sale of any of the
ordinary shares owned by them.
The Selling Shareholders may use any one or more of the following methods when disposing of
shares or interests therein:
●ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer solicits purchasers;
    
 ●block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent, but may position and
resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
    
 ●crosses, where the same broker acts as an agent on both sides of the trade;
    
 ●purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by the broker-dealer for its account;
    
 ●an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
    
 ●privately negotiated transactions;
    
 ●short sales;
    
 ●through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transactions, whether through an options
exchange or otherwise;
    
 ●broker-dealers may agree with the Selling Shareholders to sell a specified number of such shares at a
stipulated price per share;
    
 ●a combination of any such methods of sale; and
    
 ●any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
The Selling Shareholders may, from time to time, pledge or grant a security interest in some or all
of the ordinary shares owned by them and, if they default in the performance of their secured
obligations, the pledgees or secured parties may offer and sell the shares of ordinary shares, from
time to time, under this prospectus, or under an amendment to this prospectus under Rule 424(b)
(3) or other applicable provision of the Securities Act amending the list of Selling Shareholders to
include the pledgee, transferee or other successors in interest as Selling Shareholders under this
prospectus. The Selling Shareholders also may transfer the ordinary shares in other
circumstances, in which case the transferees, pledgees or other successors in interest will be the
selling beneficial owners for purposes of this prospectus; provided, however, that prior to any
such transfer the following information (or such other information as may be required by the
federal securities laws from time to time) with respect to each such selling beneficial owner must
be added to the prospectus by way of a prospectus supplement or post-effective amendment, as
appropriate: (1) the name of the selling beneficial owner; (2) any material relationship the selling
beneficial owner has had within the past three years with us or any of our predecessors or
affiliates; (3) the amount of securities of the class owned by such security beneficial owner before
the transfer; (4) the amount to be offered for the security beneficial owner’s account; and (5) the
amount and (if one percent or more) the percentage of the class to be owned by such security
beneficial owner after the transfer is complete.
Any Selling Shareholder and any other person participating in a distribution will be subject to
applicable provisions of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the rules and regulations under
that statute, including, without limitation, possibly Regulation M. This may limit the timing of
purchases and sales of any of the securities by a Selling Shareholder and any other participating
person. Regulation M may also restrict the ability of any person engaged in the distribution of the
securities to engage in market-making activities with respect to the securities. All of the foregoing
may affect the marketability of the securities and the ability of any person or entity to engage in
market-making activities with respect to the securities.
78
TAXATION
United States Federal Income Taxation
General
The following is a summary of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of our securities.
The discussion below of the U.S. federal income tax consequences to “U.S. Holders” will apply to
a beneficial owner of our securities that is for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
●an individual citizen or resident of the United States;
    
●a corporation (or other entity treated as a corporation) that is created or organized (or treated as created
or organized) in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
    
●an estate whose income is includible in gross income for U.S. federal income tax purposes regardless
of its source; or
●
a trust if (i) a U.S. court can exercise primary supervision over the trust’s administration and one or more
U.S. persons are authorized to control all substantial decisions of the trust, or (ii) it has a valid election in
effect under applicable U.S. Treasury regulations to be treated as a U.S. person
A beneficial owner of our securities that is described above is referred to herein as a “U.S. Holder.”
If a beneficial owner of our securities is not described as a U.S. Holder and is not an entity treated
as a partnership or other pass-through entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes, such owner will
be considered a “Non-U.S. Holder.” The material U.S. federal income tax consequences applicable
specifically to Non-U.S. Holders are described below under the heading “Non-U.S. Holders.”
This summary is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the “Code,” its
legislative history, Treasury regulations promulgated thereunder, published rulings and court
decisions, all as currently in effect. These authorities are subject to change or differing
interpretations, possibly on a retroactive basis.
This discussion does not address all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that may be relevant
to any particular holder of our securities based on such holder’s individual circumstances. In
particular, this discussion considers only holders that own and hold our securities as capital
assets within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code. This discussion also does not address the
alternative minimum tax. In addition, this discussion does not address the U.S. federal income tax
consequences to holders that are subject to special rules, including:
●financial institutions or financial services entities;
    
●broker-dealers;
    
●persons that are subject to the mark-to-market accounting rules under Section 475 of the Code;
    
●tax-exempt entities;
    
●governments or agencies or instrumentalities thereof;
    
●insurance companies;
79
●regulated investment companies;
    
●real estate investment trusts;
    
●certain expatriates or former long-term residents of the United States;
    
●persons that actually or constructively own 5% or more of our voting shares;
    
●persons that acquired our securities pursuant to an exercise of employee share options, in connection
with employee share incentive plans or otherwise as compensation;
    
●persons that hold our securities as part of a straddle, constructive sale, hedging, conversion or other
integrated transaction; or
    
 ●persons whose functional currency is not the U.S. dollar;
●controlled foreign corporations; or
    
 ●passive foreign investment companies.
his discussion does not address any aspect of U.S. federal non-income tax laws, such as gift or
estate tax laws, or state, local or non-U.S. tax laws, or, except as discussed herein, any tax
reporting obligations of a holder of our securities. Additionally, this discussion does not consider
the tax treatment of partnerships or other pass-through entities or persons who hold our securities
through such entities. If a partnership (or other entity classified as a partnership for U.S. federal
income tax purposes) is the beneficial owner of our securities, the U.S. federal income tax
treatment of a partner in the partnership will generally depend on the status of the partner and the
activities of the partnership. This discussion also assumes that any distribution made (or deemed
made) in respect to the our securities and any consideration received (or deemed received) by a
holder in connection with the sale or other disposition of such securities will be in U.S. dollars.
We have not sought, and will not seek, a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service, or “IRS,” or an
opinion of counsel, as to any U.S. federal income tax consequence described herein. The IRS may
disagree with the description herein, and its determination may be upheld by a court. Moreover,
there can be no assurance that future legislation, regulations, administrative rulings or court
decisions will not adversely affect the accuracy of the statements in this discussion.
THIS DISCUSSION IS ONLY A SUMMARY OF THE MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX
CONSEQUENCES OF THE ACQUISITION, OWNERSHIP AND DISPOSITION OF OUR SECURITIES.
EACH HOLDER OF OUR SECURITIES IS URGED TO CONSULT ITS OWN TAX ADVISOR WITH
RESPECT TO THE PARTICULAR TAX CONSEQUENCES TO SUCH HOLDER OF THE
ACQUISITION, OWNERSHIP AND DISPOSITION OF OUR SECURITIES, INCLUDING THE
APPLICABILITY AND EFFECT OF ANY STATE, LOCAL AND NON-U.S. TAX LAWS, AS WELL AS
U.S. FEDERAL TAX LAWS AND APPLICABLE TAX TREATIES.
U.S. Holders
Taxation of Cash Distributions Paid on Shares
Subject to the passive foreign investment company, or “PFIC,” rules discussed below, a U.S.
Holder generally will be required to include in gross income as ordinary income the amount of any
cash dividend paid on the shares of our Company. A cash distribution on such shares generally
will be treated as a dividend for U.S. federal income tax purposes to the extent the distribution is
paid out of current or accumulated earnings and profits of our Company (as determined for U.S.
federal income tax purposes). Such dividend generally will not be eligible for the dividends
received deduction generally allowed to U.S. corporations in respect of dividends received from
other U.S. corporations. The portion of such cash distribution, if any, in excess of such earnings
and profits will be applied against and reduce (but not below zero) the U.S. Holder’s adjusted basis
in its shares in our company. Any remaining excess generally will be treated as gain from the sale
or other taxable disposition of such shares.
80
Taxation on the Disposition of Securities
Upon a sale or other taxable disposition of the securities in our company, and subject to the PFIC
rules discussed below, a U.S. Holder generally will recognize capital gain or loss in an amount
equal to the difference between the amount realized and the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the
securities.
The regular U.S. federal income tax rate on capital gains recognized by U.S. Holders generally is
the same as the regular U.S. federal income tax rate on ordinary income, except that long-term
capital gains recognized by non-corporate U.S. Holders are generally subject to U.S. federal
income tax at a maximum regular rate of 20%. Capital gain or loss will constitute long-term capital
gain or loss if the U.S. Holder’s holding period for the securities exceeds one year. The
deductibility of capital losses is subject to various limitations.
Additional Taxes
U.S. Holders that are individuals, estates or trusts and whose income exceeds certain thresholds
generally will be subject to a 3.8% Medicare contribution tax on unearned income, including,
without limitation, dividends on, and gains from the sale or other taxable disposition of, our
securities, subject to certain limitations and exceptions. Under recently issued proposed
regulations, in the absence of a special election, such unearned income generally would not
include income inclusions under the qualified electing fund, or QEF, rules discussed below under
“ –Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules,” but would include distributions of earnings and
profits from a QEF. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the effect, if any,
of such tax on their ownership and disposition of our securities.
Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules
A foreign (i.e., non-U.S.) corporation will be a PFIC if at least 75% of its gross income in a taxable
year of the foreign corporation, including its pro rata share of the gross income of any corporation
in which it is considered to own at least 25% of the shares by value, is passive income.
Alternatively, a foreign corporation will be a PFIC if at least 50% of its assets in a taxable year of the
foreign corporation, ordinarily determined based on fair market value and averaged quarterly over
the year, including its pro rata share of the assets of any corporation in which it is considered to
own at least 25% of the shares by value, are held for the production of, or produce, passive
income. Passive income generally includes dividends, interest, rents and royalties (other than
certain rents or royalties derived from the active conduct of a trade or business) and gains from
the disposition of passive assets.
Based on the composition (and estimated values) of the assets and the nature of the income of our
company and its subsidiaries during its 2013 taxable year, we believe that it was treated as a PFIC
for such year. However, because we have not performed a definitive analysis as to its PFIC status
for its 2013 taxable year, there can be no assurance in respect to its PFIC status for such year.
There also can be no assurance with respect to our status as a PFIC for its current (2014) taxable
year or any future taxable year.
If we are determined to be a PFIC for any taxable year (or portion thereof) that is included in the
holding period of a U.S. Holder of Our shares and, the U.S. Holder did not make a timely QEF
election for our first taxable year as a PFIC in which the U.S. Holder held (or was deemed to hold)
shares, a QEF election along with a purging election, each as described below, such holder
generally will be subject to special rules for regular U.S. federal income tax purposes with respect
to:
●any gain recognized by the U.S. Holder on the sale or other disposition of its shares; and
●
any “excess distribution” made to the U.S. Holder (generally, any distributions to such U.S. Holder
during a taxable year of the U.S. Holder that are greater than 125% of the average annual distributions
received by such U.S. Holder in respect of the shares of our company during the three preceding
taxable years of such U.S. Holder or, if shorter, such U.S. Holder’s holding period for the shares).
81
Under these rules:
●the U.S. Holder’s gain or excess distribution will be allocated ratably over the U.S. Holder’s holding
period for the shares;
●
the amount allocated to the U.S. Holder’s taxable year in which the U.S. Holder recognized the gain or
received the excess distribution or to the period in the U.S. Holder’s holding period before the first day of
the first taxable year of our company in which we qualified as a PFIC will be taxed as ordinary income;
●
the amount allocated to other taxable years (or portions thereof) of the U.S. Holder and included in its
holding period will be taxed at the highest tax rate in effect for that year and applicable to the U.S.
Holder; and
●the interest charge generally applicable to underpayments of tax will be imposed in respect of the tax
attributable to each such other taxable year of the U.S. Holder.
In general, if we are determined to be a PFIC, a U.S. Holder may avoid the PFIC tax consequences
described above in respect to its shares in our company by making a timely QEF election (or a
QEF election along with a purging election). Pursuant to the QEF election, a U.S. Holder will be
required to include in income its pro rata share of Our net capital gains (as long-term capital gain)
and other earnings and profits (as ordinary income), on a current basis, in each case whether or
not distributed, in the taxable year of the U.S. Holder in which or with which our taxable year ends.
A U.S. Holder may make a separate election to defer the payment of taxes on undistributed income
inclusions under the QEF rules, but if deferred, any such taxes will be subject to an interest
charge.
The QEF election is made on a shareholder-by-shareholder basis and, once made, can be revoked
only with the consent of the IRS. A U.S. Holder generally makes a QEF election by attaching a
completed IRS Form 8621 (Information Return by a Shareholder of a Passive Foreign Investment
Company or Qualified Electing Fund), including the information provided in a PFIC annual
information statement, to a timely filed U.S. federal income tax return for the taxable year to which
the election relates. Retroactive QEF elections generally may be made only by filing a protective
statement with such return and if certain other conditions are met or with the consent of the IRS.
In order to comply with the requirements of a QEF election, a U.S. Holder must receive certain
information from us. Upon request from a U.S. Holder, we will endeavor to provide to the U.S.
Holder, no later than 90 days after the request, such information as the IRS may require, including
a PFIC annual information statement, in order to enable the U.S. Holder to make and maintain a
QEF election. However, there is no assurance that we will have timely knowledge of its status as a
PFIC in the future or of the required information to be provided.
If a U.S. Holder has made a QEF election with respect to its shares in our company, and the special
tax and interest charge rules do not apply to such shares (because of a timely QEF election for our
first taxable year as a PFIC in which the U.S. Holder holds (or is deemed to hold) such shares or a
QEF election, along with a purge of the PFIC taint pursuant to a purging election, as described
below), any gain recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition of such shares generally will
be taxable as capital gain and no interest charge will be imposed. As discussed above, for regular
U.S. federal income tax purposes, U.S. Holders of a QEF are currently taxed on their pro rata
shares of the QEF’s earnings and profits, whether or not distributed. In such case, a subsequent
distribution of such earnings and profits that were previously included in income generally should
not be taxable as a dividend to such U.S. Holders. The adjusted tax basis of a U.S. Holder’s shares
in a QEF will be increased by amounts that are included in income, and decreased by amounts
distributed but not taxed as dividends, under the above rules. Similar basis adjustments apply to
property if by reason of holding such property the U.S. Holder is treated under the applicable
attribution rules as owning shares in a QEF.
82
Although a determination as to our PFIC status will be made annually, an initial determination that
it is a PFIC generally will apply for subsequent years to a U.S. Holder who held shares of our
Company while it was a PFIC, whether or not it met the test for PFIC status in those subsequent
years. A U.S. Holder who makes the QEF election discussed above for Our first taxable year as a
PFIC in which the U.S. Holder holds (or is deemed to hold) shares in our Company, however, will
not be subject to the PFIC tax and interest charge rules discussed above in respect to such
shares. In addition, such U.S. Holder will not be subject to the QEF inclusion regime with respect to
such shares for any taxable year of our Company that ends within or with a taxable year of the U.S.
Holder and in which We are not a PFIC. On the other hand, if the QEF election is not effective for
each of the taxable years of our Company in which We are a PFIC and during which the U.S.
Holder holds (or is deemed to hold) shares in our Company, the PFIC rules discussed above will
continue to apply to such shares unless the holder files on a timely filed U.S. income tax return
(including extensions) a QEF election and a purging election to recognize under the rules of
Section 1291 of the Code any gain that it would otherwise recognize if the U.S. Holder sold shares
for their fair market value on the “qualification” date. ​ The qualification date is the first day of our
Company; tax year in which it qualifies as a QEF with respect to such U.S. Holder. The purging
election can only be made if such U.S. Holder held shares on the qualification date. The gain
recognized by the purging election will be subject to the special tax and interest charge rules
treating the gain as an excess distribution, as described above. As a result of the purging election,
the U.S. Holder will increase the adjusted tax basis in its shares by the amount of the gain
recognized and will also have a new holding period in the shares for purposes of the PFIC rules.
If we are a PFIC and, at any time, has a foreign subsidiary that is classified as a PFIC, a U.S. Holder
of our shares generally should be deemed to own a portion of the shares of such lower-tier PFIC,
and generally could incur liability for the deferred tax and interest charge described above if we
receive a distribution from, or disposes of all or part of its interest in, or the U.S. Holder were
otherwise deemed to have disposed of an interest in, the lower-tier PFIC. Upon request, we will
endeavor to cause any lower-tier PFIC to provide to a U.S. Holder no later than 90 days after the
request the information that may be required to make or maintain a QEF election with respect to
the lower- tier PFIC. However, there is no assurance that we will have timely knowledge of the
status of any such lower-tier PFIC or will be able to cause the lower-tier PFIC to provide the
required information.
A U.S. Holder that owns (or is deemed to own) shares in a PFIC during any taxable year of the U.S.
Holder may have to file an IRS Form 8621 (whether or not a QEF election is or has been made) with
such U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax return and provide such other information as may be
required by the U.S. Treasury Department.
The rules dealing with PFICs and with the QEF elections are very complex and are affected by
various factors in addition to those described above. Accordingly, U.S. Holders of shares in our
Company should consult their own tax advisors concerning the application of the PFIC rules to
such shares under their particular circumstances.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the securities offered in this prospectus is being passed upon for us by Conyers
Dill & Pearman, Cayman Islands and Loeb & Loeb, LLP, New York, New York.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Arabella Exploration, Inc and its subsidiaries as of
December 31, 2013 and for the year ended December 31, 2013 have been included in this
prospectus in reliance on the report of Marcum LLP, an independent registered public accounting
firm, appearing elsewhere in this prospectus upon the authority of the said firm as experts in
accounting and auditing.
The consolidated financial statements of Arabella Exploration, Limited Liability Company as of
December 31, 2012 and for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 have been included in
this prospectus in reliance on the report of Ham, Langston & Brezina, LLP, an independent
registered public accounting firm, appearing elsewhere in this prospectus upon the authority of
the said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
We have filed with the SEC a registration statement on Form F-1, which includes exhibits,
schedules and amendments, under the Securities Act, with respect to the shares to be sold in this
offering. Although this prospectus, which forms a part of the registration statement, contains all
material information included in the registration statement, parts of the registration statement have
been omitted as permitted by rules and regulations of the SEC. We refer you to the registration
statement and its exhibits for further information about us, our securities and this offering. The
registration statement and its exhibits, as well as our other reports filed with the SEC, can be
inspected and copied at the SEC’s public reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C.
20549-1004. The public may obtain information about the operation of the public reference room
by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. In addition, the SEC maintains a web site at
http://www.sec.gov which contains the Form F-1 and other reports, proxy and information
statements and information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. We are subject
to the information reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and we will file
reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC.
83
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page
Consolidated Financial Statements:
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets (unaudited)
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations For the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and
2013 (unaudited)
 
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity For the three and six months ended June 30,
2014 (unaudited)
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows For the three and six months ended June 30, 2014
and 2013 (unaudited)
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (unaudited)
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms
 
Consolidated Financial Statements:
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
84
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
 
Current assets:
F-1
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5 - F-
  
12
   
  F-14
   
   
   
  F-16
   
  F-17
   
  F-18
   
  F-19
   
F-20 - F-
  
33
December
31, 2013
June 30, 
2014
 (unaudited)
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable – oil and gas sales
Prepaid expenses
 
Total current assets
 
Deposits
Property and equipment, net
Oil and gas properties, net, successful efforts method
 
Total assets
 
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Payable to affiliate companies
Notes payable to directors
Accrued joint interest billings payable
 
Total current liabilities
 
Note payable to officer
Deferred taxes
Asset retirement obligation
 
Total liabilities
 
Commitments and contingencies
 
Shareholders’ equity
Preferred shares, $0.001 par value, authorized 5,000,000 and none issued
and outstanding
Ordinary shares, $0.001 par value, authorized 50,000,000 shares; 5,020,303
and 4,829,826 issued and outstanding
Additional paid-in-capital
Retained earnings
 
Total shareholders’ equity
 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
25,000
    -
$548,259
  $2,118,533  
   1,130,058     436,830
 
    23,077
   221,109
 
    
     
 
   1,899,426     2,578,440  
 
    
   35,000
 
   452,333
 
   27,111,242    13,249,367 
    
 
 $29,498,001  $15,852,807 
     
 
    
     
 
    
     
    
 
     
 
    
 
  $84,691
 $297,051
    -
   817,504
 
   1,300,000     -
 
   11,960,069    3,734,405  
    
 
   14,374,624    3,819,096  
    
 
   3,007,170     3,007,170  
   327,885
 
 
   24,883
    
 
   17,734,562    6,847,437
-
    21,171
-
-
5,020
4,830
10,628,527    8,488,970  
   1,129,892     511,570
 
    
 
   11,763,439    9,005,370  
    
 
 $29,498,001  $15,852,807
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-1
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues:
Oil and gas revenue
Other operating revenue – gain on sale of oil and gas
properties
 
Total revenues
 
Costs and expenses:
Lease operating expenses
Ad valorem and production taxes
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Accretion of asset retirement obligation
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses allocated from
Arabella Petroleum Company, LLC
 Total costs and expenses
 
Income (loss) from operations
 
Other income (expenses)
Interest expense, related party
Total other income (expense), net
 
Net income (loss) before taxes
 
Provision for income taxes
 
Net income (loss)
 
Net income (loss) per ordinary share:
Basic
 
Diluted
 
Weighted average ordinary shares outstanding:
Basic
 
Diluted
2013
Six Months Ended June
  
30,
  2014
Three Months Ended
 
June 30,
 2014
 
 (unaudited)  (unaudited)  (unaudited)  (unaudited) 
 
  
   
   
  
 
 $976,373   $43,725
  $1,762,197  $114,444
2013
1,768,521    -
3,004,721    -
-
-
98
198
65,955
4,766,918    114,444  
   2,744,894    43,725
 
     
    
 
     
    
    552,352     11,004
 
   438,652     7,861
 
    79,017
    5,493
   46,878
    3,617
 
    571,374     45,697
   331,731     24,481
    810
 
   180
 
    2,601,085    5,036
   1,295,961    4,991
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32,977
 
    3,804,638    133,383  
   2,113,402    74,025
 
     
    
)
)   962,280     (18,939
   631,492     (30,300
     
 
    
 
     
    
 
    (16,073
   (16,073
    (16,073
 
   (16,073
 
     
    
)
)   946,207     (18,939
   615,419     (30,300
 
     
     
    
     
    (327,885 )   -
 
   (215,417 )   -
 
     
     
    
     
)
) $618,322   $(18,939
 $400,002   $(30,300
     
 
    
 
     
    
)
) $0.13
 $0.08
     
 
    
)
) $0.10
 $0.07
 
     
    
    
     
 
   4,838,199    3,125,000    4,834,035    3,125,000 
    
 
   5,910,560    3,125,000    6,325,676    3,125,000
$(0.01
     
  $(0.01
$(0.01
     
  $(0.01
)   -
)   -
)   -
)   -
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-2
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(unaudited)
Ordinary   Shares   Paid – In
 Shares
Amount  Capital
Retained    
  Earnings   Total
Balance at December 31, 2013  4,829,826  $ 4,830   $8,488,970   $511,570   $9,005,370  
     
 
 
   
Shares sold to officer
    2,000,009  
  190,477     190
 
     
 
   
 
    139,738
Stock-based compensation
  -
 
 
     
   
Net income
 
  -
   
 
 
Balance at June 30, 2014
  5,020,303  $ 5,020   $10,628,527  $1,129,892  $11,763,439
1,999,819     -
     
     
    -
    139,738
     
     
    -
    618,322     618,322
-
     
    -
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-3
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by (used in)
operating activities:
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Accretion of asset retirement obligation
Stock-based compensation
Deferred taxes
Contribution for allocation of general and administrative expenses
Gain from sale of oil and gas properties
Six Months Ended 
June 30,
 2014
 
  2013
 (unaudited)  (unaudited) 
  
 
)
 $618,322
$(18,939
571,374
   810
   139,738
   327,885
   -
   (3,004,721 )   -
45,697
    198
    -
    -
    65,955
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable – oil and gas sales
Prepaid expenses
Deposits
Payable to affiliated companies
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
Net cash provided by (used in) provided by operating activities
 
Cash flows from investing activities:
Additions to property and equipment
Additions to oil and gas properties
Proceeds from sale of oil and gas properties
 
Net cash used in investing activities
 
Cash flows from financing activities:
Proceeds from sale of ordinary shares
Proceeds from loans from directors
Proceeds from founder loans
 
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
Non-cash investing and financing activities:
Addition to oil and gas properties through increase in accrued joint interest
billings payable
 
Addition to oil and gas properties through increase in payable to Arabella
Petroleum Company LLC
(693,228 )   (19,678
   (198,032 )   -
   (10,000
)    
    -
   817,504
    (24,263
   212,360
    
     
   (1,217,988 )   48,970
     
    
    
     
   (495,049 )   -
   (8,529,034 )   (71,009
   5,371,788     -
    
     
   (3,652,295 )   (71,009
     
    
     
    
   2,000,009     -
   1,300,000     -
   -
    
   3,300,009     22,000
    
   (1,570,274 )   (39
    
   2,118,533     12,990
    
 $548,259
$12,951
22,000
$8,225,664   $256,062
$-
$6,415,364
)
 
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
 
)
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-4
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
1. Organization and Operations of the Company
Organization
Arabella Exploration, Inc. (formerly known as Lone Oak Acquisition Corporation) (the “Parent”)
was incorporated in the Cayman Islands on June 17, 2010 as a blank check company whose
objective was to acquire an operating business. Parent’s wholly owned subsidiary Arabella
Exploration, Limited Liability Company (“Arabella LLC”) was formed in 2011, to acquire interests in
low risk prospective and producing oil and gas properties primarily in the Permian Basin in West
Texas.  The Parent and Arabella LLC (collectively the “Company”) completed a reverse merger on
December 24, 2013 as more fully described below in Note 2.
Nature of Business
The Company is an independent exploration and production company focused on the acquisition
and development of unconventional oil and natural gas resources in the Permian Basin in West
Texas. The Company owns acreage leases and participates in the drilling of oil and natural gas
wells with other working interest partners. Due to the capital intensive nature of oil and natural gas
drilling activities, the operating company responsible for conducting the drilling operations may
request advance payments from the working interest partners for their share of the costs.
Basis of Presentation
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared by the Company without audit,
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”).
They reflect all adjustments that are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair statement
of the results for interim periods, on a basis consistent with the annual audited financial
statements. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature. Certain information, accounting
policies and footnote disclosures normally included in financial statements prepared in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States have been omitted
pursuant to such rules and regulations, although the Company believes the disclosures are
adequate to make the information presented not misleading. This Report of Foreign Private Issuer
on Form 6-K should be read in conjunction with the Company’s most recent Annual Report on
Form 20-F for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013, filed May 15, 2014, which contains a
summary of the Company’s significant accounting policies and other disclosures.
2. Reverse Merger
Parent and Arabella LLC (the wholly owned subsidiary) entered into a reverse merger on
December 24, 2013 where the Parent issued 3,125,00 ordinary shares to the holders of all of the
issued and outstanding interests of Arabella LLC immediately prior to the time of the Acquisition in
exchange for 100% of the units of Arabella LLC. With that exchange, the Company’s Chief
Executive Officer Jason Hoisager owns the majority of the Company’s ordinary shares. In
connection with the reverse merger, 1,705,002 of additional ordinary shares (“earnout shares”) will
be awarded to certain individuals associated with Arabella LLC over the following three years if
and when the Company achieves its earnout goals.
The merger was accounted for as a “reverse merger” and a recapitalization since the shareholders
of Arabella LLC (i) owned a majority of the outstanding ordinary shares of the Company
immediately following the completion of the transaction, and (ii) have the significant influence and
the ability to elect or appoint or to remove a majority of the members of the governing body of the
combined entity, and Arabella LLC’s senior management dominates the management of the
combined entity in following the completion of the transaction in accordance with the provision of
Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (“FASB-ASC”) topic
805 Business Combinations. Accordingly, Arabella LLC is deemed to be the accounting acquirer
in the transaction and, consequently, the transaction is treated as a recapitalization of Arabella
LLC. Accordingly, the assets and liabilities and the historical operations that are reflected in the
financial statements are those of Arabella LLC and are recorded at the historical cost basis of
Arabella LLC. Parent’s assets, liabilities and results of operations were consolidated with the
assets, liabilities and results of operations of Arabella LLC after the merger.
F-5
Table of Contents
3. Recent Developments and Liquidity
The Company commenced oil and gas exploration activities in 2011 and had a working capital
deficit of $12,475,198 as of June 30, 2014 largely consisting of accrued joint interest billings
payable. The Company expects that it will need approximately $40 million to fund its operations
during the next twelve months, which will include minimum annual property lease payments, well
expenditures and operating costs and expenses.
On September 2, 2014 the Company sold the first $16,000,000 of Notes under its $45,000,000
Senior Secured Note Facility (See Note 13 – Subsequent Events). Future Sales of Notes are
subject to certain funding conditions. The Company expects that the proceeds from the first and
future sales of these Notes will sustain its base drilling operations for the next twelve months,
assuming it meets the conditions for future Notes sales. There can be no assurance that the
Company will meet these conditions. In the event that the Company accelerates its planned drilling
schedule or does not meet the conditions for future notes sales it may require additional funding
in 2015.
Additionally, in the event that the Company is able to redeem its initial public offering warrants as
discussed in Note 9 – Shareholders Equity, the initial public offering warrants would likely be
exercised resulting in the receipt of proceeds up to $20,532,500 to further sustain the Company’s
operations. There can be no assurance that the Company will redeem the initial public offering
warrants.
4. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
Certain amounts included in or affecting the Company’s consolidated financial statements and
related disclosures must be estimated by management, requiring certain assumptions to be made
with respect to values or conditions that cannot be known with certainty at the time the
consolidated financial statements are prepared. These estimates and assumptions affect the
amounts the Company reports for assets and liabilities and the Company’s disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the
reported revenue and expenses in the periods.
The Company evaluates these estimates on an ongoing basis, using historical experience,
consultation with experts and other methods the Company considers reasonable in the particular
circumstances. Nevertheless, actual results may differ significantly from the Company’s estimates.
Any effects on the Company’s business, financial position or results of operations resulting from
revisions to these estimates are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to the
revision become known. Significant items subject to such estimates and assumptions include
estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves and related present value estimates of future net
cash flows therefrom, the carrying value of oil and natural gas properties, asset retirement
obligations, the fair value determination of acquired assets and liabilities, stock-based
compensation, depletion expenses and estimates of income taxes.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment include leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures, computer
equipment and software and transportation equipment. These items are recorded at cost and are
depreciated using the straight-line method based on lives of the individual assets ranging from
one to seven years. During the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, the Company
recognized depreciation expense of $38,819 and $0 and $42,716 and $0, respectively.
F-6
Table of Contents
Share-Based Compensation
The Company expenses director share-based payments under Accounting Standards
Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires
compensation cost for the grant-date fair value of share-based payments to be recognized over
the requisite service period. The Company estimates the grant-date fair value of the share-based
awards issued in the form of options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing net income available to shareholders by the
weighted average number of shares outstanding for the periods presented. The calculation of
diluted earnings per share does not include the potential dilutive impact of the 4,106,500
offering warrants outstanding during the periods presented since the exercise of the offering
warrants is contingent upon the effectiveness of a registration statement to be filed with the
SEC.  The calculation of diluted earnings per share does not include the potential dilutive impact of
the Unit Purchase Option as it was not exercisable based on the Company’s average market share
price.
The calculation of diluted earnings per share does include the dilutive impact of the 6,600,000
Insider Warrants as they were sold pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements of
the Securities Act. The following table sets forth the computation of the basic and diluted earnings
per share for the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013:
June 30,
  2013
Three Months Ended   Six Months Ended
 June 30,
 2014
$400,002   $(30,300 ) $618,322   $(18,939 )
June 30,
  2014
June 30,
  2013
Numerator for basic and diluted earnings per share:  
Net income (loss)
 
Denominator:
Denominator for basic earnings per ordinary shares –
weighted average shares outstanding
Effect of dilutive warrants
Denominator for diluted earnings per ordinary share –
weighted average shares outstanding
 
Basic earnings per ordinary share
Diluted earnings per ordinary share
4,838,199    3,125,000    4,834,035    3,125,000
1,072,361    -
1,491,641    -
5,910,560    3,125,000    6,325,676    3,125,000
$0.08
 $0.07
$(0.01
  $(0.01
) $0.13
) $0.10
$(0.01
  $(0.01
)
)
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) has issued ASU No. 2014-12, Compensation
– Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Accounting for Share-Based Payments When the Terms of an
Award Provide That a Performance Target Could Be Achieved after the Requisite Service Period.
This ASU requires that a performance target that affects vesting, and that could be achieved after
the requisite service period, be treated as a performance condition. As such, the performance
target should not be reflected in estimating the grant date fair value of the award. This update
further clarifies that compensation cost should be recognized in the period in which it becomes
probable that the performance target will be achieved and should represent the compensation
cost attributable to the period(s) for which the requisite service has already been rendered. The
amendments in this ASU are effective for annual periods and interim periods within those annual
periods beginning after December 15, 2015. Earlier adoption is permitted. The adoption of this
standard is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial
position and results of operations.
F-7
Table of Contents
5. Fair Value Measurements
In accordance with the FASB’s authoritative guidance on fair value measurements, the Company’s
financial assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a recurring basis. The Company
recognizes its non-financial assets and liabilities, such as asset retirement obligations and proved
oil and natural gas properties upon impairment, at fair value on a non-recurring basis.
As defined in the authoritative guidance, fair value is the price that would be received to sell an
asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the
measurement date (exit price). To estimate fair value, the Company utilizes market data or
assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including
assumptions about risk and the risks inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. These
inputs can be readily observable, market corroborated or generally unobservable.
The authoritative guidance establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used to
measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active
markets for identical assets or liabilities (“Level 1” measurements) and the lowest priority to
unobservable inputs (“Level 3” measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as
follows:
Level 1  — Unadjusted quoted prices are available in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities as of the reporting date. Active markets are those in which transactions for the asset or
liability occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing
basis.
Level 2  — Pricing inputs, other than unadjusted quoted prices in active markets included in
Level 1, are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date. Level 2 includes those
financial instruments that are valued using models or other valuation methodologies. These
models are primarily industry-standard models that consider various assumptions, including
quoted forward prices for commodities, time value, volatility factors and current market and
contractual prices for the underlying instruments, as well as other relevant economic measures.
Substantially all of these assumptions are observable in the marketplace throughout the full term
of the instrument and can be derived from observable data or are supported by observable levels
at which transactions are executed in the marketplace.
Level 3  — Pricing inputs are generally less observable from objective sources, requiring internally
developed valuation methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.
Nonfinancial Assets and Liabilities
Asset retirement obligations. The carrying amount of the Company’s Asset Retirement
Obligations, or ARO, in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at June 30, 2014 is $24,883 (see Note 7 —
Asset Retirement Obligations). The Company determines the ARO by calculating the present value
of estimated future cash flows related to the liability. Estimating the future ARO requires
management to make estimates and judgments regarding timing and existence of a liability, as well
as what constitutes adequate restoration. Inherent in the fair value calculation are numerous
assumptions and judgments, including the ultimate costs, inflation factors, credit adjusted
discount rates, timing of settlement and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and
political environments. These assumptions represent Level 3 inputs. To the extent future revisions
to these assumptions impact the fair value of the existing ARO liability, a corresponding
adjustment is made to the related asset.
F-8
Table of Contents
Impairment. The Company reviews its proved oil and natural gas properties on a field by field basis
for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that a decline in the recoverability of
their carrying value may have occurred. The Company estimates the expected undiscounted
future cash flows of its oil and natural gas properties and compares such amounts to the carrying
amount of the oil and natural gas properties to determine if the carrying amount is recoverable. If
the carrying amount exceeds the estimated undiscounted future cash flows, the Company will
adjust the carrying amount of the oil and natural gas properties to fair value. The factors used to
determine fair value are subject to management’s judgment and expertise and include, but are not
limited to, recent sales prices of comparable properties, the present value of future cash flows, net
of estimated operating and development costs using estimates of proved reserves, future
commodity pricing, future production estimates, anticipated capital expenditures and various
discount rates commensurate with the risk and current market conditions associated with realizing
the expected cash flows projected. These assumptions represent Level 3 inputs. No impairment
charges on proved oil and natural gas properties were recorded for the six month periods ended
June 30, 2014 or 2013.
6. Oil and Gas Properties
The following table sets forth the Company’s oil and gas properties:
December 31,
 June 30,
 
 2013
2014
 
Proved oil and gas properties (1)
 $23,209,940  $7,491,321
)
Less: Accumulated depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment   (980,379 )   (484,968
 
   22,229,561    7,006,353
Proved oil and gas properties, net
   4,881,681     6,243,014
Unproved oil and gas properties
 
 $27,111,242  $13,249,367  
Total oil and gas properties, net
(1)
Included in the Company’s proved oil and gas properties are estimates of future asset retirement costs
of $23,575 and $20,267 as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, respectively.
7. Asset Retirement Obligations
The following table reflects the changes in the Company’s ARO during the six months ended June
30, 2014 and the year ended December 31, 2013:
June 30,
2014
December 31, 
 
2013
663
Asset retirement obligation — beginning of period $21,171   $ 2,963
   6,030     17,545
Additions to ARO from new properties
Reduction due to sale of property
   (3,128 )  
   810
Accretion expense during period
Asset retirement obligation — end of period
 $24,883   $ 21,171
-
8. Notes Payable to Directors
On May 1, 2014 the Company received a loan from Hauser Holdings, LLC an affiliate of Richard
Hauser, one of our directors.  The $800,000 loan is due August 31, 2014 and bears an interest rate
of 10% per annum.
On June 10, 2014 the Company received a loan from BBS Capital Fund, LP an affiliate of Berke
Bakay, one of our directors.  The $500,000 loan is due August 31, 2014 and bears an interest rate
of 10% per annum.
On September 4, 2014 the Company repaid its loans from BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser
Holdings, LLC with accrued interest for total repayment of $512,500 and $828,222, respectively.
F-9
Table of Contents
9. Note Payable to Officer
As of June 30, 2014, the Company’s note payable to officer is payable to Jason Hoisager, the
founder of Arabella LLC, with an outstanding balance of $3,007,170. The founder is currently the
Chief Executive Officer and President of the Company and is a director and significant shareholder
of the Company. The note payable is non-interest bearing and matures in December of 2023.
10. Shareholders’ Equity
The Company is authorized to issue 50,000,000 ordinary shares and 5,000,000 preferred shares
with a par value of $0.001 per share.
Ordinary Shares
On June 26, 2014 the Company’s Chief Executive Officer Jason Hoisager purchased 190,477 of the
Company’s ordinary shares for $10.50 a share in a private subscription. The shares were new
issue shares of the Company.
Preferred Shares
The Company is authorized to issue up to 5,000,000 preferred shares with a par value of $0.001
and the characteristics of the preferred shares will be determined by the Board of Directors of the
Company from time to time.
Warrants
In connection with Parent’s initial public offering (the “Offering”) in March 2011, the Company
issued 4,106,500 offering warrants, which entitles the holders to purchase ordinary shares at the
price of $5.00 per share, commencing on the date of the business combination, if the Company
has an effective and current registration statement covering the ordinary shares issuable upon
exercise of the initial public offering warrants and a current prospectus relating to such ordinary
shares, and expiring three years from that date.  The Company may redeem the initial public
offering warrants at a price of $0.01 per initial public offering warrant upon 30 days’ notice while the
initial public offering warrants are exercisable, only when the last sale price of the ordinary shares
is at least $10.50 per share for any 20 trading days within a 30 trading day period, provided that a
current registration statement is in effect for the ordinary shares underlying the initial public
offering warrants.  If not exercised, the initial public offering warrants expire on December 24,
2016.  If the Company redeems the initial public offering warrants, management of the Company
will have the option to require any holder that wishes to exercise his initial public offering warrants
to do so on a cashless basis.
Simultaneously with the Offering, certain of the shareholders purchased 6,600,000 insider warrants
at the price of $0.35 per insider warrant (for an aggregate purchase price of $2,310,000) from the
Company.  These insider warrants have the same terms as the 4,106,500 initial public offering
warrants referred to in the preceding paragraph, except these insider warrants are not redeemable
and the insider warrants are exercisable for cash or on a cashless basis.
Unit Purchase Option
In connection with the original ordinary share Offering, the Company issued unit purchase options
to purchase an aggregate of 400,000 units at an exercise price of $8.80 per unit to its underwriters
and designees of the underwriter.  Each unit consists of one ordinary share and one redeemable
ordinary share purchase warrant, which contains a provision for cashless exercise and has the
same terms as the 4,106,500 initial public offering warrants.
F-10
Table of Contents
Stock-based Compensation
On May 5, 2014 the Company granted each non-employee director 30,000 stock options to
purchase its ordinary shares for joining the board and 20,000 stock options to purchase its
ordinary shares for each year of service commencing from January 30, 2014. All, 50,000 stock
options in aggregate, vest ratably over two years and expire five years from the grant date. The
stock options have an exercise price of $6.15 per share, which represents the closing price of the
Company’s ordinary shares the day prior to the grant. The grant date fair value of the options
granted was determined to be approximately $558,950 using the Black-Scholes pricing model.
Significant assumptions used in the valuation include an expected term of 3.5 years utilizing the
“Simplified Method” as the Company does not have sufficient historical experience to estimate an
expected term, an expected volatility of 49.0% based historical value and corresponding volatility
of the Company’s peer group stock price for a period consistent with the stock option expected
term, a risk free interest rate of 0.9% based on the a U.S. Treasury Note with a similar term to the
expected term on the date of the grant, and an expected dividend yield of 0.0% as the Company
does not expect to pay dividends in the near future. According to the terms of the option plan,
vesting was retroactive to the beginning of service in January 2014; as such two quarters of
vesting has been recorded during the three months ended June 30, 2014. Accordingly, aggregated
stock-based compensation expense for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 was
$139,738 and $139,738, respectively. Unrecognized compensation expense as of June 30, 2014,
relating to non-vested common stock options is approximately $419,212 and is expected to be
recognized through the fourth quarter of 2015. At June 30, 2014, no options had been exercised
and no options had been forfeited.
A summary of stock option activity for the six months ended June 30, 2014 is presented below:
Number of Options
Outstanding at December 31, 2013 -
Granted
Forfeited
Exercised
Outstanding at June 30, 2014
Exercisable at June 30, 2014
250,000
   -
   -
   250,000
   62,500
Weighted
Average Exercise
Price
  -
  $
   
   
  $
  $
6.15
-
-
6.15
6.15
The weighted average remaining life of options outstanding at June 30, 2014 was 4.5 years.
11. Related Party Transactions
Mr. Jason Hoisager, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, owns 100% of Arabella Petroleum
Company LLC (“Petroleum”), which is the operating company for substantially all the wells that the
Company has its working interest in.   As Petroleum drills and completes the wells, Petroleum bills
the Company for its working ownership percentage of the capital costs.  After the completion of
each well, Petroleum sells the oil and gas and provides the Company its working interest revenue,
net of production taxes and charges for the lease operating expenses.
As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, the Company owed Petroleum $11,920,783 and
$3,695,119, respectively, in joint interest billings to vendors for the well costs.  During the six
months ended June 30, 2014, the Company paid Petroleum $5,855,814 in capital costs for the
wells.  Petroleum is responsible for collecting the revenue from the purchasers and providing the
Company its accounts receivable, which totaled $954,645 and $425,372 at June 30, 2014 and
December 31, 2013, respectively.
During the period ended June 30, 2014 Petroleum advanced $780,753 to the Company for working
capital purposes which is due upon demand and non-interest bearing.
F-11
Table of Contents
Petroleum also paid part of the general and administrative expenses for the companies during
2013 and allocated to Exploration $32,977 for the three months and $65,955 for the six months
ended June 30, 2013, respectively. No such expenses were paid in 2014.
As of October 1, 2014, Petroleum has ceased to provide these services to the Company and AEX
Operating, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, is the operator of record for the
Company’s wells.
12. Other Operating Revenue – Gain on Sale of Oil and Gas Properties
During the second quarter of 2014, Arabella sold undeveloped leased acreage for $2,924,854 in
cash and recognized a gain on the sale of the property of $1,722,123. Contingent conditions on the
sale of the Weatherby acreage may result in an additional $78,300 of revenue.
During the first half of 2014, Arabella sold undeveloped leased acreage for $5,044,054 in cash and
recognized a gain on the sale of the properties of $2,958,323. Contingent conditions on the sale of
the Weatherby acreage may result in an additional $78,300 of revenue.
During the second quarter of 2014, Arabella sold developed, non-operated leased acreage for
$327,734 in cash and recognized a gain on the sale of the properties of $46,398.
Total acreage sales resulted in $3,252,588 and $5,371,788 in cash and gains of $1,768,521 and
$3,004,721 for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014, respectively.
13. Income Taxes
Prior to the reverse merger described in note 2, Parent and Arabella LLC were flow-through entities
not subject to corporate level income taxes. Subsequent to the reverse merger, the Company is
subject to Federal income taxes. In as much as its principal operations are currently limited to the
state of Texas, any income or loss is not currently subject to state income taxes. The principal
difference between tax reporting and financial reporting is the intangible drilling costs, which are
expensed for income tax purposes but capitalized under generally accepted accounting purposes.
The Company incurred $8,175,916 of such costs during the six months ended June 30, 2014. For
the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 the Company’s effective tax rate approximated the
federal statutory rate.
14. Subsequent Events
On July 1, 2014 the Company sold an undeveloped leased acreage for approximately $293,333 in
cash and recognized a gain on the sale of the property of approximately $79,935.
On September 2, 2014 the Company entered into a $45,000,000 Senior Secured Note Facility (the
“Notes”) with a New York based investor (the “Investor”). The initial sale of $16,000,000 in Notes
occurred on September 2, 2014 with further sales to be based upon reserve based performance
hurdles. The Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 15%, of which six months was prepaid at
close. The Notes are due one year from the issuance date and can be redeemed by the Company
at any time without penalty. The Company paid a 3% origination fee to the Investor and a 5% cash
commission to its advisors on the transaction. In conjunction with the sale of the Notes, the
Company issued warrants to purchase 1,300,000 of the Company’s ordinary shares at a price of
$5.00. The warrants expire in five years.
On September 4, 2014 the Company repaid its loans from BBS Capital Fund, LP and Hauser
Holdings, LLC with accrued interest for total repayment of $512,500 and $828,222, respectively.
On October 1, 2014 operations of the Company’s wells were transferred from Arabella Petroleum,
LLC to AEX Operating, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
On October 8, 2014 the Company backed into a 0.5333% working interest in 6,166 gross, 5,505 net,
acres held by Energen Resources Corporation in the Delaware Basin. The interest amounts to 33
gross and 29 net acres. There is currently one horizontal well producing on this project and one
permitted well.
On October 23, 2014 the Company backed into 1.371% working interest in 15,000 gross, 11,773 net,
acres held by Brigham Resources Operating, LLC in the Delaware Basin. The interest amounts to
206 gross and 161 net acres. There are currently two vertical wells, one horizontal well and one
extended reach horizontal well producing on this project.
Between September 29, 2014 and November 7, 2014, over a series of five separate transactions,
the Company acquired additional working interests in all of its producing wells, Locker State #1H
(18.0%), Graham #1H (18.0%), Woods #1H (10.0%), Vastar State #1V (5.0%), Jackson #1H (7.1%) and
Emily Bell #1H (1.5%), as well as the drilled, but yet to be completed, Woods #2H (4.5%) and the
completed, but currently shut in, SM Prewitt #1H (18.0%). Additionally, it acquired an additional
18.0% of all of the remaining undrilled working interests in the SM Prewitt, Locker State and
Graham leases, 16.5% of the undrilled Johnson 103 and 138 leases as well as 5.0% of all of the
remaining undrilled working interests in the Woods, Vastar State, Jackson and Emily Bell leases.
Across the five transactions, the Company will pay, in the aggregate, approximately $2.2 million
and will issue 112,250 ordinary shares.
F-12
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
WITH REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRMS
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms  F-14
 
Consolidated Financial Statements:
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets
F-16
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
F-17
 
   
 
  F-18
 
   
 
  F-19
   
 
  F-20 - F-33
F-13
Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Audit Committee of the
Board of Directors and Shareholders
of Arabella Exploration, Inc.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Arabella Exploration, Inc. and
its Subsidiary (collectively the “Company”) as of December 31, 2013, and the related consolidated
statements of operations, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows for the year then ended.
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement.  The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of
its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control
over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.  An
audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures
in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.  We
believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of Arabella Exploration, Inc. and its Subsidiary, as of December 31, 2013, and the
results of their operations and their cash flows for the year then ended in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the
Company will continue as a going concern.  As discussed in Note 4 to the accompanying
consolidated financial statements, the Company has a working capital deficit of $1,240,656, and a
substantial portion of the Company’s oil and natural gas properties are undeveloped as of
December 31, 2013.  The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on its
ability to develop its oil and natural gas properties and to achieve profitable operations and to
generate sufficient cash flow to meet its obligations as they become due.  The Company will need
to raise additional capital through debt or equity offerings in order to implement its oil and natural
gas properties development plan and to support higher costs and expense in 2014.  There can be
no assurance that the Company can raise capital through additional debt or equity offerings on
commercially acceptable terms if at all.  These conditions raise substantial doubt about the
Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.  Management’s plans are discussed in Note 4 to
the accompanying consolidated financial statements
Marcum llp
New York, NY
May 15, 2014
F-14
Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Arabella Exploration, Inc.:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Arabella Exploration, Inc. (the
Company) as of December 31, 2012, and the related consolidated statements of operations and
member's equity, and cash flows for the two years in the period then ended. These consolidated
financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of Arabella Exploration, Inc. as of December 31, 2012 and the
results of its operations and its cash flows for the two years in the period then ended, in conformity
with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the
Company will continue as a going concern. As shown in the consolidated financial statements and
discussed in Note 4, the Company has incurred recurring losses from operations and is
dependent on outside sources of financing for continuation of its operations. These and other
factors raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Management's plans with regard to this matter are also discussed in Note 4. These consolidated
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this
uncertainty.
/s/ Ham, Langston & Brezina, LLP
Houston, Texas
October 18, 2013, except for notes 1, 2, 4, 6, 7 and 8,
as to which the date is December 12, 2013
F-15
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
ASSETS
Current assets:
    Cash and cash equivalents
    Accounts receivable - oil and gas sales
    Prepaid expenses
 
        Total current assets
 
Deposits
Prepaid drilling costs to Arabella Petroleum Company, LLC
Oil and gas properties, successful efforts method - Net
 
                Total assets
 
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
Current liabilities:
    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
    Accrued joint interest billings payable
 
        Total current liabilities
 
Note payable to officer
Asset retirement obligations
 
                Total liabilities
 
Commitments and contingencies
 
Shareholders’ equity
Preferred shares, $0.001 par value, authorized 5,000,000 shares and none
issued and outstanding
Ordinary shares, $0.001 par value, authorized 50,000,000 shares;  issued and
outstanding 4,829,826 at December 31, 2013, and 3,125,000 at December 31,
2012
Additional paid-in-capital
        Retained earnings
 
    Total shareholders’ equity
 
                Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
2012
2013
 
  
 
  
 
 $2,118,533   $12,990
 
    7,588
   436,830
 
    -
   23,077
 
    
     
 
   2,578,440     20,578
 
     
    
 
    -
   25,000
   -
    219,495  
   13,249,367    1,516,236 
    
 
 $15,852,807  $1,756,309 
     
 
    
     
 
    
     
    
 
 
     
    
 
 $84,691
  $20,000
   3,734,405     42,238
 
 
    
 
   3,819,096     62,238
    
 
   3,007,170     1,242,696 
 
   21,171
    
 
   6,847,437     1,307,897
2,963
-
-
4,830
3,125
8,488,970     125,436  
    319,851  
   511,570
    
     
 
   9,005,370     448,412  
    
 
 $15,852,807  $1,756,309
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F-16
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2013, 2012 AND 2011
215
2013
  
  
 $1,421,915  $65,881
2012
2011
   
   
  $16,543
    402,901     34,467
Revenues:
    Oil and gas revenue
    Other operating revenue – gain on sale of oil and gas properties    -
    
 
            Total revenues
   1,421,915    468,782     51,010
    
 
    
Costs and expenses:
   152,052     12,526
    Lease operating expenses
    Ad valorem and production taxes
   64,033
    3,174
   469,230     27,696
    Depreciation, depletion and amortization
   663
    Accretion of asset retirement obligation
    General and administrative expenses
   412,268     10,010
General and administrative expenses allocated from Arabella
Petroleum Company, LLC
 
            Total costs and expenses
 
                Net income (loss)
 
Net income (loss) per ordinary share:
Basic
 
Diluted
 
Weighted average ordinary shares outstanding:
Basic
 
Diluted
1,230,196    147,466     52,475
 
    
)
 $191,719   $321,316   $(1,465
 
    
 
    
)
 $0.06
 
    
)
 $0.06
 
    
    
 
   3,157,695    3,125,000    3,125,000 
    
 
   3,201,305    3,125,000    3,125,000
5,753
    819
    5,724
    97
    10,011
$(0.00
     
  $(0.00
$0.10
     
  $0.10
131,950     93,845
30,071
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F-17
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2013, 2012 AND 2011
Paid-In
  Capital
Amount  
  $-
$-
     
    30,001
Retained    
 
 Ordinary
 
  Earnings   Total
 
 Shares
 
   
 
 Shares
 
  $-
 
  -
Balance at December 31, 2010
     
 
   
 
    -
 
  3,125,000    3,125     26,876
Shares effectively issued to founder
     
 
   
 
    (1,465 )   (1,465
)
  -
Net loss
     
 
   
 
    (1,465 )   28,536
 
  3,125,000    3,125     26,876
Balance at December 31, 2011
    98,560
    -
 
    98,560
  -
Contribution by founder
     
     
 
   
     
 
    321,316    321,316  
    -
  -
Net income
   
     
 
     
 
  3,125,000    3,125     125,436     319,851    448,412  
Balance at December 31, 2012
 
   
 
     
 
   
Contributions by founder:
     
 
   
 
     
  -
 
   Cash
    40,000
     
 
 
   
    131,950  
General and administrative expenses  -
 
   
     
 
    3,009,832 
  -
Oil and gas assets
 
   
     
 
Outstanding shares of Lone Oak 
   Acquisition Corporation at the time 
   of the time of the reverse merger
 
Net income
 
Balance at December 31, 2013
191,719    191,719  
  -
   
 
     
  4,829,826  $4,830   $8,488,970  $511,570  $9,005,370
-
    40,000
     
     
    131,950     -
     
     
    3,009,832    -
1,704,826    1,705     5,181,752    -
-
-
     
    -
-
     
    -
     
    -
-
5,183,457
-
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F-18
Table of Contents
ARABELLA EXPLORATION, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2013, 2012 AND 2011
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided
by operating activities:
        Depreciation, depletion and amortization
        Accretion of asset retirement obligation
        Contribution recognized for allocated general and administrative
expenses
        Gain from sale of oil and gas properties
        Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
            Accounts receivable - oil and gas sales
            Prepaid expenses
            Deposits
            Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
                Net cash provided by operating activities
 
Cash flows from investing activities:
    Additions to oil and gas properties
    Proceeds from sale of oil and gas properties
    Prepaid drilling costs
 
                Net cash used in investing activities
 
Cash flows from financing activities:
Cash received in merger
Cash contribution from shareholder
Proceeds from shareholders loans
Repayment of shareholder loans
 
                Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year
 
Non-cash investing and financing activities:
Addition to oil and gas properties through increase in accrued joint
interest billings payable
Addition to oil and gas properties through Increase in Notes payable
to officer
Addition to oil and gas properties contributed by officer
Capitalized imputed interest expense contributed by sole member
2013
  
  
 $191,719
2012
 
   
   
 
  $321,316   $(1,465 )
2011
469,230
   663
27,696
    215
5,724  
    97
131,950
93,845
30,071
)   -
)   -
    50,986
     
    88,536
(402,901 )   (34,467)
   -
     
 
     
    
)   (4,967 )
   (429,242 )   (2,621
 
    -
   (23,077
    -
 
   (25,000
    11,252  
   64,691
     
 
    
    6,245  
   380,934
     
 
    
    
 
     
   (3,718,303)   (526,642 )   (68,771)
   -
    592,702     34,667  
    (155,177 )   (64,318)
   219,495
    
     
 
   (3,498,808)   (89,117 )   (98,422)
     
     
    
 
     
 
    
     
    -
 
   5,183,417     -
    -
   40,000
    -
 
    92,192  
    74,942
   -
 
    (61,386 )   -
   -
    
     
     
 
    92,192  
   5,223,417     13,556
 
     
    
 
    15
   2,105,543     12,975
    
     
 
 
    -
   12,990
 
     
    
 $2,118,533   $12,990
  $15
15
$3,692,167   $1,087,987  $62,077
$1,764,474   $-
$3,009,832      
 $2,662
$4,715
$-
$370
related to member loans
Increase in oil and gas properties through recognition of asset
retirement obligation
$18,208
$2,638
$2,699
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F-19
Table of Contents
1. Organization and Operations of the Company
Organization
Arabella Exploration, Inc. (formerly known as Lone Oak Acquisition Corporation) (the “Parent”)
was incorporated in the Cayman Islands on June 17, 2010 as a blank check company whose
objective was to acquire and operating business.  Parent’s wholly owned subsidiary Arabella
Exploration LLC (“Arabella LLC”) was formed in 2011, to acquire interests in low risk prospective
or currently producing oil and gas properties primarily in the Texas Permian Basin.  The Parent
and Arabella LLC (collectively the “Company”) completed a reverse merger on December 24, 2013
as more fully described below in Note 3.
Nature of Business
The Company is an independent exploration and production company focused on the acquisition
and development of unconventional oil and natural gas resources in the Permian Basin in West
Texas. The Company owns acreage leases and participates in the drilling of oil and natural gas
wells with other working interest partners. Due to the capital intensive nature of oil and natural gas
drilling activities, the operating company responsible for conducting the drilling operations may
request advance payments from the working interest partners for their share of the costs.
2. Initial Orginization and Public Offering
In connection with the organization of the Parent a total of 1,150,000 shares of the Parents’s
ordinary shares were sold to its founding shareholders at a price of $0.0217 per share for an
aggregate of $25,000.
The Parent consummated its initial public offering (the “Offering”) on March 24, 2011 and received
proceeds net of transaction costs of $30,566,234 and $2,310,000 from the private placement of
warrants to certain of the members of management of the Parent (the "Insider Warrants"). On
March 30, 2011 the over-allotment option was partially exercised and the Parent received an
additional $822,180 net of transaction costs. A total of 4,106,500 units consisting of one
ordinary share and one warrant each were sold in the offering and exercise of the over-allotment
option. The number of ordinary shares held by the founding shareholders was subject to forfeiture
by such shareholders if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters of
the Offering.  After the partial exercise and expiration of the over-allotment option 123,375 of the
shares held by the founding shareholders were forfeited. An amount of $33,462,180 (including the
$2,310,000 of proceeds from the sale of Insider Warrants) was placed in a trust account (“Trust”)
until the earlier of (i) the consummation of the Parent’s first Business Combination, (ii) the
Company’s failure to consummate a Business Combination within the prescribed time and (iii) the
Common Stock trades at or below $7.75 per share, subject to certain criteria contained in the 10b5-
1 plan, prior to the announcement of a Business Combination. A Business Combination was
announced on September 19, 2012, terminating the 10b5-1 plan. As of that date, a total of 665,000
shares had been repurchased under the 10b5-1 plan at a total cost, including expenses, of
$5,189,108.
On February 25, 2013, the Parent commenced a tender offer (the “First Tender Offer”) for up to
2,829,535 of its ordinary shares at approximately $8.22 per share (the amount held in trust per
share). The First Tender Offer expired on March 22, 2013. A total of 2,303,899 ordinary shares had
been tendered representing $18,927,300. The funds were released from the Trust and paid to
tendering shareholders on March 28, 2013. The tendered shares were canceled. Following the
payment and cancelation of the tendered shares, 2,164,226 of the Parent’s ordinary shares
remained outstanding and $9,345,772 remained in the Trust. On August 21, 2013, the Parent
commenced a tender offer (the “Second Tender Offer”) for up to 525,636 of its ordinary shares at
approximately $8.22 per share (the amount held in trust per share). The Second Tender Offer
expired on September 19, 2013. A total of 20,000 ordinary shares had been tendered representing
$164,307. The funds were released from the Trust and paid to tendering shareholders on
September 24, 2013. The tendered shares were canceled. Following the payment and cancelation
of the tendered shares, 2,144,226 of the Parent’s ordinary shares remained outstanding and
$9,181,466 remained in the Trust.
In connection with the reverse merger more fully described in Note 3 below, on October 25, 2013
the Parent commenced a tender offer (the “Third Tender Offer”) for up to 505,636 of its ordinary
shares at approximately $8.22 per share (the amount held in trust per share). The Third Tender
Offer ultimately expired on December 24, 2013.  A total of 439,400 ordinary shares had been
tendered representing $3,609,818.  The funds were released from the Trust and paid to tendering
shareholders on December 27, 2013. The tendered shares were canceled. Following the payment
and cancelation of the tendered shares, 1,704,826 of the Parent’s ordinary shares remained
outstanding and the remaining funds in the Trust in the amount of $5,183,417 were distributed to
the Parent.
F-20
Table of Contents
3. Reverse Merger
Parent and Arabella LLC (the wholly owned subsidiary) entered into a reverse merger on
December 24, 2013 where the Parent issued 3,125,00 ordinary shares to the holders of all of the
issued and outstanding interests of Arabella LLC immediately prior to the time of the Acquisition in
exchange for 100% of the units of Arabella LLC. With that exchange, Mr. Hoisager owns the
majority of the Company’s ordinary shares.
In connection with the reverse merger, 1,705,002 of additional ordinary shares (“earnout shares”)
will be awarded to individuals associated with Arabella LLC over the following three years, if and
when the Company achieves the following goals:
●
●
●
One third of the earnout shares will be awarded if the proved reserves of the Company as of December
31, 2014 shall have increased 100% from the proved reserves as of the closing date of the reverse
merger if (a) the finding and development cost per proved barrel of oil equivalent (“BOE”) of the increase
in proved reserves is $22 or less and/or if the ratio of finding and development cost to BOE is superior
(lower per BOE) or equal to 80% of the public peer set, and (b) the Company’s general and
administrative cost per BOE of the increase in proved reserves is $12.50 or less and/or if the Company’s
general and administrative cost per BOE of the increase is superior (lower per BOE) or equal to 80% of
the public peer set (as specified in the agreement and plan of merger).
One third of the earnout shares will be awarded if the proved reserves of the Company as of December
31, 2015 shall have increased 66% from the proved reserves as of December 31, 2014 if (a) the finding
and development cost per proved barrel of oil equivalent (“BOE”) of the increase in proved reserves is
$18 or less and/or if the ratio of finding and development cost to BOE is superior (lower per BOE) or
equal to 80% of the public peer set, and (b) the Company’s general and administrative cost per BOE of
the increase in proved reserves is $6.50 or less and/or if the Company’s general and administrative cost
per BOE of the increase is superior (lower per BOE) or equal to 80% of the public peer set.
One third of the earnout shares will be awarded if the proved reserves of the Company as of December
31, 2016 shall have increased 33% from the proved reserves as of December 31, 2015 if (a) the finding
and development cost per proved barrel of oil equivalent (“BOE”) of the increase in proved reserves is
$14 or less and/or if the ratio of finding and development cost to BOE is superior (lower per BOE) or
equal to 80% of the public peer set, and (b) the Company’s general and administrative cost per BOE of
the increase in proved reserves is $5.00 or less and/or if the Company’s general and administrative cost
per BOE of the increase is superior (lower per BOE) or equal to 80% of the public peer set.
The merger will be accounted for as a “reverse merger” and recapitalization since the
shareholders of Arabella LLC (i) owned a majority of the outstanding ordinary shares of the
Company immediately following the completion of the transaction, and (ii) have the significant
influence and the ability to elect or appoint or to remove a majority of the members of the
governing body of the combined entity, and Arabella LLC’s senior management dominates the
management of the combined entity ifollowing the completion of the transaction in accordance
with the provision of Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification
(“FASB-ASC”) topic 805 Business Combinations. Accordingly, Arabella LLC will be deemed to be
the accounting acquirer in the transaction and, consequently, the transaction is treated as a
recapitalization of Arabella LLC. Accordingly, the assets and liabilities and the historical
operations that are reflected in the financial statements are those of Arabella LLC and are recorded
at the historical cost basis of Arabella LLC. Parent’s assets, liabilities and results of operations
were consolidated with the assets, liabilities and results of operations of Arabella LLC after
consummation of the acquisition.
4. Ability to Continue As a Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in US dollars and in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States on a going concern basis, which
contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the
normal course of business.  The Company commenced its oil and gas exploration activities in
2011. During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company’s oil and gas properties increased
$ 12.2 million in costs. In addition, the Company had a working capital deficit of $ 1,240,656 at
December 31, 2013, and has not raised additional debt or equity to drill additional wells and
support higher costs and expenses in 2014. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the
Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
F-21
Table of Contents
The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on its ability to develop its oil
and gas properties and achieve profitable operations and to generate sufficient cash flow from
financing and operations to meet its obligations as they become payable. The Company expects
that it will need approximately $ 40 million to fund its operations during the next twelve months,
which will include minimum annual property lease payments, well expenditures and operating
costs and expenses.
Management has plans to seek additional capital through private debt for the development of its oil
and gas properties and operating costs and expenses. Although there are no assurances that
management’s plans will be realized, or that such debt can be obtain on terms reasonable to the
Company, management believes that the Company will be able to continue operations in the
future.  In the event that said funds are not available or acceptable, the Company will consider
alternative financing structures and/or slow its exploration activities.  Accordingly, no adjustment
relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and the classification of
liabilities has been made to the accompanying financial statements in anticipation of the Company
not being able to continue as a going concern.
5. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements of the Company include the accounts of
Arabella Exploration Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiary Arabella Exploration LLC. These
statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America (“GAAP”). All significant intercompany transactions have been
eliminated in consolidation. Certain reclassifications of prior year balances have been made to
conform such amounts to current year classifications in accordance with the reverse merger. The
Consolidated Statement of Operations includes the operations of Arabella Exploration LLC to the
date of the reverse merger. Subsequent to the reverse merger, the operations also includes the
operations of the Parent.
Use of Estimates
Preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of
assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts
of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates pertain to
proved oil and natural gas reserves and related cash flow estimates used in impairment tests of
long-lived assets, estimates of future development, dismantlement and abandonment costs,
estimates relating to certain oil and natural gas revenues and expenses and estimates of expenses
related to legal, environmental and other contingencies. Certain of these estimates require
assumptions regarding future commodity prices, future costs and expenses and future production
rates. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
As an oil and natural gas producer, the Company’s revenue, profitability and future growth are
substantially dependent upon the prevailing and future prices for oil and natural gas, which are
dependent upon numerous factors beyond its control such as economic, political and regulatory
developments and competition from other energy sources. The energy markets have historically
been very volatile and there can be no assurance that oil and natural gas prices will not be subject
to wide fluctuations in the future. A substantial or extended decline in oil and natural gas prices
could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations,
cash flows and quantities of oil and natural gas reserves that may be economically produced.
Estimates of oil and natural gas reserves and their values, future production rates and future costs
and expenses are inherently uncertain for numerous reasons, including many factors beyond the
Company’s control. Reservoir engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground
accumulations of oil and natural gas that cannot be measured in an exact manner. The accuracy of
any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of data available and of engineering and geological
interpretation and judgment. In addition, estimates of reserves may be revised based on actual
production, results of subsequent exploration and development activities, prevailing commodity
prices, operating costs and other factors. These revisions may be material and could materially
affect future depreciation, depletion and amortization expense, dismantlement and abandonment
costs, and impairment expense.
F-22Table of Contents
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments purchased with a maturity of three months or
less when purchased and money market funds to be cash equivalents. The Company maintains
cash and cash equivalents in bank deposit accounts which, at times, may exceed the federally
insured limits. The Company has not experienced any significant losses from such investments.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consist of receivables from the operators for properties in which the
Company has working interest for the oil and natural gas production delivered to purchasers. The
purchasers remit payment for production directly to the operator, then the operator allocates the
revenue based on the working interest of the owners.  The Company generally receives its share
of the working interest revenue within three months after the production month.
Accounts receivable are stated at amounts based on the percent revenue working interest due
from the purchasers that goes through the operator of the property, net of an allowance for
doubtful accounts when the Company believes collection is doubtful.  Accounts receivable
outstanding longer than the contractual payment terms are considered past due. The Company
determines its allowance by considering a number of factors, including the length of time accounts
receivable are past due, the Company’s previous loss history, the condition of the general
economy and the industry as a whole. The Company writes off specific accounts receivable when
they become uncollectible, and payments subsequently received on such receivables are credited
to the allowance for doubtful accounts. No allowance was deemed necessary at December 31,
2013 or December 31, 2012.
Oil and Gas Properties
Proved Oil and Gas Properties
Oil and natural gas exploration and development activities are accounted for using the successful
efforts method. Under this method, all property acquisition costs and costs of exploratory and
development wells are capitalized when incurred, pending determination of whether the well has
found proved reserves. If an exploratory well does not find proved reserves, the costs of drilling
the well are charged to expense. The costs of development wells are capitalized whether
productive or nonproductive.
The provision for depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) of oil and natural gas
properties is calculated on a field-by-field basis using the unit-of-production method. All
capitalized well costs and leasehold costs of proved properties are amortized on a unit-of-
production basis over the remaining life of proved developed reserves and total proved reserves,
respectively. The calculation for the unit-of-production DD&A method takes into consideration
estimated future dismantlement, restoration and abandonment costs, which are net of estimated
salvage values.
Costs of retired, sold or abandoned properties that constitute a part of an amortization base
(partial field) are charged or credited, net of proceeds, to accumulated DD&A unless doing so
significantly affects the unit-of-production amortization rate for an entire field, in which case a gain
or loss is recognized currently. No gain or loss for the sale of oil and natural gas producing
properties was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 or 2011.
Expenditures for maintenance, repairs and minor renewals necessary to maintain properties in
operating condition are expensed as incurred. Major betterments, replacements and renewals are
capitalized to the appropriate property and equipment accounts. Estimated dismantlement and
abandonment costs for oil and natural gas properties are capitalized, net of salvage, at their
estimated net present value and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of
the related proved developed reserves.
The factors used to determine fair value are subject to management’s judgment and expertise and
include, but are not limited to, recent sales prices of comparable properties, the present value of
future cash flows, net of estimated operating and development costs using estimates of proved
reserves, future commodity pricing, future production estimates, anticipated capital expenditures
and various discount rates commensurate with the risk and current market conditions associated
with realizing the expected cash flows projected. These assumptions represent Level 3 inputs, as
further discussed in Note 6 — Fair Value Measurements. No impairment of proved oil and natural
gas properties was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
Unproved Oil and Gas Properties
Unproved properties consist of costs incurred to acquire unproved leases, or lease acquisition
costs. Lease acquisition costs are capitalized until the leases expire or when the Company
specifically identifies leases that will revert to the lessor, at which time the Company expenses the
associated lease acquisition costs. The expensing of the lease acquisition costs is recorded as
impairment of oil and gas properties in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Lease
acquisition costs related to successful exploratory drilling are reclassified to proved properties
and depleted on a unit-of-production basis.
F-23
Table of Contents
The Company assesses its unproved properties periodically for impairment on a property-by-
property basis based on remaining lease terms, drilling results or future plans to develop acreage.
The Company considers the following factors in its assessment of the impairment of unproved
properties:
●the remaining amount of unexpired term under its leases;
    
 ●its ability to actively manage and prioritize its capital expenditures to drill leases and to make payments
to extend leases that may be close to expiration;
    
 ●its ability to exchange lease positions with other companies that allow for higher concentrations of
ownership and development;
    
 ●its ability to convey partial mineral ownership to other companies in exchange for their drilling of leases;
and
●
its evaluation of the continuing successful results from the application of completion technology in the
Bone Spring and Wolfcamp  formations by the Company or by other operators in areas adjacent to or
near the Company’s unproved properties.
For sales of entire working interests in unproved properties, gain or loss is recognized to the
extent of the difference between the proceeds received and the net carrying value of the property.
Proceeds from sales of partial interests in unproved properties are accounted for as a recovery of
costs unless the proceeds exceed the entire cost of the property. In 2012 and 2011, the Company
sold unproved lease acreage located in the Permian Basin in Texas for an aggregate of $ 592,702
and $ 34,667 in cash. The Company recognized a gain of $ 402,901 and $ 34,467 from these
divestures, respectively.
Exploration Expenses
Exploration costs, including certain geological and geophysical expenses and the costs of
carrying and retaining undeveloped acreage, are charged to expense as incurred.
Costs from drilling exploratory wells are initially capitalized, but charged to expense if and when a
well is determined to be unsuccessful. Determination is usually made on or shortly after drilling or
completing the well, however, in certain situations a determination cannot be made when drilling is
completed. As of December 31, 2013, the Company had no exploratory well costs.
Asset Retirement Obligations
In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) authoritative guidance
on asset retirement obligations (“ARO”), the Company records the fair value of a liability for a legal
obligation to retire an asset in the period in which the liability is incurred with the corresponding
cost capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. For oil and gas
properties, this is the period in which the well is drilled or acquired. The ARO represents the
estimated amount the Company will incur to plug, abandon and remediate the properties at the
end of their productive lives, in accordance with applicable state laws. The liability is accreted to its
present value each period and the capitalized costs are amortized using the unit-of-production
method. The accretion expense is recorded as a component of depreciation, depletion and
amortization in the Company’s Consolidated Statement of Operations.
The Company determines the ARO by calculating the present value of estimated cash flows
related to the liability. Estimating the future ARO requires management to make estimates and
judgments regarding timing and existence of a liability, as well as what constitutes adequate
restoration. Inherent in the fair value calculation are numerous assumptions and judgments
including the ultimate costs, inflation factors, credit adjusted discount rates, timing of settlement
and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and political environments.  These
assumptions represent Level 3 inputs, as further discussed in Note 4 — Fair Value Measurements.
To the extent future revisions to these assumptions impact the fair value of the existing ARO
liability, a corresponding adjustment is made to the related asset.
F-24
Table of Contents
Revenue Recognition
Oil and gas revenue from the Company’s interests in producing wells is recognized when the
product is delivered, at which time the customer has taken title and assumed the risks and rewards
of ownership, and collectability is reasonably assured. Substantially all of the Company’s
production is sold to purchasers under short-term (less than twelve months) contracts at market-
based prices. The sales prices for oil and natural gas are adjusted for transportation and other
related deductions. These deductions are based on contractual or historical data and do not
require significant judgment. Subsequently, these revenue deductions are adjusted to reflect
actual charges based on third-party documents. Since there is a ready market for oil and natural
gas, the Company sells the majority of its production soon after it is produced. As a result, the
Company maintains a minimum amount of product inventory in storage.
Production Taxes
The Company pays taxes and royalties on oil and natural gas in accordance with the laws and
regulations applicable to those agreements.
Concentrations of Market and Credit Risk
The future results of the Company’s oil and natural gas operations will be affected by the market
prices of oil and natural gas. The availability of a ready market for oil and natural gas products in
the future will depend on numerous factors beyond the control of the Company, including weather,
imports, marketing of competitive fuels, proximity and capacity of oil and natural gas pipelines and
other transportation facilities, any oversupply or undersupply of oil, natural gas and liquid
products, the regulatory environment, the economic environment, and other regional and political
events, none of which can be predicted with certainty.
The Company operates in the exploration, development and production sector of the oil and gas
industry. The Company’s receivables include amounts due from purchasers of its oil and natural
gas production. While certain of these customers are affected by periodic downturns in the
economy in general or in their specific segment of the oil or natural gas industry, the Company
believes that its level of credit-related losses due to such economic fluctuations has been and will
continue to be immaterial to the Company’s results of operations over the long-term.
Environmental Costs
Environmental expenditures are expensed or capitalized, as appropriate, depending on their future
economic benefit. Expenditures that relate to an existing condition caused by past operations, and
which do not have future economic benefit, are expensed. Liabilities related to future costs are
recorded on an undiscounted basis when environmental assessments and/or remediation
activities are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated.
Income Taxes
Arabella Exploration, Inc. has identified the Cayman Islands as its only “major” tax jurisdiction, as
defined.  Arabella Exploration, Inc. has received an undertaking from the Governor-in-Cabinet of
the Cayman Islands that, in accordance with section 6 of the Tax Concessions Law (Revised) of
the Cayman Islands, for a period of 20 years from the date of the undertaking, no law which is
enacted in the Cayman Islands imposing any tax to be levied on profits, income, gains or
appreciations shall apply to Arabella Exploration, Inc. or its operations and, in addition, that no tax
to be levied on profits, income, gains or appreciations or which is in the nature of estate duty or
inheritance tax shall be payable (i) on the Company’s securities or our debentures or other
obligations or (ii) by way of the withholding in whole or in part of a payment of dividend or other
distribution of income or capital by Arabella Exploration, Inc. to its security holders or a payment
of principal or interest or other sums due under a debenture or other obligation.
Based on the Company’s evaluation, it has been concluded that there are not significant uncertain
tax positions requiring recognition in the Company’s financial statements.  Since Arabella
Exploration, Inc. was incorporated on June 17, 2010, the evaluation was performed for the 2010,
2011 and 2012 tax years which will be the only periods subject to examination.  The Company
believes that its income tax positions and deductions would be sustained on audit and does not
anticipate any adjustments that would result in material changes to its financial position.
F-25
Table of Contents
During 2013, 2012 and 2011, Arabella Exploration LLC was not a taxable entity for federal income
tax purposes. Accordingly, Arabella did not directly pay federal income tax. Arabella Exploration
LLC’s taxable income or loss, which may vary substantially from the net income or net loss
Arabella Exploration LLC’s reports in Arabella Exploration, Inc.’s consolidated statement of
income, is includable in the federal income tax returns of the member.
Going forward in 2014, the Company expects to be a taxable corporate entity.
Fair Value of Financial and Non-Financial Instruments
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and
other payables approximate their respective fair market values due to their short-term maturities.
At December 31, 2013 the Company’s cash equivalents are Level 1 assets. The Company’s asset
retirement obligations are also recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at amounts which
approximate fair market value. See Note 6 — Fair Value Measurements.
Earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by
the weighted average number of shares outstanding for the periods presented. The calculation of
diluted earnings per share does not include the potential dilutive impact of the 4,106,500
offering warrants outstanding during the periods presented since the exercise of the offering
warrants is contingent upon the effectiveness of a registration statement to be filed with the
SEC.  The calculation of diluted earnings per share does not include the potential dilutive impact of
the Unit Purchase Option as it was not exercisable based on the Company’s share price.
The calculation of diluted earnings per share does include the dilutive impact of the 6,600,000
Insider Warrants as they were sold pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements of
the Securities Act. For the period between the Acquisition and the end of the year the weighted
average share price of the company was approximately $7.63 resulting in a potential dilutive effect
of 43,610 shares based on the treasury method. With the impact of the foregoing, weight average
shares outstanding was 3,201,305 on a diluted basis.
6. Fair Value Measurements
In accordance with the FASB’s authoritative guidance on fair value measurements, the Company’s
financial assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a recurring basis. The Company
recognizes its non-financial assets and liabilities, such as asset retirement obligations and proved
oil and natural gas properties upon impairment, at fair value on a non-recurring basis.
As defined in the authoritative guidance, fair value is the price that would be received to sell an
asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the
measurement date (exit price). To estimate fair value, the Company utilizes market data or
assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including
assumptions about risk and the risks inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. These
inputs can be readily observable, market corroborated or generally unobservable.
The authoritative guidance establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used to
measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active
markets for identical assets or liabilities (“Level 1” measurements) and the lowest priority to
unobservable inputs (“Level 3” measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as
follows:
Level 1  — Unadjusted quoted prices are available in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities as of the reporting date. Active markets are those in which transactions for the asset or
liability occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing
basis.
Level 2  — Pricing inputs, other than unadjusted quoted prices in active markets included in
Level 1, are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date. Level 2 includes those
financial instruments that are valued using models or other valuation methodologies. These
models are primarily industry-standard models that consider various assumptions, including
quoted forward prices for commodities, time value, volatility factors and current market and
contractual prices for the underlying instruments, as well as other relevant economic measures.
Substantially all of these assumptions are observable in the marketplace throughout the full term
of the instrument and can be derived from observable data or are supported by observable levels
at which transactions are executed in the marketplace.
Level 3  — Pricing inputs are generally less observable from objective sources, requiring internally
developed valuation methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.
F-26
Table of Contents
Nonfinancial Assets and Liabilities
Asset retirement obligations. The carrying amount of the Company’s Asset Retirement
Obligations, or ARO, in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2013 is $ 21,171 (see Note
6 — Asset Retirement Obligations). The Company determines the ARO by calculating the present
value of estimated future cash flows related to the liability. Estimating the future ARO requires
management to make estimates and judgments regarding timing and existence of a liability, as well
as what constitutes adequate restoration. Inherent in the fair value calculation are numerous
assumptions and judgments, including the ultimate costs, inflation factors, credit adjusted
discount rates, timing of settlement and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and
political environments. These assumptions represent Level 3 inputs. To the extent future revisions
to these assumptions impact the fair value of the existing ARO liability, a corresponding
adjustment is made to the related asset.
Impairment. The Company reviews its proved oil and natural gas properties on a field by field basis
for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that a decline in the recoverability of
their carrying value may have occurred. The Company estimates the expected undiscounted
future cash flows of its oil and natural gas properties and compares such amounts to the carrying
amount of the oil and natural gas properties to determine if the carrying amount is recoverable. If
the carrying amount exceeds the estimated undiscounted future cash flows, the Company will
adjust the carrying amount of the oil and natural gas properties to fair value. The factors used to
determine fair value are subject to management’s judgment and expertise and include, but are not
limited to, recent sales prices of comparable properties, the present value of future cash flows, net
of estimated operating and development costs using estimates of proved reserves, future
commodity pricing, future production estimates, anticipated capital expenditures and various
discount rates commensurate with the risk and current market conditions associated with realizing
the expected cash flows projected. These assumptions represent Level 3 inputs. No impairment
charges on proved oil and natural gas properties were recorded for the years ended December 31,
2013, 2012 or 2011.
7. Oil and Gas Properties
The following table sets forth the Company’s oil and gas properties:
December 31,
 
  2013
 
 
 (In thousands)
 
 
 $7,491,321   $500,883  
Proved oil and gas properties (1)
Less: Accumulated depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment   (484,968 )   (15,858 )
   7,006,353     485,025  
Proved oil and gas properties, net
   6,243,014     1,031,211 
Unproved oil and gas properties
Total oil and gas properties, net
 $13,249,367  $1,516,236
2012
(1)
Included in the Company’s proved oil and gas properties are estimates of future asset retirement costs
of $20,267 and $2,722 at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
8. Asset Retirement Obligations
The following table reflects the changes in the Company’s ARO during the years ended
December 31, 2013 and 2012:
Asset retirement obligation — beginning of period $ 2,963
   17,545
Additions to ARO from new properties
   -
Sales or abandonments of properties
   663
Accretion expense during period
Asset retirement obligation — end of period
 $ 21,171
Year Ended December 31, 
 
 2013
 
 (In thousands)
 
 
)
2012
$ 2,796
    2,638
    (2,686
    215
  $ 2,963
F-27
Table of Contents
9. Note Payable to Officer
As of December 31, 2013, the Company’s note payable is payable to Jason Hoisager, the founder
of Arabella Exploration LLC, with an outstanding balance of $ 3,007,170. The founder is currently
the President of the Company and is a director and majority shareholder of the Company. The note
payable is non-interest bearing and matures in December of 2023.
10. Shareholders’ Equity
The Company is authorized to issue 50,000,000 ordinary shares and 5,000,000 preferred shares
with a par value of $0.001 per share.
Preferred Shares
The Company is authorized to issue up to 5,000,000 preferred shares with a par value of $0.001
and such designation as may be determined by the Board of Directors of the Company from time
to time.
Warrants
In connection with the Offering for the Parent in March 2011, the Company issued 4,106,500
warrants, which entitles the holders to purchase ordinary shares at the price of $5.00 per share,
commencing on the date of the merger, if the Company has an effective and current registration
statement covering the ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants and a current
prospectus relating to such ordinary shares, and expiring three years from that date.  The
Company may redeem the Warrants at a price of $0.01 per Warrant upon 30 days’ notice while the
Warrants are exercisable, only when the last sale price of the ordinary shares is at least $10.50 per
share for any 20 trading days within a 30 trading day period, provided that a current registration
statement is in effect for the ordinary shares underlying the warrants.  If not exercised, the
warrants expire on December 24, 2016.  If the Company redeems the warrants, management of the
Company will have the option to require any holder that wishes to exercise his warrants to do so
on a cashless basis.
Simultaneously to the Offering, certain of the shareholders purchased 6,600,000 warrants at the
price of $0.35 per warrant (for an aggregate purchase price of $ 2,310,000) from the
Company.  These warrants have the same terms as the 4,106,500 public warrants referred to in the
preceding paragraph, except these warrants are not redeemable and these warrants are
exercisable for cash or on a cashless basis.
F-28
Table of Contents
Unit Purchase Option
In connection with the Offering, the Company issued a unit purchase option to purchase 400,000
units at an exercise price of $ 8.80 per unit to its underwriters.  Each unit consists of one ordinary
share and one redeemable ordinary share purchase warrant, which contains a provision for
cashless exercise and has the same terms as the 4,106,500 public warrants.  The fair value of the
option at the date of grant was $1,486,000 ($ 3.72 per unit) using a Black-Scholes option-pricing
model. The fair value of the unit purchase option granted to the underwriter was estimated as of
the date of grant using the following assumptions:  (1) expected volatility of 54.1%, (2) risk-free
interest rate of 2.625%, and (3) expected life of 5 years.  The unit purchase option may be exercised
for cash or on a cashless basis at the holder’s option.
11. Related Party Transactions
Mr. Jason Hoisager, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, owns 100% of Arabella Petroleum
Company LLC (“Petroleum”), which is the operating company for substantially all the wells that the
Company has its working interest in.   As Petroleum drills and completes the wells, Petroleum bills
the Company for its working ownership percentage of the capital costs.  After the completion of
each well, Petroleum sells the oil and gas and provides the Company its working interest revenue,
net of production taxes and charges for the lease operating expenses.
As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, The Company owed Petroleum $3,695,119 and $42,238,
respectively in joint interest billings to vendors for the well costs.  During 2013, The Company paid
Petroleum $3,589,903 in capital costs for the wells.  Petroleum is responsible for collecting the
revenue from the purchasers and providing the Company its accounts receivable, which totaled
$425,372 and $702 at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
Petroleum also paid part of the general and administrative expenses for the companies and
allocated to Exploration $131,950, $93,845 and $30,071 for the years 2013, 2012 and 2011,
respectively.
12. Significant Concentrations
Major customers. For the year ended December 31, 2013, sales, through Petroleum, to Sunoco
Partners, and Enterprise Crude Oil accounted for approximately 78% and 10% of our total sales,
respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2012, sales to Elephant Oil & Gas and LPC Crude
Oil, Inc. accounted for approximately 60%, and 25%, respectively, of our total oil and gas sales. For
the year ended December 31, 2011, sales to Elephant Oil & Gas accounted for approximately 65%
of our oil and gas sales.   No other purchasers accounted for more than 10% of the Company’s
total sales for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011. Substantially all of the
Company’s accounts receivable result from sales of oil and natural gas.
This concentration of customers may impact the Company’s overall credit risk, either positively or
negatively, in that these entities may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other
conditions. Management believes that the loss of any of these purchasers would not have a
material adverse effect on the Company’s operations, as there are a number of alternative oil and
natural gas purchasers in the Company’s producing region.
13. Commitments and Contingencies
Employment agreement.  On December 24, 2013, Arabella entered into an employment agreement
with Jason Hoisager pursuant to which Mr. Hoisager agreed to act as the Chief Executive Officer
and President.  The employment agreement has a term of one year and will automatically renew for
additional one year terms after the end of the initial term if the agreement is not terminated at least
90 days prior to the end of the applicable term.  The employment agreement provides for a base
salary of $300,000 a year, with a bonus determined by the board of directors.  If the board of
directors terminates the agreement without cause, Mr. Hoisager terminates the employment
agreement for good reason, or Mr. Hoisager’s employment is terminated within six months after a
change of control, Mr. Hoisager will be entitled to severance equal to 24 months of his base salary
and an amount equal to his bonus for the prior year.
Lease obligations. Petroleum has the operating lease for the Company’s office space, and
beginning in January 2014, the Company is paying the rent for the office lease.
F-29
Table of Contents
Future minimum annual rental commitments under the non-cancelable office lease at
December 31, 2013 are as follows:
2014
2015
2016
2017
Thereafter   -
(In thousands) 
 
 $ 217,281
 
   230,510
   236,875
 
 
   59,872
$ 744,538
Drilling contracts. As of December 31, 2013, Petroleum had a drilling rig contract at a cost of
$21,500 per day with initial terms of six months that ended on March 31, 2014, and Petroleum
extended the contract for an additional six month period. In the event of early contract termination
under this contract, the Company would not be obligated to pay its working interest portion
through the end of the primary term of the contract.
Litigation. The Company is party to various legal proceedings from time to time arising in the
ordinary course of business. The Company believes all such matters are without merit or involve
amounts which, if resolved unfavorably, either individually or in the aggregate, will not have a
material adverse effect on its financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Arbitration. Baker Hughes Oilfield Operations, Inc. (“BH”) and Arabella Petroleum Company
(“Petroleum”), the operating company for and an affiliate of Arabella Exploration, LLC, are
currently in arbitration concerning work BH claims it performed, and on which it claims is owed
$3,191,181, plus interest, on the Company’s SM Prewitt #1H well.  In conjunction with such claim,
BH has filed a lien on the SM Prewitt #1H.  Petroleum does not believe such amounts are owed to
BH due to the failure of BH to satisfactorily perform the services it was contracted to perform.  The
Company has a 14.55% working interest in this well and, were BH to prevail, could be responsible
for 14.55% of any awards granted BH in arbitration.
14. Subsequent Event
In March 2014, Arabella sold a leased undeveloped acreage for approximately $2.1 million in cash
and recognized a gain on the sale of the property of approximately $1.2 million.
On May 1, 2014 the Company received a loan from Hauser Holdings, LLC an affiliate of Richard
Hauser, one of our directors.  The $800,000 loan is due August 31, 2014 and bears an interest rate
of 10% per annum.
Management evaluates events that have occurred after the balance sheet date but before the
financial statements are issued. Based upon the review, Management did not identify any
recognized or non-recognized subsequent events, other than those discussed above, which
would have required an adjustment or disclosure in the financial statements.
15.Supplemental Oil and Gas Reserve Information (Unaudited)
The estimates of proved oil and gas reserves utilized in the preparation of the consolidated
financial statements were prepared by independent petroleum engineers.  Such estimates are in
accordance with guidelines established by the SEC and the FASB.  All of our reserves are located
in the United States.  For information about our results of operations from oil and gas activities,
see the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
We emphasize that reserve estimates are inherently imprecise.  Accordingly, the estimates are
expected to change as more current information becomes available.  In addition, a portion of our
proved reserves are classified as proved developed nonproducing and proved undeveloped,
which increases the imprecision inherent in estimating reserves which may ultimately be
produced.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, properties totaling $4,774,306 were transferred to us
from Petroleum, a company under common control and that transfer had a significant impact on
our proved reserves. Accordingly, we have included supplemental oil and gas reserve information
to give effect to the additional proved reserves on properties owned by Petroleum in prior periods
and transferred to the Company.
At December 31, 2011, we had no significant proved reserves and accordingly, our reserve
information is as of December 31, 2012 and for the year then ended. Properties assigned to us and
subsequently sold were treated as unproved properties. We had capital costs of $63,398 relating to
exploratory wells pending the determination of proved reserves as of December 31, 2011,
respectively. All capital costs related to exploratory wells at December 31, 2011 were transferred to
proved properties in 2012.  There were no exploratory wells after 2011.
F-30
Table of Contents
The following table sets forth estimated proved reserves together with the changes therein (Oil and
NGL in Bbls, gas in Mcf, gas converted to BOE by dividing Mcf by six) for the years ended
December 31, 2012 and 2013, giving effect to reserves associated with properties owned by
Petroleum during the period and transferred to us in 2013:
Oil
  
  -
Gas
   
   -
    
   -
    
   -
BOE
   
   -
    
   13,720
    
   13,720
Balance at December 31, 2010
 
 
 
Purchase and assignment of minerals in place  13,720
 
 
 
Balance at December 31, 2011
 
 
Purchase and discoveries of minerals in place  153,280    378,511    216,365  
)
Production
  (679
   
 
 
Balance at December 31, 2012
  166,321    377,173    229,183  
Revisions
  171,385    310,181    223,082  
Purchase and discoveries of minerals in place  1,216,611   2,521,015   1,636,780 
  (13,915 )  (11,048 )  (15,756 )
Production
 
   
 
  1,540,402   3,197,321   2,073,289 
Balance at December 31, 2013
13,720
)  (1,338
)  (902
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to estimated proved
reserves as of December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, as recast, giving effect to reserves associated
with properties owned by Petroleum during the period and transferred to us in 2013, was as
follows (In thousands):
2012
Future cash inflows
Future costs:
   Production
   Development
 
Future net cash inflows
10% discount factor
 
Standardized measure of discounted net cash flows $32,792   $2,708   $94
2011  
 2013
  
   
 
 $152,038  $17,034  $1,146 
    
 
   (31,849 )   (4,326 )   (466 )
   (31,885 )   (5,761 )   (225 )
    
 
   88,304     6,947     455  
   (55,512 )   (4,239 )   (361 )
F-31
Table of Contents
Changes in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to estimated
proved reserves for the year ended December 31, 2013, giving effect to reserves associated with
properties owned by Petroleum during the period and transferred to us in 2013, was as follows (In
thousands):
2013
2012   2011 
 
 
   
 
 
Standardized measure at beginning of period  $2,708   $94
 
 
 
Sales, net of production costs
Revisions
 
Purchases and discoveries of minerals in place   23,918    2,664    94  
    
 
 
Standardized measure at end of period
 $32,792  $2,708  $ 94
$ -
     
    
   (1,206 )   (50 )   -
   7,372     -
    -
The estimated present value of future cash flows relating to estimated proved reserves is
extremely sensitive to prices used at any measurement period.  The average prices used for each
commodity for the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 was as follows:
Average Price 
 
  Gas  
 Oil
 
 
  
   
 
    December 31, 2012 $89.14   $7.23  
    December 31, 2013 $91.24     6.06
Average prices for December 31, 2013 and 2012 were based on the 12-month un-weighted
arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for the period from January through
December during each respective calendar year.
F-32
Table of Contents
Analysis of Reserves
The following table presents Arabella’s estimated net proved oil and natural gas reserves and the
present value of Arabella’s reserves as of December 31, 2013 and December 31, 2012, based on
the reserve report prepared by WPC, and such reserve reports have been prepared in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the SEC. All Arabella’s proved reserves included in the reserve
reports are located in North America.
Estimated proved developed reserves:
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
Estimated proved undeveloped reserves:    
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
December 31, 
2012 (1) (2)
     
     
    7.7
    6.4
    -
    8.8
     
    158.6
    370.8
    -
    222.1
December 31, 
 
2011 (1) (2)
 
     
 
     
    -
 
 
    -
 
    -
    -
 
 
     
 
    13.7
    -
 
 
    -
    13.7
December 31, 
2013 (1) (2)
    
    
   118.5
   211.4
   -
   153.7
1,421.9
   2,985.9
   -
   1,919.6
Estimated Net Proved Reserves:   
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMcf)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
Percent proved developed
 
Probable reserves
Oil (MBbls)
Natural gas (MMCF)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
 
Possible reserves
Oil (MBls)
Natural gas (MMCF)
Natural gas liquids (MBbls)
Total (MBOE)
166.3  
  377.2  
  -
 
  229.2
1,540.4 
  3,197.3 
   -
 
  2,073.3 
%  3.8
  7.4
 
   
   
 
  2,961.5 
  6,219.1 
   -
 
  3,998.0 
   
 
   
 
  4,092.8 
  8,594.9 
   -
 
  5,525.3
13.7  
  -
 
  -
 
  13.7  
%
%  -
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
  1,414.8 
  -
 
  -
  1980.7  
 
  -
  -
 
 
  -
  1744.9  
 
   
 
   
   
   
 
 
  149.8 
  297.9  
  417.1  
  208.5 
  -
  -
 
 
  367.4  
  183.6
(1) Estimates of reserves as of December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, were prepared using an average
price equal to the unweighted arithmetic average of hydrocarbon prices received on a field-by-field
basis on the first day of each month within the 12-month periods ended December 31, 2013, 2012
and 2011, respectively, in accordance with revised SEC guidelines applicable to reserves
estimates as of the end of such periods. Reserve estimates do not include any value for probable
or possible reserves that may exist, nor do they include any value for undeveloped acreage. The
reserve estimates represent Arabella’s net revenue interest in Arabella’s properties. Although
Arabella believes these estimates are reasonable, actual future production, cash flows, taxes,
development expenditures, operating expenses and quantities of recoverable oil and natural gas
reserves may vary substantially from these estimates.
(2) The reserves at December 31, 2012 and 2011 include reserves associated with properties
owned by Petroleum during the period and transferred to us in 2012 and 2013.
The foregoing reserves are all located within the continental United States. Reserve engineering is
a subjective process of estimating volumes of economically recoverable oil and natural gas that
cannot be measured in an exact manner. The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the
quality of available data and of engineering and geological interpretation. As a result, the estimates
of different engineers often vary. In addition, the results of drilling, testing and production may
justify revisions of such estimates. Accordingly, reserve estimates often differ from the quantities
of oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered. Estimates of economically recoverable oil and
natural gas and of future net revenues are based on a number of variables and assumptions, all of
which may vary from actual results, including geologic interpretation, prices and future production
rates and costs. Arabella has not filed any estimates of total, proved net oil or natural gas reserves
with any federal authority or agency other than the SEC.
F-33