
DEF 14A 1 gblxdeffourteena.htm GBLX DEF 14A ANNUAL MEETING 2016
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
(Rule 14a-101)
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (Amendment No.     )
Filed by the Registrant  x
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant  o
Check the appropriate box:
o      Preliminary Proxy Statement
o      Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
x      Definitive Proxy Statement
o      Definitive Additional Materials
o      Soliciting Material under §240.14a-12
Growblox Sciences, Inc.
(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
x      No fee required.
o      Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11.
(1)     Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)     Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule
0-11 (set forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
(3)
(4)     Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(5)     Total fee paid:
o      Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
o      Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and
identify the filing for which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by
registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
Amount Previously Paid:
(1)
(2)     Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(3)     Filing Party:
(4)     Date Filed:
GROWBLOX SCIENCES, INC.
3550 W. Teco Avenue
Las Vegas, Nevada 89118
August 26, 2016
Dear Shareholder:
You are cordially invited to attend the annual meeting of the shareholders of GrowBlox Sciences,
Inc., a Delaware corporation ("GrowBlox"), to be held at 10:00 a.m. Pacific time on Friday, October
7, 2016, at the principal executive offices of GrowBlox, 3550 W. Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada
89118.  Information about the annual meeting and the matters to be voted on is given in the
attached Notice of Annual Meeting of Shareholders and Proxy Statement.
GrowBlox is pleased to take advantage of Securities and Exchange Commission rules that allow us
to furnish proxy materials to shareholders on the Internet.  We believe these rules allow us to
provide you with the information you need while lowering our costs.  We have posted our proxy
materials on the Internet at www.colonialstock.com/GrowBlox2016.    You may view these materials
and cast your vote online or by telephone by following the instructions provided on the website. 
You may also request a paper or email copy of the proxy materials and a proxy card, or download
the form of proxy card from the Internet, by which you may vote personally or by mail.
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT.  Regardless whether you expect to attend the annual meeting,
please vote promptly by proxy as soon as possible as instructed in the accompanying proxy.  If you
decide to attend the annual meeting, you may revoke your proxy and vote your shares in person.
As always, we appreciate your loyalty and support as a shareholder of GrowBlox.
Sincerely,
John Poss
Chief Executive Officer
GROWBLOX SCIENCES, INC.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
To Be Held Monday, October 7, 2016
TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF GROWBLOX SCIENCES, INC.:
NOTICE is hereby given that the annual meeting (the "Meeting") of the shareholders of GrowBlox
Sciences, Inc., a Delaware corporation ("we," "us," "GrowBlox" or the "Corporation"), will be held at
10:00 a.m. Pacific time on Friday, October 7, 2016, at the principal executive offices of GrowBlox,
3550 W. Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada 89118, for the following purposes:
1.              To elect five directors to serve on our Board of Directors and until each of their successors
has been duly elected and qualified, unless such individuals shall sooner die, resign or be
removed;
2.              To approve an amendment to our certificate of incorporation to reduce the number of
shares of common stock our Board of Directors is authorized to issue from 250,000,000 common
shares to 200,000,000 common shares and to authorize the issuance of up to 50,000,000 preferred
shares;
3.              To ratify the appointment of Patrick D. Heyn, CPA, P. A. as our independent registered
public accounting firm for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2017; and
4.              To transact such other business as may properly come before the Meeting or any
postponement or adjournment thereof.
Shareholders of record at the close of business on August 10, 2016, will be entitled to receive
notice of and to vote at the Meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.  The
accompanying proxy is solicited by the Board of Directors.  All of the above matters are more fully
described in the accompanying Proxy Statement, into which this Notice is incorporated by
reference.
Shareholders are cordially invited to attend the Meeting in person.  Whether or not you expect to
attend the Meeting, you are urged to vote promptly by proxy as soon as possible over the Internet or
by telephone.  FOR SPECIFIC VOTING INSTRUCTIONS, PLEASE REFER TO THE
INFORMATION PROVIDED IN THE ACCOMPANYING PROXY STATEMENT, THE PROXY
CARD OR THE INSTRUCTIONS PROVIDED VIA THE INTERNET.  YOU MAY ALSO REQUEST
A PAPER OR EMAIL COPY OF THE PROXY STATEMENT AND PROXY CARD, OR
DOWNLOAD THE FORM OF PROXY CARD FROM THE INTERNET, FROM WHICH YOU MAY
VOTE PERSONALLY OR BY MAIL.
Important Notice Regarding the Availability of Proxy Materials for the Shareholder Meeting to Be
Held on October 7, 2016.  The Corporation's Proxy Statement and Annual Report on Form 10-K are
available online at www.colonialstock.com/GrowBlox2016.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
John Poss
Chief Executive Officer
August 26, 2016
GROWBLOX SCIENCES, INC.
3550 W. Teco Avenue
Las Vegas, Nevada 89118
PROXY STATEMENT
FOR THE ANNUAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
To Be Held Monday, October 7, 2016
INFORMATION CONCERNING SOLICITATION AND VOTING AT THE ANNUAL MEETING
Security Holders Entitled to Vote
Holders of shares of common stock, par value $.0001 per share of GrowBlox Sciences, Inc., a
Delaware corporation ("we," "us," "GrowBlox" or the "Corporation"), of record at the close of
business on August 10, 2016 (the "Record Date"), will be entitled to vote at the annual meeting of
shareholders to be held at 10:00 a.m. Pacific time on Friday, October 7, 2016, at the principal
executive offices of GrowBlox, and at any subsequent time which may be necessary by the
postponement or adjournment thereof (the "Meeting").  Our principal executive offices are located at
3550 W. Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada 89118, and our telephone number is (866) 721-0297.
This proxy statement (the "Proxy Statement"), together with the Notice of Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, the enclosed proxy card, and the accompanying 2016 Annual Report on Form 10-K,
was first made available to shareholders on or about August 26, 2016.
The information in this proxy statement relates to the proposals to be voted on at the Annual
Meeting, the voting process, our Board and our Board committees, the compensation of our
directors and current executive officers for fiscal 2016, and other required information.
There are no dissenters' rights available in connection with any of the matters to be voted on at the
Annual Meeting.
Voting of Proxies
If a proxy is properly voted or executed and returned prior to voting at the Meeting, the shares
represented thereby will be voted in accordance with any specifications made therein.  If you do not
indicate instructions on your proxy, then your shares will be voted as follows:
"FOR" the election of the nominees to the Board of Directors (the "Board") of the Corporation as
·
more fully described in the section herein entitled "Proposal 1;"
"FOR" the amendment to our certificate of incorporation as more fully described in the section
·
herein entitled "Proposal 2;" and
"FOR" the ratification of Patrick D. Heyn, CPA, P. A. as our independent registered public
·
accounting firm for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2017, as more fully described in the section
herein entitled "Proposal 3."
If your shares are held in street name and you do not instruct your broker on how to vote your
shares, your brokerage firm will be unable to vote your shares in the election of directors or with
regard to the approval of the amendment to our certificate of incorporation.
1
Quorum and Vote Required
A majority of the outstanding shares of common stock entitled to be voted as of the close of
business on the Record Date, present in person or by proxy, is necessary to constitute a quorum to
transact business at the Meeting.  In the election of directors, the five director candidates receiving
the highest number of affirmative votes will be elected.  Approval of the proposal to an amendment
to our certificate of incorporation, requires the affirmative vote of a majority of outstanding stock
entitled to vote thereon.  Approval of the ratification of the appointment of our independent
registered public accounting firm requires the affirmative vote of a majority of those shares present
in person or represented by proxy and voting on that proposal at the Annual Meeting.
Abstentions and Broker Non-votes
Abstentions and broker non-votes (which occur if a broker or other nominee does not have
discretionary authority and has not received voting instructions from the beneficial owner with
respect to a particular item) are counted for purposes of determining the presence or absence of a
quorum for the transaction of business.  Abstentions are counted in tabulations of the votes cast on
proposals presented to the shareholders and have the same legal effect as a vote against a
particular proposal.  Broker non-votes are not counted for purposes of determining whether a
proposal has been approved by the requisite shareholder vote.
If you hold shares through a brokerage firm, bank, dealer or other nominee, then you are a holder of
shares in "street name." If you hold your shares beneficially in "street name," you must review the
voting form used by that firm and follow the voting instructions you receive from the broker or other
nominee. If you hold shares in street name and do not provide your broker or other nominee with
voting instructions, your shares may constitute broker "non-votes," which occur when a broker is not
permitted to vote on that matter without instructions from the beneficial owner and such instructions
are not given. These matters are referred to as "non-routine" matters.
All of the matters scheduled to be voted on at the Annual Meeting are likely to be considered "non-
routine," except for the proposal to ratify the appointment of the Corporation's independent
accountants for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2017 (Proposal 3). If you do not provide voting
instructions to your broker or other nominee, your shares will not be voted or counted towards any of
the proposals other than Proposal 3. If you hold shares in street name, it is therefore particularly
important that you instruct your broker on how you wish to vote your shares.
Electronic Availability of Proxy Materials
Under rules adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC"), GrowBlox is making
this Proxy Statement, GrowBlox's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31,
2016, and the proxy card available on the Internet instead of mailing a printed copy of these
materials to each shareholder. Shareholders who received a Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy
Materials (the "Notice") by mail will not receive a printed copy of these materials other than as
described below.  Instead, the Notice contains instructions as to how shareholders may access and
review all of the important information contained in the materials on the Internet, including how
shareholders may submit proxies over the Internet or by telephone.
If you received the Notice by mail and would prefer to receive a printed copy of GrowBlox's proxy
materials, please follow the instructions for requesting printed copies included in the Notice. 
GrowBlox encourages you to take advantage of the availability of the proxy materials on the
Internet.
The accompanying proxy is being solicited by the Board of Directors.  The entire cost of this
solicitation will be paid by us.  In addition, we may reimburse brokerage firms and others for their
expenses in forwarding solicitation materials regarding the Meeting to beneficial owners.  In
addition to solicitation by mail, officers and regular employees of the Corporation may solicit proxies
from shareholders by telephone, facsimile, electronic mail or personal interview.  Such persons will
receive no additional compensation for such services.
2
Methods of Voting
You may vote over the Internet, by telephone, by mail or in person at the Meeting.
Voting over the Internet.  You may vote via the Internet.  The website address for Internet voting is
provided on your Notice and proxy card.  You will need the control number appearing on your
Notice and proxy card to vote via the Internet.  You may use the Internet to transmit your voting
instructions up until 1:00 am, Pacific time, on October 7, 2016.  Internet voting is available 24 hours
a day.  If you vote via the Internet you do not need to vote by telephone or return a proxy card.
Voting by Telephone.  You may vote by telephone by calling the toll-free telephone number
provided on your proxy card.  You will need to use the control number appearing on your Notice and
proxy card to vote by telephone.  You may transmit your voting instructions from any touch-tone
telephone up until 1:00 a.m., Pacific time, on October 7, 2016.  Telephone voting is available 24
hours a day.  If you vote by telephone you do not need to vote over the Internet or return a proxy
card.
Voting by Mail.  You may request a copy of this proxy statement and proxy card in paper or by email,
and vote by marking, dating and signing the proxy card and mailing it to us.  You may also
download the proxy card off the Internet and mail it to us.  Please promptly mail your proxy card to
ensure that it is received prior to the closing of the polls at the Meeting.
Voting in Person at the Meeting.  If you attend the Meeting and plan to vote in person, we will
provide you with a ballot at the Meeting.  If your shares are registered directly in your name, you are
considered the shareholder of record and you have the right to vote in person at the Meeting.  If your
shares are held in the name of your broker or other nominee, you are considered the beneficial
owner of shares held in street name.  As a beneficial owner, if you wish to vote at the Meeting you
will need to bring to the Meeting a legal proxy from your broker or other nominee authorizing you to
vote those shares.
Revocability of Proxies
You may revoke your proxy at any time before it is voted at the Meeting.  To do this, you must timely:
Enter a new vote over the Internet or by telephone, or by signing and returning a replacement proxy
·
card;
Provide written notice of revocation to our Corporate Secretary at the address provided in this proxy
·
statement; or
·Attend the Meeting and vote in person.
If you attend the Meeting but do not vote, your previous proxy will not be revoked.
Voting Confidentiality
Proxies, ballots and voting tabulations are handled on a confidential basis to protect your voting
privacy.  This information will not be disclosed, except as required by law.
Additional Proposals
Other than the three proposals described in this proxy statement, we are not aware of any other
business to be acted upon at the Annual Meeting.  If you grant a proxy, the persons named as proxy
holders, John Poss and Ksenia Griswold, will have the discretion to vote your shares on any
additional matters properly presented for a vote at the Annual Meeting.  If for any reason any of our
nominees is no longer a candidate for director, the persons named as proxy holders will vote your
proxy for such other candidate or candidates as may be nominated by our Board.
3
Householding of Proxy Materials
In a further effort to reduce printing costs and postage fees, we have adopted a practice approved by
the SEC called "householding."  Under this practice, shareholders who have the same address and
last name will receive only one paper copy of the Notice, unless one or more of these shareholders
notifies us that he or she wishes to continue receiving individual copies.  If: (1) you share an
address with another shareholder and received only one Notice, and would like to request a
separate paper copy of the Notice; or (2) you share an address with another shareholder and
together you would in the future like to receive only a single paper copy of the Notice, please notify
our Corporate Secretary by mail at 3550 W. Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada 89118 or by
telephone at (866) 721-0297.
Shares that may be Voted
You may vote all shares owned by you as of the close of business on August 10, 2016, the record
date for the Annual Meeting, whether such shares are held of record or beneficially.  There is no
cumulative voting.  On the record date, GrowBlox had outstanding 65,345,701 shares of common
stock.  A holder of common stock is entitled to one vote for each share of common stock held on the
record date for each of the Proposals.  The inspector of elections will be our transfer agent, Colonial
Stock Transfer.   We intend to announce preliminary results of voting at the Annual Meeting and
publish the final results in a Form 8-K filed with the SEC shortly after our Annual Meeting.
Questions about Stock Ownership
Please contact our transfer agent, at the phone number or address listed below, with questions
concerning stock certificates, transfer of ownership or other matters pertaining to your stock account.
Colonial Stock Transfer Company, Inc.
66 Exchange Place, 1st Floor
Salt Lake City, Utah  84111
(801) 355-5740
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Directors, Executive Officers, and Significant Employees
Biographical summaries concerning the current directors who are each a director nominee and the
Corporation's executive officers are shown below. None of the directors or officers are related to
each other.  Each officer is appointed by, and serves at the pleasure of, the Board subject to the
terms of their respective employment agreements with the Corporation, if any.   We have a
staggered Board.  Two of the nominees are nominated for a two-year term and three of the
nominees are nominated for a three-year term.
AgePosition with GrowBlox
68 Chief Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer and Director
63 Chief Innovation Officer and Chairman of the Board
Name
John Poss
Craig Ellins
Dr. Andrea Small-Howard47 Chief Science Officer and Director
Leslie Bocskor
Shane Terry
51 Director
37 Director
Ksenia Griswold
33 Chief Financial Officer
4
John Poss, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer, and Director
Effective April 29, 2016, The Board of Directors elected John Poss to serve as Chief Executive
Officer. Mr. Poss has been serving as the CFO of the Company since August, 2015 and its COO
since December 31, 2015.  He resigned his position as CFO on August 4, 2016.
Mr. Poss has over 30 years of experience working as a consultant to companies facing major
transitions and transformations. Mr. Poss began his career in the Washington, D.C. office of Arthur
Andersen & Co. and has served as Chief Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer, Chief Financial
Officer and Chief Technology Officer of both public and private companies in such diverse
industries as homebuilding, mining, telecommunications, manufacturing, logistics, construction
lending and mortgage banking. For the past twenty months prior to joining Growblox, Mr. Poss
served as Chief Executive Officer of Experiential Teaching Online Corp., an educational content
developer and for four years prior thereto owned and operated his own consulting firm. Mr. Poss has
also has worked extensively internationally, successfully negotiating agreements in countries
throughout Asia, Europe and the Americas. Mr. Poss graduated from the University of Texas in
1974 with a degree in accounting.
Craig Ellins, Chairman of the Board and Chief Innovation Officer
Mr. Ellins was appointed as Chief Executive Officer and as chairman of our board of directors on
March 13, 2014. Effective April 29, 2016, the Board of Directors accepted the resignation of Craig
Ellins as Chief Executive Officer of the Company and immediately appointed Craig Ellins to serve
as Chief Innovation Officer of the Company.
Mr. Ellins has spent over 30 years discovering emerging trends and developing start-ups for various
industries. He has served as Chief Executive Officer and on the Board of Directors of numerous
organizations, both in the private and public sectors and has worked with a multitude of Fortune 500
organizations. Mr. Ellins has a proven and successful background in international and domestic
product and business development, technological innovation, trade secrets, strategic planning,
critical infrastructure and sustainable growth. Mr. Ellins continuously sets new standards for
innovation and most recently set his sights on the cannabis industry. His work in medical marijuana
has produced significant advancements in indoor growing technology, all of which have pending
patents. Mr. Ellins has worked diligently over the years to produce state-of-the-art technology that
has a substantial impact on cultivation and ingenuity. Finding treatments to serious medical
conditions has become the benchmark to Mr. Ellins technological innovation, out of which has come
the Growblox™. Mr. Ellins' rich history of new technology and financial expertise has created a
framework for change in technological enterprises, especially in cultivation.
From 2013 to 2014, Mr. Ellins served as the Chairman and CEO of Cognitiv, Inc. Cognitiv, Inc.,
together with its subsidiaries, engages in the creation, development, and maintenance of Websites
and mobile applications. It also provides Website search engine optimization services; email
marketing services; pay per click consultation services; social media consultation, creation, and
marketing services; domaining services; and mobile marketing services. The company was formerly
known as University Health Industries, Inc. and changed its name to Cognitiv, Inc. in March 2012.
Cognitiv, Inc. is based in Heathrow, Florida. As Chairman and CEO, Mr. Ellins was responsible for
all aspects of the company.
From 2009 to 2013, Mr. Ellins served as CEO and Chairman of Phototron Holdings, Inc., now
known as GrowLife, Inc. GrowLife, Inc. manufactures and supplies branded equipment and
expendables for urban gardening in the United States. The company offers equipment and
expendables, such as nutrients and soils for the growing of medical marijuana. As Chairman and
CEO, Mr. Ellins was responsible for all aspects of the company.
5
Dr. Andrea Small-Howard, PhD, MBA, Chief Science Officer and Director
Dr. Small-Howard was appointed as our Chief Science Officer and as a member of our board of
directors on June 10, 2014 and has served continuously in both positions since that time. As the
Chief Science Officer, her goal is to create and maintain a novel cannabinoid therapy pipeline
based on the Company's proprietary technology suite, direct research & development efforts,
facilitate clinical research partnerships, guide product commercialization strategies, develop
corporate cannabis education programming, and create corporate messaging around our novel
drug discovery process.
From January, 2012 to present, she has served as a Director on the Board of Directors at The
Center for Healthcare Innovation, "CHI". CHI is a non-profit, non-partisan, and independent
organization committed to serving as a catalyst for stimulating ideas, people, companies, and
institutions to collaborate and achieve excellence in healthcare innovation, particularly in the
biotechnology, medical device, nanotechnology, and pharmaceutical sectors. Her board level
responsibilities at CHI have included shaping and supporting the evolving mission of this dynamic
group. She has also been on the planning committee for their annual "Emerging Markets in the Life
Sciences" seminar series, which is now in its 5th consecutive year.
From July 2011 to June 2014, Dr. Small-Howard was the Founder and President of International
Biotechnology Solutions, a management consulting firm that created customized, cost-effective
commercialization solutions for viable yet abandoned biopharmaceutical products. International
Biotechnology Solutions provided management consulting with a focus on assisting US biotech
companies with products that could be commercialized within the Asia-Pacific region. Dr. Small-
Howard she successfully completed projects within the areas of business development, corporate
alliance building, product commercialization, due diligence reporting on medical marijuana
companies, corporate restructuring, and management of successful fund raising campaigns.
From June 2011 to March 2013, she served as a Director on the Board of Directors (President for
part of that time), for the Ceremax Investment Corporation. The Ceremax Investment Group was
established by members of the USC EMBA Class XXV to pool its financial and intellectual
resources to identify investment opportunities. During her tenure at Ceremax, Dr. Small Howard
reviewed and approved capital and resource investments in promising start-up or scale-up phase
private companies.
From November, 2008 to July, 2011, she served as the Vice President of Scientific Oversight for the
Radient Pharmaceutical Corporation, a vertically-integrated biopharmaceutical research,
development and manufacturing corporation with operations in both the US and China. Dr. Small-
Howard provided oversight for global product development in multiple international business
divisions. She authored and/or attained 12 patents & 3 trademarks on proprietary cancer tests,
cancer (gene) therapies, cosmeceuticals, and animal models. She achieved numerous regulatory
approvals for cancer tests, cancer therapies, pharmaceuticals, and cosmeceutical products with the
United States FDA, Health Canada and other foreign ministries of health. She initiated and/or
nurtured five international, collaborative, cancer research trial programs with universities and that
yielded 7 publications supporting cancer products, and supervised the Quality Management
Systems for an ISO 13485/cGMP compliant medical device manufacturing facility in the US; as well
as the regulated manufacturing facilities in China. She also led and participated in internal and US
FDA, CDPH, CE Mark/ISO 13485, and CMDR audits of Radient's Quality Management System.
Leslie Bocskor, Director
In the burgeoning cannabis economy, Leslie Bocskor has emerged as one of the most influential
and respected global advisors for business, policy and social reform, using his unique lens and
understanding of what is, what will be, and what is needed -- based on decades of success in the
trenches of investment banking and entrepreneurship in disruptive industries.  With his rare
combination of financial market experience and business sensibilities, he is beloved by policy
makers and growers, technologists and scientists, doctors and patients alike, curating the unrivaled
network necessary to shepherd them all into achieving goals and prosperity.
6
The advisory firm he founded, Electrum Partners, works with leading companies around the globe
in the hemp, legal medical cannabis, recreational cannabis, cannabis based pharmaceuticals,
cannabis based nutraceuticals and supplements, technology, retails sales, processing, cultivation,
ecommerce, unique brands, edibles manufacturing, intellectual property, finance and banking.  The
firm is sought after to deliver high-level strategies for profitability and shareholder value, and to bring
together critical partnerships and solutions that contribute positively to further develop the cannabis
business ecosystem.  The company maintains relationships with key industry groups including
MPP, DPA, NCIA, The ArcView Group, Red Estatal de Mujeres Antiprohibicionistas and Women
Grow.
In position to provide perspective and guidance as to how the dots will be connected as the industry
takes shape, Mr. Bocskor's contributions have already had substantial impact.  He was bestowed
with the 2015 ArcView Group Outstanding Member Award, and was named 2015 CEO of the Year
by The Weed Blog, one of the industry's most-trafficked media sites.  Bocskor is the founding
chairman of the Nevada Cannabis Industry Association and in November 2014, Mr. Bocskor was
ranked 58th of 100 Most Influential People in the Cannabis industry by Cannabis Business
Executive Magazine and was soon after the subject of a Newsweek's Special Edition Weed
2.0.Magazine feature article, "A Future Gold Mine," and featured on CNBC's special coverage of the
Marijuana business economy among hundreds of news features and commentaries.
Share Terry, Director
Mr. Terry is an independent consultant provides advisory services to Medical Marijuana
Establishments (MME's) in Nevada and other states. He served as a CEO of NuVeda NMS, LLC, a
company that operates marijuana dispensaries in Nevada, from 2013 until 2016. He is also a former
President of the Nevada Dispensary Association Mr. Terry is a decorated veteran of the United
States Air Force, whose 15-year career as an Officer and F-16 fighter pilot included earning two Air
Medals for combat action over Iraq and Afghanistan while leading his team to three Air Force
Outstanding Unit awards from 2006-2009.
Ksenia Griswold, Chief Financial Officer
Ms. Griswold has been serving as the controller of the Company since November, 2015, and was
appointed Chief Financial Officer on August 4, 2016.  For the five years prior to November, 2015,
beginning in October, 2010, she worked in the Las Vegas, Nevada office of Ernst & Young, LLP.  At
the time of her departure from Ernst & Young, she was audit manager.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Director Independence
Two of our directors, Leslie Bocskor and Shane Terry, are independent directors.  The remaining
three are not.  The definition the Company uses to determine whether a director is independent is
NASDAQ Rule 4200(a)(15).
Board Meetings
All directors elected or appointed to our Board hold office until the next annual meeting of
stockholders following the expiration of their board term and the election of their successors. During
the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016, our Board held six meetings, and each director who was in
office at that time attended at least 75% of such meetings.  Our board committees are newly
established and did not exist during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016.  Accordingly, no
committee meetings were held during such fiscal year.
Director Attendance at Annual Meetings
Although we do not have a formal policy regarding attendance by Board members at the Annual
Meeting of stockholders, directors are strongly encouraged to attend Annual Meetings of
stockholders. All of our directors are expected to attend the upcoming Annual Meeting.
7
Board Leadership Structure
The Board believes that Craig Ellins service as Chairman of the Board is in the best interest of
Growblox and its shareholders. Mr. Ellins possesses detailed knowledge of the priorities,
opportunities and challenges facing Growblox, and is well positioned to develop an agenda and
strategic vision that ensure that the Board's time and attention are focused on the most critical
matters. Growblox does not have a lead independent director and does not believe one is
necessary at this time.
Board's Role in Risk Oversight
The Board has an active role, as a whole and also at the committee level, in overseeing
management of the Corporation's risks. The Board regularly reviews information concerning our
operations, liquidity, competitive position and personnel, as well as the risks associated with each
of these. Our Compensation Committee is responsible for overseeing the management of our risks
relating to our executive and long-term compensation plans and oversees the Corporation's
management of its risks pertaining to potential conflicts of interest and independence of Board
members. The Audit Committee oversees the Corporation's management of our risks pertaining to
internal controls, adherence to generally accepted accounting principles, and financial reporting.
While each committee is responsible for evaluating certain risks and overseeing the management of
such risks, the entire Board will be regularly informed through committee reports about such risks.
Compensation Committee
On July 6, 2016, the Board established the Compensation Committee and approved and adopted a
charter (the "Compensation Committee Charter"). The compensation committee is comprised of
Leslie Bocskor and Shane Terry, each of whom is independent pursuant to NASDAQ Rule 4200(a)
(15). Leslie Bocskor is designated the chairperson of the committee. In addition to the enumerated
responsibilities of the Compensation Committee in the Compensation Committee Charter, the
primary function of the Compensation Committee is to oversee the compensation of our executives,
produce an annual report on executive compensation for inclusion in our proxy statement, if and
when required by applicable laws or regulations, and advise the Board on the adoption of policies
that govern our compensation programs. The Compensation Committee Charter is filed as Exhibit
10.26 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on
July 14, 2016.
Audit Committee
On July 6, 2016, the Board established the Audit Committee and approved and adopted a charter
(the "Audit Committee Charter") to govern the Audit Committee. The audit committee is comprised
of Leslie Bocskor and Shane Terry, each of whom is independent pursuant to NASDAQ Rule
4200(a)(15).  Leslie Bocskor is designated the chairperson of the committee. In addition to the
enumerated responsibilities of the Audit Committee in the Audit Committee Charter, the primary
function of the Audit Committee is to assist the Board in its general oversight of our accounting and
financial reporting processes, audits of our financial statements, and internal control and audit
functions. The Audit Committee Charter is filed as Exhibit 10.25 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 14, 2016.  At the present time, no
member of our board of directors qualifies as an "audit committee financial expert" as defined in
Item 407(d)(5) of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Securities Act.
Shareholder Communications with the Board
Mail can be addressed to directors in care of the Office of the Secretary, GrowBlox Sciences, Inc.,
3550 W. Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada 89118. At the direction of the Board, all mail received
will be opened and screened for security purposes. The mail will then be logged in. All mail, other
than trivial or obscene items, as decided by the Secretary, will be forwarded to appropriate
management personnel.  Trivial items will be delivered to the directors at the next scheduled Board
meeting. Mail addressed to a particular director will be forwarded or delivered to that director. Mail
addressed to "Outside Directors" or "Non-Management Directors" will be forwarded or delivered to
the Chairman of the Audit Committee. Mail addressed to the "Board of Directors" will be forwarded
or delivered to the Chairman of the Board.
8
PROPOSALS REQUIRING YOUR VOTE
PROPOSAL 1
ELECTION TO THE BOARD OF THE DIRECTORS
Election of Directors
The Board currently consists of five individuals.  The Board recommends that it is in the best interest
of the Corporation to have a staggered board of directors so that the terms of all of the members of
the Board do not terminate at the same time.  The Board of Directors has nominated Craig Ellins
and Dr. Andrea Small-Howard to stand for election for a two-year term and John Poss, Leslie
Bocskor and Shane Terry to stand for election for a three-year term.
Votes will be cast pursuant to the enclosed proxy for the election of the nominees named therein
unless specification is made withholding such authority.  The nominees are presently directors of
the Corporation.  Should any nominee for Director become unavailable, which is not anticipated, the
proxies named in the proxy card will vote for the election of such other person as the Board of
Directors may recommend.
THE BOARD UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMENDS A VOTE FOR THE ELECTION OF THE
NOMINEES TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
9
PROPOSAL 2
APPROVAL OF AMENDMENT TO THE CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION TO REDUCE THE
NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED COMMON SHARES FROM 250,000,000 TO 200,000,000 AND TO
AUTHORIZED THE ISSUANCE OF UP TO 50,000,000 PREFERRED SHARES.
At the present time, our Certificate of Incorporation authorizes the issuance of up to 250,000,000
shares of common stock and does not authorize the issuance of preferred stock. Our Board of
Directors has unanimously approved a resolution to amend the Certificate of Incorporation, subject
to shareholder approval, to authorize the issuance of up to 200,000,000 shares of common stock,
par value $0.0001 per share and of up to 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.0001
per share.  The new authorized capital structure would have the effect of keeping the total capital
stock authorized at 250,000,000 capital shares while allowing for the issuance of preferred stock. 
On the Record Date, the Corporation had 65,345,701 shares of common stock issued and
outstanding and has no current plans for the issuance of additional common shares other than for
normal corporate purposes.  Accordingly, the Board believes reducing the number of authorized
common shares from 250,000,000 to 200,000,000 is of no consequence.  Also, the Board has no
commitments or plans to issue preferred stock at the present time but believes it is in the best
interest of the Corporation and its shareholders to have preferred stock authorized and available
and is taking advantage of this annual meeting to obtain the approval to do so.
The preferred stock to be authorized ("Preferred Stock"), would have such designations,
preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights and qualifications, limitations
or restrictions thereof, as shall be expressed in the resolution or resolutions adopted by the Board of
Directors from time to time providing for the issuance of such stock. As such, the Preferred Stock
would be available for issuance without further action by the Company's shareholders, except as
may be required by applicable law, or pursuant to the requirements of the exchange or quotation
system upon which the Company's securities are then trading or quoted.
The Board's primary objective in amending the Certificate of Incorporation to authorize the Preferred
Stock is to provide maximum flexibility with respect to future financing transactions.  Preferred stock
is commonly authorized by publicly traded companies and is frequently used as a preferred means
of raising capital.  In some circumstances, companies have been required to utilize senior classes
of securities to raise capital, with the terms of those securities being negotiated and tailored to meet
the needs of both investors and issuing companies. Such senior securities typically include
liquidation and dividend preferences, protections, conversion privileges and other rights not found
in common stock.
We presently lack the authority to issue preferred stock.  As a result, without this amendment, we
would continue to be limited to issuing common stock or debt securities to raise capital. By
authorizing the Preferred Stock, we would increase our flexibility in raising capital.  If the Certificate
of Incorporation is amended to authorize the issuance of the Preferred Stock, the Board will have
discretion to establish series of preferred stock and the rights and privileges of each series so
established. In the event of any such issuance, the holders of our common stock would have no
input or right to approve the terms of any such series.  Generally, the authority to issue the Preferred
Stock will enable the Company to respond promptly to, and take advantage of, market conditions
without incurring the delay and expense associated with calling a special shareholders' meeting to
approve a contemplated stock issuance. The Board of Directors believes that this authority will also
help to reduce costs because the Board will not have to seek shareholder approval to issue the
shares of the Preferred Stock unless such approval is otherwise required under the rules of any
quotation board or stock exchange to which GrowBlox is subject.
Potential Anti-Takeover Effect
The proposal to amend the Certificate of Incorporation to authorize the Preferred Stock could
adversely effect the ability of third parties to take over or change the control of GrowBlox by, for
example, permitting issuances that would dilute the stock ownership of a person seeking to effect a
change in the composition of our Board of Directors or contemplating a tender offer or other
transaction for the combination of GrowBlox with another company.
The ability of our Board of Directors to establish the rights of, and to cause GrowBlox to issue,
substantial amounts of preferred stock without the need for shareholder approval, upon such terms
and conditions, and having such rights, privileges and preferences, as our Board of Directors may
determine from time to time in the exercise of its business judgment, may, among other things, be
used to create voting impediments with respect to changes in control of GrowBlox or to dilute the
stock ownership of holders of common stock seeking to obtain control of GrowBlox. The rights of the
holders of common stock will be subject to, and may be adversely affected by, any preferred stock
that may be issued in the future. The issuance of Preferred Stock, while providing desirable
flexibility in connection with possible financings, may have the effect of discouraging, delaying or
preventing a change in control of GrowBlox.  We have no present plans to issue any shares of
Preferred Stock.
10
Proposed Amendment
In order to authorize the Preferred Stock, we propose that the text of Paragraph 4 of our Certificate of
Incorporation be amended and restated to read in its entirety as follows:
4.  The aggregate number of shares of capital stock which the Corporation shall have authority to
issue is 250,000,000 shares, 200,000,000 of which shall be common shares, having a par value of
$0.0001 per share, and 50,000,000 of which shall be preferred shares, having a par value of
$0.0001 per share ("Preferred Shares").
The Board of Directors is authorized, subject to any limitations prescribed by law, to provide for the
issuance of the Preferred Shares in series, to establish the number of shares to be included in each
such series, and to fix the designations, powers, preferences, and rights of the shares of each series
and any qualifications, limitations or restrictions thereof.
THE BOARD UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMENDS A VOTE FOR APPROVAL OF THE
AMENDMENT TO THE CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION.
11
PROPOSAL 3
RATIFICATION OF APPOINTMENT OF INDEPENDENT ACCOUNTANTS
The Audit Committee of the Board has appointed Patrick D. Heyn, CPA, P.A. ("Patrick D. Heyn") as
the Corporation's independent accountants to audit the Corporation's financial statements for the
fiscal year ending March 31, 2017 and recommends that shareholders vote for ratification of such
appointment.  Although the Board is not required to seek shareholder approval of this appointment,
the Board believes it to be sound corporate governance to do so.  Notwithstanding the appointment
by the Audit Committee of Patrick D. Heyn and ratification of that appointment by the shareholders
of the Corporation, the Audit Committee may direct the appointment of a new independent
accountant at any time during the year if the Board determines that such a change would be in the
Corporation's best interest and in the best interests of the shareholders. If the appointment is not
ratified, the Audit Committee will investigate the reasons for shareholder rejection and may
reconsider the appointment.
Patrick D. Heyn has served as the Corporation's independent accountants since July 15, 2015.  It is
anticipated that a representative from Patrick D. Heyn will not be present at the Meeting. If a
representative from Patrick D. Heyn is in attendance at the Meeting, it is anticipated that such
representative will be available to respond to appropriate questions and to make a statement, if so
desired.
THE BOARD UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMENDS A VOTE FOR THE RATIFICATION OF PATRICK
D. HEYN, CPA, P.A. AS THE CORPORATION'S INDEPENDENT ACCOUNTANTS FOR THE
FISCAL YEAR ENDING MARCH 31, 2017.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT
Because our audit committee was formed following the end of the prior fiscal year, it did not submit
a report of the Audit Committee of the Board, with respect to the Corporation's audited financial
statements for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016.
FEES PAID TO THE INDEPENDENT ACCOUNTANTS
Audit Fees
Patrick D. Heyn billed us fees of $17,050 for professional services rendered for the audit of our
annual consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016.  Our prior auditor
billed us $91,113 for the audit of our consolidated financial statements for the prior fiscal year and
for the review of the consolidated financial statements included in our quarterly reports on Form 10-
Q for the first three quarters of fiscal year 2015.
Audit-Related Fees
We incurred no audit-related fees during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015.
Tax Fees
Patrick D. Heyn billed us fees of $6,950 for tax related work during the fiscal year ended March 31,
2016.  Our prior auditor billed us $3,035 for tax related work during the prior fiscal year.
Other Fees
During the fiscal year ending March 31, 2016, we were billed $33,600 by our prior auditor LJ
Sullivan Certified Public Accountant, LLC for consulting services related to the Company's
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q.
12
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS AND CERTAIN
BENEFICIAL OWNERS
The following table shows information regarding the beneficial ownership of our common stock by
each named executive officer, director and director nominee, by certain beneficial owners and by
the executive officers and directors as a group.  Percentage ownership is based on 65,345,701
shares of common stock outstanding as of the Record Date. A person is deemed to be the
beneficial owner of securities that can be acquired by that person within 60 days from the date of
this Annual Report upon the exercise of options, warrants or convertible securities. Each beneficial
owner's percentage ownership is determined by dividing the number of shares beneficially owned
by that person by the base number of outstanding shares, increased to reflect the shares underlying
options, warrants or other convertible securities included in that person's holdings, but not those
underlying shares held by any other person.
Name of Beneficial Owner(1)
Officers and Directors
Craig Ellins
Dr. Andrea Small-Howard
John Poss
Leslie Bocskor
Shane Terry
Ksenia Griswold
Directors and officers as a group (six)persons
5% Holders:
Cesar Cordero-Kruger
Lazarus Management Company LLC, Justin B.
Borus (6)
No. of Shares
Owned
 
12,127,692(2)
1,693,924(3)
809,037(4)
150,000(7)
150,000(7)
58,889(8)
14,989,542
 
2,820,000(5)
Percentage of Total Shares
Owner
 
17.2%
2.5%
1.2%
*(9)
*(9)
*(9)
20.6%
 
4.3%
8,691,479(6)
12.5%
(1) Unless otherwise noted, the address of each person listed is Growblox Sciences, Inc. 3550 W.
Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, NV 89118.
(2) Includes (a) 7,127,692 shares of common stock currently owned of record by Mr. Ellins, and (b)
5,000,000 additional shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of warrant at an exercise
price of $0.30 per share.
(3) Includes (a) 116,000 shares of common stock currently owned of record by Dr. Small-Howard,
(b) options to purchase 377,924 shares of common stock at $0.17 per share exercisable as of the
Record Date or within 60 days thereafter, and (c) 1,200,000 additional shares of common stock
issuable upon exercise of warrant at an exercise price of $0.30 per share.
(4) Includes options to purchase 809,037 shares of common stock at $0.30 per share exercisable as
of the Record Date or within 60 days thereafter.
(5) Does not include a minimum of 16.2% and a maximum of 20.6% of the equity of GBSPR, our
Puerto Rico subsidiary which operates the Solutions division.
(6) Address is Lazarus Management Company LLC, 3200 Cherry Creek South Drive, Suite 670,
Denver, CO  80209.  The 8,691,479 common shares are beneficially owned by Lazarus
Management Company LLC and by Justin B. Borus.  The 8,691,479 total is made up of: (i)
3,269,632 common shares held by Lazarus Investment Partners LLLP; (ii) warrants held by Lazarus
Investment Partners LLLP to purchase an additional 3,000,000 shares of common stock; (iii)
1,421,847 shares of common stock held by Lazarus Israel Opportunities Fund LLLP; and (iv)
warrants held by Lazarus Israel Opportunities Fund LLLP to purchase an additional 1,000,000
shares of common stock.
(7) Includes options to purchase shares of common stock at $0.16 per share exercisable as of the
Record Date or within 60 days thereafter.
(8) Includes (a) 25,000 shares of common stock currently owned of record by Ms. Griswold, and (b)
33,889 additional shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of warrants or options.
(9) Less than 1%
13
VOTING SECURITIES HELD BY CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
The securities entitled to be voted at the Meeting consist of shares of common stock of the
Corporation.  Each shareholder is entitled to one vote per each share of common stock owned. 
There were 65,345,701 shares of common stock issued and outstanding (exclusive of treasury
shares) at the close of business on the Record Date.  There are no persons that beneficially own
more than 5% of our outstanding common stock as of the Record Date other than our Chairman, Mr.
Craig Ellins, who owns 16.5% of our issued and outstanding common shares without adjustment for
shares that can be obtained upon the exercise of options and/or warrants.
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
Directors are entitled to be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred on behalf
of the Company. Independent directors are paid $25,000 annually with an additional $1,000 for
each meeting attended.  The compensation is payable in cash or stock at the election of the
Company.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The following summary compensation table reflects all compensation awarded to, earned by, or
paid to the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Innovation Officer and Chief Science Officer for all
services rendered to us in all capacities during each of the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015.
Summary Compensation Table
YearSalary Stock Awards(1)Option Awards(2)Total
Name and Position
John Poss, CEO, COO and Director2016$55,055 0
0
 
20150
 
 
 
 
Craig Ellins, CIO and Chairman
2016$137,1920
2015$168,6170(3)
 
 
 
 
2016$63,000 0
Dr. Andrea Small-Howard, CSO
2015$62,700 $756,000
and Director
$179,585
0
 
$860,000
0
 
0
$84,413
$234,640
0
 
$997,192
$168,617
 
$63,000
$903,113
(1) Represents the grant date fair value of restricted stock awards granted, as calculated in
accordance with stock-based compensation accounting standards.  The fair value of each of these
awards is based on the closing share price of our stock on the grant date.  Although the table above
indicates the full grant date value of the awards in the year which the compensation is considered,
the restricted stock granted vests over a three-year period.
(2) Represents the grant date fair value of option awards granted, as calculated in accordance with
stock-based compensation accounting standards.  The fair value of these awards is determined
under the Black-Scholes option pricing model.  Although the table above indicates the full grant
date value of the awards in the year which the compensation is considered, the options granted vest
over a three-year period.
(3) Per terms of the Amended Employment Agreement dated June 22, 2015, the executive waived
and relinquished all rights to the grant of 3,000,000 shares of the common stock of the Company
that was awarded under the Prior Agreement dated June 19, 2014. In lieu of the stock grant the
Company issued to the executive a three-year warrant to purchase 5,000,000 shares of the common
stock of the Company at an exercise price of $0.45 per share. Thus, 3,000,000 shares of the
common stock of the Company award under the June 19, 2014, Agreement were cancelled.
14
Employment Agreements
John Poss, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer, and Director
On August 10, 2015, Mr. Poss, entered into an employment agreement with the Company. The term
of employment is one-year subject to automatic extensions for additional one year periods unless
either party chooses to terminate such employment. The Company may terminate the Employment
Agreement at any time with or without cause. If the Company terminates the Employment
Agreement without cause, Mr. Poss is entitled to three months' severance if the termination takes
place during the first year of employment, four months' severance if the termination takes place
during the second year of employment and six months' severance if the termination takes place
during the third year or a subsequent year of employment. No severance payments are due in the
case of a termination for cause. Similar severance provisions apply to a termination by Mr. Poss for
good reason but not to a termination by Mr. Poss without good reason. Mr. Poss receives a monthly
salary of $10,000 per month. In addition, in August 2015, the Company issued 600,000 options to
Mr. Poss under our 2014 Equity Incentive Plan. The options are exercisable upon vesting for a
period of 10 years from issuance for the purchase of shares of our common stock at a price of $0.30
per share. The options vest ratably on a monthly basis in equal installments over the course of 30
months commencing on the seventh month of the employment period. In the event that Mr. Poss'
employment is terminated for cause or by Mr. Poss without good reason, all unvested options at the
time of termination will be cancelled. In the event of a Change of Control, as such term is defined in
the 2014 Equity Incentive Plan, all of the options issued to Mr. Poss shall vest immediately. The
number of options issuable to Mr. Poss is subject to increase within 6 months of the commencement
of Mr. Poss' employment at the discretion of our Board of Directors. At the end of the third year of
employment, the compensation payable to Mr. Poss shall be renegotiated in good faith by the
parties.
Pursuant to the appointment of Mr. Poss as the Company's President, Chief Executive Officer and
Board Member, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Employment Agreement,
effective June 1, 2016.  The agreement will end on May 1, 2017, which end date can be extended
upon the mutual agreement of the parties.  Under the agreement Mr. Poss will receive an annual
salary of not less than $120,000 and quarterly bonuses equal to the value of 125,000 shares of
Growblox common stock.  Bonuses are payable in S-8 stock or cash in the discretion of the
Company.  Under the agreement, Mr. Poss will also receive options to acquire 1.4 million shares of
the Company's common stock subject to certain vesting requirements.  The option strike price is the
market value of the stock on the date the options were granted.
Craig Ellins, Chairman and Chief Innovation Officer
On June 19, 2014 Craig Ellins entered into an amended employment agreement having a three
year term. Mr. Ellins received a salary of $140,000 per annum, year one, $180,000 per annum year
two and $240,000 per annum year three. Additionally he received 3,000,000 shares of the common
stock of Growblox which vest over three years in equal 1,000,000 amounts. Effective as of June 19,
2015, Growblox and Mr. Ellins amended and restated the employment agreement with the same
compensation terms and cancelling the 3,000,000 share stock grant. In consideration for such
forfeiture, Mr. Ellins received a three year warrant to purchase 5,000,000 shares of Growblox
common stock at an exercise price of $0.45 per share, the closing price of Growblox common stock
on the date of the restated employment agreement. The warrant contains customary anti-dilution
provisions and cashless exercise provisions. The warrant and underlying shares of common stock
issuable upon exercise of the warrant are restricted securities as defined by the Rules and
Regulations promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Company may
terminate the Employment Agreement at any time with or without cause. If the Company terminates
the Employment Agreement without cause, Mr. Ellins is entitled any unpaid base salary accrued
through the effective date of termination notice and pay in a lump sum of an amount equal to the
product of the sum of the executive's based salary plus the amount of the highest annual bonus or
other incentive compensation payment therefore made by the Company to the executive, multiplied
by one. In the event of a Change of Control, as such term is defined in the 2014 Equity Incentive
Plan, all equity compensation grants not yet vested shall vest immediately.
Effective June 1, 2016, the Board amended compensation arrangements with Mr. Ellins.  Pursuant
to the amendment, warrants issued on June 22, 2015, for the purchase of 5,000,000 shares of
common stock of the Company at the exercise price of $0.45 per share were cancelled and
warrants for the purchase of 5,000,000 shares of common stock of the Company at the exercise
price of $0.30 were issued to Mr. Ellins.
15
Dr. Andrea Small-Howard, PhD, MBA, Chief Science Officer and Director
On June 19, 2014, Dr. Andrea Small-Howard, Chief Science Officer, entered into a three year
employment agreement with Growblox. Dr. Small-Howard received a salary at the annual rate of
$78,000 and 450,000 shares of restricted common stock that vests over the three year term of
employment. The stock is restricted as defined by the Rules and Regulations promulgated under
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Company may terminate the Employment Agreement
at any time with or without cause. If the Company terminates the Employment Agreement without
cause, Dr. Small-Howard is entitled any unpaid base salary accrued through the effective date of
termination notice and pay in a lump sum of an amount equal to the product of the sum of the
executive's based salary plus the amount of the highest annual bonus or other incentive
compensation payment therefore made by the Company to the executive, multiplied by one. In the
event of a Change of Control, as such term is defined in the 2014 Equity Incentive Plan, all of the
restricted stock granted to Dr. Small-Howard shall vest immediately. Dr. Small-Howard also
received 500,000 of stock options not in connection with her employment agreement, of which
100,000 vested immediately and the remainder vest over three years.
Effective on June 1, 2016, the Company amended its employment agreement with Dr. Small-
Howard.  Pursuant to the amendment, Ms. Small-Howard surrendered a stock award for 450,000
shares of common stock in exchange for warrants to purchase 1.2 million common shares at the
strike price of $0.30 per share.
Leslie Bocskor, Director
Effective June 1, 2016, the Board of Directors established compensation for Mr. Bocskor to be
$25,000 annually with an additional $1,000 for each meeting attended.  The compensation is
payable in cash or stock at the election of the Company.  Mr. Bocskor also received options to
purchase 450,000 shares of stock which vest over 24 months.  The strike price of the options is
$0.16 per share, the market value of the Company's common stock on the date the Mr. Bocskor was
elected to the Board.
Share Terry, Director
Effective June 1, 2016, the Board of Directors established compensation for Mr. Terry to be $25,000
annually with an additional $1,000 for each meeting attended.  The compensation is payable in
cash or stock at the election of the Company.  Mr. Terry also received options to purchase 450,000
shares of stock which vest over 24 months.  The strike price of the options is $0.16 per share, the
market value of the Company's common stock on the date the Mr. Terry was elected to the Board.
16
Outstanding Equity Awards
The following table summarizes the number of shares underlying outstanding equity incentive plan
awards for each named executive officer as of March 31, 2016:
Number of
shares underlying
exercisable
options/warrants
Number of
shares underlying
unexercised
options/warrants
Option
exercise
price ($)
Option
expiration
date
Number of
shares that
have not
vested
Market value of
shares that have
not vested ($)
5,000,000(2)
0
0.45
6/22/20180
0
200,000(3)
300,000(4)
0.17
3/27/2025300,000(6)
60,000(1)
20,000(3)
580,000(5)
0.30
8/10/20250
0
Name
Craig
Ellins
Andrea
Small-
Howard
John
Poss
(1) Based on our closing stock price of $0.20 on March 31, 2016.
(2) Represents three-year warrant to purchase 5,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise
price of $0.45 per share.
(3) These options were vested at March 31, 2016.
(4) These options vest one-third on each of March 27, 2017, 2018, and 2019.
(4) These options vest ratably on a monthly basis in equal installments over the course of 29
months commencing on the April 10, 2016,
(6) These shares vest one-half on each of June 19, 2016 and 2017.
OTHER INFORMATION
INFORMATION REGARDING THE CORPORATION
Annual Report
This proxy statement is accompanied by our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
March 31, 2016 (the "Annual Report").  GrowBlox will furnish without charge to each person whose
proxy is being solicited, upon the written request of any such person, a copy of the Annual Report,
as filed with the SEC, including the financial statements and a list of exhibits to the Annual Report. 
We will furnish to any such person any exhibit described in the list of exhibits in the Annual Report
upon the advance payment of a reasonable fee.   Requests for a copy of the Annual Report and/or
any exhibit should be directed to the Chief Financial Officer, c/o GrowBlox Sciences, Inc., 3550 W.
Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada 89118 or by telephone at (866) 721-0297.
SECTION 16(a) BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP REPORTING COMPLIANCE
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act requires our executive officers and directors, and persons who
beneficially own more than 10% of our common stock (collectively referred to herein as "Reporting
Persons"), to file initial reports of ownership and reports of changes in ownership with the SEC. 
Reporting Persons are required by SEC regulations to furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a)
forms they file.  Based solely upon a review of copies of Forms 3, 4 and 5 and amendments thereto
furnished to us during our most recent fiscal year, we believe each of the directors, officers and
persons who beneficially own more than 10% of our common stock need to file a Form 3 and
applicable Form 4's to be in compliance with the reporting requirements of Section 16(a) of the
Exchange Act.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS
Employment Agreements
We have entered into employment agreements with Craig Ellins, Dr. Andrea Small-Howard and
John Poss, as described above under "Executive Compensation".
17
OTHER MATTERS
Availability of Accountants
Representatives of our auditing firm are not expected to be present at the Meeting. If representatives
are present, an opportunity will be provided for the representatives to make a statement, if they
desire to do so, and to respond to appropriate shareholder questions.
Deadline for Receipt of Shareholders' Proposals
Stockholders may submit proposals for consideration at future stockholder meetings.  For a
stockholder proposal to be considered for inclusion in our proxy statement for the annual meeting
next year, the written proposal must be received by our Corporate Secretary, at our principal
executive offices, no later than April 28, 2017.  If the date of next year's annual meeting is moved
more than 30 days before the anniversary date of this year's annual meeting, the deadline for
inclusion of proposals in our proxy statement is instead a reasonable time before we begin to print
and mail our proxy materials.  Such proposals also will need to comply with SEC regulations under
Rule 14a-8 regarding the inclusion of stockholder proposals in company-sponsored proxy
materials.  Proposals should be addressed to Corporate Secretary, GrowBlox Sciences, Inc., 3550
W. Teco Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada 89118, telephone number (866) 721-0297.   Stockholders
may propose director candidates for consideration by our Board.  Any such recommendations
should include the nominee's name and qualifications for Board membership and should be
directed to our Corporate Secretary at the address set forth above.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
John Poss
Chief Executive Officer
18
GROWBLOX SCIENCES, INC.
PROXY FOR THE ANNUAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
TO BE HELD OCTOBER 7, 2016
THIS PROXY IS SOLICITED ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
The undersigned hereby appoints John Poss and Ksenia Griswold, or either of them, as proxies,
each with the power to appoint his or her substitute, and hereby authorizes them to represent and to
vote, as designated below, all of the shares of common stock of GROWBLOX SCIENCES, INC. that
the stockholders(s) is/are entitled to vote at the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held at 10:00
a.m. Pacific time on October 7, 2016, at the Company's executive offices located at 3550 W. Teco
Avenue, Las Vegas, Nevada 89118 and any adjournment or postponement of the annual meeting.
The proxies are authorized to vote in their discretion: (i) for the election of any person to the Board of
Directors if the nominees named herein becomes unable to serve or for good cause will not serve;
and (ii) on other business, if any, as may properly be brought before the meeting or any adjournment
or postponement of the meeting for which voting direction is not noted on this proxy.
This proxy, when properly executed, will be voted in the manner directed herein by the undersigned
stockholder(s).  If no direction is made, this proxy will be voted in accordance with the Board of
Directors' recommendations.  To indicate your preference, mark [X] in the space provided.
The Board of Directors recommends a vote "FOR" the following:
1. Election of Directors
Nominees:  (1) John Poss; (2) Craig Ellins; (3) Dr. Andrea Small-Howard; (4) Leslie Bocskor; and
(5) Shane Terry.
[   ] FOR all nominees    [   ] WITHHOLD all nominees    [   ] FOR only the following nominees:
_______________________________________________________________________________
.
The Board of Directors recommends a vote "FOR" the following proposal:
2. To approve an amendment to our certificate of incorporation reducing the number of shares of
common stock our Board of Directors is authorized to issue from 250,000,000 common shares to
200,000,000 common shares and to authorize the issuance of up to 50,000,000 preferred shares.
[   ] FOR                         [   ] AGAINST                        [   ] ABSTAIN
The Board of Directors recommends a vote "FOR" the following proposal:
3. To ratify the appointment of Patrick D. Heyn, CPA, P. A. as our independent registered public
accounting firm for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2017.
[   ] FOR                         [   ] AGAINST                        [   ] ABSTAIN
Date: _____________________
Signature _____________________________ Signature (joint
owners)________________________________
Print name ____________________________ Print name                    
________________________________
(Please date this proxy card and sign above exactly as your name appears on this card.  Joint
owners should each sign personally. Corporate proxies should be signed by an authorized officer.
Executors, administrators, trustee, etc., should give their full titles.)
19