
EX-99.1 7 d755268dex991.htm EX-99.1 EX-99.1
Exhibit 99.1
NEWS
FOREST OIL CORPORATION
707 17th STREET, SUITE 3600
DENVER, COLORADO 80202
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
CONTACT: LARRY C. BUSNARDO
VP – INVESTOR RELATIONS
303.812.1441
FOREST OIL ANNOUNCES AGREEMENT WITH SABINE OIL & GAS TO REVISE
TRANSACTION STRUCTURE AND ADOPTION OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS PLAN
New structure requires only majority approval
Sabine and Forest economic interests post transaction remain 73.5% / 26.5%, respectively
Shareholder rights plan adopted to protect interest of Forest shareholders
DENVER, COLORADO – July 10, 2014 – Forest Oil Corporation (NYSE:FST) (“Forest”) today
announced that it has reached an agreement with Sabine Oil & Gas LLC (“Sabine Oil & Gas”) to
amend their previously announced merger agreement to protect the interests of their respective
shareholders. The revised transaction structure does not change the economic terms of the
transaction. Upon completion, current Forest shareholders will own approximately 26.5% of the
economic interest in the combined businesses of Forest and Sabine Oil & Gas, the same as
under the original merger agreement.
Under the terms of the amended merger agreement, Forest and Sabine Oil & Gas will combine
their businesses through a revised transaction structure, where Sabine Investor Holdings, LLC
and a related investment entity (together, the “Sabine Investor Entities”), the owners of Sabine
Oil & Gas, will contribute their interests in Sabine Oil & Gas to Forest, in exchange for the
issuance to the Sabine Investor Entities of common and preferred stock in Forest. As a result of
the contribution and stock issuance (the “Transaction”), Sabine Oil & Gas will become a wholly
owned subsidiary of Forest, the Sabine Investor Entities will hold common and preferred shares
representing an aggregate 73.5% economic interest in Forest and the existing Forest common
shareholders will hold an aggregate 26.5% economic interest in Forest. The 73.5% / 26.5%
economic interest allocation is the same as under the original merger agreement.
In addition, through the issuance of preferred stock (the “Series A Common-Equivalent Preferred
Stock”) to the Sabine Investor Entities, the Sabine Investor Entities will have
Page 1 of 7
approximately 80% of the combined voting interest in Forest. The Transaction is expected to be
tax-free for the Forest shareholders and the Sabine Investor Entities, as was the case with the
original transaction structure. The Series A Common Equivalent Preferred Stock will be
convertible into Forest common stock at the option of the holder, and will convert automatically if
the Sabine Investor Entities and their affiliates cease to own Forest shares representing two-
thirds of the combined voting interest in Forest. The Series A Common-Equivalent Preferred
Stock will be equivalent to Forest common stock, other than with respect to voting rights, and will
have no special dividend rights.
The completion of the Transaction is conditioned upon, among other things, (i) the approval of
the issuance of the equity consideration to the Sabine Investor Entities by holders of a majority of
the shares of Forest common stock represented and entitled to vote at a special meeting of
Forest shareholders and (ii) unless waived by Forest and the Sabine Investor Entities, the
approval of an amendment to Forest’s charter to increase the number of authorized shares of
common stock (the “Charter Amendment”) by holders of a majority of the outstanding Forest
shares.
The revised transaction structure is not expected to have any impact on the treatment of the
existing indebtedness of Forest and Sabine Oil & Gas, as compared to the original transaction
structure. As was the case with the original transaction structure, the completion of the
Transaction will trigger change-of-control provisions in the indentures governing Forest’s existing
senior notes. These change-of-control provisions entitle holders of the Forest notes to receive
101% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest with respect to each series of
notes if they desire. Sabine Oil & Gas expects that any of Forest’s notes that are not tendered
pursuant to the change-of-control offers will remain outstanding following the transaction, subject
to any opportunistic refinancing of such notes which may be pursued based on market
conditions. Sabine Oil & Gas continues to have committed financing in place for both a $1 billion
reserves based lending facility and to backstop the purchase of any Forest bonds that are
redeemed as a result of the change-of-control provisions.
In connection with entering into the amended merger agreement, Forest also has adopted a
shareholder rights plan and today declared a dividend of one right on each outstanding share of
Forest’s common stock. The rights plan is intended to prevent persons from acquiring beneficial
ownership of 5% or more of Forest’s common stock or, for investors that own in excess of 5%
today, from increasing their beneficial ownership, but will not apply to and will not affect any
shareholder that does not have a “short”-equivalent position with respect to Forest’s debt. Forest
is adopting the shareholder rights plan, in conjunction with the revised transaction structure, to
address the concern that certain investors with “short”-equivalent positions in Forest’s debt
securities or similar derivative positions could attempt to negatively influence or manipulate the
outcome of the shareholder vote related to the combination of Forest and Sabine Oil & Gas in
order to drive down the trading prices of Forest’s debt securities. Forest believes the shareholder
vote should focus on the merits of the transaction.
Following the completion of the Transaction, Forest has agreed to submit to its shareholders for
their approval a plan to reincorporate Forest from New York to Delaware, through a
reincorporation merger. If the reincorporation merger is completed, Forest will continue as a
wholly-owned subsidiary of a newly formed Delaware holding company, and holders of common
and preferred shares in Forest would receive corresponding common and preferred shares in the
new Delaware holding company.
Page 2 of 7
Under the amended stockholder’s agreement entered into by Forest and the Sabine Investor
Entities, the Sabine Investor Entities are entitled to nominate a number of individuals to the
Forest board of directors corresponding to their proportionate voting power in Forest stock, which
is initially 80%, rounded to the nearest director. In order to ensure that the Sabine Investor
Entities are able to nominate a number of directors proportionate to their 80% voting power, the
number of directors on the board is being increased to 10. The other two individuals nominated to
serve on the Forest board will be selected by the nominating committee, but under the
stockholder’s agreement, the Sabine Investor Entities have agreed to vote in favor of the election
of such nominees.
The combined entity will still be headquartered in Houston, Texas, and will be led by Sabine’s
current executive management team. The transaction is expected to be completed in the fourth
quarter of 2014.
Presentation slides detailing the new transaction structure are available in the “Investor
Relations” section of Forest’s website under “Recent Presentations” and on Sabine’s website
under “Events / Presentations” at http://www.sabineoil.com.
Page 3 of 7
A summary of the key terms of the revised transaction structure compared to the original
transaction structure is set forth in the table below:
Term
Structure
Revised Transaction Structure
Contribution of Sabine Oil & Gas and
related holding companies to Forest
by Sabine Investor Entities, in
exchange for common and preferred
shares of Forest.
Resulting Public
Company following
the Transactions
Forest Oil Corporation (NYSE: FST).
If approved by the Forest
Original Transaction Structure
Combination of Forest and Sabine
Oil & Gas under a newly formed
public holding company (“Holdco”),
through the simultaneous merger of
a wholly owned subsidiary of
Holdco with and into Forest and the
contribution of Sabine Oil & Gas
and related holding companies to
Holdco by Sabine Investor
  
Holdings, LLC.
Sabine Oil & Gas Corporation, the
newly formed Holdco entity (NYSE:
SABO)
shareholders, the name of Forest will
be changed to “Sabine Oil & Gas
Corporation” as of the closing date,
and the ticker correspondingly
changed to “SABO.”
Forest shareholders will retain their
existing shares in Forest.
No change.
Sabine Investor Entities will hold
80% of the combined voting power in
Forest; existing Forest public
shareholders will hold 20% of the
voting power in Forest.
A majority of the Forest common
shares represented and entitled to
vote at the Forest shareholder
meeting.
Impact on
Securities Held by
Existing Forest
Shareholders
Resulting
Economic
Ownership
Resulting Voting
Power
Legally Required
Vote to Approve
Transaction
Page 4 of 7
Revised Transaction Structure
Unless waived by the parties, a vote
of a majority of the outstanding
Forest common shares approving
the Charter Amendment will be
required to complete the
Transactions.
No change.
Term
Additional Waivable
Approval
Requirements
Impact on
Outstanding
Indebtedness
Forest shareholders would have
received 0.1 shares of Holdco for
each share of Forest common stock
  
owned by such Forest shareholder.
Sabine Investor Entities would
have owned a 73.5% economic
interest in the combined company;
existing Forest public shareholders
would have owned a 26.5%
economic interest in the combined
  
company.
Sabine Investor Entities would
have held 73.5% of the voting
power in the combined company;
existing Forest public shareholders
would have held 26.5% of the
voting power in the combined
  
company.
Two-thirds of the outstanding
Forest common shares.
Original Transaction Structure
None.
The completion of the Transactions
will trigger change-of-control
provisions in the indentures
governing Forest’s existing senior
notes. These change-of-control
provisions entitle holders of the
notes to receive 101 percent of the
Eight directors chosen by Sabine
and two directors chosen by Forest.
Sabine Oil & Gas’ executive
management team will manage the
combined company.
No change, other than the end date
under the amended merger
agreement and the expiration of the
amended commitment letters is
December 31, 2014.
Board and
Executive
Composition
Financing
Commitments; End
Date Specified in
Merger Agreement
principal amount of the notes plus
accrued interest with respect to
  
each series of notes.
Six directors chosen by Sabine and
two directors chosen by Forest.
Sabine Oil & Gas’ executive
management team will manage the
  
combined company.
Sabine Oil & Gas had obtained
financing commitment letters, which
provided commitments for a new
credit facility for the combined
company to refinance the existing
revolving credit facilities of Sabine
and Forest and for bridge financing
to finance the purchase of any
Forest notes which are required to
be purchased in connection a
change of control offer.
The end date under the merger
agreement and the expiration of the
commitment letters was
  
November 1, 2014.
Page 5 of 7
*****
Forest Oil Corporation is engaged in the acquisition, production, exploration, and development of
natural gas and liquids in the United States. Forest’s principal reserves and producing properties
are located in East Texas, the Eagle Ford in South Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma.
Forest’s common stock trades on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol FST. For
more information about Forest Oil, please visit its website at http://www.forestoil.com.
IMPORTANT ADDITIONAL INFORMATION WILL BE FILED WITH THE SEC
In connection with the proposed transactions, Forest Oil Corporation intends to file a proxy
statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), and each of Sabine Oil & Gas
LLC and Forest Oil Corporation also plan to file other relevant documents with the SEC
regarding the proposed transactions. INVESTORS ARE URGED TO READ THE DEFINITIVE
PROXY STATEMENT AND OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE SEC IF
AND WHEN THEY BECOME AVAILABLE BECAUSE THEY WILL CONTAIN IMPORTANT
INFORMATION. You may obtain a free copy of the definitive proxy statement (if and when it
becomes available) and other relevant documents filed by Sabine Oil & Gas LLC and Forest Oil
Corporation with the SEC at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. You may also obtain Forest’s
documents by contacting Forest Oil Corporation’s Investor Relations department
at www.forestoil.com or by email at IR@forestoil.com.
PARTICIPANTS IN THE SOLICITATION
Forest Oil Corporation, Sabine Oil & Gas LLC and their respective directors and executive
officers and other members of management and employees may be deemed to be participants in
the solicitation of proxies in respect of the proposed transactions. Information about Forest Oil
Corporation’s directors is available in Forest Oil Corporation’s proxy statement filed with the SEC
on March 26, 2014, for its 2014 annual meeting of shareholders, and information about Forest Oil
Corporation’s executive officers is available in Forest Oil Corporation’s Annual Report on Form
10-K for 2013 filed with the SEC on February 26, 2014. Information about Sabine Oil & Gas
LLC’s directors and executive officers is available in the registration statement on Form S-4 filed
by New Forest Oil Inc. on May 29, 2014. Other information regarding the participants in the proxy
solicitations and a description of their direct and indirect interests, by security holdings or
otherwise, will be contained in the definitive proxy statement and other relevant materials to be
filed with the SEC regarding the proposed transactions when they become available. Investors
should read the definitive proxy statement carefully when it becomes available before making
any voting or investment decisions. You may obtain free copies of these documents from Forest
Oil Corporation using the sources indicated above.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This document contains forward-looking statements concerning the proposed transactions, its
financial and business impact, management’s beliefs and objectives with respect thereto, and
management’s current expectations for future operating and financial performance, based on
assumptions currently believed to be valid. Forward-looking statements are all statements other
than statements of historical facts. The words “anticipates,” “may,” “can,” “plans,” “believes,”
“estimates,” “expects,” “projects,” “intends,” “likely,” “will,” “should,” “to be,” and any similar
expressions or other words of similar meaning are intended to identify those assertions as
forward-looking statements. It is uncertain whether the events anticipated will transpire, or if they
do occur what impact they will have on the results of operations and financial condition of
Page 6 of 7
Forest Oil Corporation or Sabine Oil & Gas LLC. These forward-looking statements involve
significant risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those
anticipated, including but not limited to the ability of the parties to satisfy the conditions precedent
and consummate the proposed transactions, the timing of consummation of the proposed
transactions, the ability of the parties to secure regulatory approvals in a timely manner or on the
terms desired or anticipated, the ability of Forest Oil Corporation to integrate the acquired
operations, the ability to implement the anticipated business plans following closing and achieve
anticipated benefits and savings, and the ability to realize opportunities for growth. Other
important economic, political, regulatory, legal, technological, competitive and other uncertainties
are identified in the documents filed with the SEC by Forest Oil Corporation from time to time,
including Forest Oil Corporation’s Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-
Q, and Current Reports on Form 8-K. For additional information on the risks and uncertainties
that could impact Sabine Oil & Gas LLC’s business and operations, as well as risks related to the
transactions, please see the registration statement on Form S-4 filed by New Forest Oil, Inc. on
May 29, 2014. The forward-looking statements included in this document are made only as of the
date hereof. Neither Forest Oil Corporation nor Sabine Oil & Gas LLC undertakes any obligation
to update the forward-looking statements included in this document to reflect subsequent events
or circumstances.
July 10, 2014
Page 7 of 7