
ENCANA CORPORATION
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
THE HOLDERS OF COMMON SHARES OF ENCANA CORPORATION ARE INVITED TO OUR ANNUAL
MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS (THE “MEETING”)
WHEN
Wednesday, April 25, 2012
2:00 p.m. (Calgary time)
WHAT THE MEETING IS ABOUT
WHERE
Calgary TELUS Convention Centre
Macleod Hall, Lower Level, South Building
120 - 9 Avenue S.E.
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
2.
3.
4.
to receive the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Auditor’s Report for the year ended December 31,
2011;
to elect directors;
to appoint the auditor for the ensuing year and authorize the directors to fix their remuneration;
to hold a non-binding advisory vote approving the Corporation’s approach to executive compensation as
described in the accompanying Information Circular; and
to transact such other business as may properly be brought before the Meeting or any adjournments thereof.
The purposes of the Meeting are:
1.
5.
WHO HAS THE RIGHT TO VOTE
You are entitled to receive notice of and vote at the Meeting, or any adjournment or postponement, if you were a
holder of common shares of Encana Corporation (“Common Shares”) as at the close of business on March 6, 2012.
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT
As a shareholder, it is very important that you read this material carefully and then vote your shares, either in person
or by proxy, at the Meeting. To be used at the Meeting, completed proxies must be received by our registrar and
transfer agent, CIBC Mellon Trust Company c/o Canadian Stock Transfer Company Inc., 600 The Dome Tower, 333
– 7 Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P 2Z1, by 2:00 p.m. (Calgary time) on April 23, 2012 or, in the case of
any adjournment or postponement of the Meeting, not less than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays) before the time of the adjourned or postponed Meeting.
The accompanying Information Circular tells you more about how to vote your Common Shares. If you have any
questions, please contact our proxy solicitation agent, Phoenix Advisory Partners (“Phoenix”), toll free in North
America at 1-800-926-4985 or by email at inquiries@phoenixadvisorypartners.com.
IDENTIFICATION, ENTRY AND WEBCAST
Shareholders, duly appointed proxyholders and registered guests will be requested to present government-issued or
other appropriate identification prior to being permitted to enter the Meeting.
Persons who are not shareholders or duly appointed proxyholders who wish to attend the Meeting as a registered
guest should request permission to attend in advance of the Meeting via email to investor.relations@encana.com or
by mail to Investor Relations at 1800, 855 – 2 Street S.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2P 2S5.
Only shareholders and duly appointed proxyholders are entitled to vote and participate in the business of the
Meeting.
The Corporation’s authorized representatives may also inspect bags and shall be entitled to require that bags not be
brought into the Meeting.
A live audio webcast of the Meeting will be available on our website at www.encana.com.
By Order of the Board of Directors of Encana Corporation,
Jeffrey G. Paulson
Vice-President, Associate General Counsel
& Corporate Secretary
Calgary, Alberta
March 7, 2012