
EX-99.1 3 exhibit99_1.htm EXHIBIT 99.1 exhibit99_1.htm
Exhibit 99.1
News Release
For Immediate Release
DUNE ENERGY, INC. ENTERS INTO AGREEMENT TO BE ACQUIRED BY EOS PETRO,
INC.
Houston, Texas, September 18, 2014—Dune Energy, Inc. (OTCBB:DUNR) (“Dune” or the
“Company”) has entered into a definitive agreement with Eos Petro, Inc. (OTCBB:EOPT) (“Eos”)
whereby Eos will acquire all of the outstanding shares of the Company for $0.30 per share in
cash pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger dated September 17, 2014.
Under the terms of the agreement, Eos, through a merger subsidiary, will commence a tender
offer no later than October 9, 2014 for all outstanding common stock of the Company for $0.30
per share in cash (the “Tender Offer”). The Tender Offer will expire on the 20th business day
following and including the commencement date, unless extended in accordance with the terms
of the agreement and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Following the completion of the Tender Offer, the parties will complete a second-
step merger in which any remaining shares of the Company will be converted into the right to
receive the same price per share paid in the Tender Offer (the “Merger”). Eos will negotiate with
the management team at Dune to have them become a part of Eos’ management team and
expects James Watt to become the President and Chief Executive Officer of Eos at the closing of
the Merger.
The announcement follows a comprehensive review undertaken by the Company’s Board of
Directors to maximize stockholder value. The Company’s Board of Directors unanimously
approved the agreement and unanimously recommends that the Company’s stockholders tender
their shares in the Tender Offer.
“The Board considered a range of potential alternatives, including continuing to operate as an
independent entity, the returns and dilution associated with issuing additional equity in a public
or private offering, the possibility of certain asset sales, and a sale to or combination with a public
or private merger partner,” said Robert Schmitz, non-executive Chairman of the Company’s
Board. “After an exhaustive evaluation, our Board of Directors unanimously concluded that this
transaction with Eos is in the best interests of our stockholders.”
Commenting on the transaction, Nikolas Konstant, current Chief Financial Officer and Chairman
of the Board of Directors of Eos, said, “We believe Dune’s high-quality assets and its outstanding
management team will be a positive addition to our asset portfolio and we look forward to
working with the Company.  We are excited at the possibility of having James Watt on board as
our new President and CEO, as well as a member of Eos’ Board of Directors, and believe that
the rest of his management team will add significant value.”
The closing of the Tender Offer is subject to certain conditions including the tender of a number
of Dune shares that represent at least a majority of the total number of Dune’s outstanding
shares, and other customary conditions. There is no financing condition to the obligations to
consummate the transaction.
In connection with the transaction, Perella Weinberg Partners served as financial advisors to the
Company. Haynes and Boone, LLP served as the Company’s legal counsel. Global Hunter
Securities LLC served as financial advisors to Eos, and Baker Hostetler LLP served as its legal
counsel.
The Company
Dune Energy, Inc. is an independent energy company based in Houston, Texas. The Company
is engaged in the exploration, development, acquisition and exploitation of crude oil and natural
gas properties, with interests along the Louisiana and Texas Gulf Coast.  Additional information
on the Company is available at the Company’s website at www.duneenergy.com.
Eos Petro, Inc.
Eos Petro, Inc. is a U.S. listed company that is in the business of acquiring, exploring and
developing oil and gas-related assets, both domestically and internationally. Eos’ current, active
properties are located in the Illinois Basin.
Important Information for Investors and Security Holders
 
A tender offer for the outstanding shares of the Company referred to in this press release has not
yet commenced. No statement in this press release is an offer to buy or the solicitation of an offer
to sell any securities. A solicitation and an offer to buy shares of the Company’s will be made
only pursuant to an offer to purchase and related materials that Merger Subsidiary intends to file
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). When the Tender Offer is commenced,
Eos and Merger Subsidiary will file a Tender Offer Statement on Schedule TO with the SEC, and
thereafter the Company will file a Solicitation/Recommendation Statement on Schedule 14D-9
with respect to the Tender Offer. Investors and stockholders are urged to read the Tender Offer
Statement (including an offer to purchase, a related letter of transmittal and other offer
documents) and the Solicitation/Recommendation Statement on Schedule 14D-9 carefully when
they become available, as well as other documents filed with the SEC before any decision is
made with respect to the Tender Offer, because they will contain important information. The
Tender Offer Statement and Solicitation/Recommendation Statement on Schedule 14D-9 (when
available) will be sent free of charge to Company stockholders. Free copies of these and other
materials (when available) may be obtained by contacting the information agent for the tender
offer Okapi Partners, LLC toll-free at (855) 305-0856 or info@okapipartners.com.  In addition, all
of these materials (and all other documents filed with the SEC) will be available at no charge
from the SEC through its website at www.sec.gov. Investors and stockholders may also obtain
free copies of the respective documents of the Company and Eos that are filed with the SEC from
http://www.duneenergy.com and http://www.eos-petro.com.
Forward Looking Statements
 
Certain statements contained herein constitute forward-looking statements with respect to certain
plans and objectives of the Company and Eos with respect to the proposed Tender Offer, Merger
and related transactions, including the timing of the completion of the Merger with Merger
Subsidiary. These forward-looking statements can be identified by the fact that they do not relate
only to historical or current facts. By their nature, forward-looking statements involve known and
unknown risks and uncertainties because they relate to events and depend on circumstances
that will occur in the future. Forward-looking statements often use words such as “anticipate”,
“target”, “expect”, “estimate”, “intend”, “plan”, “goal”, “believe”, “hope”, “aim”, “continue”, “will”,
“may”, “would”, “could” or “should” or other words of similar meaning or the negative thereof.
There are several factors which could cause actual plans to differ materially from those
expressed or implied in forward-looking statements. Such factors include, but are not limited to:
the risk that the acquisition of Company and any related Tender Offer and Merger may not be
consummated, or may not be consummated in a timely manner. The Company’s and Eos’
businesses, each as a whole, are subject to a number of risks, and to the extent those risks are
known to be material, they have been listed and discussed in the Company and Eos’s respective
annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013, and quarterly and
current reports on Form 10-Q and 8-K.  Although it is believed that the expectations reflected in
such forward-looking statements are reasonable, no assurance can be given that such
expectations will prove to have been correct, and persons reading this communication are
therefore cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which
speak only as at the date of this communication. The Company and Eos assume no obligation to
update the information contained in this communication (whether as a result of new information,
future events or otherwise), except as required by applicable law.
Media/Investor Contacts
 
For the Company:
Steven J. Craig
Sr. Vice President Investor Relations and Administration
713-229-6300
For Eos:
Michael Briola, Partner
Anubis Partners, LLC
+1 541.482.0919
mbriola@anubispartners.com