
MIC
Notice and 
Management
Information Circular
for the Annual 
and Special Meeting 
of Shareholders
to be held on May 18, 2011
Franco-Nevada Corporation
www.franco-nevada.com
FRANCO-NEVADA CORPORATION
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
May 18, 2011
The  Annual  and  Special  Meeting  (the  “Meeting”)  of  the  shareholders  of  Franco-Nevada  Corporation  (the 
“Corporation”) will be held at the TMX Broadcast Centre, The Exchange Tower, 130 King Street West, Ontario 
M5X 1J2 on Wednesday, May 18, 2011, at 4:30 p.m. (Toronto time) for the following purposes:
(a)  to  receive  the  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  of  the  Corporation  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2010, together with the auditors’ report thereon;
(b)  to elect the directors of the Corporation;
(c)  to  appoint  PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP,  Chartered  Accountants,  as  auditors  of  the  Corporation 
for  the  ensuing  year  and  to  authorize  the  directors  to  fix  the  remuneration  to  be  paid  to  the 
auditors;
(d)  to consider and, if thought appropriate, pass, with or without variation, an advisory resolution on
the Corporation’s approach to executive compensation; and
(e)  to  transact  such  other  business  as  may  properly  come  before  the  Meeting  or  any  adjournment
thereof.
The  accompanying  management  information  circular  dated  April  1,  2011  provides  additional  information 
relating to the matters to be dealt with at the Meeting and forms part of this notice.
Registered  shareholders  who  are  unable  to  be  present  at  the  Meeting  in  person,  may  vote  their  shares  by 
proxy. Instructions on how to complete and return the proxy are provided with the form of proxy. To be valid, 
proxies  must  be  deposited  with  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.  at  100  University  Avenue,  9th  Floor, 
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1, no later than 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on May 16, 2011 or on the second business 
day preceding the date of any adjournment of the Meeting.
Non-registered  beneficial  shareholders  should  follow  the instructions  of  their  intermediaries  in  order  to  vote 
their shares.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Dated at Toronto, the 1st day of April, 2011.
“Jacqueline A. Jones” 
Chief Legal Officer & Corporate Secretary
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION CIRCULAR
Dated April 1, 2011
GENERAL PROXY INFORMATION
Solicitation of Proxies
This management information circular (this “Circular”) is furnished in connection with the solicitation by the 
management of Franco-Nevada Corporation (the “Corporation”) of proxies to be used at the annual and special 
meeting  (the  “Meeting”)  of  shareholders  of  the  Corporation  to  be  held  at  the  TMX  Broadcast  Centre,  The 
Exchange Tower, 130 King Street West, Ontario M5X 1J2 on Wednesday, May 18, 2011, at 4:30 p.m. (Toronto 
time),  and  at  all  adjournments  thereof,  for  the  purposes  set  forth  in  the  notice  of  the  Meeting  that 
accompanies this Circular (the “Notice of Meeting”).  It is expected that the solicitation will be made primarily 
by  mail  but  proxies  may  also  be  solicited  personally  by  directors,  officers  or  employees  of  the  Corporation.  
Such persons will not receive any extra compensation for such activities.  The Corporation may also retain, and 
pay a fee to, one or more proxy solicitation firms to solicit proxies from the shareholders of the Corporation in 
favour of the matters set forth in the Notice of Meeting.  The Corporation may pay brokers or other persons 
holding  common  shares  of  the  Corporation  in  their  own  names,  or  in  the  names  of  nominees,  for  their 
reasonable  expenses  for  sending  proxies  and  the  Circular  to  beneficial  owners  of  common  shares  and 
obtaining proxies therefor.  The total cost of the solicitation will be borne directly by the Corporation.
Appointment and Revocation of Proxies
The persons named in the enclosed form of proxy are officers or directors of the Corporation.  A shareholder 
has the right to appoint a person (who need not be a shareholder of the Corporation) other than the persons 
specified in such form of proxy to attend and act on behalf of such shareholder at the Meeting.  Such right may 
be exercised by striking out the names of the persons specified in the form of proxy, inserting the name of the 
person  to  be  appointed  in  the  blank  space  provided  in  the  form  of  proxy,  signing  the  form  of  proxy  and 
returning it in the manner set forth in the form of proxy.
A shareholder who has given a proxy may revoke it:
(i)
by depositing an instrument in writing, including another completed form of proxy, executed by such 
shareholder or shareholder’s attorney authorized in writing either:
(A)
(B)
at the registered office of the Corporation at any time up to and including the last business 
day preceding the date of the Meeting or any adjournment thereof; or
with the chairman of the Meeting prior to the commencement of the Meeting on the day of 
the Meeting or any adjournment thereof;
(ii)
or in any other manner permitted by law.
Exercise of Discretion
The persons named in the enclosed form of proxy will vote the shares in respect of which they are appointed by 
proxy  on  any  ballot  that  may  be  called  for  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  contained  therein.    If  the 
shareholder  specifies  a  choice  with  respect  to  any  matter  to  be  acted  upon,  the  shares  will  be  voted 
accordingly.  In the absence of such specifications, such shares will be voted FOR each of the matters referred 
to herein.
-3-
The  enclosed  form  of  proxy  confers  discretionary  authority  upon  the  persons  named  therein  with  respect  to 
amendments to or variations of matters identified in the Notice of Meeting and with respect to other matters, if 
any, which may properly come before the Meeting.  At the date of the Circular, management of the Corporation 
knows of no such amendments, variations or other matters to come before the Meeting.  However, if any other 
matters that are not now known to management should properly come before the Meeting, the proxy will be 
voted on such matters in accordance with the best judgment of the named proxy.
Advice to Beneficial Holders of Common Shares
The information set forth in this section is of significant importance to many holders of common shares, as a 
substantial number of shareholders do not hold common shares in their own name.  Shareholders who do not 
hold their common shares in their own name (referred to herein as “Beneficial Shareholders”) should note that 
only  proxies  deposited  by  shareholders  whose  names  appear  on  the  records  of  the  Corporation  as  the 
registered holders of common shares can be recognized and acted upon at the Meeting.  If common shares 
are  listed  in  an  account  statement  provided  to  a  shareholder  by  a  broker,  then,  in  almost  all  cases,  those 
common  shares  will  not  be  registered  in  the  shareholder’s  name  on  the  records  of  the  Corporation.    Such 
shares will more likely be registered under the name of the shareholder’s broker or an agent of that broker.  
More particularly, a person is a Beneficial Shareholder in respect of common shares which are held on behalf 
of  that  person  but  which  are  registered  either:  (a)  in  the  name  of  an  intermediary  that  the  Beneficial 
Shareholder deals with in respect of the common shares (intermediaries include, among others, banks, trust 
companies,  securities  dealers  or  brokers  and  trustees  or  administrators  of  self-administered  RRSPs,  RRIFs, 
RESPs  and  similar  plans);  or  (b)  in  the  name  of  a  clearing  agency  (such  as  The  Canadian  Depository  for 
Securities Limited (“CDS”)), of which the intermediary is a participant.  In Canada, the vast majority of such 
shares  are  registered  under  the  name  of  CDS,  which  acts  as  nominee  for  many  Canadian  brokerage  firms.  
Common shares held by brokers or their nominees can only be voted upon the instructions of the Beneficial 
Shareholder.    Without  specific  voting  instructions,  brokers  and  their  nominees  are  prohibited  from  voting 
common  shares  held  for  Beneficial  Shareholders.    Therefore,  Beneficial  Shareholders  should  ensure  that 
instructions respecting the voting of their common shares are communicated to the appropriate person or that 
the common shares are duly registered in their name.
Applicable  Canadian  securities  regulatory  policy  requires  intermediaries/brokers  to  seek  voting  instructions 
from  Beneficial  Shareholders  in  advance  of  shareholders’  meetings.    Every  intermediary/broker  has  its  own 
mailing procedures and provides its own return instructions to clients, which should be carefully followed by 
Beneficial Shareholders in order to ensure that their common shares are voted at the Meeting.
In Canada, the majority of brokers now delegate responsibility for obtaining voting instructions from Beneficial 
Shareholders to Broadridge Investor Communication Solutions (“Broadridge”). Broadridge typically supplies a 
special  sticker  to  be  attached  to  the  proxy  forms  and asks  Beneficial  Shareholders  to  return  the  completed 
proxy  forms  to  Broadridge.    Broadridge  then  tabulates  the  results  of  all  instructions  received  and  provides 
appropriate  instructions  respecting  the  voting  of  common  shares  to  be  represented  at  the  Meeting.  A 
Beneficial Shareholder receiving such a proxy from Broadridge cannot use that proxy to vote common shares 
directly at the Meeting. The proxy must be returned to Broadridge well in advance of the Meeting in order to 
instruct Broadridge how to vote the common shares.
In  addition,  the  Corporation  has  decided  to  take  advantage  of  certain  provisions  of  applicable  securities 
regulatory requirements that permit it to deliver meeting materials directly to non-objecting beneficial owners. 
These materials are being sent to both registered and non-registered owners of common shares.  If you are a 
Beneficial Shareholder, and the Corporation or its agent has sent these materials directly to you, your name 
and address and information about your holdings of common shares have been obtained in accordance with 
applicable  securities  regulatory  requirements  from  the  intermediary  holding  the  common  shares  on  your 
behalf.  By choosing to send these materials to you directly, the Corporation (and not the intermediary holding 
on  your  behalf)  has  assumed  responsibility  for  (i)  delivering  these  materials  to  you,  and  (ii)  executing  your 
proper voting instructions.  As a result, you can expect to receive a scannable voting instruction form (“VIF”) 
from  our  transfer  agent,  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.  (the  “Transfer  Agent”).    These  VIFs  are  to  be 
completed  and  returned  to  the  Transfer  Agent  in  the  envelope  provided.    In  addition,  the  Transfer  Agent 
provides both telephone voting and Internet voting as described on the VIF.  The Transfer Agent will tabulate 
the  results  of  the  VIFs  received  and  will  provide  appropriate  instructions  at  the  Meeting  with  respect  to  the 
common shares represented by the VIFs they receive.
-4-
Record Date
The directors have fixed March 31, 2011 as the record date for the determination of shareholders entitled to 
receive  notice  of  the  Meeting.    Only  shareholders  of  record  on  such  record  date  are  entitled  to  vote  at  the 
Meeting.
Voting Securities and Principal Holders Thereof
As at March 31, 2011, there were 126,252,243 common shares of the Corporation issued and outstanding.  
Each common share has the right to one vote on each matter at the Meeting.
To  the  knowledge  of  the  directors  and  officers  of  the  Corporation,  the  following  persons  or  companies 
beneficially  own,  or  exercise  control  or  direction  over,  directly  or  indirectly,  10%  or  more  of  the  issued  and 
outstanding common shares of the Corporation:
Name
Number of Common Shares
Beneficially Owned or Controlled
or Directed
Percentage of 
Outstanding
Common Shares
Fidelity Management & Research Company, Pyramis 
Global Advisors, LLC, Pyramis Global Advisors Trust 
Company and FIL Limited (collectively, “Fidelity”)
15,822,490(1)
12.53%
Notes
(1)
According to an early warning report filed on SEDAR under the alternative monthly reporting system of National 
Instrument 62-103 on October 12, 2010.
Interests of Certain Persons or Companies in Matters to be Acted Upon
Except as otherwise disclosed below, management of the Corporation is not aware of a material interest, direct 
or  indirect,  by  way  of  beneficial  ownership  of  common  shares  or  otherwise,  of  any  director  or  officer  of  the 
Corporation at any time since the beginning of the Corporation’s last financial year, of any proposed nominee 
for election as a director of the Corporation, or of any associate or affiliate of any such person, in any matter to 
be acted upon at the Meeting other than the election of directors or the appointment of auditors.
-5-
Election of Directors
BUSINESS OF THE MEETING
At the Meeting, it is proposed that the seven directors whose names are set out below be elected to the board 
of directors of the Corporation (the “Board”).  Each nominee for election as a director is currently a director of 
the Corporation.  Each director’s term of office will expire at the next annual meeting of shareholders of the 
Corporation or when his successor is duly elected or appointed, unless his term ends earlier in accordance with 
the articles or by-laws of the Corporation, he resigns from office or he becomes disqualified to act as a director 
of the Corporation.
Unless the shareholder has specified in the enclosed form of proxy that the common shares represented by 
such proxy are to be withheld from voting in the election of directors, the persons named in the enclosed form 
of proxy intend to vote FOR the election of the nominees whose names are set forth below.
In 2009, the Board adopted a policy on majority voting. If, with respect to any particular nominee, the number 
of  common  shares  withheld  from  voting  exceeds  the  number  of  common  shares  voted  in  favour  of  the 
nominee, then for purposes of the policy the nominee shall be considered not to have received the support of 
the shareholders, even though duly elected as a matter of corporate law. A person elected as a director who is 
considered under this test not to have the confidence of the shareholders is expected forthwith to submit to 
the Board his or her resignation, to take effect upon acceptance by the Board.
The following table sets forth for each of the persons proposed to be nominated for election as directors their 
name, age, city, province/state and country of residence; their principal occupations or employment; a brief 
biographical description; the date on which they became directors of the Corporation; their independence; their 
memberships  with  the  Audit  and  Risk  Committee  (“ARC”)  or  Compensation  and  Corporate  Governance 
Committee (“CCGC”), as  applicable; their attendance at Board meetings; their attendance at ARC and CCGC 
meetings, as applicable; the number of common shares of the Corporation beneficially owned or over which 
control  or  direction  is  exercised,  directly  or  indirectly;  the  number  of  stock  options  held;  and  the  number  of 
deferred share units (“DSUs”) or restricted share units (“RSUs”) held, all as at March 31, 2011.
For  additional  information  regarding  compensation,  options,  equity  ownership,  current  directorships  and 
attendance of each of the nominees, please see “Statement of Executive Compensation – Compensation of 
Directors”  and  “Statement  of  Corporate  Governance  Practices  –  Other  Directorships;  and  Attendance  at 
Meetings”.
Nominees for Election as Directors 
Pierre Lassonde  
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Director Since: November 12, 2007 
Age: 63 
Independent Member of the Board 
(Chair) 
Board Meetings Attended 2010: 100%
Number of Common
Shares(1)
3,374,247
Options(2)
175,000
DSUs/RSUs(3)
3,744 DSUs
Pierre  Lassonde  is  Chairman  of  the  Board.  Mr.  Lassonde  formerly  served  as 
President  of  Newmont  Mining  Corporation  (“Newmont”)  from  2002  to  2006 
and resigned as a director and Vice-Chairman of Newmont effective November 
30, 2007. Previously, Mr. Lassonde served as a director and President (1982 
to  2002)  and  Co-Chief  Executive  Officer  (1999  to  2002)  of  Franco-Nevada 
Mining  Corporation  Limited  (“Old  Franco-Nevada”).  Mr.  Lassonde  also  served 
as  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Euro-Nevada  Mining  Corporation 
from  1985  to  1999,  prior  to  its  amalgamation  with  Old  Franco-Nevada.  Mr. 
Lassonde  served  as  a  director  of  Normandy  Mining  Limited  from  2001  to 
2002. Mr. Lassonde is past Chairman and a director of the World Gold Council, 
Chairman of the Quebec National Art Museum and a director of New Gold Inc. 
and Enghouse Systems Limited. Mr. Lassonde received his Chartered Financial 
Analyst  designation  from  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1984,  a  P.  Eng 
(Association  of  Professional  Engineers  of  Ontario)  in  1976,  a  Master  of 
Business Administration from the University of Utah in 1973, a B.Sc. (Electrical 
Engineering) from Ecole Polytechnique in 1971 and a B.A. from Seminaire de 
St. Hyacinthe/Université de Montréal in 1967.
-6-
Nominees for Election as Directors 
David Harquail 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Director Since: November 13, 2007 
Age: 54 
Non-Independent Member of the Board 
Board Meetings Attended 2010: 100%
Derek W. Evans 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
Director Since: August 8, 2008 
Age: 54 
Independent Member of the Board 
Committee Membership: ARC 
Board Meetings Attended 2010: 100% 
ARC Meetings Attended 2010: 100%
Graham Farquharson 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Director Since: November 12, 2007 
Age: 70 
Independent Member of the Board 
Committee Membership: CCGC 
Board Meetings Attended 2010: 100% 
CCGC Meetings Attended 2010: 100%
Louis Gignac 
Brossard, Quebec, Canada 
Director Since: November 12, 2007 
Age: 60 
Independent Member of the Board 
Committee Membership: ARC 
Board Meetings Attended 2010: 100% 
ARC Meetings Attended 2010: 100%
Number of Common
Shares(1)
1,224,000
Options(2)
500,000
DSUs/RSUs(3)
22,203 RSUs(4)
David Harquail is President and Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation and 
is a director of the Corporation. Mr. Harquail served as Executive Vice President 
of Newmont (2006 to 2007) and previously served as President and Managing 
Director of Newmont Capital, the merchant banking division of Newmont (2002 
to 2006). Prior to the acquisition by Newmont of Old Franco-Nevada in 2002, 
Mr. Harquail was with Old Franco-Nevada for a period of 15 years with the final 
position of Senior Vice President responsible for the metals royalty division and 
corporate  development.  Mr.  Harquail  has  also  held  roles  as  President  and 
Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Redstone  Resources  Inc.,  as  a  director  of  Inco 
Limited,  Echo  Bay  Mines  Limited,  Kinross  Gold  Corporation  and  the 
Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada and as a task force advisor 
to  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange.  Mr.  Harquail  holds  a  B.A.Sc.  in  Geological 
Engineering  from  the  University  of  Toronto,  a  Master’s  degree  in  Business 
Administration from McGill University and is a registered Professional Engineer 
in Ontario.
4,000
75,000
2,972 DSUs
Derek  Evans  is  currently  the  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of 
Pengrowth Energy Corporation and Chairman of Endurance Energy, a private oil 
and gas company, as well as a director of the Corporation and a number of not-
for-profit  organizations.  From  May  to  September  2009,  Mr.  Evans  was 
President  and  Chief  Operating  Officer  of  Pengrowth  Energy  Trust.  Mr.  Evans 
served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Focus Energy Trust from May 
2002 until March 2008. Mr. Evans has over 25 years of experience in the oil 
and gas business in Western Canada and has spent the majority of his career 
with  Renaissance  Energy  Limited  in  senior  management.  Mr.  Evans  holds  a 
Bachelor of Science degree in Mining Engineering from Queen’s University and 
is a registered Professional Engineer in Alberta. Mr. Evans is also a member of 
the Institute of Corporate Directors.
76,630(5)
75,000
3,217 DSUs
Graham  Farquharson  has  been  the  President  of  Strathcona  Mineral  Services 
Limited since 1974 and is a director of the Corporation as well as a director of 
St Andrew Goldfields Ltd. Mr. Farquharson previously served on the boards of 
Placer  Dome  Inc.,  Cambior  Inc.  and  several  other  mining  companies.  In 
addition,  Mr.  Farquharson  is  the  Chairman  of  the  Canadian  Mineral  Industry 
Education  Foundation  and  a  director  of  the  Physicians  Services  Incorporated 
Foundation.  Mr.  Farquharson  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  Mining 
Engineering  from  the  University  of  Alberta,  a  Master’s  degree  in  Business 
Administration  from  Queen’s  University  and  is  a  registered  Professional 
Engineer in Ontario. Mr. Farquharson was recently inducted into the Canadian 
Mining Hall of Fame.
75,000
75,000
2,308 DSUs
Louis  Gignac  is  currently  President  of  G  Mining  Services  Inc.,  a  private 
consultancy, and is a director of the Corporation. Mr. Gignac previously served 
as  President,  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  a  director  of  Cambior  Inc.  from  its 
creation  in  1986  until  its  acquisition  by  IAMGOLD  Corporation  in  2006.  Mr. 
Gignac  previously  held  management  positions  with  Falconbridge  Copper 
Company and Exxon Minerals Company. Mr. Gignac also served as a professor 
in  mining  engineering  at  Laval  University  from  1979  to  1981.  Mr.  Gignac 
currently  serves  as  a  director  of  Domtar  Corp,  Gaz  Métro  Inc.  and  St  Andrew 
Goldfields Ltd., and is a member of the Ordre des ingénieurs du Québec. Mr. 
Gignac holds a Doctorate in Mining Engineering from the University of Missouri 
Rolla,  a  Master’s  degree  in  Mineral  Engineering  from  the  University  of 
Minnesota, and a Bachelor of Science degree in Mining Engineering from Laval 
University.
-7-
Nominees for Election as Directors 
Randall Oliphant 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Director Since: November 12, 2007 
Age: 51 
Independent Member of the Board 
Committee Membership: ARC (Chair) 
Board Meetings Attended 2010: 89% 
ARC Meetings Attended 2010: 100%
Hon. David R. Peterson 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Director Since: November 12, 2007 
Age: 67 
Independent Member of the Board 
Committee Membership: CCGC (Chair) 
Board Meetings Attended 2010: 89% 
CCGC Meetings Attended 2010: 100%
Number of Common
Shares(1)
75,000
Options(2)
75,000
DSUs/RSUs(3)
Nil
Randall Oliphant is the Executive Chairman of New Gold Inc. and is a director 
of the Corporation and of Silver Bear Resources Inc. Mr. Oliphant is a member 
of  the  advisory  board  for  Metalmark  Capital  LLC  (formerly  Morgan  Stanley 
Capital  Partners),  is  a  director  of  WesternZagros  Resources  Ltd.  and  also 
serves on the boards and advisory boards of a number of companies and not-
for-profit  organizations.  Mr.  Oliphant  held  positions  with  Barrick  Gold 
Corporation  from  1987  to  2003  and  served  as  Barrick’s  President  and  Chief 
Executive  Officer  from  1999  to  2003.  Mr.  Oliphant  received  his  Bachelor  of 
Commerce degree with honours in 1984 from the University of Toronto and his 
Chartered Accountant designation in 1986.
75,000
75,000
3,727 DSUs
David Peterson is a Senior Partner and Chairman of the law firm Cassels Brock 
& Blackwell LLP, and is a director of the Corporation. Prior to that he was the 
Premier  of  the  Province  of  Ontario  from  1985  to  1990.  He  was  the  founding 
chairman  of  the  Toronto  Raptors  of  the  National  Basketball  Association  and 
was chairman of the successful Toronto Bid for the 2015 Pan Am Games. Mr. 
Peterson  currently  serves  as  a  director  of  a  number  of  companies,  including 
Rogers  Communications  Inc.,  Shoppers  Drug  Mart  Corporation,  Industrielle-
Alliance  Insurance  and  Financial  Services  Inc.,  South  East  Group  Limited, 
MBAC Fertilizer Corp. and Versapay Corporation. Mr. Peterson is Chancellor of 
the University of Toronto and a director of St. Michael’s Hospital. Mr. Peterson 
holds an LL.B. from the University of Toronto, was called to the Bar of Ontario 
in 1969, appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1980 and summoned by Her Majesty 
to the Privy Council in 1992.
Notes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The information as to the number of common shares of the Corporation and any of its subsidiaries beneficially 
owned, or over which control or direction is exercised, directly or indirectly, by each proposed director, including 
those  which  are  not  registered  in  the  name  of  such  director  and  not  being  within  the  knowledge  of  the 
Corporation, has been furnished by the respective director. 
For additional information regarding options held by directors, please see “Statement of Executive Compensation 
– Compensation of Directors”. 
Non-employee directors are eligible to participate in the Corporation’s deferred share unit plan to receive DSUs. 
The President and Chief Executive Officer, as an employee director is eligible to participate in the Corporation’s 
share  compensation  plan  to  receive  RSUs.  For  additional  information  regarding  these  plans,  please  see 
“Statement of Executive Compensation”.  Fractional DSUs have been rounded. 
Comprised  of  16,024  performance-based  RSUs  and  6,179  time-based  RSUs.  See  “Statement  of  Executive 
Compensation.” 
Mr. Farquharson also holds 2,500 warrants of Franco-Nevada GLW Holdings Corp. which each entitle him upon 
exercise to either 0.1556 of a common share of the Corporation or C$5.20 per warrant.
Securities laws require the Corporation to disclose whether a proposed director has: (i) been a director or an 
executive officer of a company that has been subject to a cease trade or other order or become bankrupt; (ii) 
been bankrupt; (iii) been subject to any penalties or sanctions relating to securities legislation or entered into a 
settlement  agreement  with  a  securities  regulatory  authority;  and  (iv)  been  subject  to  any  other  penalties  or 
sanctions that would likely be considered important to a reasonable shareholder in deciding whether to vote 
for  a  proposed  director.  To  the  Corporation’s  knowledge  (based  on  information  furnished  by  the  proposed 
directors), no disclosure is required in respect of the proposed directors.
-8-
Appointment of Auditors
The auditors of the Corporation are PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, who were first appointed as auditors of the 
Corporation on November 29, 2007. Unless the shareholder has specified in the enclosed form of proxy that 
the common shares represented by such proxy are to be withheld from voting in the appointment of auditors, 
the  persons  named 
the  appointment  of 
PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP,  as  auditors  of  the  Corporation  to  hold  office  until  the  next  annual  meeting  of 
shareholders, and to authorize the directors to fix the remuneration of the auditors.
form  of  proxy
the  enclosed
in
intend
to  vote  FOR
Fees
For  the  periods  ended  December  31,  2010  and  2009,  PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP  billed  fees  from  the 
Corporation as detailed below:
Audit Fees 
Audit-Related Fees 
Tax Fees 
Other Fees 
Total Fees
December 31, 2010 
C$290,100 
C$47,366 
Nil 
Nil 
C$337,466
December 31, 2009 
C$444,624 
C$48,000 
Nil 
Nil 
C$492,624
For the years  ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, “Audit Fees” noted above include $Nil and C$95,384, 
respectively, for services rendered in connection with the Corporation’s equity offerings.  
The “Audit-Related Fees” noted  above were incurred in connection with professional services provided for the 
accounting treatment of certain transactions completed by the Corporation for the years ended December 31, 
2010 and 2009.
Policies and Procedures Regarding Services Provided by External Auditors
The Board, upon the recommendation of the Audit and Risk Committee (the “ARC”), has adopted policies and 
procedures regarding services provided by external auditors (collectively, the “Auditor Independence Policy”). 
Under the Auditor Independence Policy, specific proposals for audit services and permitted non-audit services 
must  be  pre-approved  by  the  ARC.  The  ARC  may  delegate  to  any  one  or  more  of  its  members  pre-approval 
authority (other than pre-approval of the annual audit service engagement). Any approvals granted under this 
delegated authority must be presented to the ARC at its next meeting. The Auditor Independence Policy also 
provides that the ARC may pre-approve services (other than the annual audit service engagement) without the 
requirement for a specific proposal where the scope and parameters of such services and their attendant fees 
are clearly defined. The ARC must be informed in writing at its next scheduled meeting of any engagement of 
the  external  auditor  to  provide  services  in  such  circumstances.  The  Auditor  Independence  Policy  deems  de 
minimus  non-audit  services  to  have  been  pre-approved  by  the  ARC  in  limited  circumstances  and  subject  to 
certain conditions being met.
The  Auditor  Independence Policy  prohibits  the  external auditors  from  providing  any  of  the  following  types  of 
non-audit services: (a) bookkeeping or other services related to the accounting records or financial statements; 
(b)  financial  information  systems  design  and  implementation;  (c)  appraisal  or  valuation  services,  fairness 
opinions,  or  contribution-in-kind  reports;  (d)  actuarial  services;  (e)  internal  audit  outsourcing  services;  (f) 
management functions or human resources services; (g) corporate finance or other services; (h) broker-dealer, 
investment  advisor  or  investment  banking  services;  (i)  legal  services;  and  (j)  any  other  service  that  under 
applicable law and generally accepted auditing standards cannot be provided by an external auditor.
The Auditor Independence Policy provides that the external auditor should not be precluded from providing tax 
or advisory services that do not fall within any of the categories described above, unless the provision of those 
services would reasonably be expected to compromise the independence of the external auditor.
-9-
“Say-on-Pay” Advisory Resolution  
 
In early 2010, the CCGC reviewed the guidelines of various governance ratings agencies with respect to “say-
on-pay”, in particular, the Canadian Coalition for Good Governance’s Model Shareholder Engagement and “Say 
on  Pay”  Policy  for  Boards  of  Directors.  The  CCGC  recommended  to  the  Board  that  shareholders  have  the 
opportunity to, on an advisory basis, vote in respect of the Corporation’s approach to executive compensation. 
Shareholders of the Corporation are being given the opportunity to vote on an advisory basis “for” or “against” 
the  Corporation’s  approach  to  executive  compensation  through  the  following  resolution  (the  “Say-on-Pay 
Advisory Resolution”):
BE IT RESOLVED THAT, on an advisory basis and not to diminish the role and responsibilities of the 
board  of  directors  of  the  Corporation,  the  shareholders  accept  the  approach  to  executive 
compensation as disclosed in the Corporation’s management information circular dated April 1, 2011.
The  Board  recommends  to  shareholders  of  the  Corporation  that  they  vote  FOR  the  Say-on-Pay  Advisory 
Resolution.  Unless  the  shareholder  has  specified  in  the  enclosed  form  of  proxy  that  the  common  shares 
represented by such proxy are to be voted against the Say-on-Pay Advisory Resolution, the persons named in 
the enclosed form of proxy intend to vote FOR the Say-on-Pay Advisory Resolution. Since the vote is advisory, it 
will not be binding on the Board or the CCGC. However, the Board and, in particular, the CCGC, will consider the 
outcome  of  the  vote  as  part  of  its  ongoing  review  of  executive  compensation.  For  information  on  the 
Corporation’s approach to executive compensation, see “Statement of Executive Compensation”.
STATEMENT OF EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Compensation Discussion & Analysis
Background
The  Corporation  was  incorporated  on  October  17,  2007  and  its  initial  public  offering  (“IPO”)  closed  on 
December 20, 2007. The Corporation was formed to acquire an established portfolio of mining and oil & gas 
royalties  and  other  interests.  The  Corporation’s  strategic  objectives  are  to  manage  and  grow  a  diversified 
portfolio in the resource sector that delivers attractive returns over the full commodity cycle. These strategic 
objectives focus on per share net asset value growth and exposure to exploration optionality.
In  order  to  ensure  that  the  interests  of  the  directors  and  members  of  management  would  be  aligned  with 
shareholders,  at  the  time  of  the  IPO,  certain  members  of  management  and  the  directors  subscribed  for  an 
aggregate of 3,000,000 common shares of the Corporation.
In  addition,  the  compensation  arrangements  for  the  nine  initial  employees,  collectively  known  as  the  “IPO 
Team”, were developed through negotiations between David Harquail, the Corporation’s President and Chief 
Executive Officer, on behalf of the IPO Team, and Newmont over a period of five months prior to the IPO. This 
Compensation Discussion & Analysis includes an outline of the process that was undertaken with respect to 
arriving  at  executive  compensation  packages  for  the  IPO  Team  for  2007  and  2008.  This  Compensation 
Discussion  &  Analysis  also  outlines  the  Corporation’s  compensation  programs  for  2009  and  2010  and  its 
plans for compensation going forward for 2011.
IPO Process
Both the IPO Team and Newmont separately conducted research of compensation precedents from Canadian 
initial  public  offerings,  spin-outs,  management  buy-outs  and  trust  conversions.  Newmont’s  research  and 
evaluations were made in consultation with Mercer Human Resource Consulting. Mr. Harquail led the process 
of  tabling  compensation  proposals  based  on  discussions  with  the  IPO  Team,  followed  by  consultation  with 
Pierre Lassonde, who it was proposed would join the Corporation as the independent, non-executive Chair of 
the Board. Mr. Harquail then tabled the compensation proposals with Newmont and Mr. Lassonde separately 
consulted with Newmont on such proposals. Some of the factors relevant to the IPO Team and Newmont in 
their negotiations included:
-10-
• 
•
•
•
the current compensation then being received by the IPO Team members at Newmont;
the fact that several IPO Team members were being solicited by potential buyers to join their bid for the 
assets  which  the  Corporation  ultimately  acquired  from  Newmont  and  that  they  had  other  employment 
options;
that  there  was  a  desire  for  equal  treatment  among  the  “founders”  of  the  Corporation,  but  at  the  same 
time, there was varying capacity of IPO Team members to subscribe for pre-IPO common shares and, in 
some cases, there were stronger preferences for options;
that there were tax structuring constraints which limited the number of pre-IPO common shares that could 
be issued to U.S. residents; and
•  Newmont’s desire to maximize its return from the overall IPO consideration.
Negotiations between the IPO Team and Newmont extended from August of 2007 until the final decision to 
launch the IPO was made. The pre-IPO employment agreements and the purchases of pre-IPO common shares 
by the IPO Team members were subject to review and agreement by Newmont. The Board was assembled in 
November of 2007 and became involved in reviewing the IPO Team’s compensation packages and eventually 
approved the pre-IPO employment agreements and the purchases of pre-IPO common shares by the IPO Team 
members.
Compensation and Corporate Governance Committee Mandate
The Compensation and Corporate Governance Committee (the “CCGC”) was established by the Board to assist 
the  Board  in  fulfilling  its  responsibilities  relating  to  compensation  matters,  including  the  evaluation  and 
approval  of  the  Corporation’s  compensation  plans,  policies  and  programs.  It  is  the  CCGC’s  responsibility  to 
ensure that the Corporation develops and maintains a compensation program for its executive officers that will 
be fair and competitive, consistent with the best interests of the Corporation.
The CCGC is responsible for reviewing the position description and performance goals and objectives relevant 
to the compensation of the Chief Executive Officer (the “CEO”) and for evaluating the CEO’s performance in 
light of those goals and objectives. The CCGC recommends to the Board the CEO’s compensation based on 
such evaluation. The CCGC is also responsible for making recommendations to the Board with respect to the 
compensation of all executive officers, including incentive compensation plans, equity-based plans, the terms 
of  any  employment  agreement,  severance  and  change  of  control  arrangements  and  any  special  or 
supplemental  benefits.  The  CEO  provides  the  CCGC  with  recommendations  for  compensation  of  other 
executive officers, supported by relevant factual data and an assessment of appropriate compensation.
The CCGC has the authority to retain and receive advice from compensation consultants to carry out its duties, 
but to date has not determined it necessary to do so.
Compensation Philosophy and Objectives
The  Corporation’s  strategic  objectives  drive  its  compensation  philosophy  such  that  executive  officers  will 
expect a significant portion of their income to be derived from the long-term growth of the Corporation’s share 
price. The Corporation has been increasing the emphasis placed on share ownership supported by RSUs. The 
Corporation does not provide for pension plans or other benefits not generally available to all employees.
The Corporation’s overall compensation philosophy is that compensation should be sufficiently competitive to 
attract  and  retain  talented  employees,  but  that  compensation  should  ultimately  focus  on  the  interests  of 
employees at all levels of the Corporation being aligned with the interests of the Corporation’s shareholders. 
The Corporation is of the view that individual employee compensation should be linked to the performance of 
both the Corporation and each individual employee.
The specific objectives of the Corporation’s compensation program for executive officers are as follows:
• 
•
to attract and retain talented executive officers;
to align the interests of executive officers with those of the Corporation’s shareholders; and
-11-
•
to  link  individual  executive  compensation  to  the  performance  of  both  the  Corporation  and  the 
performance of each individual executive officer.
The Corporation’s compensation program is designed to reward executive officers for:
• 
•
•
superior corporate performance relative to pre-set internal objectives;
superior corporate performance relative to an external performance index (see “Benchmarking”); 
and
exceptional levels of individual performance consistent with, and contributing to the achievement 
of, the Corporation’s strategic objectives.
Benchmarking
As  discussed  above,  benchmarks  were  referred  to  during  the  negotiations  of  the  compensation  of  the  IPO 
Team  in  2007.  Since  then,  the  Corporation  has  generally  considered  compensation  programs  in  relevant 
sectors of the mining and oil and gas industries, but, other than in respect of performance-based RSUs, has 
not  specifically  engaged  in  benchmarking.  As  one  of  five  components  of  the  vesting  criteria  for  the 
performance-based  RSUs  awarded  in  November    2009  and  December  2010,  which  will  vest  in  November 
2012 and December 2013, respectively, assuming the vesting criteria are met on the measurement date, the 
Corporation will measure its share price performance against an internally-developed performance index based 
on external indices. For further information, see “Elements of Compensation – Long-Term Incentives – Share 
Compensation Plan – Restricted Share Units – Vesting” below.
Risk Management
The  Board  is  responsible  for  strategic  aspects  relating  to  risk  management  and  the  enforcement  of  an 
appropriate risk culture throughout the organization, including relating to compensation aspects. The Board is 
responsible for considering the implications of risks associated with the Corporation’s compensation policies 
and  practices,  if  any.    The  CCGC  is  responsible  for  ensuring  compliance  of  the  compensation  policies  and 
practices  of  the  Corporation  with  its  enterprise  risk  management  goals.  The  Corporation’s  enterprise  risk 
management environment is further described under “Statement of Corporate Governance Practices – Ethical 
Business  Conduct  –  Risk  Management”.  To  date,  the  Board  and  CCGC  have  not  identified  any  risks  arising 
from the Corporation’s compensation policies and practices that would be reasonably likely to have a material 
adverse effect on the Corporation.
Elements of Compensation
The Corporation currently provides a compensation program for executive officers comprised of base salary, 
annual incentives in the form of cash bonuses and time-based RSUs and long-term incentives in the form of 
performance-based RSUs. Stock options have not been part of the annual incentive compensation program but 
instead have been used as an incentive when hiring a new employee or in the context of a promotion, transfer 
or increase in the scope of responsibilities for an existing employee. However, the CCGC may use its discretion 
to  grant  stock  options  for  future  compensation  awards.  The  Board  also  has  the  ability  to  make  further 
discretionary awards when considered appropriate.
The Corporation also provides basic perquisites and benefits to its executive officers on the same basis that 
they  are  generally  available  to  all  employees.  The  majority  of  executive  officers  of  the  Corporation  have 
termination  and  change  of  control  provisions  in  their  employment  agreements.  The  Corporation  does  not 
provide a defined benefit plan or a defined contribution plan for any of its executive officers, nor does it have a 
deferred compensation plan for any of its executive officers.
Base Salary
Base salary is a fixed element of compensation for each executive officer for performing his or her position’s 
specific responsibilities and is typically determined with general reference to, among other things, base salary 
compensation  at  industry  peers.  Base  salary  is  intended  to  fit  into  the  Corporation’s  overall  compensation 
objectives  by  serving  to  attract  and  retain  talented  executive  officers.  Notwithstanding  this  objective  the
-12-
Corporation  intends  to  place  a  greater  relative  emphasis  on  long-term  incentives.  In  2009,  base  salary 
comprised approximately 50% of an executive officer’s annual compensation (100/200), excluding long-term 
incentives  and  discretionary  awards.  In  2010,  base  salary  comprised  approximately  57%  of  an  executive 
officer’s annual compensation (100/175), excluding long-term incentives and discretionary awards. For 2011 
and  future  years,  the  CCGC  has  determined  that  base  salary  is  intended  to  comprise  approximately  50% 
(100/200)  of  an  executive  officer’s  annual  compensation,  excluding  long-term  incentives  and  discretionary 
awards.
The  base  salaries  of  the  executive  officers  with  pre-IPO  employment  agreements  were  set  out  in  such 
agreements for 2007 and 2008. See “Summary Compensation Table – Discussion of Summary Compensation 
Table – Employment Agreements”. For new executive officers and otherwise for 2009 and onwards, the CCGC 
has considered and will consider, respectively, the following factors in setting base salaries:
• 
• 
• 
•
the level of responsibility related to each executive officer’s position;
the base salaries paid to equivalent executive officers at industry peers generally;
the experience of the executive officer; and
the executive officer’s overall performance versus established goals and objectives.
For 2009, the CCGC implemented base salary changes for the Corporation’s executive officers in the range of 
a decrease of 3.7% up to a 15% increase (in local currency terms). The CEO received the same base salary (in 
Canadian dollar terms) for 2009 as in 2008. In setting base salaries for executive officers for 2009, the CCGC 
took into consideration the factors listed above, as well as the standardization of percentage bonuses among 
executive officers and the availability of RSU awards in the future.
For 2010, the CCGC implemented base salary changes for the Corporation’s executive officers in the range of 
no increase to a 6.6% increase (in local currency terms). The CEO received an increase of 6.6% (in Canadian 
dollar terms) in base salary for 2010 as compared to 2009. In setting base salaries for executive officers for 
2010, the CCGC took into consideration the factors listed above.
For 2011, the CCGC has implemented base salary changes for the Corporation’s executive officers in the range 
of  no  increase  to  a 30.4% increase  (in  local  currency terms).  The  CEO  will  receive  an  increase  of  12.5%  (in 
Canadian dollar terms) in base salary for 2011 as compared to 2010. In setting base salaries for executive 
officers  for  2011,  the  CCGC  took  into  consideration  the factors  listed  above.  In  particular,  for  the  executive 
officer with the 30.4% increase, the CCGC considered the increased progression of such executive officer.
Annual Incentives
An annual incentive is a short-term variable element of compensation that rewards each executive officer for 
both corporate and individual performance and is typically determined with reference to pre-set corporate and 
individual  performance  objectives.  An  annual  incentive  is  intended  to  fit  into  the  Corporation’s  overall 
compensation objectives by directly linking individual executive compensation to the performance of both the 
Corporation and the individual executive officer and indirectly aligning the interests of executive officers with 
shareholders.  The Corporation currently provides  an  annual  incentive  in  the  form of  both  a cash  bonus  and 
time-based RSUs, the latter of which also enables the Corporation to place a greater relative emphasis on long-
term incentives (as time-based RSUs vest over a three-year period) and to improve retention. In 2009, cash 
bonus  and  time-based  RSUs  comprised  approximately  50%  of  an  executive  officer’s  annual  compensation 
(100/200),  excluding  performance-based  RSUs  and  discretionary  awards.  In  2010,  cash  bonus  and  time-
based RSUs comprised approximately 43% of an executive officer’s annual compensation (75/175), excluding 
performance-based RSUs and discretionary awards. For 2011 and future years, the CCGC has determined that 
cash  bonus  and  time-based  RSUs  are  intended  to  comprise  approximately  50%  (100/200)  of  an  executive 
officer’s annual compensation, excluding performance-based RSUs and discretionary awards. A realignment of 
the allocation of time-based and performance-based RSUs, which form part of the annual compensation for 
executive  officers,  was  determined  by  the  CCGC  for  the  year  2010  and  future  years.  This  change  occurred 
following a general review of comparable executive compensation programs.
The targeted annual cash bonuses of the executive officers with pre-IPO employment agreements were set out 
in such agreements for 2007 and 2008 and were established at either a set dollar value or a percentage of
-13-
base salary. See “Summary Compensation Table – Discussion of Summary Compensation Table – Employment 
Agreements”. For new executive officers and otherwise for 2009 and onwards, executive officers are eligible 
for annual incentives of a certain percentage of base salary, which varies according to level of responsibility. As 
there was no restricted share unit plan available for 2009, annual cash bonuses were targeted at 75% of base 
salary in 2009. Time-based RSUs at a level of 25% of base salary were also awarded in respect of 2009 in May 
2010. For 2010, annual incentives consisted of an award of both a cash bonus and time-based RSUs, and the 
percentage  of  annual  cash  bonuses  declined  to  a  target  of  50%  of  base  salary  in  2010.  In  2010,  a 
discretionary  award  was  also  approved  by  the  CCGC.  See  “Discretionary  Awards”  below.  For  2011,  annual 
incentives are intended to consist of an award of both a cash bonus and time-based RSUs (although the latter 
also enables the Corporation to place a greater relative emphasis on long-term incentives), and the percentage 
of annual cash bonuses is intended to remain at a target of 50% of base salary in 2011.
Annual incentives are awarded up to the targeted amounts or percentages on the basis of the achievement of 
pre-set  corporate  and  personal  objectives  for  the  year.  These  may  include  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 
objectives for both the Corporation and the individual executive officer.
Annual Incentives for 2009: For 2009, these corporate and personal objectives included: financial and share 
price  performance,  strengthening  of  the  balance  sheet,  business  development  achievements,  asset 
management, governance, risk control, personnel development and succession planning. The CCGC concluded 
that these objectives were met by the Corporation and each of the Corporation’s executive officers and, as a 
result, the executive officers received actual cash bonuses of 100% of their targeted awards (i.e. 75% of base 
salary in 2009). See “Summary Compensation Table”.
Annual Incentives for 2010: For 2010, these corporate and personal objectives included: growth from value-
added  acquisitions,  outperforming  internal  corporate  benchmarks,  margins  through  containing  costs, 
governance  through  robust  asset  management  and  risk  control  and  ensuring  succession  planning  and 
technical depth are in place.  The following chart outlines the 2010 objectives (which involved both subjective 
and  objective  considerations)  for  each  Named  Executive  Officer  (as  defined  below)  and  the  weighting  by 
importance of each objective to the respective role of each executive officer as follows:
Corporate and Personal Objectives Chart
Weighting for each Named Executive Officer
Chief Executive
Officer
Chief Financial
Officer
Chief Legal
Officer
High (20%)
High (20%)
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Objective
Growth
Performance - including 
comparative benchmarks 
and market indices
Business
Development &
Operations
High
Medium
Medium
Low
Margins
Governance
Succession
High (20%)
High (20%)
High (20%)
High
High
Low
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
2010 Performance of Named Executive Officers (other than the CEO): For the Named Executive Officers, the 
CCGC used both subjective and objective measures in considering each of the objectives set out in the chart 
above.  For  growth,  the  CCGC  considered  the  number,  nature  and  value  of  possible  transactions  that  were 
initiated.  For  performance,  the  CCGC  considered  an  annual  time  period  performance  relative  to  the  2009-
2012 RSU Index referenced in the Corporation’s management information circular dated April 7, 2010.  For 
margins, the CCGC considered earnings and revenues against budget, cash flow as a percentage of revenues 
and general and administrative expense performance against budget. For governance, the CCGC considered 
external  rating  agency  rankings,  as  well  as  the  Corporation’s  financial  reporting.  For  succession,  the  CCGC 
considered progress in developing depth in the organization, the quality of new hires and assessment of the 
progression  of  succession  candidates.  The  CCGC  concluded  that  these  objectives  were  exceeded  by  the 
Corporation and each of the Corporation’s executive officers and, as a result, the executive officers received
-14-
actual  cash  bonuses  of  100%  of  their  targeted  awards  (i.e.  50%  of  base  salary  in  2010).  In  addition,  a 
discretionary  award  was  also  approved  by  the  CCGC.  See  “Discretionary  Awards”  below.  See  “Summary 
Compensation Table”.
2010 Performance of CEO: The CEO’s objectives were the same as those for the Corporation. As noted in the 
chart above, for the CEO, each of the objectives was weighted as “high” and was equally weighted (i.e. 20%), 
subject to the discretion of the CCGC. In respect of the CEO, for growth the CCGC considered the twenty-two 
different transactions that were brought to possible actionable level. For performance, the CCGC considered an 
annual  time  period  performance  relative  to  the  2009-2012  RSU  Index  referenced  in  the  Corporation’s 
management information circular dated April 7, 2010.  For margins, the CCGC considered forecast earnings 
substantially  above  budget,  revenues  against  budget  and  general  and  administrative  expense  performance 
against budget. For governance, the CCGC considered external rating agency rankings, as well as the quality of 
financial controls and financial reporting of the Corporation.  For succession, the CCGC reviewed the progress 
of  key  successors,  the  addition  of  three  new  officers  and  the  reorganization  of  the  U.S.  office.  The  CCGC 
concluded  that  these  objectives  were  exceeded  by  the  Corporation  and  the  CEO  and,  as  a  result,  the  CEO 
received an actual cash bonus of 100% of his targeted award (i.e. 50% of base salary in 2010). In addition, a 
discretionary award was also approved by the CCGC in recognition of another extraordinarily successful year 
and to assist in the final transition to share-based compensation.  The Board instructed that the CEO was to 
receive $100,000 of the discretionary award. See “Discretionary Awards” below. See “Summary Compensation 
Table”.
Annual  Incentives  for  2011:  For  2011,  corporate  and  personal  objectives  for  Named  Executive  Officers 
(including the CEO) will continue to include those set out in the chart above entitled “Corporate and Personal 
Objectives Chart”. The CEO’s objectives will continue to be the same as those for the Corporation. For the CEO, 
each  of  the  objectives  will  be  weighted  as  “high”  and  will  be  equally  weighted  (i.e.  20%),  subject  to  the 
discretion  of  the  CCGC.  For  growth,  the  CCGC  will  consider  the  number,  nature  and  value  of  possible 
transactions initiated. For performance, the CCGC will consider an annual time period performance relative to 
the 2010-2013 RSU Index described below under “Long-Term Incentives – Restricted Share Units – Vesting”.  
For  margins,  the  CCGC  will  consider  earnings  and  revenues  against  budget,  cash  flow  as  a  percentage  of 
revenues and general and administrative expense performance against budget. For governance, the CCGC will 
consider external rating agency rankings, as well as the Corporation’s financial reporting. For succession, the 
CCGC  will  consider  progress  in  developing  depth  in  the  organization,  the  quality  of  new  hires,  if  any,  and 
assessment of the progression of succession candidates.
Long-Term Incentives
A long-term incentive is an element of compensation that directly ties an executive officer’s compensation to 
the performance of the Corporation and is typically determined with reference to certain long-term corporate 
performance  objectives.  A  long-term  incentive  is  intended  to  fit  into  the  Corporation’s  overall  compensation 
objectives  by  directly  aligning  the  interests  of  executive  officers  with  shareholders.  The  Corporation  is 
progressively  increasing  the  proportion  of  deferred  share-based  compensation  as  compared  to  base  salary. 
This  is  being  accomplished  by  awarding  both  performance-based  RSUs  as  a  long-term  incentive  and  time-
based RSUs with vesting over a three-year period as an annual incentive (see “Annual Incentives”). In 2009, 
performance-based  RSUs  comprised  approximately  27%  of  an  executive  officer’s  annual  compensation 
(75/275),  excluding  discretionary  awards,  subject  to  the  achievement  of  pre-determined  performance 
objectives. In 2010, performance-based RSUs comprised approximately 22% of an executive officer’s annual 
compensation  (50/225),  excluding  discretionary  awards,  subject  to  the  achievement  of  pre-determined 
performance objectives. For 2011 and future years, the CCGC has determined that performance-based RSUs 
are  intended  to  comprise  approximately  20%  (50/250)  of  an  executive  officer’s  annual  compensation, 
excluding discretionary awards, subject to the achievement of pre-determined performance objectives. Time-
based RSUs and performance-based RSUs represent or are intended to represent, collectively, for 2009, 2010 
and  2011  and  future  years,  36%  (100/275),  33%  (75/225)  and  40%  (100/250)  of  an  executive  officer’s 
annual  compensation,  excluding  discretionary  awards,  subject  to  the  achievement  of  pre-determined 
performance  objectives.  A  realignment  of  the  allocation  of  time-based  and  performance-based  RSUs,  which 
form part of the annual compensation for executive officers, was determined by the CCGC for the year 2010 
and  future  years.  This  change  occurred  following  a  general  review  of  comparable  executive  compensation 
programs.
-15-
As  part  of  the  IPO  process,  the  Corporation  established  a  stock  option  plan  (the  “Option  Plan”),  which  was 
replaced  by  the  Corporation’s  share  compensation  plan  (the  “Share  Compensation  Plan”)  effective  May  12, 
2010. Initial stock options were granted to the IPO Team during the financial year ended December 31, 2007, 
as set in out their pre-IPO employment agreements. Other than a grant of stock options to one executive officer 
upon a promotion, no further stock options were granted to these executive officers during the financial years 
ended December 31, 2010, 2009 or 2008.
For new executive officers and otherwise for 2010 and onwards, executive officers are eligible for long-term 
incentives  in  the  form  of  stock  options  and  performance-based  RSUs.  To  date,  stock  options  have  been 
granted to new executive officers when they join the Corporation and, after such initial employment, only in 
circumstances where there is a material change to personal or corporate developments, such as  a promotion, 
at  the  judgment  of  the  CCGC.  However,  the  CCGC  may  use  its  discretion  to  grant  stock  options  for  future 
compensation  awards.  It  is  expected  that  performance-based  RSUs  will  be  awarded  subsequent  to  initial 
employment to provide long-term incentives that are aligned with the Corporation’s share price performance, 
consistent  with  past  grants  and  awards.  In  November  2009,  the  Corporation  made  its  first  award  of 
performance-based  RSUs  and  in  December  2010,  the  Corporation  made  a  further  award  of  performance-
based  RSUs.  See  “Share  Compensation  Plan  –  Restricted  Share  Units  –  Vesting”  below  for  information 
regarding the vesting criteria for these RSUs.
Share Compensation Plan
The  Share  Compensation  Plan  was  approved  by  shareholders  at  the  annual  and  special  meeting  of 
shareholders  held  on  May  12,  2010.  The  Share  Compensation  Plan  replaced  the  Option  Plan  and  the 
Corporation’s restricted share unit plan (the “Restricted Share Unit Plan”). Options and RSUs that were granted 
or  awarded  under  the  Option  Plan  and  the  Restricted  Share  Unit  Plan  remain  outstanding  pursuant  to  their 
original  terms.  Please  see  the  Corporation’s  management  information  circular  dated  April  7,  2010  for  a 
summary of the terms of the Option Plan and Restricted Share Unit Plan.
Purpose: The stated purpose of the Share Compensation Plan is to advance the interests of the Corporation 
and its shareholders by: (a) ensuring that the interests of officers and employees are aligned with the success 
of  the  Corporation;  (b)  encouraging  stock  ownership  by  such  persons;  and  (c)  providing  compensation 
opportunities to attract, retain and motivate such persons.
Participants: Each officer and employee of the Corporation and its subsidiaries is eligible to participate in the 
Share  Compensation  Plan.  Non-employee  directors  of  the  Corporation  are  not  eligible  to  participate  in  the 
Share Compensation Plan in respect of RSUs. Under the Share Compensation Plan, non-employee directors of 
the Corporation are eligible to participate in respect of Options, however, only on a limited basis consistent with 
the  guidelines  of  certain  governance  rating  agencies.  See  “Restrictions  on  the  Award  of  RSUs  and  Grant  of 
Options” below.
Administration: The Share Compensation Plan is administered by the CCGC, which determines, from time to 
time, the eligibility of persons to participate in the Share Compensation Plan, when RSUs and options will be 
awarded or granted, the number of RSUs and options to be awarded or granted, the vesting criteria for each 
award of RSUs and grant of options and all other terms and conditions of each award and grant, in each case 
in accordance with applicable securities laws and stock exchange requirements.
Plan  Maximum  and  Common  Shares  Reserved  for  Issuance:  The  Share  Compensation  Plan  has  a  fixed 
maximum  of  5,700,876  common  shares.  Taking  into  account  the  change  from  a  5%  rolling  plan  to  a  fixed 
maximum plan effective May 12, 2010, an aggregate of 5,530,208 common shares are currently reserved for 
issuance under the Share Compensation Plan on the following basis:
Total granted/awarded to date
Vested (not exercised)
Exercised/issued
Cancelled/otherwise terminated
Options
3,495,000
2,160,834
634,166
143,334
-16-
RSUs
108,111(1)
Nil
N/A
6,572
Aggregate
3,603,111
2,160,834
634,166
149,906
Total exercisable/issuable under the Plan
2,717,500
101,539
2,819,039
% of issued and outstanding common shares
%  of  common  shares  reserved  for  issuance 
under the Plan
2.15%
49.14%
0.08%
1.84%
2.23%
50.98%
(1)   76,317 performance-based and 31,794 time-based RSUs.
Based on the foregoing, an aggregate of 2,711,169 common shares remain available for issuance pursuant to 
future grants and awards under the Share Compensation Plan (being approximately 2.15% of the issued and 
outstanding  common  shares  and  approximately  49.02%  of  the  total  common  shares  reserved  for  issuance 
under the Share Compensation Plan). 
  
Restriction on the Award of RSUs and Grant of Options: Certain restrictions on awards of RSUs and grants of 
options apply as follows: (a) the total number of common shares issuable to any one person under the Share 
Compensation  Plan  and  any  other  share  compensation  arrangements  cannot  exceed  5%  of  the  common 
shares  then  outstanding;  (b)  the  number  of  common  shares  reserved  for  issuance  under  the  Share 
Compensation  Plan  together  with  any  other  share  compensation  arrangements  cannot  exceed  5%  of  the 
common  shares  then  outstanding;  (c)  the  number  of  common  shares  issuable  to  insiders  under  the  Share 
Compensation  Plan  and  any  other  share  compensation  arrangements  cannot  exceed  5%  of  the  common 
shares then outstanding; (d) the number of common shares issued to insiders under the Share Compensation 
Plan  and  any  other  share  compensation  arrangements  within  any  one-year  period  cannot  exceed  5%  of  the 
common shares then outstanding; and (e) the number of common shares issued to any one person within any 
one-year period cannot exceed 5% of the common shares then outstanding. In addition, consistent with the 
guidelines of certain governance rating agencies relating to participation of non-employee directors in option 
plans,  the  number  of  common  shares  reserved  for  issuance  to  non-employee  directors  pursuant  to  options 
under the Share Compensation Plan is limited to the lesser of: (i) 0.25% of the common shares then issued 
and outstanding;  and  (ii)  $1,000,000  in total  value  of grants  that  each  director  receives  over  the  life  of  the 
Share Compensation Plan from the effective date thereof or an annual grant value of $100,000 per director, in 
both cases based on a valuation determined using the Black-Scholes formula or any other formula which is 
widely accepted by the business community as a method for the valuation of options.
Restricted Share Units:
(a)  Mechanics for RSUs: RSUs awarded to participants under the Share Compensation Plan are credited to an 
account that is established on their behalf and maintained in accordance with the Share Compensation 
Plan. Each RSU awarded conditionally entitles the holder thereof to the issuance of one common share 
upon achievement of the vesting criteria. It is currently anticipated that RSUs awarded under the Share 
Compensation Plan will be redeemed for common shares issued from treasury once the vesting criteria 
established  by  the  CCGC  at  the  time  of  the  award  have  been  satisfied.  However,  the  Corporation  will 
continue  to  retain  the  flexibility  through  the  amendment  provisions  in  the  Share  Compensation  Plan  to 
satisfy  its  obligation  to  issue  common  shares  by  purchasing  common  shares  in  the  open  market  or  by 
making a lump sum cash payment of equivalent value.
(b)  Vesting: The Share Compensation Plan provides that: (i) at the time of the award of RSUs, the CCGC will 
determine  the  vesting  criteria  applicable  to  the  awarded  RSUs;  and  (ii)  vesting  of  RSUs  may  include 
criteria such as performance-vesting. The Share Compensation Plan further provides that RSUs with time-
vesting criteria will, at a minimum (i.e. as the least restrictive criteria), vest in respect of 33 1/3 % of the 
common shares subject to RSUs on the first day after each of the first three anniversaries of the award 
date  of  such  RSUs;  and  (ii)  RSUs  with  performance-vesting  criteria  will,  at  a  minimum  (i.e.  as  the  least 
restrictive criteria), vest on the first day after the first anniversary of the award date of such RSUs. It is the 
CCGC’s  current  intention  that  RSUs  will  be  awarded  with  both  time-based  vesting  provisions  as  a 
component of the Corporation’s annual incentive compensation program, and performance-based vesting 
provisions as a component of the Corporation’s long-term incentive compensation program.
In May 2010, time-based RSUs in respect of both 2009 and 2010 were awarded, vesting in respect of 33 
1/3 % of the common shares subject to RSUs on the first day after each of the first three anniversaries of 
the award date of such RSUs.
-17-
In November 2009, the Corporation awarded performance-based RSUs for the first time. The 2009-2012 
RSUs will vest 100% only three years from the date of the award, if the performance-vesting criteria are 
met on the measurement date. Information regarding the performance-vesting criteria for the 2009-2012 
RSUs is set out in the Corporation’s management information circular dated April 7, 2010.
In  December  2010,  the  Corporation  awarded  performance-based  RSUs.  The  2010-2013  RSUs  will  vest 
100%  only  three  years  from  the  date  of  the  award,  if  the  performance-vesting  criteria  are  met  on  the 
measurement date. The performance-vesting criteria involved five components as follows: (i) growth; (ii) 
performance;  (iii)  margins;  (iv)  governance;  and  (v)  succession,  as  further  set  out  in  the  chart  above 
entitled “Corporate and Personal Objectives Chart”. Satisfaction of such criteria for vesting for the 2010-
2013 RSUs will be definitively determined by the CCGC at a meeting to consider the matter which will be 
held in December of 2013.
With  respect  to  the  second  component,  being  performance  (i.e.  whether  share  price  performance  has 
exceeded  an  internally  developed  performance  index  based  on  external  indices),  the  CCGC  has  given 
considerable attention to developing a broadly-based performance index based on external indices (the 
“2010-2013 RSU Index”) against which to measure the Corporation’s share price performance and thus 
management’s  performance  over  this  three-year  period  as  one  of  the  five  components  of  the  vesting 
criteria. The 2010-2013 RSU Index takes into account the following components: the performance of key 
commodities  underlying  the  Corporation’s  asset  portfolio;  the  performance  of  certain  gold  and  energy 
indices;  and  the  performance  of  reference  stock market  indices.  The  relative  weighting  of  the gold  and 
energy components within the 2010-2013 RSU Index will be based upon the relative contribution of gold 
and energy to the projected revenues of the Corporation for the life of the RSUs awarded. The inclusion of 
gold  and  oil  price  performance  in  the  2010-2013  RSU  Index  is  intended  to  moderate  the  impact  of 
commodity price fluctuations on share price performance, which is appropriate given that the Corporation 
has no control over commodity prices.
The specific terms of the 2010-2013 RSU Index, other than the weightings of the various components, for 
the  three  year  measurement  period  from December  23,  2010  through  December 23,  2013  have  been 
established  by  the  CCGC.  At  the  end  of  the  measurement  period,  one  of  the  factors  to  be  weighed  will 
involve measuring the Corporation’s share price performance against the performance of the 2010-2013 
RSU Index.
For illustrative purposes, using the relevant figures as at December 31, 2010, the 2010-2013 RSU Index 
would have been composed of the following items with the following weightings for the fiscal year 2011 
(based  on  the  Corporation’s  commodity  revenue  mix  as  at  December  31,  2010  and  the  Corporation’s 
2011 budget):
Commodities 
• 
•  Cushing, Oklahoma West Texas Intermediate oil spot price (US$/bbl) (8% weighting)
London PM gold fix (US$/oz) (35% weighting)
Gold and Energy Indices 
•  S&P/TSX Global Gold Index (35% weighting) 
•  S&P/TSX Capped Energy Index (8% weighting)
General Market Measures 
•  S&P/TSX Composite Index (14% weighting)
The relative weighting of the gold and energy components, for the commodity prices and the indices, will 
be based upon the relative contribution of gold and energy to the projected revenues of the Corporation 
for each relevant fiscal year’s results for the three years following the grants as at December 31 in each 
year.
The  CCGC  expects  that  awarded  performance-based  RSUs  would  be  adjusted  if  a  performance  goal  or 
similar condition on which they were based were restated or adjusted.
-18-
Options:
(a)  Mechanics for Options: Each option granted will entitle the holder thereof to the issuance of one common 
share upon achievement of the vesting criteria and payment of the applicable exercise price. It is currently 
anticipated  that  options  granted  under  the  Share  Compensation  Plan  will  be  exercisable  for  common 
shares  issued  from  treasury  once  the  vesting  criteria  established  by  the  CCGC  at  the  time  of  the  grant 
have been satisfied. However, the Corporation will continue to retain the flexibility through the amendment 
provisions in the Share Compensation Plan to satisfy its obligation to issue common shares by making a 
lump sum cash payment of equivalent value (i.e. pursuant to a cashless exercise), provided there is a full 
deduction of the number of underlying common shares from the Share Compensation Plan’s reserve.
(b)  Vesting:  The  Share  Compensation  Plan  provides  that  at  the  time  of  the  grant  of  options,  the  CCGC  will 
determine the vesting criteria applicable to the granted options and that unless otherwise determined by 
the  CCGC,  options  shall  vest  and  become  exercisable  in  respect  of  33  1/3%  of  the  common  shares 
subject to such options on the first day after each of the first three anniversaries of the grant date of such 
options. In most circumstances, stock options will only be granted to new executive officers when they join 
the  Corporation  and,  after  such  initial  employment,  only  in  circumstances  where  there  is  a  material 
change  to  personal  or  corporate  developments,  such  as  a  promotion,  at  the  judgment  of  the  CCGC. 
However, the CCGC may use its discretion to grant stock options for future compensation awards.
(c)  Exercise  Price:  The  CCGC  will  determine  the  exercise  price  and  term/expiration  date  of  each  option, 
provided that the exercise price shall not be less than the fair market value (i.e. weighted average trading 
price for the last five trading days) on the date the option is granted and no option shall be exercisable 
after ten years from the date on which it is granted.
Termination,  Retirement  and  Other  Cessation  of  Employment:  A  person  participating  in  the  Share 
Compensation  Plan  will  cease  to  be  eligible  to  participate  in  the  following  circumstances:  (a)  receipt  of  any 
notice of termination of employment or service (whether voluntary or involuntary and whether with or without 
cause); (b) retirement; and (c) any cessation of employment or service for any reason whatsoever, including 
disability and death (an “Event of Termination”). In such circumstances, unless otherwise determined by the 
CCGC  in  its  discretion,  any  unvested  RSUs  will  be  automatically  forfeited  and  cancelled  and  any  unvested 
options will be automatically cancelled, terminated and not available for exercise. Any vested options may be 
exercised only before the earlier of: (i) the termination of the option; and (ii) six months after the date of the 
Event  of  Termination.  If  a  person  is  terminated  for  just  cause,  all  unvested  RSUs  must  be  forfeited  and 
cancelled and all options are (whether or not then exercisable) automatically cancelled. If a person retires in 
accordance  with  the  Corporation’s  retirement  policy  at  such  time,  the  pro-rata  portion  of  any  unvested 
performance-based  RSUs  will  not  be  forfeited  or  cancelled  and  instead  shall  vest  after  the  retirement  has 
occurred  (as  if  it  had  not  occurred),  but  only  if  the  performance  vesting  criteria  are  met  on  the  applicable 
measurement date.
Blackout Periods: Under the Share Compensation Plan, should the vesting of an RSU fall, or the term of an 
option expire on a date that falls, within a blackout period or within nine business days following the expiration 
of a blackout period, the vesting or expiration dated, as applicable, will be automatically extended to the tenth 
business day after the end of the blackout period.
Change of Control: The Share Compensation Plan provides that any unvested RSUs and any unvested options 
will vest at such time as determined by the CCGC such that RSU and option holders will be able to participate 
in a change of control transaction, including by surrendering such RSUs and options to the Corporation or a 
third party or exchanging such RSUs and options, for consideration in the form of cash and/or securities.
Transferability: RSUs awarded and options granted under the Share Compensation Plan are non-transferable 
other than in accordance with the Share Compensation Plan.
Amendment Provisions in the Share Compensation Plan: The Board may amend the Share Compensation Plan 
or any RSU or option at any time without the consent of any participants under the Share Compensation Plan 
provided that such amendment shall:
(a)
not adversely alter or impair any RSU previously awarded or any option previously granted except as 
permitted by the adjustment provisions of the Share Compensation Plan;
-19-
(b)
(c)
be  subject  to any  regulatory approvals  including,  where required, the approval  of  the  Toronto  Stock 
Exchange; and
be subject to shareholder approval, where required, by law or the requirements of the Toronto Stock 
Exchange, provided that shareholder approval shall not be required for the following amendments:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
amendments  of  a  “housekeeping  nature”, 
including  any  amendment  to  the  Share 
Compensation Plan or a RSU or option that is necessary to comply with applicable laws, tax or 
accounting provisions or the requirements of any regulatory authority or stock exchange and 
any amendment to the Share Compensation Plan or a RSU or option to correct or rectify any 
ambiguity,  defective  provision,  error  or  omission  therein,  including  any  amendment  to  any 
definitions therein;
amendments that are necessary for RSUs or options to qualify for favourable treatment under 
applicable tax laws;
a  change  to  the  vesting  provisions  of  any  RSU  or  any  option  (including  any  alteration, 
extension or acceleration thereof);
a change to the termination provisions of any option (for example, relating to termination of 
employment, resignation, retirement or death) that does not entail an extension beyond the 
original expiration date (as such date may be extended by virtue of a blackout period);
the  introduction  of  features  to  the  Share  Compensation  Plan  that  would  permit  the 
Corporation to, instead of issuing common shares from treasury upon the vesting of the RSUs, 
retain  a  broker  and  make  payments  for  the  benefit  of  participants  under  the  Share 
Compensation Plan to such broker who would purchase common shares through the facilities 
of the Toronto Stock Exchange for such persons;
the  introduction  of  features  to  the  Share  Compensation  Plan  that  would  permit  the 
Corporation to, instead of issuing common shares from treasury upon the vesting of the RSUs, 
make lump sum cash payments to participants under the RSU Plan;
the introduction of a cashless exercise feature payable in cash or securities, which provides 
for a full deduction of the number of underlying securities from the Share Compensation Plan 
reserve; and
(viii)
change the application of adjustment and change of control sections.
For  greater  certainty,  shareholder  approval  will  be  required  in  circumstances  where  an  amendment  to  the 
Share Compensation Plan would:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
increase the fixed maximum number of common shares issuable under the Share Compensation Plan, 
other than by virtue of the adjustment provisions in the Share Compensation Plan, or change from a 
fixed maximum number of common shares to a fixed maximum percentage of issued and outstanding 
common shares;
increase the limits referred to above under  “Restrictions on the Award of RSUs and Grant of Options”;
permit the award of RSUs to non-employee directors of the Corporation or a change in the limitations 
on grants of options to non-employee directors;
permit  RSUs  or  options  to  be  transferable  or  assignable  other  than  for  normal  estate  settlement 
purposes;
reduce  the  exercise  price  of  any  option  (including  any  cancellation  of  an  option  for  the  purpose  of 
reissuance of a new option at a lower exercise price to the same person);
-20-
(f)
extend the term of any option beyond the original term (except if such period is being extend by virtue 
of a blackout period); or
(g)
amend the amendment provisions in the Share Compensation Plan.
Amendments to the Share Compensation Plan: Effective November 9, 2010, the Board amended the Share 
Compensation Plan to update the tax and source deduction provisions relating to RSUs. Effective January 1, 
2011,  the  Corporation  is  required  to  withhold  taxes  from  the  taxable  benefit  on  the  issuance  of  common 
shares of the Corporation on the vesting of RSUs and exercise of options, even when there is no cash payment 
from  which  to  deduct  the  taxes.  The  Corporation  must  remit  the  required  withholding  taxes  with  its  other 
payroll deductions for the pay period in which the common shares of the Corporation are issued on the vesting 
of RSUs or exercise of options.  The new tax and source deduction provisions permit the the Corporation to 
take  such  reasonable  steps  for  the  deduction  and  withholding  of  any  taxes  and  other  required  source 
deductions  which  the  Corporation  is  required  by  any  law  or  regulation  of  any  governmental  authority 
whatsoever to remit in connection with the Share Compensation Plan, any RSUs, any options or any issuance 
of common shares.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Corporation may, at its discretion: (i) 
deduct  and  withhold  those  amounts  it  is  required  to  remit  from  any  cash  remuneration  or  other  amount 
payable to the participant, whether or not related to the Share Compensation Plan, the vesting of any RSUs, 
the  exercise  of  any  options  or  the  issue  of  any  common  shares;  (ii)  allow  the  participant  to  make  a  cash 
payment to the Corporation equal to the amount required to be remitted, which amount shall be remitted by 
the Corporation to the appropriate governmental authority for the account of the participant; (iii) in the case of 
RSUs, settle a portion of vested RSUs of a participant in cash equal to the amount the Corporation is required 
to remit, which amount shall be remitted by the Corporation to the appropriate governmental authority for the 
account of the participant; or (iv) sell, on behalf of the participant, that number of common shares to be issued 
upon the vesting of any RSUs or exercise of any options such that the amount withheld by the Corporation from 
the proceeds of such sale will be sufficient to satisfy any taxes required to be remitted by the Corporation for 
the account of the participant. Where the Corporation considers that the steps undertaken in connection with 
the foregoing result in inadequate withholding or a late remittance of taxes, the delivery of any common shares 
to be issued to a participant on vesting of any RSU or exercise of any option may be made conditional upon the 
participant  (or  other  person)  reimbursing  or  compensating  the  Corporation  or  making  arrangements 
satisfactory to the Corporation for the payment to it in a timely manner of all taxes required to be remitted for 
the account of the participant.
Also on November 9, 2010, the Board added a cashless exercise feature to the Share Compensation Plan in 
respect  of  options  to  facilitate  the  required  tax  and  source  deduction  remittances.  Under  this  feature,  a 
participant may elect a cashless exercise in a notice of exercise of options if the common shares issuable on 
the  exercise  are  to  be  immediately  sold.    In  such  case,  the  following  procedure  will  be  followed:  (a)  the 
participant will instruct a broker selected by the participant to sell through the stock exchange or market on 
which the common shares are listed or quoted, the common shares issuable on the exercise of options, as 
soon as possible at the then applicable bid price of the Common Shares; (b) on the trade date, the participant 
will deliver the exercise notice including details of the trades to the Corporation electing the cashless exercise 
and the Corporation will direct its registrar and transfer agent to issue a certificate in the name of the broker 
(or  as  the  broker  may  otherwise  direct)  for  the  number  of  common  shares  issued  on  the  exercise  of  the 
options, against payment by the broker to the Corporation of (i) the exercise price for such common shares; 
and  (ii)  the  amount  the  Corporation  determines,  in  its  discretion,  is  required  to  satisfy  the  Corporation’s 
withholding  tax  and  source  deduction  remittance  obligations  in  respect  of  the  exercise  of  the  options  and 
issuance of common shares; and (c) the broker will deliver to the participant the remaining proceeds of sale, 
net of the brokerage commission.
The above amendments to the Share Compensation Plan have been approved by the TSX and did not require 
shareholder approval.
Common Shares Reserved for Issuance under Other Plans:
(a)  Moydow  Transaction:  Pursuant  to  an  arrangement  agreement  dated  November  20,  2009  between  the 
Corporation and Moydow Mines International Inc. (“Moydow”), the Corporation agreed to acquire all of the 
issued  and  outstanding  common  shares  of  Moydow  (the  “Moydow  Shares”)  pursuant  to  a  plan  of 
arrangement. Under the terms of the plan of arrangement, Moydow shareholders were entitled to receive 
common  shares  of  the  Corporation  in  exchange  for  each  of  their  Moydow  Shares  on  the  basis  of  an
-21-
exchange ratio of 0.02863 common shares of the Corporation for each Moydow Share. An aggregate of 
3,300,000 Moydow Shares were issuable upon the exercise of outstanding options of Moydow (“Moydow 
Options”) on the closing date and as a result, on closing, up to a maximum of 94,470 common shares of 
the Corporation were reserved for issuance upon the exercise of the Moydow Options. Since the closing, 
90,177 Moydow Options have been exercised and therefore, as of the date hereof, up to a maximum of 
4,293  common  shares  of  the  Corporation  are  reserved  for  issuance  pursuant  to  Moydow  Options 
outstanding.
(b)  Gold Wheaton Transaction: Pursuant to an arrangement agreement dated January 5, 2011 between the 
Corporation and Gold Wheaton Gold Corp. (“Gold Wheaton”), the Corporation agreed to acquire all of the 
issued and outstanding common shares of Gold Wheaton (the “Gold Wheaton Shares”) pursuant to a plan 
of  arrangement.  Under  the  terms  of  the  arrangement  agreement,  holders  of  options  of  Gold  Wheaton 
(“Gold Wheaton Options”) are entitled to receive 0.1556 of a common share of the Corporation upon the 
exercise of each Gold Wheaton Option. An aggregate of 4,696,000 Gold Wheaton Shares were issuable 
upon the exercise of outstanding options of Gold Wheaton (“Gold Wheaton Options”) on the closing date 
and  as  a  result,  on  closing,  up  to  a  maximum  of  730,698  common  shares  of  the  Corporation  were 
reserved for issuance upon the exercise of the Gold Wheaton Options. Since the closing, 150,000 Gold 
Wheaton Options have been exercised for 23,340 common shares of the Corporation and therefore, as of 
the  date  hereof,  up  to  a  maximum  of  707,358  common  shares  of  the  Corporation  are  reserved  for 
issuance pursuant to Gold Wheaton Options outstanding.
Discretionary Awards
The Board has the ability to make further discretionary awards when considered appropriate. A discretionary 
award can consist of cash, options and/or RSUs and is a variable element of compensation that rewards an 
executive officer for extraordinary performance. Circumstances when such a discretionary one-time award may 
be considered by the Board would include, when in the Board’s judgment: (a) there has been achievement of 
exceptional  performance  or  outcomes  beyond  the  targeted  achievements  previously  contemplated  by  the 
Corporation’s  incentive  programs;  (b)  there  is  a  specific  need  to  recognize  a  change  in  role  or  retain  a  key 
executive officer; or (c) previously established base salaries and targeted incentives are not reflective of the 
current market.   
At its March 26, 2009 meeting, the Board approved an overall discretionary award of $1 million in recognition 
of the exceptional performance of management of the Corporation, including the recent closing of two major 
transactions, related successful investor relations efforts and the Company’s strong share price performance 
relative to the market.  The award was made in cash, as the Corporation did not yet have RSUs available to 
award. The Board instructed that the CEO was to receive $250,000 of the award and that the balance was to 
be distributed to all of the management team as agreed upon by the Chairman and the CEO. Each of the other 
five  executive  officers  received  $100,000  of  the  award  and  the  balance  was  awarded  to  other  members  of 
management. These amounts are included the Summary Compensation Table below for 2009.
At  its  December  14,  2010  meeting,  the  Board  approved  an  overall  discretionary  award  of  approximately 
$500,000 in recognition of another extraordinarily successful year and to assist in the final transition to share-
based compensation.  The Board instructed that the CEO was to receive $100,000 of the award or 25% of his 
base  salary  and  that  the  balance  was  to  be  distributed  to  all  of  the  management  team.  The  other  senior 
executive  officers  received  25%  of  their  base  salary  and  the  balance  was  awarded  to  other  members  of 
management. These amounts are included for the Named Executive Officers in the Summary Compensation 
Table below for 2010.
Perquisites and Personal Benefits
The Corporation provides credits for perquisites and benefits to its executive officers, which include health and 
insurance  benefits,  as  well  as  basic  fitness  club  memberships  and  parking.  These  basic  perquisites  and 
benefits  are  necessary  to  attract  and  retain  executive  officers.  Given  the  relatively  nominal  nature  of  these 
perquisites and benefits, they do not affect decisions about other elements of compensation. The Corporation 
has no pension plan or retirement fund matching programs.
-22-
Termination and Change of Control Benefits
Each Named Executive Officer of the Corporation also has termination and change of control provisions in his 
or  her  employment  agreement.  See  “Termination  and  Change  of  Control  Benefits”.  The  events  that  trigger 
payment  under  these  arrangements  were  initially  determined  through  or  related  to  the  negotiation  process 
relating to the IPO Team’s employment agreements. See “IPO Process”.
Performance Graph
The  common  shares  of  the  Corporation  commenced  trading  on  the  TSX  on  December  20,  2007.  The  graph 
below compares the percentage change in the Corporation’s total shareholder return on a C$100 investment 
in common shares to the total return of the S&P/TSX Global Gold Index, the S&P/TSX Composite Index and the 
S&P/TSX  Capped  Energy  Index  for  the  period  commencing  December  20,  2007  and  ending  December  31, 
2010. The graph below assumes that dividends have been reinvested.
Comparison of Cumulative Total Shareholder Return on a $100 Investment in Common Shares of the
Corporation and the relevant S&P/TSX Indices
Performance ‐ IPO to December 31, 2010
219
185
107
91
86
140
100
66
66
134
FNV
S&P/TSX Global  Gold CAD$
S&P/TSX Capped Energy
S&P/TSX Composite
98 
98
250
200
150
100
50
0
December 3, 2007
December 31, 2008
December 31, 2009
December 31, 2010
Summary Compensation Table
The  following  table  (presented  in  accordance  with  Form  51-102F6  – Statement  of  Executive Compensation 
(“Form  51-102F6”)  under  National  Instrument 51-102  –  Continuous  Disclosure  Obligations)  sets  forth  all 
direct  and  indirect  compensation  for,  or  in  connection  with,  services  provided  to  the  Corporation  and  its 
subsidiaries  for  the  financial  years  ended  December  31,  2010,  2009  and  2008  in  respect  of  the  CEO,  the 
Chief  Financial  Officer  and  the  other  three  most  highly  compensated  executive  officers  of  the  Corporation. 
Collectively, these individuals are referred to as the “Named Executive Officers”.
-23-
The  Corporation  is  required  to  report  compensation  using  the  same  currency  that  it  uses  in  its  financial 
statements which is U.S. dollars. Unless otherwise indicated, all dollar amounts in this Statement of Executive 
Compensation are in U.S. dollars. The Corporation’s share price on the TSX is denoted in Canadian dollars and 
in some circumstances, where appropriate, such amounts have not been converted to U.S. dollars.
Name and 
principal 
position
Year
Salary
($)
Share-based
Option-based
awards
($)
awards
($)
Non-equity
incentive plan 
compensation
($)
compensation(1)
compensation
All other
($)
Total
($)
Annual 
incentive
plans
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
$292,110(5) 
$511,137(8) 
$358,106
$2,511,706(12)
$131,450
2010(2) 
2009(6) 
2008(9)
$389,480 
$329,738 
$358,106
2010(2)
$155,086
$292,707(3)(4) 
$371,677 (7) 
Nil
$168,743(3)(4)
Long-
term
incentive
plans
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil
$17,208 
$15,932 
$11,056
$991,505 
$1,228,484 
$727,268(10)
$8,382
$2,975,367
$208,491(15) 
$30,016(16) 
$280,029(16)(17)
$270,991 
$567,516 
$2,646,082
$15,569 
$14,444 
$11,443
$13,544 
$12,611 
$10,593
$576,226 
$693,304 
$446,816
$574,212 
$640,788 
$445,966
$6,794
$2,306,791
2010 
2009 
2008
2010(2) 
2009(6) 
2008(9)
2010(2) 
2009(6) 
2008(9)
$62,500 
$250,000 
$249,653
$223,951 
$202,239 
$196,637
$223,951 
$197,842 
$196,637
2010(2)
$147,698
Nil(14) 
Nil(14) 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
$1,866,400(12)
Nil 
$287,500(8) 
$250,000
$168,743(3)(4) 
$217,667 (7) 
Nil
$168,754(3)(4) 
$215,786 (7) 
Nil
$145,104(3)(4)
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
$167,963 
$258,954(8) 
$238,736
$167,963 
$214,549(8) 
$238,736
$1,883,780(12)
$123,416
David 
Harquail 
President 
and Chief 
Executive 
Officer
Sandip Rana 
Chief 
Financial 
Officer(11)
Alex Morrison 
Chief 
Financial 
Officer(13)
Geoff 
Waterman 
Chief 
Operating 
Officer
Paul Brink 
Senior Vice 
President, 
Business 
Develop-
ment
Jacqueline A. 
Jones 
Chief Legal 
Officer and 
Corporate 
Secretary(18)
Notes
(1)
Includes all perquisites, including health and insurance benefits in all cases, $100 or less per month for fitness club memberships in 
some cases and parking costs in some cases.
(2)  Salary and other cash compensation awarded to, earned by, paid to, or payable was payable in Canadian dollars. The rate used for 
currency translation into U.S. dollars (the Corporation’s reporting currency) was 0.9737, which was the average rate used for currency 
translation for the Corporation’s expenses for the year ended December 31, 2010. Base salary for the Named Executive Officers was 
as  follows:  Mr.  Harquail  C$400,000,  Mr.  Rana  C$230,000,  Mr.  Waterman  C$230,000,  Mr.  Brink  C$230,000  and  Ms.  Jones 
C$225,000.
(3)  Represents time-based RSUs awarded on May 22, 2010 in respect of 2010 performance which will vest in respect of 33 1/3 % of the 
common shares subject to RSUs on the first day after each of the first three anniversaries of the award date of such RSUs. The value 
of these share-based awards was calculated using the 5-day weighted average price on the TSX prior to the award date of May 22, 
2010, which  was C$31.39 per share. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 0.9461, which was the Bank of 
Canada noon rate on May 21, 2010.
(4)  Represents performance-based RSUs awarded on December 23, 2010 which will vest on December 23, 2013 upon satisfaction of 
certain performance criteria. The value of the share-based awards was calculated using the 5-day weighted average price on the TSX 
prior to the award date of December 23, 2010, which was C$33.20 per share. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars 
was 0.9906, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 23, 2010.
-24-
(5)
Includes  a  targeted  cash  bonus  of  50%  of  base  salary  and  a  discretionary  award  averaging  25%  of  base  salary  approved  on 
December  14,  2010  by  the  Board  totalling  in  each  case  C$300,000  for  the  CEO,  C$135,000  for  the  current  the  Chief  Financial 
Officer, C$172,500 for the Chief Operating Officer, C$172,500 for the Senior Vice President, Business Development and C$126,750 
for the Chief Legal Officer. See “Compensation Discussion and Analysis – Elements of Compensation – Discretionary Awards”.
(6)  Salary and other cash compensation awarded to, earned by, paid to, or payable was payable in Canadian dollars. The rate used for 
currency translation into U.S. dollars (the Corporation’s reporting currency) was 0.8793, which was the average rate used for currency 
translation for the Corporation’s expenses for the year ended December 31, 2009. Base salary for the Named Executive Officers was 
as follows: Mr. Harquail C$375,000, Mr. Waterman C$230,000 and Mr. Brink C$225,000.
(7)  Represents performance-based RSUs awarded on November 26, 2009 which will vest on November 26, 2012 upon satisfaction of 
certain performance criteria. The value of these share-based awards was calculated using the 5-day weighted average price on the 
TSX prior to the award date of November 26, 2009, which was C$29.96 per share. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. 
dollars was 0.9438, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on November 26, 2009. Also represents time-based RSUs awarded on 
May 22, 2010 in respect of 2009 performance which will vest in respect of 33 1/3 % of the common shares subject to RSUs on the 
first  day  after  each  of  the  first  three  anniversaries  of  the  award  date  of  such  RSUs.  The  value  of  these  share-based  awards  was 
calculated  using  the  5-day  weighted  average  price  on  the  TSX  prior  to  the  award  date  of  May  22,  2010,  which  was  C$31.39  per 
share.  The  rate  used  for  currency  translation  into  U.S.  dollars was  0.9461,  which  was  the  Bank  of  Canada  noon  rate  on  May  21, 
2010. 
Includes a discretionary award made on March 26, 2009 by the Board of C$250,000 for the CEO and C$100,000 for each of the 
other Named Executive Officers in 2009. See “Compensation Discussion and Analysis – Elements of Compensation – Discretionary 
Awards”.
(8)
(9)  Salary and other cash compensation awarded to, earned by, paid to, or payable was payable in Canadian dollars. The rate used for 
currency translation into U.S. dollars (the Corporation’s reporting currency) was 0.9432, which was the average rate used for currency 
translation for the Corporation’s expenses for the year ended December 31, 2008. Base salary for the Named Executive Officers was 
as follows: Mr. Harquail C$375,000, Mr. Waterman C$200,000 and Mr. Brink C$200,000.
(10)  The  Corporation  reimbursed  Mr.  Harquail  for  expenses  of  $34,799  incurred  in  connection  with  his  relocation  to  the  Corporation’s 
head  office  in  Toronto.  This  reimbursement  was  not  considered  a  perquisite  as  it  was  integrally  and  directly  related  to  the 
performance of his duties.
(11)  Mr. Rana joined effective April 22, 2010. 
(12)  Value of stock options granted at inception of employment.  
(13)  Mr. Morrison resigned effective March 31, 2010. 
(14)  Share-based awards were cancelled upon Mr. Morrison’s resignation.   
(15)  Includes $200,000 lump sum payment and cost of benefits related to U.S. health care benefits.   
(16)  Includes the cost of benefits related to U.S. health care benefits.  
(17)  Includes value of one-time signing bonus of $250,000. 
(18)  Ms. Jones joined effective April 29, 2010.
Discussion of Summary Compensation Table
Additional  factors  necessary  to  understand  the  information  disclosed  in  the  Summary  Compensation  Table 
above  include  the  terms  of  each  Named  Executive  Officer’s  employment  agreement  and  executive  officers’ 
equity investment requirements.
Employment Agreements
As a result of the Corporation’s Equity Ownership Policy for Executives, the adoption of the RSU Plan in 2009 
and  consequent  changes  to  the  Corporation’s  annual  and  long-term  incentives  and  the  adoption  of  a  new 
Retirement Policy for Executives in 2010, in 2010 the CCGC determined that it would be appropriate for the 
Named Executive Officers’ initial employment agreements to be updated to be consistent with these policies 
and plans. In 2010, the CCGC also considered the recommendations of various ratings agencies with respect 
to the CEO being required to hold securities upon departure from the Corporation and the level of termination 
and change of control benefits for the CEO.  This resulted in negotiating a new employment agreement with the 
CEO in early 2010 and in negotiating new employment agreements with the other existing Named Executive 
Officers during the remainder of 2010.
David  Harquail  -  The  Corporation  originally  entered  into  an  employment  agreement  effective  December  20, 
2007, for Mr. Harquail, as President and CEO, to receive a base salary of C$375,000 per year, subject to an 
annual review by the CCGC, which may increase such base salary in its sole discretion. The Corporation agreed 
to  reimburse  Mr.  Harquail  for  all  reasonable  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with  his  relocation  to  the 
Corporation’s head office in Toronto. Mr. Harquail was also eligible for a target annual bonus of 100% of his 
base  salary,  based  on  satisfaction  of  performance  criteria  set  by  the  CCGC  for  each  year.  In  addition,  Mr. 
Harquail was eligible to participate in the Option Plan. Mr. Harquail received an initial grant of 500,000 options 
in 2007 in accordance with his employment agreement.
The Corporation entered into a new employment agreement effective January 1, 2010 with Mr. Harquail which 
is substantially similar to his original employment agreement other than as further described herein. Under the
-25-
terms  of  the  new  employment  agreement,  Mr.  Harquail  is  to  receive  a  base  salary  of  C$400,000  per  year, 
subject  to  an  annual  review  by  the  CCGC  which  may  increase  such  base  salary  in  its  sole  discretion.  Mr. 
Harquail  is  required  to  hold  an  amount  of  securities  in  accordance  with  the  Corporation’s  Equity  Ownership 
Policy  for  Executives  and  has  agreed  to  hold  for  one  year  following  departure  from  the  Corporation  the 
securities  he  has  received  from  the  Corporation  in  the  then  most  recent  three  year  period  under  the 
Corporation’s equity  incentive compensation plans. In addition, rather than having a specified  target annual 
bonus, Mr. Harquail is entitled to receive a performance-based bonus based on satisfaction of performance 
criteria set by the CCGC for each year which may be payable in cash and/or securities of the Corporation and 
on a deferred basis, such terms to be determined in the sole discretion of the Board or CCGC consistent with 
the Corporation’s incentive compensation plans.
Sandip Rana - The Corporation entered into an employment agreement effective April 22, 2010, for Mr. Rana, 
as Chief Financial Officer, to receive a base salary of C$230,000 per year, subject to an annual review by the 
CCGC, which may increase such base salary in its sole discretion. Mr. Rana is required to hold an amount of 
securities in accordance with the Corporation’s Equity Ownership Policy for Executives. Mr. Rana is entitled to 
receive a performance-based bonus based on satisfaction of performance criteria set by the CCGC for each 
year which may be payable in cash and/or securities of the Corporation and on a deferred basis, such terms to 
be  determined  in  the  sole  discretion  of  the  Board  or  CCGC  consistent  with  the  Corporation’s  incentive 
compensation plans. In addition, Mr. Rana is eligible to participate in the Share Compensation Plan. Mr. Rana 
received an initial grant of 200,000 options in 2010 in accordance with his employment agreement. In respect 
of fiscal 2010, notwithstanding the date of his employment agreement, Mr. Rana is entitled to a bonus as if he 
had  made  a  full  year  contribution  for  both  cash  and  share  compensation  under  the  Corporation’s  incentive 
compensation plans and the Share Compensation Plan.
Alex  Morrison  -  The  Corporation  entered  into  an  employment  agreement  effective  January  4,  2008,  for  Mr. 
Morrison, as Chief Financial Officer, to receive a base salary of $250,000 per year, subject to an annual review 
by the CCGC, which could increase such base salary in its sole discretion. Under this agreement, Mr. Morrison 
was also eligible for a target annual bonus of 100% of his base salary, based on satisfaction of performance 
criteria set by the CCGC for each year. In addition, Mr. Morrison was eligible to participate in the Option Plan. 
Mr.  Morrison  received  an  initial  grant  of  400,000  options  in  2008  in  accordance  with  his  employment 
agreement. The Corporation also paid Mr. Morrison a signing bonus in the aggregate of $250,000 payable in a 
series of instalments over his first full year of employment.
Mr.  Morrison  resigned  effective  March  31,  2010  and  was  succeeded  by  Mr.  Sandip  Rana.  Pursuant  to  the 
terms of a termination agreement, the Corporation paid Mr. Morrison a lump sum payment of $200,000, all 
unvested RSUs were terminated and cancelled, vested options became exercisable until March 31, 2011 and, 
subject to certain conditions being satisfied, 40,000 remaining unvested options were to vest on January 3, 
2011 and be exercisable until January 3, 2012.
Geoff Waterman - The Corporation originally entered into an employment agreement effective December 20, 
2007, for Mr. Waterman, as Chief Operating Officer, to receive a base salary of C$200,000 per year, subject to 
an annual review by the CCGC, which may increase such base salary in its sole discretion. For 2009, this base 
salary was amended to C$230,000. Under this agreement, Mr. Waterman was also eligible for a target annual 
bonus of 100% of his base salary, based on satisfaction of performance criteria set by the CCGC for each year. 
In addition, Mr. Waterman was eligible to participate in the Option Plan. Mr. Waterman received an initial grant 
of 350,000 options in 2007 in accordance with his employment agreement.
The Corporation entered into a new employment agreement effective May 1, 2010 with Mr. Waterman which is 
substantially similar to his original employment agreement other than as further described herein. Under the 
terms  of  the  new  employment  agreement,  Mr.  Waterman  is  required  to  hold  an  amount  of  securities  in 
accordance  with  the  Corporation’s  Equity  Ownership  Policy  for  Executives.  In  addition,  rather  than  having  a 
specified  target  annual  bonus,  Mr.  Waterman  is  entitled  to  receive  a  performance-based  bonus  based  on 
satisfaction  of  performance  criteria  set  by  the  CCGC  for  each  year  which  may  be  payable  in  cash  and/or 
securities of the Corporation and on a deferred basis, such terms to be determined in the sole discretion of the 
Board or CCGC consistent with the Corporation’s incentive compensation plans.
Paul Brink - The Corporation originally entered into an employment agreement effective December 20, 2007, 
for Mr. Brink, as Senior Vice President, Business Development, to receive a base salary of C$200,000 per year, 
subject to an annual review by the CCGC, which may increase such base salary in its sole discretion. For 2009,
-26-
this  base  salary  was  amended  to  C$225,000  and  for  2010  was  amended  to  C$230,000.  Under  this 
agreement,  Mr.  Brink  was  also  eligible  for  a  target  annual  bonus  of  100%  of  his  base  salary,  based  on 
satisfaction  of  performance  criteria  set  by  the  CCGC  for  each  year.  In  addition,  Mr.  Brink  was  eligible  to 
participate in the Option Plan. Mr. Brink received an initial grant of 225,000 options in 2007 in accordance 
with his employment agreement.
The  Corporation  entered  into  a  new  employment  agreement  effective  May  1,  2010  with  Mr.  Brink  which  is 
substantially similar to his original employment agreement other than as further described herein. Under the 
terms of the new employment agreement, Mr. Brink is required to hold an amount of securities in accordance 
with the Corporation’s Equity Ownership Policy for Executives. In addition, rather than having a specified target 
annual  bonus,  Mr.  Brink  is  entitled  to  receive  a  performance-based  bonus  based  on  satisfaction  of 
performance  criteria  set  by  the  CCGC  for  each  year  which  may  be  payable  in  cash  and/or  securities  of  the 
Corporation and on a deferred basis, such terms to be determined in the sole discretion of the Board or CCGC 
consistent with the Corporation’s incentive compensation plans.
Jacqueline A. Jones - The Corporation entered into an employment agreement effective April 29, 2010, for Ms. 
Jones, as Chief Legal Officer & Corporate Secretary, to receive a base salary of C$225,000 per year, subject to 
an  annual  review  by  the  CCGC,  which  may  increase  such  base  salary  in  its  sole  discretion.  Ms.  Jones  is 
required  to  hold  an  amount  of  securities  in  accordance  with  the  Corporation’s  Equity  Ownership  Policy  for 
Executives. Ms. Jones is entitled to receive a performance-based bonus based on satisfaction of performance 
criteria set by the CCGC for each year which may be payable in cash and/or securities of the Corporation and 
on a deferred basis, such terms to be determined in the sole discretion of the Board or CCGC consistent with 
the Corporation’s incentive compensation plans. In addition, Ms. Jones is eligible to participate in the Share 
Compensation Plan. Ms. Jones received an initial grant of 150,000 options in 2010 in accordance with her 
employment agreement.
For information as to the termination provisions and termination and change of control benefits provided in the 
above  employment  agreements,  including  changes  to  certain  of  the  Named  Executive  Officers’  employment 
agreements, see “Termination and Change of Control Benefits” below.
Executives’ Equity Investment Requirements
With a view to aligning the interests of executive officers with those of shareholders, each executive officer of 
the Corporation is required to hold a minimum equity investment in the Corporation equivalent in value to a 
multiple  of  the  executive  officer’s  then  current  base  salary,  depending  on  the  executive  officer’s  level  of 
responsibility.  The  requirement  is  to  be  satisfied  in  the  form  of  common  shares  of  the  Corporation.  Each 
executive officer has a period of three years from the date on which he or she commenced employment with 
the Corporation as an executive officer, to satisfy the minimum equity investment requirement.
Under the Equity Ownership Policy for Executive Officers, if an executive officer has not achieved the minimum 
equity  investment  at  the  time  of  any  options  being  exercised  by  the  executive  officer,  he  or  she  shall  be 
required to continue to  hold at least 50% or such lesser number of the common shares issuable upon the 
exercise  of  such  options  as  required  to  achieve  the  minimum  equity  ownership  requirements  and  if  an 
executive  officer  has  not  achieved  the  minimum  equity  investment  at  the  time  of  any  RSUs  vesting,  the 
executive officer will be required to continue to hold at least 50% or such lesser number of the common shares 
issuable upon the RSUs vesting required to achieve the minimum equity ownership requirements.
-27-
The following table summarizes the equity investment in the Corporation of each Named Executive Officer as at 
March 31, 2011.
Equity
Ownership 
as at March 
31, 2011
Equity
Ownership 
as at March 
31, 2010
Net
Changes in
Equity
Ownership
Value of  
Equity
Investment at
March 31, 
2011(1)(2)
Additional Required
Investment
1,224,000
1,224,000
Nil
C$43,562,160
Nil
Nil
N/A
N/A
Nil
C$460,000
100,000
100,000
175,000
175,000
Nil
Nil
C$3,559,000
C$6,228,250
Nil
Nil
Nil
N/A
N/A
Nil
C$460,000
Ownership 
Requirement
3 times /
C$1,200,000
2 times / 
C$460,000
2 times / 
C$460,000
2 times / 
C$460,000
2 times / 
C$460,000
Name
David Harquail
Sandip Rana
Geoff Waterman
Paul Brink
Jacqueline A. Jones
Notes
(1)  The closing price of the common shares on the TSX on March 31, 2011 was C$35.59 per share.
Other Information
There were no repricings during the financial year ended December 31, 2010. During the financial year ended 
December  31,  2010,  changes  were  made  to  the  tax  and  source  deductions  provisions  in  the  Share 
Compensation Plan and a cashless exercise feature was added to the Share Compensation Plan in respect of 
options  to  facilitate  the  required  tax  and source  deduction  remittances.  See “Compensation  Discussion  and 
Analysis – Elements of Compensation – Long-Term Incentives – Share Compensation Plan – Amendments to 
Share Compensation Plan”.
The share-based awards reported in the Summary Compensation Table above are for RSUs awarded pursuant 
to the RSU Plan and the Share Compensation Plan. During 2009, an aggregate of 34,713 performance-based 
RSUs  were  awarded  to  the  Named  Executive  Officers,  which  will  vest  on  November  26,  2012  upon  the 
satisfaction of certain performance criteria. During 2010, an aggregate of 29,653 RSUs were awarded to the 
Named  Executive  Officers,  being  19,876  performance-based  RSUs  which  will  vest  on  December  23,  2013 
upon satisfaction of certain performance criteria and 6,625 time-based RSUs which will vest in respect of 33 
1/3 % of the common shares subject to RSUs on the first day after each of the first three anniversaries of the 
award date of such RSUs (being May 22, 2010).
The only awards of options reported in the Summary Compensation Table above are as follows: (i) an award of 
stock options to Sandip Rana pursuant to his employment agreement in 2010 (an aggregate of 200,000 stock 
options were awarded, at an exercise price of C$31.39, vesting over a three-year period); (ii) an award of stock 
options  to  Jacqueline  A.  Jones  pursuant  to  her  employment  agreement  in  2010  (an  aggregate  of  150,000 
stock  options  were  awarded,  at  an  exercise  price  of  C$31.39,  vesting  over  a  three-year  period);  and  (iii)  an 
award  of  stock  options  to  Alex  Morrison  pursuant  to  his  employment  agreement  in  2008  (an  aggregate  of 
400,000 stock options were awarded, at an exercise price of C$15.61, vesting over a three-year period).
An aggregate of 350,000 options were granted to Named Executive Officers in 2010 and, therefore, the option 
grant rate in 2010 as a percentage of the number of common shares outstanding was 0.31%.
The  total  of  cost  of  Named  Executive  Officer  compensation  in  2010  as  a  percentage  of  free  cash  flow  was 
4.22% and of market performance plus dividends (as a measure of shareholder returns) was 1.16%.
-28-
Incentive Plan Awards
Outstanding Option-Based Awards and Share-Based Awards
The following table (presented in accordance with Form 51-102F6) sets forth for each Named Executive Officer 
all  awards  outstanding  at  the  end  of  the  most  recently  completed  financial  year,  including  awards  granted 
before the most recently completed financial year.
Name
Option-based Awards
Share-based Awards
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised
options
(#)
Option 
exercise
price 
($)
Option
expiration
date
Value of
unexercised 
in-the-money
options(1)
($)
Number of 
shares or 
units of
shares that 
have not 
vested
(#)
Market or
payout value
of share- 
based
awards that
have not 
vested
($)
David Harquail
500,000(2)
C$15.20
Dec. 1, 2017
$9,078,762
Sandip Rana
200,000(9)
C$31.39
May 22, 2020
$376,020
Alex Morrison(10) 
Geoff Waterman
40,000(11) 
350,000(2)
C$15.61 
C$15.20
Jan. 3, 2012(12) 
Dec. 1, 2017
$709,806 
$6,355,133
Paul Brink
187,500(2)
C$15.20
Dec. 1, 2017
$2,723,629
150,000(9)
C$31.39
May 22, 2020
$282,015
Jacqueline A. 
Jones 
 
Notes
10,000(3) 
6,179(5) 
6,024(7) 
1,847(5) 
3,463(7)
Nil
5,758(3) 
3,694(5) 
3,463(7) 
5,758(3) 
3,631(5) 
3,643(7) 
1,051(5) 
3,463(7)
$334,396(4) 
$206,623(6) 
$201,440(8) 
$61,763(6) 
$115,801(8)
Nil
$192,545(4) 
$123,526(6) 
$115,801(8) 
$192,545(4) 
$121,419(6) 
$121,820(8) 
$35,145(6) 
$115,801(8)
(1)  The value of unexercised options was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on December 31, 2010, 
which  was  C$33.26  per  share,  less  the  exercise  price  of  the  options.  The  rate  used  for  currency  translation  into  U.S.  dollars  was 
1.0054, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 31, 2010.
(2)  These options vest over a three-year period from their grant date of December 1, 2007. 
(3)  Represents  performance-based  RSUs  awarded  on  November  26,  2009,  which  shall  vest  on  November  26,  2012  upon  the
satisfaction of certain performance criteria.
(4)   The market or payout value as at December 31, 2010 was calculated using the closing price on the TSX of C$33.26 per share and 
the Bank of Canada noon rate on that day of 1.0054. The grant date fair value (i.e. the value as of the award date of November 26, 
2009)  was  as  follows:  Mr.  Harquail  -  $282,762,  Mr.  Waterman  -  $162,815  and  Mr.  Brink  -  $162,815,  using  the  5-day  weighted 
average price on the TSX prior to such award date, which was C$29.96 per share, and the Bank of Canada noon rate of 0.9438 on 
such award date.
(5)  Represents time-based RSUs awarded on May 22, 2010, which shall vest in respect 33 1/3 % of the common shares subject to RSUs
on the first day after each of the first three anniversaries of the award date of such RSUs.
(6)   The market or payout value as at December 31, 2010 was calculated using the closing price on the TSX of C$33.26 per share and 
the Bank of Canada noon rate on that day of 1.0054. The grant date fair value (i.e. the value as of the award date of May 22, 2010) 
was  as  follows:  Mr.  Harquail  -  $183,504,  Mr.  Rana  -  $54,852,  Mr.  Waterman  -  $171,002,  Mr.  Brink  -  $171,002  and  Ms.  Jones  - 
$31,213, using the 5-day weighted average price on the TSX prior to such award date, which was C$31.39 per share, and the Bank 
of Canada noon rate of 0.9461 on May 21, 2010.
(7)  Represents  performance-based  RSUs  awarded  on  December  23,  2010,  which  shall  vest  on  December  23,  2013  upon  the
satisfaction of certain performance criteria.
(8)   The market or payout value as at December 31, 2010 was calculated using the closing price on the TSX of C$33.26 per share and 
the Bank of Canada noon rate on that day of 1.0054. The grant date fair value (i.e. the value as of the award date of December 23, 
2010) was as follows: Mr.  Harquail - $198,117, Mr. Rana - $113,891, Mr. Waterman - $113,891, Mr. Brink - $119,811 and Ms. 
Jones - $113,891, using the 5-day weighted average price on the TSX prior to such award date, which was C$33.20 per share, and 
the Bank of Canada noon rate of 0.9906 on such award date.
(9)  These options vest over a three-year period from their grant date of May 22, 2010.  
(10)  Mr. Morrison resigned effective March 31, 2010. 
(11)  These options vest over a three-year period from their grant date of January 3, 2008. 
(12)  Pursuant to a termination agreement these options are only exercisable until January 3, 2012.
-29-
Incentive Plan Awards – Value Vested or Earned During the Year
The  following table  (presented  in  accordance  with  Form  51-102F6) sets  forth  details  of  the  value  vested  or 
earned during the most recently completed financial year for each incentive plan award.
Name
David Harquail 
Sandip Rana 
Alex Morrison 
Geoff Waterman 
Paul Brink 
Jacqueline A. Jones 
 
Notes
Option-based awards - 
Value vested during
the year
($)
Share-based awards - 
Value vested during
the year
($)(3)
Non-equity incentive 
plan compensation - 
Value earned during
the year
($)
$3,090,717(1)
Nil
$1,656,107(2) 
$2,163,502(1) 
$1,390,823(1)
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
$292,110 
$131,450
Nil
$167,963 
$167,963 
$123,416
(1)  The value vested during the year of option-based awards was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on 
December  2,  2010  (the  first  trading  day  following  the  vesting  date),  which  was  C$33.83  per  share,  less  the  exercise  price  of  the 
options. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 0.9954, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 
2, 2010.
(2)  The value vested during the year of option-based awards was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on 
January 4, 2010 (the first trading day following the vesting date), which was C$28.50 per share, less the exercise price of the options. 
The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 0.9636, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on January 4, 2010.
(3)  Performance-based  RSUs  were  first  awarded  on  November  26,  2009,  but  these  will  only  vest  on  November  26,  2012  upon 
satisfaction of certain performance criteria. Time-based RSUs were first awarded on May 22, 2010, but these will only vest in respect 
of 33 1/3 % of the common shares subject to RSUs on the first day after each of the first three anniversaries of the award date of 
such RSUs. Further performance-based RSUs were awarded on December 23, 2010, but these will only vest on December 23, 2013 
upon satisfaction of certain performance criteria. As a result, no RSUs vested during the year.
Aggregated Option Exercises During the Most Recently Completed Financial Year and Financial Year-
End Option Values
The following table sets forth details of the exercise of options during the most recently completed financial 
year  by  each  Named  Executive  Officer  and  the  financial  year-end  value  of  unexercised  options  on  an 
aggregated basis.
Name
David Harquail 
Sandip Rana 
Alex Morrison 
Geoff Waterman 
Paul Brink 
Jacqueline A. Jones
Notes
Securities Acquired on
Exercise
(#)
Aggregate Value
Realized
($)
Unexercised Options at
Financial Year-End
(#)
Exercisable/ 
Unexercisable
Nil 
Nil
133,333
Nil
37,500
Nil
Nil 
Nil
$1,480,078
Nil
C$708,825
Nil
500,000/Nil 
Nil/200,000 
Nil/40,000 
350,000/Nil 
150,000/Nil 
Nil/150,000
Value of Unexercised In-
the-Money Options at
Financial Year-End
($)(1)
Exercisable/ 
Unexercisable 
$9,078,762/Nil 
Nil/$376,020 
Nil/$709,806 
$6,355,133/Nil 
$2,723,629/Nil 
Nil/$282,015
(1)  The value of unexercised options was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on December 31, 2010, 
which was C$33.26  per share, less the exercise price of the options. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 
1.0054, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 31, 2010.
-30-
Discussion of Incentive Plan Awards
The significant terms of all plan-based awards, including non-equity incentive plan awards, issued or vested, or 
under which options have been exercised, during the year, or outstanding at year end, are set out above in the 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis. An aggregate of 170,833 outstanding stock options held by Named 
Executive Officers were exercised during the financial year ended December 31, 2010.
As indicated above, for 2011, annual incentives will consist of an award of both a cash bonus and time-based 
RSUs, which in the aggregate will be targeted at 100% of base salary. Long-term incentives will consist of an 
award of performance-based RSUs, which will be targeted at 50% of base salary. For illustrative purposes, if all 
pre-set  corporate  and  personal  objectives  for  2011  are  met,  in  2011  cash  bonuses,  time-based  RSUs  and 
performance-based RSUs will be awarded as follows:
Name
Potential 2011 Cash Bonus
Potential 2011 Time-Based
RSUs
David Harquail 
Sandip Rana 
Geoff Waterman 
Paul Brink 
Jacqueline A. Jones
C$225,000 
C$125,000 
C$127,500 
C$150,000 
C$125,000
C$225,000 
C$125,000 
C$127,500 
C$150,000 
C$125,000
Potential 2011 Performance-
Based RSUs 
C$225,000 
C$125,000 
C$127,500 
C$150,000 
C$125,000
Termination and Change of Control Benefits
Each of the Named Executive Officers has entered into an employment agreement with the Corporation that 
provides  for  payments  at,  following  or  in  connection  with  a  termination  (whether  voluntary,  involuntary  or 
constructive),  resignation,  retirement,  a  change  of  control  of  the  Corporation  or  a  change  in  such  Named 
Executive Officers’ responsibilities.
If a Named Executive Officer is terminated without just cause or resigns for “good reason” as defined in the 
applicable employment agreement (see below), the individual will be entitled to a lump sum payment equal to 
his or her base salary at the time of termination or resignation, as applicable, for the  “compensation period” 
(see below). The individual will also be entitled to continue participating in the Corporation’s benefit plans for 
the compensation period. If the Corporation is unable to continue the individual’s participation in one or more 
of its benefit plans, the Corporation is required to pay an amount equal to the premium cost or contributions 
that would have otherwise been made for the same period of time.
Under  the  terms  of  the  Named  Executive  Officers’  employment  agreements,  the  concept  of  resignation  for 
“good reason” applies in circumstances unrelated to a “change of control” (see below). The concept of “good 
reason” generally includes:
(a)  changes  in  a  Named  Executive  Officer’s  duties  or  status,  including  a  material  change  to  the  Named
Executive Officer’s reporting relationship;
(b)  a change in aggregate compensation which would include annual base salary and the Named Executive 
Officer’s aggregate incentive compensation or aggregate target incentive compensation that would have 
the  effect  of  reducing  aggregate  compensation  by  35%  or  more,  including  any  change  in  performance 
metrics that would produce such a result;
(c)  failure by the Corporation to continue to provide benefits at least as favourable as those initially provided
or the taking of any action that would materially reduce any such benefits;
(d)  the Corporation requiring the Named Executive Officer to relocate; and
(e)  failure by the Corporation to obtain a satisfactory agreement from a successor corporation to assume and
agree to perform the employment agreement.
-31-
For  illustrative  purposes,  in  accordance  with  Form  51-102F6,  if  a  Named  Executive  Officer  had  been 
terminated  without  just  cause  or  had  resigned  for  “good  reason”  on  December  31,  2010,  the  applicable 
compensation period (relevant for both base salary and continued participation in the Corporation’s benefits 
plans), the amounts payable and the value of options vested as of such date would have been as follows:
Name
Compensation
period
Aggregate amount 
payable for base
salary
David Harquail 
Sandip Rana 
Geoff Waterman 
Paul Brink 
Jacqueline A. Jones
24 months 
24 months 
24 months 
24 months 
24 months
C$800,000 
C$460,000 
C$460,000 
C$460,000 
C$450,000
Notes
Aggregate amount
Option-based awards -
payable for
perquisites and
Value vested(2)
($)
benefits(1) 
$34,416 
$16,764 
$31,138 
$27,088 
$13,588
$9,078,762
Nil
$6,355,133 
$2,723,629
Nil
(1)  The actual amounts of perquisites for all Named Executive Officers have been disclosed in the Summary Compensation Table and it
has been assumed that payment of these amounts would continue for the compensation period.
(2)  The value of stock options vested as of December 31, 2010 was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX 
on December 31, 2010, which was C$33.26 per share, less the exercise price of the options. The rate used for currency translation 
into U.S. dollars was 1.0054, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 31, 2010.
The Named Executive Officers have “change of control” provisions in their applicable employment agreements. 
A  “change  of  control”  is  defined  as:  (i)  the  acquisition  of  control  in  law  (whether  by  sale,  transfer,  merger, 
consolidation  or  otherwise)  of  the  Corporation  by  a  third  party  (that  is,  the  acquisition  of  control  of  at  least 
50.1%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  voting  shares  of  the  Corporation)  or  (ii)  the  sale,  transfer  or  other 
disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of the Corporation to a third party.
In the event that a “change of control” occurs and the Named Executive Officer is terminated without cause or 
resigns for “good reason” within the twelve month period following the “change of control”, the Corporation is 
required to provide to the Named Executive Officer a lump sum payment of a multiple of the Named Executive 
Officer’s base salary and bonus (see below) at the time of termination or resignation, as applicable. For this 
purpose, the term bonus means the sum of: (i) the cash bonus awarded for performance during the applicable 
calendar year; (ii) the dollar value of the time-based RSUs at the time of their award for the applicable calendar 
year’s  performance,  if  awarded;  and  (iii)  the  value  of  the  performance-based  RSUs  awarded  for  the  period 
beginning in the applicable calendar year. The Corporation is also required to continue the Named Executive 
Officer’s  benefits  coverage  for  a  specified  period  (see  below).  If  the  Corporation  is  unable  to  continue  the 
Named Executive Officer’s participation in one or more of its benefit plans, the Corporation is required to pay 
an  amount  equal  to  the  premium  cost  or contributions that  would  have  otherwise been  made  for  the  same 
period  of  time.  In  addition,  under  the  terms  of  the  original  Option  Plan,  all  options  issued  thereunder  vest 
immediately upon a “change of control” (as defined in the Option Plan) and Named Executive Officers will have 
30 days after receiving notice thereof to exercise their options. Under the terms of the Share Compensation 
Plan, all unvested RSUs and all options (whether or not currently exercisable) will vest or become exercisable, 
as applicable, at such time as determined by the CCGC in its sole discretion such that the Named Executive 
Officers will be able to participate in a change of control transaction, including by surrendering such RSUS or 
options,  for  consideration  in  the  form  of  cash  and/or  securities,  to  be  determined  by  the  CCGC  in  its  sole 
discretion.
For  illustrative  purposes,  in  accordance  with  Form  51-102F6,  if  a  Named  Executive  Officer  had  been 
terminated without just cause or had resigned for “good reason” on December 31, 2010 following a “change 
of control”, the applicable multiple, the amount payable based on base salary and bonus, the specified period 
for  benefits,  the  amount  payable  for  benefits,  the  value  of  options  vested  as  of  such  date  (assuming 
accelerated vesting of all options as a result of the change of control) and the value of RSUs vested as of such 
date (assuming accelerated vesting of all RSUs (both time-based and performance-based) as a result of the 
change of control) would have been as follows:
-32-
Name
Multiple
Compensation
period
Aggregate amount
payable for
perquisites and
benefits(1)
Option-based
awards -
Value vested(2)
($)
Share-based
awards -
Value vested(3)
Aggregate
amount payable 
for base salary
and bonus
David Harquail
2 times
$1,948,594
Sandip Rana
1.5 times
$786,216
Geoff Waterman
1.5 times
$840,986
Paul Brink
1.5 times
$841,002
Jacqueline A. Jones
1.5 times
$731,405
24 months
18 months
18 months
18 months
18 months
$34,416
$12,573
$23,353
$20,316
$10,191
$9,078,762
$742,460
$376,020
$177,564
$6,355,133
$431,872
$2,723,629
$429,766
$282,015
$150,946
Notes
(1)  The actual amounts of perquisites for all Named Executive Officers have been disclosed in the Summary Compensation Table and it
has been assumed that payment of these amounts would continue for the compensation period.
(2)  The value of stock options vested as of December 31, 2010 (assuming accelerated vesting of all options as a result of the change of 
control  as  provided  or  permitted  for  in  the  Option  Plan/Share  Compensation  Plan)  was  calculated  using  the  closing  price  of  the 
common shares on the TSX on December 31, 2010, which was C$33.26 per share, less the exercise price of the options. The rate 
used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 1.0054, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 31, 2010.
(3)  The value of RSUs vested as of December 31, 2010 (assuming accelerated vesting of all RSUs (both time-based and performance-
based) as a result of the change of control as provided or permitted for in the Share Compensation Plan) was calculated using the 
closing price of the common shares on the TSX on December 31, 2010, which was C$33.26 per share. The rate used for currency 
translation into U.S. dollars was 1.0054, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 31, 2010.
Director Compensation
Director Compensation Table
The  following  table  (presented  in  accordance  with  Form  51-102F6)  sets  forth  all  amounts  of  compensation 
earned by the non-executive directors for the Company’s most recently completed financial year.
Name
Pierre 
Lassonde 
Derek Evans 
Graham 
Farquharson 
Louis Gignac 
Randall 
Oliphant 
David 
Peterson
Notes
Fees
earned(1)
($)
Share- 
based 
awards 
($)(2)
Option- 
based 
awards
($)
$38,948(4)
$1,091
$29,211 
$29,211
$29,211 
$38,948(5)
$38,948(6)
$673 
 $745
$576
Nil
$836
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Non-equity 
incentive
plan
compensation
($) 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
All other
compensation
($)(3)
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Total 
($)
$40,039
$29,884 
$29,956
$29,787 
$38,948
$39,784
(1)  For a breakdown of fees paid in cash versus fees credited in DSUs, see the chart below under “Deferred Share Unit Plan”. Fees paid 
or payable to the directors were payable in Canadian dollars as follows: Lassonde – C$40,000, Evans - C$30,000, Farquharson  - 
C$30,000, Gignac - C$30,000, Oliphant - C$40,000 and Peterson - C$40,000. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars 
was 0.9737, which was the average rate used for currency translation for the Corporation’s expenses for the year ended December 
31, 2010.
(2)  This represents the grant date fair value of the dividend equivalents credited under the DSU Plan in U.S. dollars. 
(3)  Reimbursement  to  each  of  the  directors  for  expenses  and  fees  was  made  during  the  year.    These  reimbursements  were  not
considered perquisites, as they were integrally and directly related to the performance of each director’s duties.
(4)  Fees earned include C$30,000 in annual fees and C$10,000 in fees for serving as the Chair of the Board. 
(5)  Fees earned include C$30,000 in annual fees and C$10,000 in fees for serving as the Chair of the ARC. 
(6)  Fees earned include C$30,000 in annual fees and C$10,000 in fees for serving as Chair of the CCGC.
-33-
Discussion of Director Compensation Table
Significant  factors  necessary  to  understand  the  information  disclosed  in  the  Director  Compensation  Table 
above  include  the  Board’s  fee  structure,  the  Corporation’s  deferred  share  unit  plan,  and  directors’  equity 
investment requirements.
Board Fees
Compensation for non-executive directors of the Corporation has been set at C$30,000 per director per year 
(the  “Annual  Retainer”).  Directors  do  not  currently  receive  additional  compensation  for  attending  Board  or 
committee  meetings. In  addition,  the  Chair  of  the Board  receives  additional  compensation of C$10,000  per 
year and the chair of each of the ARC and the CCGC receives additional compensation of C$10,000 per year. 
The  foregoing  fees  are  collectively  referred  to  as  “Board  Fees”.  Directors  are  also  be  reimbursed  for  out-of-
pocket  expenses  for  attending  Board  and  committee  meetings  and  in  respect  of  other  activities  relating  to 
Board  service.  No  director  compensation  is  paid  to  directors  who  are  members  of  management  of  the 
Corporation.
After  review  by  the  CCGC  and  as  approved  by  the  Board,  effective  January  1,  2011,  Board  Fees  have  been 
updated  such  that  the  Annual  Retainer  will  be  C$45,000  per  director  per  year,  the  Chair  of  the  Board  will 
receive  additional  compensation  of  C$45,000  per  year,  the  chair  of  the  ARC  will  receive  additional 
compensation  C$15,000  and  the  chair  of  the  CCGC  will  receive  additional  compensation  of  C$10,000  per 
year.
Deferred Share Unit Plan
Effective  March  26,  2008,  the  Board  adopted  a  deferred  share  unit  plan  (the  “DSU  Plan”),  which  permits 
directors who are not salaried officers or employees of the Corporation or a related corporation (referred to as 
“Eligible Directors”) to defer receipt of all or a portion of their Board Fees until termination of Board service. 
The  DSU  Plan  also  provides  the  Board  with  the  flexibility  to  award  deferred  share  units  (“DSUs”)  to  Eligible 
Directors as another form of compensation. Only Eligible Directors are permitted to participate in the DSU Plan 
which is administered by the CCGC.
With respect to conversion of Board Fees into DSUs, each Eligible Director may elect to be paid a minimum of 
20% up to a maximum of 100%, in 10% increments, of Board Fees in the form of DSUs in lieu of being paid 
such fees in cash. On the date on which Board Fees are payable (on a quarterly basis), the number of DSUs to 
be credited to a participating Eligible Director (a “Participant”) is determined by dividing an amount equal to 
the designated percentage of the Board Fees that the Participant has elected to have credited in DSUs on that 
fee  payment  date,  by  the  calculated  market  value  of  a  common  share  (typically  on  the  TSX)  on  that  fee 
payment date.
The DSU Plan also permits the CCGC to award DSUs to directors as compensation beyond Board Fees. This 
flexibility under the DSU Plan is intended to permit the CCGC to compensate directors for any special projects 
required  by  the  Board  or  its  committees.  However,  to  date  no  DSUs  have  been  awarded  to  directors  under 
these provisions of the DSU Plan. Under the DSU Plan, the CCGC is authorized to determine when DSUs will be 
awarded, the number of DSUs to be awarded, the vesting criteria for each award of DSUs, if any, and all other 
terms and conditions of each award. Unless the CCGC determines otherwise, DSUs awarded under the Plan 
will be subject to a vesting schedule whereby they will become vested in equal instalments over three years 
with one-third vesting on the first anniversary of the award and one-third vesting on each of the subsequent 
anniversaries of the award. The CCGC may consider alternatives for vesting criteria related to the Corporation’s 
performance and has the flexibility under the DSU Plan to apply such vesting criteria to particular awards of 
DSUs. The DSU Plan also provides that: (i) where a participant’s termination of Board service is as a result of 
death, all unvested DSUs will vest effective on the date of death; and (ii) in a change of control context, all 
unvested DSUs will vest immediately prior to the change of control.
When dividends are declared by the Corporation, a Participant is also credited with dividend equivalents in the 
form of additional DSUs based on the number of vested DSUs the Participant holds on the record date for the 
payment of a dividend.
-34-
A  Participant  is  permitted  to  redeem  his  vested  DSUs  only  following  termination  of  Board  service  by  way  of 
retirement,  non-re-election  as  a  director,  resignation  or  death.  A  Participant  (or,  in  the  case  of  death  of  the 
Participant, the Participant’s legal representative) will be entitled, by giving written notice to the Corporation, 
provided the Participant is not at that time a salaried officer or an employee of the Corporation or a related 
corporation,  to  redeem,  on  one  or  more  dates  specified  by  the  Participant  (or  the  Participant’s  legal 
representative, as the case may be) occurring on or after the date of such notice, which date(s) shall not, in any 
event, be prior to the tenth trading day following the release of the Corporation’s quarterly or annual financial 
results  immediately  following  the  Participant’s  termination  of  Board  service  and  shall  not  be  later  than 
December 1 of the first calendar year commencing after the time of such termination of Board service, all or a 
portion of the vested DSUs. If the Participant (or the Participant’s legal representative, as the  case may be) 
fails  to  provide  written  notice  to  the  Corporation  in  respect  of  the  redemption  of  all  or  any  portion  of  the 
Participant’s vested DSUs, the Participant (or the Participant’s legal representative, as the case may be) will be 
deemed to have elected to redeem all vested DSUs on December 1 of the calendar year commencing after the 
date of termination of Board service of the Participant.
Upon redemption of DSUs, the Corporation will pay to the Participant a lump sum cash payment equal to the 
number of DSUs to be redeemed multiplied by a calculation of the market value of a common share (typically 
on the TSX) on the redemption date, net of any applicable deductions and withholdings. The DSU Plan does not 
entitle any Participant to acquire common shares of the Corporation.
The following chart outlines the breakdown of fees paid in cash versus fees credited in DSUs during the year 
ended December 31, 2010 and the total DSUs accumulated during the year ended December 31, 2010.
Fees
earned(1)
($)
Election
percentage
(%)
$38,948
100%(2)
$29,211 
$29,211
$29,211 
$38,948
100% 
100%
50% 
0%
Total fees 
paid in cash
($)
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Total fees 
accrued in
cash  
($)
Total fees 
credited in
DSUs 
($)
$22,720
$16,228
Nil 
Nil
$29,211 
$29,211
$6,086 
$16,228
$8,520 
$22,720
$14,605
Nil
Number of
DSUs 
(#)
697
978 
978
489 
Nil
$38,948
100%
Nil
Nil
$38,948
1,319
Dividend 
Equiva-
lents 
(#) 
34
21 
23
18 
Nil
26
Total 
DSUs
731
999 
1,001
507 
Nil
1,345
Name
Pierre 
Lassonde 
Derek Evans 
Graham 
Farquharson 
Louis Gignac 
Randall 
Oliphant 
David 
Peterson
Notes
(1)  Fees paid or payable to the directors were payable in Canadian dollars. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 
0.9737, which was the average rate used for currency translation for the Corporation’s expenses for the year ended December 31, 
2010.
(2)  Mr. Lassonde elected 100% of his fees to be payable in DSUs for the period June 1, 2009 to May 31, 2010 and 0% of his fees to be
payable in DSUs for the period June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2011.
Directors’ Equity Investment Requirements
With a view to aligning the interests of directors with those of shareholders, each director that is not a salaried 
officer  or  employee  of  the  Corporation  is  required  to  hold  a  minimum  equity  investment  in  the  Corporation 
equivalent in value to three times the Annual Retainer in the form of common shares of the Corporation and/or 
DSUs held pursuant to the DSU Plan. Each director has a period of three years from the date of his/her first 
election by shareholders or appointment by the Board, as applicable, to satisfy the minimum equity investment 
requirement.
Under the Equity Ownership Policy for Directors, if a director has not achieved the minimum equity investment 
at the time of any options being exercised by the director, he or she shall be required to continue to hold at
-35-
least 50% or such lesser number of common shares issuable upon the exercise of such options as required to 
achieve the minimum equity ownership requirements.
For  the  purpose  of  determining  the  value  of  the  equity  investment  of  a  director  at  any  time,  the  value  of 
common  shares  and  DSUs  under  the  DSU  Plan  held  by  such  director  will  be  based  on  the  higher  of:  (i)  the 
acquisition cost of such common shares and DSUs; and (ii) the current market value of the common shares 
held and of the DSUs under the DSU Plan. Based on the Annual Retainer for fiscal 2010, the minimum equity 
investment  is  C$90,000.  The  following  table  summarizes  equity  investment  in  the  Corporation  by  individual 
directors as at March 31, 2011.
Equity Ownership 
as at March 31,
2011
Equity Ownership
as at March 31, 2010
Net Changes in 
Equity Ownership
Value of Equity 
Investment at  
March 31, 2011
Additional 
Required 
Investment
Name
Common 
Shares
4,000 
76,630
Pierre Lassonde  3,374,247 
Derek Evans 
Graham 
Farquharson 
Louis Gignac 
Randall 
Oliphant 
David Peterson
75,000 
75,000
75,000
DSUs
3,744 
2,972 
3,217
2,308
Nil
Common 
Shares
3,374,247
4,000 
76,000
75,000 
75,000
DSUs
3,372 
1,940 
2,183
1,783
Nil
3,727
75,000
2,379
Common 
Shares
Nil 
Nil 
630
Nil 
Nil
Nil
DSUs
372 
1,032 
1,034
525 
Nil
C$120,089,451
C$142,360 
C$2,727,262
C$2,669,250 
C$2,669,250
1,348
C$2,669,250
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Notes
(1)  The closing price of the common shares on the TSX on March 31, 2011 was C$35.59 per share.
Other Information
There were no repricings during the financial year ended December 31, 2010. During the financial year ended 
December  31,  2010,  changes  were  made  to  the  tax  and  source  deductions  provisions  in  the  Share 
Compensation Plan and a cashless exercise feature was added to the Share Compensation Plan in respect of 
options  to  facilitate  the  required  tax  and source  deduction  remittances.  See “Compensation  Discussion  and 
Analysis – Elements of Compensation – Long-Term Incentives – Share Compensation Plan – Amendments to 
Share Compensation Plan”. Other than the DSU Plan, the Corporation did not have any other share-based or 
option-based award programs for non-executive directors in place during the financial year ended December 
31, 2010. No awards of DSUs (as opposed to Board Fee conversions) were made under the DSU Plan during 
the financial year ended December 31, 2010.
Incentive Plan Awards for Directors
Outstanding Share-Based Awards and Option-Based Awards
The following table (presented in accordance with Form 51-102F6) sets forth for each non-executive director 
all  awards  outstanding  at  the  end  of  the  most  recently  completed  financial  year,  including  awards  granted 
before the most recently completed financial year.
Name
Option-based Awards
Share-based Awards
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised
options
(#)
Option 
exercise
price 
($)
Option
expiration
date
Value of
unexercised 
in-the-money
options(1)
($)
Number of 
shares or 
units of
shares that 
have not 
vested 
(#)(4)
of share- 
based
awards that
Market or
payout value
have not 
vested(5)
($)
Pierre Lassonde
175,000(2)
C$15.20
Dec. 1, 2017
$3,177,567
69
$2,307
-36-
Option-based Awards
Share-based Awards
Name
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised
options
(#)
Option 
exercise
price 
($)
Option
expiration
date
Value of
unexercised 
in-the-money
options(1)
($)
Number of 
shares or 
units of
shares that 
have not 
vested 
(#)(4)
39
45
39
Nil
48
Market or
payout value
of share- 
based
awards that
have not 
vested(5)
($)
$1,304
$1,505
$1,304
Nil
$1,605
Derek Evans
Graham 
Farquharson
75,000(3)
75,000(2)
C$18.91
Aug. 8, 2018
C$15.20
Dec. 1, 2017
Louis Gignac
75,000(2)
C$15.20
Dec. 1, 2017
$1,082,062
$1,361,814
$1,361,814
Randall Oliphant
75,000(2)
C$15.20
Dec. 1, 2017
$1,361,814
David Peterson
75,000(2)
C$15.20
Dec. 1, 2017
$1,361,814
Notes
(1)  The value of unexercised options was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on December 31, 2010, 
which  was  C$33.26  per  share,  less  the  exercise  price  of  the  options.  The  rate  used  for  currency  translation  into  U.S.  dollars  was 
1.0054, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 31, 2010.
(2)  These options vest over a three-year period from their grant date of December 1, 2007. 
(3)  These options vest over a three-year period from their grant date of August 8, 2008.  
(4)  This is the number of dividend equivalents credited under the DSU Plan since its inception. 
(5)   The market or payout value as at December 31, 2010 was calculated using the closing price on the TSX of C$33.26 per share and 
the Bank of Canada noon rate on that day of 1.0054. The grant date fair value of the dividend equivalents credited under the DSU 
Plan was as follows: Mr. Lassonde - $1,861, Mr. Evans - $1,063, Mr. Farquharson - $1,218, Mr. Gignac - $1,020, Mr. Oliphant - Nil 
and Mr. Peterson -$1,322.
Incentive Plan Awards – Value Vested or Earning During the Year
The  following table  (presented  in  accordance  with  Form  51-102F6) sets  forth  details  of  the  value  vested  or 
earned  by  each  non-executive  director  during  the  most  recently  completed  financial  year  for  each  incentive 
plan award.
Name
Pierre Lassonde 
Derek Evans 
Graham Farquharson 
Louis Gignac 
Randall Oliphant 
David Peterson 
 
Notes
Option-based awards - 
Value vested during
the year
($)
Share-based awards - 
Value vested during
the year
($)
$1,081,751(1) 
$340,969(2) 
$463,608(1) 
$463,608(1) 
$463,608(1) 
$463,608(1)
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Non-equity incentive 
plan compensation - 
Value earned during
the year
($) 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
(1)  The value vested during the year of option-based awards was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on 
December  2,  2010  (the  first  trading  day  following  the  vesting  date),  which  was  C$33.83  per  share,  less  the  exercise  price  of  the 
options. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 0.9954, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 
2, 2010.
(2)  The value vested during the year of option-based awards was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on 
August  23,  2010  (the  first  trading  day  following  the  vesting  date),  which  was  C$33.25  per  share,  less  the  exercise  price  of  the 
options. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 0.9511, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on August 23, 
2010.
-37-
Aggregated Option Exercises During the Most Recently Completed Financial Year and Financial Year-
End Option Values
The following table sets forth details of the exercise of options during the most recently completed financial 
year by each non-executive director and the financial year-end value of unexercised options on an aggregated 
basis.
Name
Pierre Lassonde 
Derek Evans 
Graham Farquharson 
Louis Gignac 
Randall Oliphant 
David Peterson 
 
Notes
Securities Acquired on
Exercise
(#)
Aggregate Value
Realized
($)
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Unexercised Options at
Financial Year-End
(#)
Exercisable/ 
Unexercisable
175,000/Nil
Value of Unexercised In-
the-Money Options at
Financial Year-End
($)(1)
Exercisable/ 
Unexercisable 
$3,177,567/Nil
50,000/25,000
$721,375/$360,687
75,000/Nil 
75,000/Nil 
75,000/Nil 
75,000/Nil
$1,361,814/Nil 
$1,361,814/Nil 
$1,361,814/Nil 
$1,361,814/Nil
(1)  The value of unexercised options was calculated using the closing price of the common shares on the TSX on December 31, 2010 , 
which was C$33.26  per share, less the exercise price of the options. The rate used for currency translation into U.S. dollars was 
1.0054, which was the Bank of Canada noon rate on December 31, 2010.
Discussion of Incentive Plan Awards for Directors
The significant terms of all plan-based awards, including non-equity incentive plan awards, issued or vested, or 
under  which  options  have  been  exercised,  during  the  year,  or  outstanding  at  year  end,  in  respect  of  non-
executive directors, are set out above. For clarity, the only plan-based awards for which non-executive directors 
are eligible are those awarded under the Share Compensation Plan and under the DSU Plan. Non-executive 
directors are not eligible for annual cash bonuses or RSUs under the Share Compensation Plan.
No outstanding options held by directors were exercised during the financial year ended December 31, 2010. 
To  date,  at  the  time  of  joining  the  Board,  directors  have  been  granted  stock  options  to  provide  a  long-term 
ownership  perspective  on  the  direction  of  the  Corporation.  While  the  Share  Compensation  Plan  technically 
permits the grant of options to directors, the Corporation has no intention of granting options to any existing 
non-executive directors in the foreseeable future. Options would however be considered in connection with the 
recruitment of a new director.
-38-
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
OTHER INFORMATION
The  following table  (presented  in  accordance  with  Form  51-102F5) sets  forth  all  compensation  plans  under 
which  equity  securities  of  the  Corporation  are  authorized  for  issuance  as  of  the  end  of  the  most  recently 
completed financial year.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
Number of securities to be
issued upon exercise of
outstanding options, 
warrants and rights
(a)
Weighted-average exercise 
price of outstanding options,
warrants and rights
(b)
101,539
Not applicable
2,764,168
C$18.60
Number of securities 
remaining available for
future issuance under equity
compensation plans 
(excluding securities
reflected in column (a))
(c)
N/A
N/A
2,865,707
Not applicable
2,835,169(1)
Plan Category
Equity compensation plans 
approved by shareholders – 
Share Compensation Plan - 
RSUs
Equity compensation plans 
approved by shareholders – 
Share Compensation Plan - 
Options
Total 
 
Notes
(1)  This  is  the  total  number  of  common  shares  remaining  available  for  future  issuance  under  the  Share  Compensation  Plan  as  of 
December  31,  2010,  less  the  number  of  common  shares  to  be  issued  upon  the  vesting  of  outstanding  RSUs  and  the  exercise  of 
outstanding stock options.
(2)  Please note, as of the date hereof, up to a maximum of 4,294 common shares of the Corporation are reserved for issuance pursuant 
to Moydow Options outstanding. See “Statement of Executive Compensation – Compensation Discussion and Analysis – Elements of 
Compensation – Long-Term Incentives – Common Shares Reserved for Issuance – Moydow Transaction”.
(3)  Please  note,  as  of  the  date  hereof,  up  to  a  maximum  of  707,358  common  shares  of  the  Corporation  are  reserved  for  issuance 
pursuant to Gold Wheaton Options outstanding. See “Statement of Executive Compensation – Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
– Elements of Compensation – Long-Term Incentives – Common Shares Reserved for Issuance – Gold Wheaton Transaction”.
Indebtedness of Directors and Officers
During the most recently completed financial year and as at the date hereof, no director, proposed nominee for 
election  as  a  director,  officer,  employee  or  associate  of  any  such  persons  has  been  or  is  indebted  to  the 
Corporation nor has the Corporation guaranteed any loans on behalf of any of these individuals.
Interest of Management and Others in Material Transactions
Management of the Corporation is not aware of a material interest, direct or indirect, of any director or officer 
of  the  Corporation,  any  director  or  officer  of  a  body  corporate  that  is  itself  an  insider  or  subsidiary  of  the 
Corporation, any proposed nominee for election as a director of the Corporation, any principal shareholder, or 
any associate or affiliate of any such person, in any transaction since the commencement of the Corporation’s 
most recently completed financial year or in any proposed transaction which has materially affected or would 
materially affect the Corporation or any of its subsidiaries.
-39-
Directors’ and Officers’ Liability Insurance
The  Corporation  maintains  directors’  and  officers’  liability  insurance  for  the  officers  and  directors  of  the 
Corporation  which  provides  coverage  in  the  amount  of  $50,000,000  in  each  policy  year.    The  deductible 
amount on the policy is $1,000,000 and the total annual premium for the policy is $209,000.
STATEMENT OF GOVERNANCE PRACTICES
Board of Directors
Composition of the Board - Independence
The Board is currently comprised of seven directors. The Board has considered the independence of each of its 
directors.  Consistent  with  National  Instrument  58-101  –  Disclosure  of  Corporate  Governance  Practices  (“NI 
58-101”), to be considered independent, the Board must conclude that a director has no material relationship 
with  the  Corporation.  A  “material  relationship”  is  a  relationship  which  could,  in  the  view  of  the  Board, 
reasonably interfere with the exercise of a director’s independent judgment and includes an indirect material 
relationship.
The Board has concluded that six directors (Messrs. Lassonde, Peterson, Gignac, Farquharson, Oliphant and 
Evans)  are  “independent”  for  purposes  of  Board  membership,  as  provided  in  NI  58-101,  and  therefore  a 
majority of the directors are “independent”. By virtue of his position as President and CEO, Mr. Harquail is not 
considered “independent”.
The  Board  has  also  considered  the  independence  of  its  directors  more  generally,  and  whether  they  are 
“related” or “affiliated” as defined by various governance ratings agencies and confirms its view that Messrs. 
Lassonde,  Peterson,  Gignac,  Farquharson,  Oliphant  and  Evans  are  not  “related”  or  “affiliated”  with  the 
Corporation in such a way as to affect their exercise of independent judgment.
Composition of the Board – Skills Matrix
In connection with its nomination and Board assessment responsibilities (see “Nomination of Directors” and 
“Board Assessment” below), the CCGC has developed a skills matrix comprised of the skills and competencies 
it  expects  the  Board  as  a  whole  to  possess  and  has  identified  which  of  those  skills  and  competencies  are 
possessed by its existing directors. The skills and competencies are as follows: experience with respect to the 
mining  industry,  experience  with  respect  to  the  oil  &  gas  industry,  experience  in  accounting  and  finance 
matters, risk management, legal matters, human resources and compensation matters, corporate governance, 
public company boards and public company management. The following table outlines the CCGC’s assessment 
of which of those skills are possessed by the existing directors.
Skill
Mining
Oil & Gas
Accounting and 
Finance
Legal
Risk Management
HR and Compensation
Corporate Governance
Public Company 
Boards
Public Company 
Management
Lassonde
Peterson
Gignac
Farquharson
Oliphant
Evans
Harquail
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-40-
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Other Directorships
Certain directors of the Corporation are also presently directors of other issuers that are reporting issuers (or 
the  equivalent)  in  Canada  or  elsewhere.    Information  as  to  such  other  directorships  is  set  out  below.  Louis 
Gignac  and  Graham  Farquharson  are  both  directors  of  St  Andrew  Goldfields  Ltd.  and  Pierre  Lassonde  and 
Randall Oliphant are both directors of New Gold Inc.  With respect to these interlocking board memberships, it 
is the Board’s view that the mining community at the highest levels is closely connected and that in order for 
the Corporation’s directors to maintain these connections, which are in the best interests of the Corporation, 
directors of the Corporation should be permitted to serve on other boards of directors, including in some cases, 
the same board of directors. The Board is satisfied that it has a system for dealing with conflicts of interest if 
any were to arise. See “Ethical Business Conduct” below.
Director 
Pierre Lassonde
David Harquail 
Derek Evans 
Graham Farquharson 
Louis Gignac
Randall Oliphant
David Peterson
Other Public Company Directorships 
Enghouse Systems Limited 
New Gold Inc. 
Not applicable 
Pengrowth Energy Corporation 
St Andrew Goldfields Ltd. 
Domtar Corp 
Gaz Métro Inc. 
St Andrew Goldfields Ltd. 
Silver Bear Resources Inc. 
New Gold Inc. 
WesternZagros Resources Ltd. 
Rogers Communications Inc. 
Shoppers Drug Mart Corporation 
Industrielle-Alliance Insurance and Financial Services Inc. 
South East Group Limited 
MBAC Fertilizer Corp.  
Versapay Corporation
Independent Director Meetings
At 100% of the meetings of the Board and its committees held during fiscal 2010, the independent directors 
held  an  in-camera  session  at  which  non-independent  directors  and  members  of  management  were  not 
present. It is the intention of the directors to continue to hold such an in-camera session at each Board and 
committee meeting going forward.
Chair of the Board
The  Board  has  concluded  that  Mr.  Lassonde,  the  Chair  of  the  Board,  is  an  independent  director.  See 
“Composition of the Board – Independence” above. The Chair of the Board’s role is to provide leadership to the 
directors in discharging their mandate, including by: (i) leading, managing and organizing the Board, consistent 
with  the  approach  to  corporate  governance  adopted  by  the  Board  from  time  to  time;  (ii)  promoting 
cohesiveness  among  the  directors;  and  (iii)  being  satisfied  that  the  responsibilities  of  the  Board  and  its 
committees are well understood by the directors. The responsibilities of the Chair of the Board include:
•  providing advice, counsel and mentorship to the CEO;
•  promoting the provision of information to the directors on a timely basis;
•  with  respect  to  meetings  of  the  Board,  scheduling  meetings,  setting  the  agendas  for  the  meetings, 
presiding  over  the  meetings,  co-ordinating  with  the  chairs  of  the  committees  of  the  Board  to  schedule 
committee  meetings,  ensuring  that  all  business  required  to  come  before  the  Board  is  brought  properly, 
monitoring  the  adequacy  of  Board  materials,  ensuring  sufficient  time  for  review  of  materials,  and 
encouraging free and open discussion at meetings of the Board; and
•  presiding over shareholders’ meetings.
-41-
Attendance at Meetings
During the financial year ended December 31, 2010, the Board held 9 meetings. The ARC held 5 meetings and 
the CCGC held 5 meetings. The following summarizes the attendance record for each of such meetings.
Name
Pierre Lassonde
David Harquail
Derek Evans
Graham Farquharson
Louis Gignac
Randall Oliphant
David Peterson
Board Meetings
Attended
ARC Meetings
Attended
CCGC Meetings
Attended
9 of 9
9 of 9
9 of 9
9 of 9
9 of 9
8 of 9
8 of 9
N/A
N/A
5 of 5
N/A
5 of 5
5 of 5
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5 of 5
N/A
N/A
5 of 5
It is the policy of the Board that, except in exceptional circumstances (i.e. due to illness or other incapacity), all 
directors of the Corporation shall attend the annual meeting of shareholders of the Corporation.
Board Mandate
A copy of the Board’s written mandate is attached as Schedule “A” to this Circular.
Board Engagement with Shareholders on Governance Matters
On  November  11,  2010,  the  Board  adopted  a  policy  relating  to  Board  engagement  with  shareholders  on 
governance  matters.  The  policy  provides  that  the  Board  believes  that  it  is  important  to  have  regular  and 
constructive  engagement  directly  with  the  shareholders  of  the  Corporation  to  allow  and  encourage 
shareholders to express their views on governance matters directly to the Board outside of the Corporation’s 
annual  meetings.  These  discussions  are  intended  to  be  an  interchange  of  views  about  governance  and 
disclosure matters that are within the public domain and will not include a discussion of undisclosed material 
facts or material changes. This policy further provides that the Board will continue with developing practices to 
increase engagement with its shareholders as is appropriate for its shareholder base and size. Examples of 
engagement  practices  include  meetings  between  the  Chair  of  the  Board  and  the  Corporation’s  larger 
shareholders  and  organizations  representing  a  group  of  shareholders,  as  well  as  creating  conduits  for 
communication  with  smaller  shareholders  on  an  ongoing  basis.  This  policy  also  provides  that  the  Board 
recognizes  that  shareholder  engagement  is  an  evolving  practice  in  Canada  and  globally  and  will  review  this 
policy annually to ensure that it is effective in achieving its objectives.
Director Retirement Policy
The Board has adopted director retirement policy which provides the framework for the Corporation to ensure 
the  ongoing  renewal  of  the  Board  by  specifying  requirements  regarding  the  retirement  of  directors.  On  the 
March 1st after a non-employee director’s 72nd birthday and on every March 1st thereafter while the director is 
still a director of the Corporation, a director must submit his or her resignation to the Board and the CCGC for 
consideration.  The  CCGC  will  consider  such  resignation  and,  taking  into  account  factors  such  as  the 
competencies and skills possessed by the Board as a whole and the director individually, the size of the Board 
and  the  overall  best  interests  of  the  Corporation,  make  a  recommendation  to  the  Board  as  to  whether  the 
Board  should  accept  such  resignation  in  conjunction  with  the  Corporation’s  next  annual  meeting  of 
shareholders or reject such resignation and nominate the director for election at the Corporation’s next annual 
meeting  of  shareholders.  The  Board  will  then  consider  the  CCGC’s  recommendation  and  make  its 
determination. Given the stage of the Corporation’s development, the Board has determined not to establish 
term limits for directors due to the potential loss of contributions from directors who have developed increasing 
insight into the Corporation and its operations.
-42-
Board Committees
Audit and Risk Committee
The Corporation has an audit and risk committee (the “ARC”) that consists of Derek Evans, Louis Gignac and 
Randall  Oliphant,  with  Randall  Oliphant  serving  as  Chair.  All  members  of  the  ARC  are  “independent”  and 
“financially  literate”  (as  defined  in  National  Instrument  52-110  –  Audit  Committees).  The  ARC  has  been 
established to assist the Board in fulfilling its oversight and evaluation of:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the quality and integrity of the financial statements of the Corporation;
the  compliance  by  the  Corporation  with  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  in  respect  of  financial 
disclosure;
the qualification, independence and performance of the Corporation’s independent auditors;
the performance of the Chief Financial Officer;
risk management oversight;
the  compliance  by  the  Corporation  with  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  in  respect  of  its  oil  and  gas 
disclosure; and
the  qualification,  independence  and  performance  of  the  Corporation’s  qualified  oil  and  gas  reserves 
evaluator or auditor.
Specifically,  with  respect  to  the  independent  auditors,  the  ARC  is  directly  responsible  for  the  appointment, 
compensation,  retention  (and  termination)  and  oversight  of  the  work  of  the  independent  auditor  (including 
oversight of the resolution of any disagreements between management and the independent auditor regarding 
financial reporting).
The Corporation’s Audit and Risk Committee Charter also addresses the ARC’s responsibilities relating to risk 
management and oil and gas reserves. A copy of the Corporation’s Audit and Risk Committee Charter is set out 
in the Corporation’s Annual Information Form which is available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
Compensation and Corporate Governance Committee
The  Corporation  has  a  compensation  and  corporate  governance  committee  (the  “CCGC”)  that  consists  of 
Graham  Farquharson  and  David  Peterson,  with  David  Peterson  serving  as  Chair.  The  CCGC  serves  as  the 
Board’s nominating committee. All members of the CCGC are “independent” (as defined in National Instrument 
58-101 – Disclosure of Corporate Governance Practices). Among other things, the CCGC:
•
reviews  and  makes  recommendations  to  the  Board  concerning  the  appointment  of  officers  of  the 
Corporation;
•  annually reviews the CEO’s goals and objectives for the upcoming year, provides an appraisal of the CEO’s
performance and reviews his compensation;
•  makes recommendations concerning the remuneration of directors; and
•  administers and makes recommendations regarding the operation of the Corporation’s employee incentive
compensation plans.
The CCGC is also responsible for:
•  developing the Corporation’s approach to governance issues;
-43-
•
•
filling vacancies among the directors (see “Nomination of Directors”);
reviewing the effectiveness and the contribution of the Board, its committees and individual directors (see 
“Board Assessment”);
•  adopting and reviewing and updating the Corporation’s written code of business conduct and ethics and
its written disclosure policy (see “Ethical Business Conduct”); and
•
ensuring compliance of the compensation policies and practices of the Corporation with its enterprise risk 
management goals.
Position Descriptions
The Board has developed and approved written position descriptions for the Chair of the Board, the Chair of 
the ARC, the Chair of the CCGC and for the CEO.
Orientation and Continuing Education
The Corporation provides an orientation program for new directors in order that they can become familiar with 
the role of the Board, its committees and its directors and with the nature and operation of the Corporation’s 
business.  To date, all Board members have been provided with a copy of the written mandate and charters for 
the Board and each of its committees, respectively, and a copy of the Board’s approved policies relating to, 
among  other  things,  the  business  conduct  and  ethics  of  directors,  officers  and  employees,  auditor 
independence,  employee  complaint  procedures  for  accounting  and  auditing  matters  and  confidentiality,  fair 
disclosure and trading in securities. Board members have also been provided with a copy of each committee’s 
planning schedules / work plans, as applicable. New Board members are provided with these materials and 
meet with the Chair of the Board and members of management as part of their orientation.
With respect to continuing education, the Corporation continues to ensure that its directors maintain the skill 
and  knowledge  necessary  to  meet  their  obligations  as  directors  by  having  management  provide  relevant 
presentations  at  each  annual  strategy  meeting  and  at  each  quarterly  meeting,  as  appropriate,  by  bringing 
consultants in to address the Board on various issues, and by arranging for other meetings with management 
from time to time. During 2010, the Board received presentations from management and outside advisors on 
the  following  matters:  IFRS  and  the  impact  on  the  Corporation,  enterprise  risk  management,  compensation 
policies  and  strategies,  the  Corporation’s  portfolio  of  assets  and  management  thereof,  including  details 
relating  to  various  properties,  a  possible  New  York  Stock  Exchange  listing  and  related  U.S.  reporting 
requirements, analyst reports, corporate performance reviews and merger and acquisitions strategies in the 
mining  and  oil  &  gas  industries.  In  addition,  Board  members  are  encouraged  to  attend  external  director 
education conferences at the Corporation’s expense, to visit mines sites on properties in which the Corporation 
has  an  interest  and  to  attend  mining  industry  events.  During  2010,  one  director  visited  a  mine  site  on  a 
property on which the Corporation has an interest and several directors attended mining industry events.
Ethical Business Conduct
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
The  Board  has  adopted  a  written  Code  of  Business  Conduct  and  Ethics  (the  “Code”)  for  the  Corporation’s 
directors, officers and employees. The Code was updated effective March 24, 2011 to reflect the Corporation’s 
policy  that  loans  to  or  guarantees  of  obligations  of  the  Corporation’s  personnel  may  present  conflicts  of 
interest, as well as other operational policies of the Corporation. The updated version of the Code was filed on 
SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
The  Code  reflects  the  Corporation’s  core  values  of  honesty,  responsibility  and  fairness  and  addresses  the 
following matters: compliance with laws, rules and regulations; conflicts of interest; confidentiality; corporate 
opportunities;  protection  and  proper  use  of  corporate  assets;  competition  and  fair  dealing;  gifts  and 
entertainment; payments to government personnel; discrimination, harassment and equal opportunity; health 
and safety; accuracy of company records and reporting; use of e-mail and internet services; and reporting of 
any illegal or unethical behaviour.
-44-
With respect to the issue of conflicts of interest in particular, various officers, directors or other insiders of the 
Corporation may hold senior positions with entities involved in the resource industry or otherwise be involved in 
transactions within the resource industry and may develop other interests outside the Corporation. In the event 
that  any  such  conflict  of  interest  arises,  a  director  who  has  such  a  conflict  will  be  required  to  disclose  the 
conflict to a meeting of the directors of the Corporation and abstain from voting for or against the approval of 
such participation or such terms. In appropriate cases, the Corporation will establish a special committee of 
independent directors to review a matter in which several directors, or management, may have a conflict. Any 
decision made by any of such directors involving the Corporation will be required to be made in accordance 
with  their  duties  and  obligations  to  deal  honestly  and  in  good  faith  with  a  view  to  the  best  interests  of  the 
Corporation and its shareholders.
The CCGC will monitor the Code and be responsible for granting any waivers from the application of the Code 
and will review management’s monitoring of compliance with the Code. To date, no such waivers have been 
granted.
Under  the  Code,  the  Corporation’s  personnel  are  expected  to  talk  to  supervisors,  managers  or  other 
appropriate personnel about observed illegal or unethical behaviour and when in doubt about the best course 
of  action  in  a  particular  situation.  All  of  the  Corporation’s  personnel  are  required  to  cooperate  in  internal 
investigations of misconduct.
Whistleblower Policy
The Board has adopted employee complaint procedures for accounting and auditing matters (collectively, the 
“Whistleblower  Policy”)  for  the  Corporation’s  directors,  officers  and  employees  to  enable  such  personnel  to 
submit  good  faith  complaints  relating  to  any  questionable  accounting  or  auditing  matter.  The  Whistleblower 
Policy outlines how an employee with a good faith concern about any accounting or auditing matter can report 
those concerns directly to the Chief Legal Officer, and on an anonymous basis, directly to the Chair of the Audit 
Committee.
Policy Concerning Confidentiality, Fair Disclosure and Trading in Securities
The  Board  has  adopted  a  policy  concerning  confidentiality,  fair  disclosure  and  trading  in  securities,  which 
serves  as  the  Corporation’s  corporate  disclosure  policy  and  insider  trading  policy.  This  policy  applies  to  the 
Corporation’s  directors,  officers  and  employees  to  ensure  that  such  personnel  comply  with  securities 
legislation  and  the  rules  of  applicable  stock  exchanges  relating  to  insider  trading,  tipping  and  selective 
disclosure.
With  respect  to  confidentiality  and  disclosure,  this  policy  generally  outlines  principles  of  confidentiality  and 
guidelines for maintaining confidentiality, disclosure principles and guidelines for disclosure (including who the 
authorized spokespersons are and how discussions with the investing community will occur), what constitutes 
material information, what is non-public information and how forward-looking information should be disclosed.
With  respect  to  trading  in  securities,  this  policy  generally  outlines  prohibitions  on  trading,  the  Corporation’s 
policies on trading windows and black-out periods, required pre-approval for trades by insiders (including the 
entering  into  of  any  “equity  monetization”    transactions  or  purchases  of  financial  instruments,  including  for 
greater certainty, prepaid variable forward contracts, equity swaps, collars, or units of exchange funds, that are 
designed to hedge or offset a decrease in market value of equity securities) and sanctions if improper trading 
were to occur. This policy requires the Corporation’s personnel to report any violations immediately to the CEO 
or the Chief Legal Officer.
Risk Management
The Corporation’s enterprise risk management environment ensures that the key objectives and strategy for 
the  success  of  the  Corporation  are  achieved.  The  risk management  process  of  the  Corporation  is  a  several 
pronged  process  involving  management,  the  ARC  and  the  Board  of  the  Corporation.  In  its  annual  strategic 
planning session, the Board’s understanding of the current business strategy, its critical success factors and 
the related business risks is a key focus. The risks of the business are analyzed and reviewed together with 
strategic opportunities and issues. Management provides a detailed listing of risks and a related risk analysis, 
the latest of which was presented and reviewed with the ARC in November of 2010. Included in this review, the
-45-
roles of management, the ARC and the Board relating to risk were highlighted and reaffirmed. The Board is 
responsible  for  strategic  aspects  and  the  enforcement  of  an  appropriate  risk  culture  throughout  the 
organization, including relating to compensation aspects. The ARC is charged with the supervision of the risk 
analysis and policing of the mitigation factors and plans.  Management conducts a periodic detailed analysis of 
risks, recommended mitigation plans and is responsible for the implementation and review of effectiveness of 
such mitigation plans.
Environmental and Corporate Social Responsibility Policy
The  Board  has  adopted  an  environmental  and  corporate  social  responsibility  policy  which  provides  the 
framework for the Corporation’s approach to addressing its environmental and social responsibilities as a good 
corporate citizen. This policy acknowledges the nature of the Corporation’s business (i.e. that it invests in the 
businesses  of  others,  principally  through  holding  royalties,  and  does  not  operate  any  mineral  or  oil  &  gas 
properties and that it is an entity with a very small workforce, with limited operations). This policy articulates 
the Corporation’s positions with respect to: (i) compliance with legal and regulatory environmental, health and 
safety and human rights requirements; (ii) due diligence in choosing its investments and their operators (i.e. 
that  they  be  “quality”  operators);  (iii)  supporting  the  mineral  and  oil  &  gas  industries  (through  industry 
associations  and  councils)  in  their  efforts  to  operate  in  an  environmentally  and  socially  responsible  fashion 
with  continual  improvement  in  sustainable  development  performance;  (iv)  employees  of  the  Corporation 
making  a  positive  impact  on  the  environment  and  on  social  issues,  including,  where  feasible,  in  the 
procurement of goods and services; and (v) maintaining open lines of communications with stakeholders and 
taking into account their concerns and suggestions.
Health and Safety Policy
The  Board  has  adopted  a  health  and  safety  policy  which  provides  the  framework  for  the  Corporation’s 
approach  to  addressing  health  and  safety  risks.  This  policy  acknowledges  the  nature  of  the  Corporation’s 
business  (as  described  above)  and  the  fact  that  health  and  safety  are  not  typically  direct  risks  of  the 
Corporation’s operations. This policy articulates the Corporation’s positions with respect to: (i) compliance with 
legal  and  regulatory  health  and  safety  requirements;  (ii)  the  standard  for  the  facilities  in  which  the 
Corporation’s  offices  are  located  from  a  health  and  safety  perspective;  (iii)  the  health  and  safety 
responsibilities of the Corporation’s employees with respect to maintenance of the workplace, following rules 
and reporting issues and the Corporation’s responsibilities with respect to training its employees; (iv) violence 
and harassment in the workplace; and (iv) substance abuse.
Discrimination, Harassment and Equal Opportunity Policy
The  Board  has  adopted  a  discrimination,  harassment  and  equal  opportunity  policy  which  provides  the 
framework for the Corporation to maintain an environment free of discrimination and harassment, in which all 
individuals are treated with respect and dignity, are able to contribute fully and have equal opportunities. This 
policy  also  deals  with  harassment  and  workplace  violence.  This  policy  articulates  the  Corporation’s  position 
with  respect  to:  diversity,  equal  opportunity,  discrimination  (including  grounds  therefore),  harassment  and 
threats  or  acts  of  violence;  (ii)  reporting  inappropriate  conduct,  harassment  and  workplace  violence;  (iii) 
disciplinary measures; and (iv) the development of procedures to prevent and address human rights issues.
Nomination of Directors
The  CCGC  serves  as  the  Board’s  nominating  committee.  The  CCGC  is  composed  entirely  of  independent 
directors.  The  responsibilities,  powers  and  operation  of  the  CCGC  generally  are  summarized  above  under 
“Compensation and Corporate Governance Committee”. With respect to nomination of directors, the CCGC is 
responsible for:
•  developing and recommending to the Board criteria for selecting new directors;
•  assisting the Board by identifying individuals qualified to become members of the Board; and
•
recommending to the Board the director nominees for the next annual meeting of shareholders and for 
each committee of the Board.
-46-
The process by which the Board will identify new candidates for Board nomination will involve:
•  annually reviewing the competencies, skills and personal qualities required of directors to add value to the
Corporation;
•  annually  reviewing  the  competencies  and  skills  that  the  Board  considers  each  director  to  possess  and
what each new nominee should bring to the Board; and
•
seeking individuals qualified to become members of the Board, in the context of the Corporation’s needs 
and the criteria established by the Board.
The CCGC has the authority to retain a search firm to be used to identify director candidates.
Compensation Process
The  CCGC  serves  as  the  Board’s  compensation  committee.  The  CCGC  is  composed  entirely  of  independent 
directors.  The  responsibilities,  powers  and  operation  of  the  CCGC  generally  are  summarized  above  under 
“Compensation  and  Corporate  Governance  Committee”.    With  respect  to  compensation  of  directors  and 
executive officers, the CCGC is responsible for:
•  assisting  the  Board  in  its  annual  review  of  the  Board’s  performance  and  oversight  of  the  evaluation  of
management’s performance;
•
reviewing and making recommendations to the Board with respect to the compensation of directors and 
the executive officers (including the CEO) of the Corporation; and
•  approving and evaluating the compensation plans, policies and programs of the Corporation.
For information regarding the process by which the Board determines the compensation for the Corporation’s 
executive officers, please see “Statement of Executive Compensation – Compensation Discussion & Analysis”. 
For information regarding the process by which the Board determines the compensation for the Corporation’s 
directors, please see “Statement of Executive Compensation – Compensation of Directors”.
During the financial year ended December 31, 2010, no compensation consultant or advisor was retained to 
assist in determining compensation for any of the Corporation’s directors and officers, although directors did 
obtain guidance from experienced third parties on various compensation-related matters.
Board Assessment
The  Board  assesses  itself,  its  committees  and  individual  directors  with  respect  to  their  effectiveness  and 
contribution  on  an  annual  basis.  Such  assessment  process  involves  a  director  questionnaire and  interviews 
with  each  director  to  consider  overall  Board  assessment,  individual  committee  assessments,  Board  Chair 
assessment,  individual  committee  chair  assessments  and  individual  director  self  and  peer  assessments. 
Members  of  the  CCGC  are  responsible  for  collecting  questionnaires  and  assessing  them,  and  conducting 
interviews.  However,  such  Committee  is  also  permitted  to  retain  external  advisors  to  assist  with  the 
assessment process. The assessment for 2010 was conducted in the first quarter of 2011 and the CCGC and 
the Board are expected to consider the results of the assessment process at their next meeting. 
 
Succession Planning 
 
As part of the matrix of individual goals and compensation measures, succession is a matter of attention for 
each executive officer of the Corporation. At most meetings of the CCGC, succession is an agenda item and at 
the August meeting of the CCGC and the following meeting of the Board each year particular attention is paid 
to succession issues for the CEO and the other executive officers. At the CCGC meeting in December 2010, in 
connection with cash bonus and share compensation awards and the review of 2011 base salary levels, the 
CEO reviewed with the CCGC his succession plan for consideration and discussion. Regular reporting against 
the succession plan by the CEO to the CCGC is requested by the CCGC and reviewed periodically by the CCGC.
-47-
SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS FOR NEXT MEETING
The Canada Business Corporations Act, which governs the Corporation, provides that shareholder proposals 
must be received by January 3, 2012 to be considered for inclusion in the management information circular 
and the form of proxy for the 2012 annual meeting of shareholders, which is expected to be held on or about 
May 9, 2012.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Additional  information  relating  to  the  Corporation  is  available  on  SEDAR  at  www.sedar.com.  Financial 
information  is  provided  in  the  Corporation’s  audited  annual  financial  statements  and  management’s 
discussion and analysis as at and for the year ended December 31, 2010.
In addition, copies of the Corporation’s audited annual financial statements and management’s discussion and 
analysis as at and for the year ended December 31, 2010 may be obtained upon request to the Corporate 
Secretary of the Corporation. The Corporation may require the payment of a reasonable charge if the request is 
made by a person who is not a shareholder of the Corporation.
DIRECTORS’ APPROVAL
The directors of the Corporation have approved the contents and the sending of this Circular.
DATED as of April 1, 2011.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
“Jacqueline A. Jones” 
Chief Legal Officer & Corporate Secretary
-48-
1.
PURPOSE
SCHEDULE “A”
FRANCO-NEVADA CORPORATION
MANDATE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The purpose of this mandate is to set out the mandate and responsibilities of the board of directors 
(the “Board of Directors” or “Board”) of Franco-Nevada Corporation (“Franco-Nevada”).  The Board of Directors 
is  committed  to  fulfilling  its  statutory  mandate  to  supervise  the  management  of  the  business  and  affairs  of 
Franco-Nevada with the highest standards of ethical conduct and in the best interests of Franco-Nevada.
2.
COMPOSITION
The Board of Directors shall be composed of between six and 12 individuals, the majority of whom will 
be  Canadian  residents.    The  Board  shall  be  constituted  with  a  majority  of  individuals  who  qualify  as 
“independent”  directors  as  defined  in  National  Instrument  58-101  –  Disclosure  of  Corporate  Governance 
Practices.
3.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The Board of Directors is responsible for the stewardship of Franco-Nevada and in that regard shall be
responsible for:
(a)  to the extent feasible, satisfying itself as to the integrity of the Chief Executive Officer and other 
executive officers and that the Chief Executive Officer and other executive officers create a culture 
of integrity throughout the organization;
(b)  enhancing the reputation, goodwill and image of Franco-Nevada;
(c)  adopting a strategic planning process and reviewing, on an annual basis, the strategic plan and 
business objectives of Franco-Nevada (taking into account, among other things, the opportunities 
and risks of Franco-Nevada’s business) that are presented by management;
(d)  the identification and review of the principal risks of Franco-Nevada’s business and ensuring, with 
the assistance of the audit and risk committee of the Board (the “Audit and Risk Committee”), the 
implementation of appropriate risk management systems;
(e)  ensuring,  with  the  assistance  of  the  compensation  and  corporate  governance  committee  of  the 
Board  (the  “Compensation  and  Corporate  Governance  Committee”),  the  effective  functioning  of 
the  Board  of  Directors  and  its  committees  in  compliance  with  the  corporate  governance 
requirements  of  applicable  laws,  and  that  such  compliance  is  reviewed  periodically  by  the 
Compensation and Corporate Governance Committee;
(f)  assessing  the  performance  of  Franco-Nevada’s  executive  officers,  monitoring  succession  plans 
and  periodically  monitoring  the  compensation  levels  of  executive  officers  based  on  the 
determinations  and  recommendations  made  by  the  Compensation  and  Corporate  Governance 
Committee;
(g)  ensuring internal control and management information systems are in place for Franco-Nevada, 
with  the  Audit  and  Risk  Committee  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  the  internal  control  and 
management  information  systems  through  meetings  held  with  the  external  auditors,  as 
appropriate, and senior management and a review of reports prepared by senior management;
(h)  establishing the Audit and Risk Committee as a standing audit committee of the Board;
-49-
(i)  developing Franco-Nevada’s approach to corporate governance by establishing the Compensation 
and  Corporate  Governance  Committee  as  a  standing  committee  of  the  Board,  including 
developing a set of corporate governance principles and guidelines that are specifically applicable 
to Franco-Nevada;
(j)  ensuring that Franco-Nevada has in place a communication policy which enables Franco-Nevada 
to effectively communicate with shareholders, other stakeholders and the public generally, and is 
reviewed at such intervals as the Board deems appropriate; and
(k)  establishing measures for receiving feedback from stakeholders.
4.
EXPECTATIONS OF DIRECTORS
The Board of Directors has developed a number of specific expectations of directors to promote the
discharge by the directors of their responsibilities and to promote the proper conduct of the Board.
(a)  Commitment and Attendance.  All directors are expected to maintain a high attendance record at 
meetings of the Board and the committees of which they are members. Attendance by telephone 
or video conference may be used to facilitate a director’s attendance.
(b)  Preparation for Meetings.  All directors are expected to review the materials circulated in advance 
of  meetings  of  the  Board  and  its  committees  and  should  arrive  prepared  to  discuss  the  issues 
presented.  Directors are encouraged to contact the Chair of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer 
and  any  other  appropriate  executive  officer(s)  of  Franco-Nevada  to  ask  questions  and  discuss 
agenda items prior to meetings.
(c)  Participation  in  Meetings.    Each  director  is  expected  to  be  sufficiently  knowledgeable  of  the 
business  of  Franco-Nevada,  including  its  financial  statements,  and  the  risks  it  faces,  to  ensure 
active  and  effective  participation  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Board  of  Directors  and  of  each 
committee on which he or she serves.
(d)  Loyalty and Ethics.  In their roles as directors, all directors owe a duty of loyalty to Franco-Nevada. 
This duty of loyalty mandates that the best interests of Franco-Nevada take precedence over any 
other  interest  possessed  by  a  director.    Directors  are  expected  to  conduct  themselves  in 
accordance with Franco-Nevada’s Code of Business Conduct and Ethics.
(e)  Other  Directorships  and  Significant  Activities.    Franco-Nevada  values  the  experience  directors 
bring  from  other  boards  on  which  they  serve  and  other  activities  in  which  they  participate,  but 
recognizes that those boards and activities also may present demands on a director’s time and 
availability and may present conflicts or legal issues, including independence issues. No director 
should serve on the board of a competitor or of a regulatory body with oversight of Franco-Nevada. 
Each director should, when considering membership on another board or committee, make every 
effort to ensure that such membership will not impair the director’s time and availability for his or 
her commitment to Franco-Nevada.  Directors should advise the chair of the Compensation and 
Corporate Governance Committee and the Chief Executive Officer before accepting membership 
on  other  public  company  boards  of  directors  or  any  audit  committee  or  other  significant 
committee  assignment  on  any  other  board  of  directors,  or  establishing  other  significant 
relationships  with businesses, institutions, governmental units or regulatory entities, particularly 
those that may result in significant time commitments or a change in the director’s relationship to 
Franco-Nevada.
(f)  Contact  with  Management  and  Employees.    All  directors  should  be  free  to  contact  the  Chief 
Executive Officer at any time to discuss any aspect of Franco-Nevada’s business.  Directors should 
use their judgement to ensure that any such contact is not disruptive to the operations of Franco-
Nevada. The Board of Directors expects that there will be frequent opportunities for directors to 
meet with the Chief Executive Officer in meetings of the Board of Directors and committees, or in 
other formal or informal settings.
-50-
(g)  Speaking on Behalf of Franco-Nevada.   It  is  important  that  Franco-Nevada  speak  to  employees 
and  outside  constituencies  with  a  single  voice,  and  that  management  serve  as  the  primary 
spokesperson.    As  a  result,  directors  should  ensure  that  they  adhere  to  Franco-Nevada’s 
disclosure policy.
(h)  Confidentiality.  The proceedings and deliberations of the Board of Directors and its committees 
are  confidential.  Each  director  will  maintain  the  confidentiality  of  information  received  in 
connection with his or her service as a director.
5.
MEASURES FOR RECEIVING SHAREHOLDER FEEDBACK
All publicly disseminated materials of Franco-Nevada shall provide for a mechanism for feedback from 
shareholders.  Persons designated to receive such information shall be required to provide a summary of the 
feedback to the Board of Directors on a semi-annual basis or at such other interval as they see fit.  Specific 
procedures  for  permitting  shareholder  feedback  and  communication  with  the  Board  will  be  prescribed  by 
Franco-Nevada’s disclosure policy approved by the Board.
6.
MEETINGS
The Board of Directors will meet not less than four times per year: three meetings to review quarterly
results and one prior to the issuance of the annual financial results of Franco-Nevada.
7.
INDEPENDENT ADVICE
In discharging its mandate, the Board of Directors shall have the authority to retain and receive advice
from, special legal, accounting or other advisors and outside consultants if appropriate.
8.
EXPECTATIONS OF MANAGEMENT OF FRANCO-NEVADA
Management shall be required to report to the Board of Directors at the request of the Board on the 
performance  of  Franco-Nevada,  management’s  concerns  and  any  other  matter  the  Board  or  its  Chair  may 
deem appropriate.  In addition, the Board expects management to promptly report to the Chair of the Board 
any significant developments, changes, transactions or proposals respecting Franco-Nevada.
9.
ANNUAL EVALUATION
At  least  annually,  the  Board  of  Directors  through  the  Compensation  and  Corporate  Governance
Committee shall, in a manner it determines to be appropriate:
(a)  conduct  a  review  and  evaluation  of  the  performance  of  the  Board  and  its  members,  its 
committees and their members, including the compliance of the Board with this mandate and of 
the committees with their respective charters; and
(b)  review and assess the adequacy of this mandate on an annual basis.
-51-