
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, no 20549
Form 10—K
® Annual report pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of The Securities Exchange Act 91 1934 For the ﬁscal year ended December 31, 2013
Commission ﬁle No. [-8491
(Exact nariie olregrstrant as speciﬁed in its charter)
Delaware 77—0664171
(State or other jurisdiction of ([.R.S. Employer
incorporation or organization) Identiﬁcation No.)
5500 N. Mineral Drive, Suite 200
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho 0301594011
(Address of principal executive olﬁces) (zip Code)
208-769-4100
(Registrant's telephone number. ineludrng area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) orthe Act:
Name oteuch exchange
Title oleach class 1m which registered
Common Stock, par value $0.25 per share New York Stock Exchange
SCIICS 13 Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock, par value 1025 per New York Stock Exchange
share
Securities registered pursuant to Section l2(g) orthe Aeti None
Indicate by check mark ifthe registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as deﬁned in Rule 405 ofthe Securities Act, Yes t/No _
Indicate by check mark ifthe registrant is not required to ﬁle repnns pursirarit to Sectinn 13 nr Sectinn 15(d) ofthe Act. Yes No 1
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant ( 1) has ﬁled all reports required tn be ﬁled by Sectinii 13 or [3(tl] ot‘ the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 during the preceding 12 months, and (2) has been Subject to such ﬁling requirements tor the past 90 days, Yes iNo 7
Indicate by check mark whether the regrstraiit has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, rfany, every Interactive Data
File required to be submitted and pnsted pursuant to Rule 405 afReglllallon S-T (§ 232.405 ofﬂlls chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such
shorter perind that the regrstrarit was required to submit and post such ﬁles). Yes 1N0 7
Indicate by check mark it‘disclosure nfdeliiiquerit ﬁlers pursuant tn Item 405 nl‘Regulatinii S-K is nnt cniitarned herein, and will tint be cniitarned,
to the best ofregislranl‘s knowledge, in deﬁnitive proxy or intnnnatinn statements incorporated by reference in Part 111 of this Form 10-K or any
amendment to this Form lO-K. E
Indicate by check mark whether-the registrant is a large accelerated ﬁler, an accelerated ﬁler. a non-accelerated ﬁler, or a smaller reporting company.
See the deﬁnitions of“largc aeeelerated ﬁler," “accclcmtcd ﬁler“ and “5111111ch reporting company“ in Rule le-Z ofthe Exchange Aet. (Check 0116):
Large Accelerated Eilet E Accelerated Filer D
Non-Accelerated riler D Smaller teponing company D
1 Do not check rfa smaller reporting company)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as deﬁned in Rule lzb-z nfthe Act) Yes D No E
The aggregate market value ofthe registrant's voting Common Stock held by non-afﬁliates was $1,015.7oo,330 as ntJune 30, 2013. There were
342,638,214 shares orthe registrant's Cnrttrtton Stock outstanding as oflune 30, 2013. and 342,0011 14 shares as ntFebruary 14,2014.


Documents incorpormed by reference herein:
To rlie exreni herein speciﬁcally referenced in Pan III, ilie informallon conmined in the Proxy Stalemem for ﬁle 2014 Annual Meeiing of Shareholders unlie
regisiram, which wlll be ﬁled wilh the Commission pursuant to Regulalion 14A wilhin 120 days oflhe end oflhe reglsrranrs 2013 ﬁscal year, IS
lncorpomlcd hcrcm by rererenee. Scc ran in,


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Special Note on Forward-Looking Statements 1
PART I 1
Item 1. Business 1
Introduction 1
Products and Segments 4
Employees 6
Available Information 6
Item IA. Risk Factois 6
Item IE. Unresolved Staff Comments 25
ltein 2, Propenics 25
The Greens Creek Unit 25
The Lucky Friday Unit 29
The C358 Bemrdi Unit 34
item 3. Legal Proceedings 33
Item 4, Mine Safely Disclosures 38
PART [1 38
Item 5. Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 33
Item 6. Selected Financial Data 41
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis ofFinnncial Condition and Results of Opeiations 42
Overview 42
Results of Operations 45
The Greens Creek Segment 45
The Lucky Friday Segment so
The Casa Berardi Segment 52
Corporate Matters 54
Reconciliation ofCasli Cost. Before By-product Credits and Cash Cast, Aﬁer By-produet Credits (noii-GAAP) to Cost of Sales and Otlier 5 5

Direct Production Costs and Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization (GAAP)
Reconciliation of Earnings Before interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amonization (non-GAAP) to Net Income (Loss) (GAAP) 5 9
Financial quuldlty and Capital Resources 5 9
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities and Commitments 62
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements 64
Critical Accounting Estimates 64
New Accounting Pranoiuiceinents 6 6
Forward-Looking Statements 6 6
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 6 6
Commodity-Price Risk Management 6 6
Provisional Sales 6 6
Foreign Currency 67
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 67
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreement: witli Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 68
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 68
Disclosure Controls and Procedures 68
Management‘s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial chnrting 68
Attestation Report oflndependent Registered Public Accounting Fri-in 70
PART III 70
Item 10. Directors, Executive Ofﬁcers and Corporate Governance 71


Iiem 1 1. Execuiive Compensatlon 73
Iiem 12. Secumy Owneiship ofCennin Beneﬁcial Owners and Manngemeni and Relaied Sioekholder Manet: 73
Iiem l3. Cenain Relationships and Related Transaciions, and Dimmer Independence 73
Iiem 14. Piineipal Accoumam Fees and Semces 73
PART IV 74
liem 15. Exlubiis and Financlal Slalemcm Schedules 74
Signatures 7 5
Index to Consolidated Finaneial Slalcmenls F»l
Index 10 Exhibiis F-SO


Special Note an Fumnrzl-Lonkt‘ng Statements

Certain statements contained in this repon (including mt‘oirnation incorporated by reference) are "forward-looking statements" and are intended to
be covered by the safe harbor provided for under Section 27A of the Secunlies Act of [933, as amended, and Section 2 l E of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as amended Our forward-looking statements utclude our current expectations and projections about future production, results. perfon‘naitce.
prospects and opportunities, including reserves and other mineralization. We have tried to identify these forward-looking statements by using words such
as "may," "might," "will," “expect,” "anticipate," “believe,” “could,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimale” and similar expressions, These forward-looking
stalemenls are based on inforiiialioii currently available to us and are expressed in good faith and believed lo have a reasonable basis. However, our
forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks, uncenarntres and other factors that euuld cause our actual production, results, pei‘lhnnance,
prospects or opportunities, iitctuding reserves and mineralization, to dirrer materially from those expressed tn, or implied by, ttiese lorward-lookiug
statements,

These risks, uncertalnlles and olher factors include, bul are not limited In, those sel forth under Item 1A. Risk Fut’lors and Part II, Item 7,
thugorntml’r Dixcnrxiun tmd Analyrix ()thmmLiuI Condition ant] Rerullr ofOperttziunx, Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned
not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements, Projections and other forward-lacking statements included in this report have been prepared
based on assumptions, which we believe to be reasonable. but not in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) or
any guidelines of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Actual results may vary, perhaps matenally. You are strongly cautioned not to place
undue reliance on such projeclions and other forward-looking statements, All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to llecla
Mining Company or to peisons acting on our behalfare expressly qualiﬁed in their entirety by these cautionary statements. Except as required by federal
securities laws, we disclaim any intention or obligation to update or reiuse any forward-leaking statements, whether as a result of new infonnation, future
events or otherwise.

PART I
Item 1, Business

For information regarding the organization of our business segments and our significant customers, see Note 11 of Nolex It) Consolidated
Financial Statements

Information sel foth in Items IA, 113 and 2 are incorporated by reference iiito this Item 1,

Introduction

1-1ecla Mining Company and oui subsidiaries have provided pi ecious and base metals to the US, and woildwide since [891 (in this report. “we”
oi “our” oi “us” iet‘ers to 1-1ecla Mining Company and oui atriliates and subsidiaries), We discover, acquire, develop, and produce silver, gold, lead and
zinc. In doing so, we intend to manage our business activities in a safe, environmentally responsible and cost-effective manner.

We produce lead, zinc aud bulk coucentrates, which we sell to custom smelters, aud unreﬁned bullion bars (dore') coiuainiug gold and silver,
which are iunlier reﬁiied before sale to precious metals traders. We are organized and managed into three segments that encompass our operating units: the
Greens Creek. Lucky Friday, and Casa Berardi units.

1


The map below shows the locations of our operating units and our exploration and pre—developrnent projects, as well as our eorporate oﬁioes located
in Coeur d'Alene, ldaho and Vancouver, British Columbia
‘ I '3‘ E y
‘ ' i
v . 1
V v H I I? t y
s 1 F \ h r , K
. - a . a
. F ) V . p . .
_Gfoans Creek 1 « Opinacu I Wildcat
Admmliy Island. Alaska A ‘ . James 301, Quebec
a , ,
Capaci- Ollie.
Vancouvet. at: x s t _
Commit Ofﬁce ~ . l. I ‘ Coca normal
009m d‘Mene, Idaho “ . I Vol d‘Or. Quebec
stlvor Valley 1‘ Fayolle
Wallace team I," A Vol d'Or, Quebec
t
luckyﬂday ~ Hove-Howe
Mul n. Idaho ‘ I Va| d'Ot, Quebec
Mom. 01an
Esmeralda 60.. Nevada in, '
o , 7'
San Juan sum , , vL I
Cleede, Comma i, IsA ,x .
g is“ ,5 _ ,
San Sebatﬁqn ~ \ «j
Butango, Memo a K v, I wrpomtenllioe
~ ~. 'gxﬁ I Whammy
55m; ‘ O 
" '* ‘ ‘ o automatme

Our current business strategy is to focus our ﬁnancial and huruan resourees in the following areas:

- Operating our properties safely, in an envirorunentally responsible manner, and wsI-cﬁemively.

- Optimizing and improving operations at our Casa Betardi unit, which, along with other mineral interests, was obtained as a result ofour
acquisition of Aurizon Mines, lel ("Aurizon").

- Expanding our proven and probable reserves and production oapaoity at our operating properties.

- Maintaining and investing in exploration and pre—developinent projects in the vicinities oflive mining districts we believe to be under—explored
and under—invested: North Idaho's Silver Valley in the historic Coeur d'Alene Mining Dishiot; our Greens Creek unit on Alaska's Admiralty
Island located near Juneau; the silver-producing district near Duraugo, Mexico; the Abitibi regiou of uorth-western Quebec, Cauada; and the
Creede district of Southwestern Colorado.

- Continuing to seek opportunities to aoquire and invest in mining properties and companies Examples inelude our acquisition of the Monte
Cristo property in Nevada, investments in Dolly Varden silver Corporation, Canamex Resources Corp, Brixlun Metals Corporation and
Typhoon Exploration Inc. in 2012 and 2013, and the acquisition of Aurizon diseussed further below.

2


Below is a snmiiiary of nei incniiie (1oss) fur each of ihe 1asi ﬁve years (“1 ihousands):
Year Ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
Nei income (loss) 5 (25,130) 5 14,954 5 151,154 5 48,983 5 57,526

Our rinanciai resu1is nver ihe 1asi five years have been impacied by:

- F1iiciuaiicns in prices oi‘ihe iiieia1s we pi-nduce, The average, high and 1owdai1y closing marker prices for siiver, gnld, 1eai1 and zinc {or each
ufﬂie 1215! ﬁve year: are as fellows:

2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
Siivei (per oz):
Average S 23.83 S 31.15 8 35.11 3 20.16 S 14.65
High S 32.23 S 3723 S 48.70 $ 30.70 S 19.18
Lmv S 18.61 S 2667 8 26.16 3 15.14 S 10.51
Gold (per 02.):
Average 5 1,411 5 1,559 3 1,559 5 1,225 5 973
High 5 1,694 5 1,792 5 1,595 5 1,421 5 1,213
Lmv 5 1,192 5 1,540 3 1,319 5 1,058 5 310
Lead (per 1b,):
Average S 0.97 S 0.94 S 1.09 S 0.97 S 0.78
High S 1.11 S 1.06 S 1.33 $ 1.18 S 1.11
Lmv S 0.88 S 0.79 S 0.81 S 0.71 S 0.45
Zine (per 1b.):
Average S 0.87 S 0.88 S 1.00 S 0.98 S 0.75
High S 0.99 S 0.99 S 1.15 $ 1.20 S 1.17
Lmv S 0.81 S 0.80 S 0.79 S 0.72 S 0.48
See Item 7. Managcnicni ii- Dia'ruxxiun and Anillys‘ix chinanciat Condition and Rcriiiii of 017('I'1lli0m‘ e Rdxultx cf operuiicns for a
summary ofaverage market and realized prices for each oflhe three years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, Our results of
cperaiicns are signiﬁcanriy irnpacied by nucruaiicns in [he prices orsiiver, goid, 1ead and nine, which are arrecied by numerous racicrs
beyond mu cunlrul. See Item 1A, Risk FHCIUI‘A‘ r Fmiumul Riv/r5 r A .mhxtuntiul or (amended decline in merulxprica would have a
niarciiut udvdrxa (’ffed on in- for infomialiuii on a nrrmber of iiie various factors [1131 can inipaci prices of iiie meiais we produce, Hecla's
average reaiized prices {in siiver, gn1d, and zinc were 1nwei in 2013 cniiipai ed in 2012, whi1e iiie average rea1ized price fol 1ead increased,
Average reaiized prices {or silver, 1eai1, and zinc decreased in 2012 compared io 201 1, iviiiie gn1i1 prices increased, We believe iiiai marker
iiieiai price irends are a significani facior in our operaiing and ﬁnaiicia1 performance. We are unable io predici ﬂuciuaiions in prices for meiais
and have hmned cnniroi over ihe iiming of our ccncenirare shipineriis. However, in Apni 2010, we began unhzrng financia11y-se111er1 fnrward
coniracrs for 1eai1 and zrnc Willi ihe obieciive of managing the exposure in changes in prices of lead and zinc coniainen in our concenirare
shipmems beiween ilie iiine ufsale and ﬁnal senlemeni. 1n nddiiion, in July 2013, we iiiiiiaied a similar program for silver and gulrl wrili lhe
ohjeclwe orrnanaging exposure in changes in prices rnr lllose meiais ccniained in our concenirare shipments. See Note 10 of Nana- m
(.‘ausolzdmcd Financial Smmmz'ltlx for more iiifoniiaiion on our base and precious iiieial forward summer programs,

- Casi ofsales and other direct producncin crisis 0f$235.3 million in 2013, $134.1 million 1n 2012 and S165.6 million in 2011, During 2012
and 2013, ccsis cf sa1es and ciher dii-eci produciinn cnsis were nnpacied by ihe iempnrary suspension ni‘ pi-nduciicn a1 ihe Lucky Friday iiiine
during iiiesin12012 and by are acquisiiion criiie Casa Berardi mine during 2013. See Item 7. Mnnugcnicni 2i- Din-ninnn and Analysii- of
Financial Crmili'ii‘rm and Ramlis a/(Ipcmiimix e Rcmlls ofOpcmiians for more informaiinii,

- S25.3 m1llion in suspensmn—relaled cosls at our Lucky Friday unil in 2012, including $6.3 m1llion in deprecialion, depletion, and
aiiioriizaiinn. We recognized suspensinn-reiaieri incniiie af$1.4 "1|"an in 2013 due io iiie i-eceipi oi‘business iiiieriiipiion insurance pi-nceeds
i-eiaied io iiie suspension penod. Lnnned prcriiiciion recciinnenceri ai ihe Lucky Friday unll in are firsi quaner Df2013, and are mine resuiiied
full produciion in Seprember 2013. See The LiiL/(y Friday Segmﬁm secnon far more inrorrnaiion on ihe iemporary suspension or prodiiciion.

3


- Exploration and pre—development expenditures totaling $37.7 million, $49.7 million, $31.4 million, $21.6 million and $9.2 million for the
years ended December 31, 2013, 2012,2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.

- Provision for closed operations and environmental matters of $5.4 million, 84.7 million, $9.7 million, $201.1 million and $7.7 million,
respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012, 2011, 2010, and 2009, The $201,] provision in 2010 included $193.2 tiiillion
acciued fol environmental obligations in Idaho's Coein d‘Alene Basin as a result oi'an agreement with the United States, the Coeur d'Alene
Indian Tribe. and the State of Idaho on ﬁnancial tenns that would be incorporated into a comprehensive settlement oftlie Coeur d'Alene Basin
environmental litigation and related claims. The settlement was ﬁnalized upon entry of the Consent Decree by the Court in September 2011.

~ Net gain on base metal forward contracts oi‘$18.0 million in 2013, a net loss oi‘$10.5 million in 2012, a net gain of$38,0 million in 2011,
and a net loss of$20.8 million in 2010. These gains and losses are related to ﬁnancially-settled forwaid contracts on forecasted zinc and lead
production as part ofa risk management program initiated in 2010. See Note 10 of News [0 Consolidated Financial Statements for more
information on our derivatives contracts.

~ Dnr acquisition ofAurizon for $714.5 million in June 2013, which was partially funded by the issuance oi‘6.875% Senior Notes due 2021
("Senior Notes“) In Apr112013 for net proceeds of $490.0 million, We recognized expenses relating to the Aurlzoii acquisition of$26,4 million
in 2013. In addition, in 2013 we iecoided inteiest expense related to the Senior Notes, including amortization ofissuance costs, of $19.1
million, net oi'$t’i.5 million in capitalized interest. See Note [6 ofNalz's (0 Consolidated Financial Statements for more Information on the
acquisition.

- Our acquisition ofthe remaining 703% oflhe Greens Creek mine for $758.5 million in April 2008, a portion ofvlihich was funded by a
$140.0 million teiTn loan and $220.0 million bridge loan, We recorded interest expense related to these loans, including amortization of loan
fees and interest rate swap adjustments, of $10.1 million in 2009, net of $1.9 million in capitalized interest, We also recorded approximately
$6.0 million in expense in 2009 for additional debt—related fees, We completed repayment of the bridge loan balance in February 2009 and
repayment of the term loan balance in October 2009.

- An increase in the number of shares of our common stock outstanding, which impacts our income (loss) per common share.

A comprehensive discussion of our ﬁnancial results for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, individual operating unit
performance, general corporate expenses and other signiﬁcant items can be found in Item 7. 7 Management is Damn-ion and Analvsii- ()melxalidilled
Ftnant'ia] Condition and chulis' of Operations, as well as the (.‘mixolidazed Financial Smierneriitr and Naiex thereto.

Products and Segments

Our segments are ditt‘erentraied by geographic region, We produce zinc, lead and bulk concentrates at our Greens Creek unit and lead and zinc
concentrates at our Lucky Fiiday unil, each of which we sell to custom smelters on contract, and unreﬁned gold and silver bullion bats (dore) at Gieens
Creek and Casa Berardi, wluch are shipped directly to customers or further reﬁned before sale ofthe metals to precious metals traders. Casa Bet-ai-di also
sells gold and silver extracted from carbon fines, which represented less than 2% of gold revenue for the segment. The concentrates produced at our Greens
Creek and Lucky Friday units contain payable silver, zinc and lead. and the concentrates produced at Greens Creek also contain payable gold, Payable
metals are those included in our products that can be recovered and sold by smelters aiid refineis. Dui segments as ofDecembei 31, 2013 included.

- The Greens Creek ilnit is located on Admiralty Island, near Juneau, Alaska. Greens Creek is 100% owned and has been in production since
198‘). with a temporary care and maintenance period from April 1993 through Jilly 1996.

- The Lucky Fnday unit located in northen'l Idaho, Lucky Friday is 100%-owned and has been a producing mine for us since 1958. Production
at the Lucky Fnday unit began ramping up dunng February 2013 followtng a period of temporary care and maintenance and no production in
2012 (see [tern 2. Property Description, Operating Properties, The Lucky Friday Unit 1. Production leached the historical t‘ull thioiigliput
rate of 900 tons per day in mid-September, finishing the year averaging 327 tons per day In the fourth quarter.

4


~ The Casa Berardl unit located in the Ablllbl raglan cf nonh-weslem Quebec, Canada. Casa Berardi Is 100% Dwned and was acquired on June
1, 2013 with the purchase of all issued and outstanding common shares ofAui’iztm Mines Ltd. I'Aurizon", see Note 16 of Nate's to
Consolidated FillﬂIIL‘iIll Statemerm'). Aurizun had operaled and produced from the Casa Berdrdl mlne since lale 2006 and began various
rnine enhancements, including a shaﬁ deepening project which is expected to be completed in 2014 and a new paste ﬁll facility completed in
2013 in an eﬁorl to improve operational efﬁciency,
The iollowrng ohart illustrates the contributions to our consolidated sales by our operating units:
2013 Sales of Products by Operating Unit
Casi! Berardl' 19,694.
Luck} Fndiu l l n%
GNCIIS Creek (ix We
The table below summarizes our productlon for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011. Zlnc and lead production quantiﬁes are
presented in short tons ("Ions"),
Year
2013 2012 201 1
Silver(ounces) 8,919,728 6,394,235 9,483,676
Gold (ounces) 119,989 55,496 56,818
Lead (tons) 30,374 21,074 39,150
Zinc (Ions) 61,406 64,249 73,355
Litenses, Permits am! Contessiuns
We are required to obtain various licenses and permits to operate our mines and conduct exploration and reclamation activrties. The suspension in
production at the Lucky Friday unit during 2012 was pursuant to an order from the Federal Mine Safety and Health Administration See [tern 1A, Risk
thcttmt‘ . Legal, Market and Regulatory Kit-tet- . We are required to obrein governmental and lexs‘ur approvals and permitr in order to ceriaaer
mining epereiient. The operations and exploralion activities at our Casa Berardi unit are subjecl to claitns renewal and minimum work commitment
requirements under the Quebec Mining Act, In addition, we conduct our exploration activtties in Mexico pursuant to concessions granted by the Mexican
government, which are subject to certain pulltical risks associated with foreign operations. See Item 1A, Rixk Fuctors . operation, Development,
Exploration and Acquisition Riv/av - Oarfareign activities are subject to additional inherent risks.
5


PhysicnlAssem

Our business is capital intensive and requires ongoing capital investment tor the replacement, modeniization or expansion orequipnient and
facilities and to develop new ore reserves. At December 31, 2013, the book value olour property, plant, equipment and mineral interests, net of
accumulated depreciation, was approximately 31,8 billion. We maintain insurance policies against propeny loss and business interruption. However,
such insurance contains exclusions and limitations on coverage, and there can be no assurance that claims would be paid under such insurance policies in
connection with a particular event. See Item 1A, Risk Fncmrx - Operation, Development, Exploration and Acquisition Rt,\‘](,\‘ - Our operations may be
odvcrrely oﬂmted by rislcr and hazardr Ll.\‘.\‘i’)L'tL1t(’l'1 witli the mining inditrtry that may not bcﬁlIIy Covered by inrrironce .

Employezx

As of December 31. 2013. we employed 1,312 people, and we believe relations with our employees are generally good,

Many oitiie employees at our Lucky Friday unit are represented by a union. The current collective bargaining agreement with workers at our
Lucky Friday unit expires on April 30, 2016, As a result of the requirement to remove built-up ceinentitious material from the Silver Shaﬁ, underground
access was limited and production temporarily suspended at the Lucky rriday, lorcing i-iecla Limited to lay off 121 employees in January 2012
[approximately 25 ofthose employees accepted temporary positions at other Hecla operations), With the resumption oiproduction in early 2013,
employment at the Lucky Friday returned to roughly its level prior to the suspension of production. See Purl II, Item 7. Muring(’m(’llt’,i‘ Did'cttd‘xitm and
Analysis o/Faiancial Condition and Ranks 0/ Operations - The Lat-Icy Friday Segment section for more information.

In March 2012. Hecla Limited received notice ofa complaint ﬁled against it by the United Steel Workers, Local 51 14. with the Federal Mine Safety
Health Review Commission lor compensation for bargaining unit workers at the Lucky Friday iriine who were idled as a result of the temporary
suspension of production at the mine (see the Other Contingenciar section of Note 7 of Notcr to Conralidatcd Finam'iul Statements for more
iniormanon).

Available lnﬁtrnmtl'tm

llecla Mining Company is a Delaware corporation. Our current liolding company structure dates from the incorporation oi llecla Mining Company
in 2006 and tire renaming of our subsidiary (previously IIecla Mining Company) as IIecla Limited. Our pnucipal executive ofﬁces are located at 6500 N.
Mineral Diive, Suite 200, Cueiir Lt‘Alene, Idaho 83815-9408. Our telephone nuinhei 15(208) 769-4100. Our web site address is www.hccla»mining.com.
We rile our annual, quarterly and current repons and any amendments to these repons with the SEC, copies of which are available on our website or from
the SEC free of charge (\iiww.scc,gov or KOO—SEC—OZZO or the SEC‘s Public Refeience Room, 100 F Street. N,E.. Washington, DC, 20549), Charters of
our audit, compensation, and corporate govemance and directors' nominating committees, as well as our Code of Ethics for the Chief Executive Oiiicer
and Senior Financial Ofﬁcers and our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for Directors, Ofﬁcers and Employees, are also available on our website. We
wtli provrdc copies ortliese materials to stockholders upon request using the above-listed contact information, directed to the attention of investor Relations,
or via email request sent to hmc-info lilliecla-miiiingcom.

We have included the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer (CEO) and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer (CFO) certiﬁcations regarding our public disclosure required by
Section 302 ofthe Sarbanes-Oxley Act onOOZ as Exhibits 31.1 and 31,2 to this report, Additionally, we filed with the New York Stock Exchange
("NYSE") tlie CED's cenitication regarding our coinpllance witli the NYSE's Corporate Governance Listing Standards (“Listlng Standards") pursuant to
Section 303A.12(a) ofthe Listing Standards, which certiﬁcation was dated June 5, 2013, and indicated that the CEO was not aware of any violations of
the Listing Standards,

Item 1A, Risk Factors

The following risks and uncertainties, together with the other infonnation set forth in this Form 10-K, should be carefully considered by those who
invest iii our securities. Any ortiie rollowing risks could materially adversely arrect our business, financial condition or operating results aiid could
decrease the Value of our common and/or preferred stock.

6


FINANCIAL RISKS
A ,t'abstanti‘til or extended decline in metals pricey would have a material advent eﬂect on as.

Our revenue is derived from the sale oiconcenrrates and dare containing silver. gold. lead and zrnc and, as a result, our eaniings are directly related
to the prices of these metals. silver. gold, lead and zinc prices ﬂuctuate widely and are affected by nuitierous factors. including:

- speculailveacilvllies:

~ relative exchange rates oflllc US, dollar;

- global and regional demand and production;

- political instability;

- inilation. recession or increased or reduced economic activity; and

- other political, regulatory and economic conditions.

These factors are largely beyond our control and are difﬁcult to predict. If the marltet prices for these metals fall below our production or
development costs for a sustained period oftinre. we will experience losses and may have to discontinue exploration, development or operations. or incur
asset write-downs at one or more of our properties. See [rent 1, Business 7 Introduction for iniormation on the average, high, and low daily closing prices
for silver, gold. lead and zinc for the last tive years. On February 14, 2014. the closing prices for silver, gold. lead and zinc were $21.09 per ounce.
$1,320 per oiiitce, $096 per pound and $0.93 per pound, respectively.

The acquisition ofAuriwn increased our exposure to gold price volatility.

The financial results of our Casa Berardi unit, obtained through the acquisition ot‘Aunzon, are highly sensitive to changes in the price ot‘ gold. and
the acquisition ofAunzoll increased the sensitivity ot‘ our results to such changes. Gold prices ﬂuctuate and are at‘t‘ected by numerous factors, including
expectations with respect to the rate ofinﬂalion, exchange rates. interest rates, global and regional political and economic crises and governmental policies
with respect to gold holdings by cenlial banks. The demand tbr and supply ot‘ goid at‘t‘ects gold prices but not necessarily in the same manner as demand
and supply affect the prices of other commodities. The supply ofgold consists ofa combination of mine production and existing stocks of bullion and
fabricated gold held by governments, public and private ﬁnancial institutions, industrial organizations and private individuals. The demand for gold
consists primarily of Jewelry and investment demand. We do not used forward sale contracts, or other denvative products, to protect the price level oi
iuture gold sales at the Casa Beiardi unit. thereby exposing those sales to commodity price risk.

An extended decline in metals prices, an increase in operating or capital costs, mine accidents or closures, increasing environmental
obligations, or our inability to convert erplorarion potential to reserves may cause as to recent write—downs, which could negatively impact our
results ofoperations.

When events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value oicur long-lived assets may not be recoverable, we review the
recoverabihty orthe carrying value by estimating the ruture undiscounted cash ﬂows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition orthe
asset, lntpaimient must be recognized when the carrying value of the asset exceeds these cash ﬂows, and recognizing impairment write—downs could
negatively impact our results of operations, Metal price estimates are a key component used in the analysis of the carrying values of our assets, as the
evaluation approach involves comparing carrying values to the average estimated undiscounted cash ﬂows resulting from opeiatiiig plans using vaiious
metals price scenarios. Our esllmales of undiscnunled cash ﬂows fur our long-lived assets also include an eslimale of the markel value of the exploration
potential beyond the current operating plans. Because the average estimated undiscounted cash ﬂows exceeded the carrying values ofuur long-lived assets,
we did rial record Impainriems as of December 3 l i 20 [3, However, ihhe prices of silver, gold. zinc and lead decline for an extended period chime, lfwe
fail to control production costs. if regulatory issues increase costs or decrease production. or ifwe do not realize the mineable are reserves or exploration
potential at our mining properties, we may be required to evaluate the carrying values ofour long-lived assets and recognize asset write—downs in the
i‘iitiii e. In addition, the perceived iiiaiket value of the expluiallun potential of our properties is dependent upon prevailing metals prices as well as our
ability to discover economic ore. A decline in metals prices for an extended period ofllme or our inability to convert exploration potential to reserves could
signiﬁcantly reduce our estimations of the value of the exploration potential at our properties and result in asset write-downs.

7


We have lint! [asses that could reoccur in thefuturei

We reported a tiet loss for the year ended December 31, 2013 of$25.l tnillion, However, we reported net income for each ofthe years ended
December 31, 2012, 2011, 2010 and 2009 “$15.0 million, $151.2 million, $49.0 million, and $67.8 million, respectively, A comparison of operating
results over the past three yeais can he found in Results ofOpcmitonx in Management ii Di'xcuxstun and Anabrxi'x osz'nant-i'ul Condition and Results
of Operations.

Many ofthe factors affecting our operating results are beyond our control, including, but not limited to, the volatility ofmetals prices; stiielter
terms, rock and soil conditions; seismic events; availability of hydroelectric power; diesel fuel prices; interest rates, foreign exchange rates; global or
regional political or economic policies; inﬂation; availability and cost of labor; economic developments and crises: governmental regulations; continuity of
orebodies; ore grades; recoveries, and price speculation by certain investors, purchases and sales by central banks and other holders and producers of
gold and silver in response to these factors. We cannot foresee whether onr operations will continue to generate snfricient revenue in order for its to generate
net cash from operating activities, There can be no assurance that we will not experience net losses in the futnre.

Commodity rixk management activities could mince in to losses

We periodically enter into risk management activities, such as financially—settled forward sales contracts and comtiiodity put and call option
contracts, to manage the prices received on the metals we produce. Such activities are utilized to attempt to insulate our operating results from changes in
prices for those metals, However, such activities may prevent us from realizmg possible revenues in the event that the market price ofa metal exceeds the
piice stated in a forward sale or call option contract In addition, we may experience losses ifa coiintei-pany fails to piiicliase under a conti act when the
contract price exceeds the spot price ofa commodity.

We utilize financially settled forward contract progiams to manage the exposure to changes in silver, gold, lead and zinc prices contained in our
concentrate shipments between the time of sale and final settlement, and to manage the exposure to changes in the prices of lead and zinc contained in our
forecasted future concentrate shipments, See Note 10 ofNalex to Corlxalidaled FinattctalStazcmcnzs for more information on these base metals forward
contract programs.

The ﬁnancial terms ofsettlernent of the Coeirr a'atlene Basin environmental litigation and other claims may materially impact our cash
resources and our access to additional ﬁnancing

On September 8, 2011, a Consent Decree (Ilie “Consent Decree") settling environmental litigation and related claims involving Hecla Limited
pertaining to historic releases of mining wastes in the Coenr d'Alene Basin was approved and entered by the us. District Court in Idaho. The Consent
Decree resolved all existing claims of the Uiilted States. the Coeur d‘Alene Indian Tribe. and the State of Idaho (“Plaintiffs”) against Hecla Limited and its
afﬁliates under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 [CERCLA) and certain other statutes for past
response casts. future environmental remediation costs. and natural resource damages related to historic releases of mining wastes in the Coeur d‘Alene
River Basin. as well as all remaining obligations of1-1ec1a Limited with respect to the Bunker Hill stiperfnnd site. In addition to the approximately $203
million already paid under the Consent Decree in 201 1. 2012, and 2013. Hecla Limited remains obligated under the Consent Decree to pay approximately
$55.5 million by August 2014. as quanerly payments of the proceeds from the exercise of any outstanding Series 1 and Series 3 warrants (which have an
exercise price ofbetween $2.40 and $2.51 per share) during the quarter, with the remaining balance, ifany, due “1 August 2014.

If additional warrants are not exercised, the requirement to pay $55.5 million in August 2014 would cause us to use a significant poition of either
our cash currently on hand or future cash resources, or utilize our iindrawn revolving credit facility or other sources of financing oiir cash on hand at
December 31, 2013 was $212.2 million; however. tliere can be no asslirance that we will have the casli on liand to meet these obligations.

Our proﬁtability coalrl be affected by the prices ofcrner ulnlmnditieo and services

Our business activities are highly dependent on the costs of commodities and serVices such as fuel, steel. cement and electricity. The recent prices
for such commodities have been volatile and may increase our costs ofproductioii and development. A mateiial increase in costs at any of our opeiating
properties could have a significant effect on our proﬁtability, For additional discussion, see Results of operations- in Management 's Discussion and
Analysis ofFirianatal Calldttmn and Results ofoperanons ,

8


0ur accounting and other estimates may lie imprecise.

Prepanng financial statements requires management to make estimates anti assumptions that affect the repoited amounts and related disclosure of
assets. liabilities, revenue and expenses at the date ofthe consolidated financial statements and reporting periods. The more significant areas requinng the
use of management assumptions and estimates relate to:

~ mineral reserves. milieralized material, and other resources that are the basis for future income and cash flow estimates and uiiits-of-productioii

depreciation. depletion and amortization calculations:

- future metals prices;

~ environmental, reclamation and closure obligations:

- asset impaiiiiients;

- valuation ofbusiness combinations;

- reserves for contingencies alid litigation; and

~ defencd tax asset valuation allowance.

Actual results may differ materially from these estimates using different assumptions or conditions, For additional information, see (‘rt‘lt‘ctzl
Accounting Estimates in Management is Discussion and Analvstx ofFinunt-iul Condition anti Results of Operations, Note 1 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements and the risk factors: “Our development ofnm (IIebrllIiex arul other capital costs may be higher antlprovitle less
return than we cslimltlcll, " “Our orc reserve estimates may he imprecise. " “Our environmental obligations may cxeeeti the pluvixiom‘ we have
made, " and “We are currently involved in ongoing legal disputes that may materially lzdvcn‘ely affect us, "

Our ability to recognize the Irene/its nfdeferreit not assets is dependent on future cash/Ions and taxable income.

We recognize the expected future tax beneﬁt from deferred tax assets when the tax beneﬁt is considered to be more likely than not ofbeing
realieed. Otherwise, a valuation allowance is applied against deterred tax assets, reducing the value orsuch assets, Assessing the recoverability cl
deferred tax assets requires management to make signiﬁcant estimates related to expectations of future taxable income. Estimates of future taxable income
are based on forecasted income from operations and the application oi existing tax laws in each Jurisdiction. Metal price and production estimates are key
components used in tlie dcten‘ninatioii ofour ability to realize the expected future beneﬁt of our deferred tax assets, To the extent that future taxable income
differs signiﬁcantly from estimates as a result ofa decline in metals prices or other factors, our abilin to realize the deferred tax assets could be
impacted. Additionally. slgnlﬁcam future issuances of common stock or common stock equivalents, or changes in the direct or indirect ownership ofour
common stock or common stock equivalents could limit our ability to utilize our net operating loss carryt‘omards pursuant to Section 382 ofthe lntemal
Revenue Code. Future changes in tax law or changes in ownership structure could limit our ability to utilize our recorded tax assets. We currently have no
deterred tax valuation allowances, with the exception of certain amounts related to toreign net operating loss canytonvards, and our current and non—
ciiirent tiefeiietl tax asset balances as oi‘Deceiiiber 31. 2013 were $35.7 million aiitl $78.8 million, iespectively. See Nola 5 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements for further discussion of our deferred tax assets.

Giulia/ﬁnancial events may have an impact on our business and ﬁnancial condition in ways that we currently cannot predict

The 2008 credit crisis and related turmoil in the global ﬁnancial system and ensuing recession had an impact on our business and ﬁnancial
position. and similar events in the future could also impact us. The continuation or re-eiiiergence ot‘ the financial crisis or recession may limit our ability
to raise capital through ciedit anti equity markets, The prices of the metals that we produce are ail‘ectetl by a number of factors, and it is unknown how
these factors may be impacted by a global financial event.

Returns for investments in pension plans andpensian plan funding requirements are uncertain.

We maintain defined beneﬁt pension plans for us. employees, which provide for speciﬁed payments attei retirement for most us. employees,
Canadian employees participate in Canada‘s public retirement system, and are not eligible to participate in the deﬁned beneﬁt pension plans that we
maintain for U.S. employees. The ability at the pension plans maintained for us. employees to provide the specified benetits depends on our funding of
the plans and returns on investments made by the plans. Returns, irany, on investments are subject to ﬂuctuations based on investment choices and
market conditions. A sustained period otlow returns or losses on investments could require us to fund the pension plans to a greater extent than
anticipated. See Note 8 ofNales la Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our pension plans.

9


oiir level ofileln could impair ourﬁnoneiol health oat/prevent iii from fulﬁlling our obligations, including our Senior Notes and other
indebtedness.

As ofDecember 3 l, 2013, we had total outstanding indebtedness ufappmximalely $5135 inilhon. oiir level of debt and debt service obligations
could:

- make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations, including our Senior Nales;

- reduce the amount of funds available to finance our operations. capital expenditures and other acuvllies;

- increase our vulnerability to economic downtunis and industry candmons:

- limit our fiextbility in responding to changing business and economic condmunsr including increased competition and demand for new products
and services:

- place us at a disadvantage when compared to our competitors that have lower leverage;

- increase our cost ufbormwmg: and

- limit our ability to borrow additional funds.

We may be able to incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future; howcverr the iiidenttire governing the Senior Notes contains restrictions
on the incurrence of additional indebtedness. These restrictions are subjec! to a number ofsigniricant qualiﬁcations and exceptions and, under certain
circumstances, the amount of indebtedness that could be incurred in compliance wrth these restrictions could be substantial. We have $100 million in
available capacity to be drawn from our revolving credit facility.

ifnew debt is added to our extsting debt levels, the risks associated wrth such debt that we currently face would increase, The indenture
governing the Senior Notes does not prevent us from incurring obligations that constitute indebtedness iuider that agreement.

The terms nfnur item impose restrictions on our operations.
The indenture governing our Senior Notes includes a number of slgmﬁcam restrictive covenants. These covenants could adversely affect us by
limiting our ability to plan for or react to market conditions or to meet our capital needs. Among other things, these covenants:

- make it more difﬁcult for us to satisfy our obligations with respect to the Senior Notes and our other debl;

- limit our ability to obtain additional financing to fund future working capital, capital expenditures. acquisitions or other general corporate
requirements, or require us to make divestitures;

- require a substantial portion of our cash flows to be dedicated to debt service payments instead of other purposes, thereby reducing the amount of
cash tlows available forworking capital capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;

- increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry condiuons;

- limit our fiexrbility in planning for and reacting to changes in the industry in which we compete;

- place us at a disadvantage compared to other, less leveraged competitors; and

- increase our cost of borrowrng additional funds.

10


In addition, our revolving credit facility requires us to comply with various covenants. A breach of any ofthese c ovenants could result in an
event of default under the agreement governing our credit facility that, if not eured or waived. could give the lenders the right to tcrnrinate coinnritmcnts to
lend and cause all arnouirts outstanding wrtlr respect to the debt to be due and payable immediately, Accelemtlun of any of our debt could result in cross-
defaults under our other debt instruments. including the indenture governing the Senior Notes Our assets and cash flow may be nrsufﬁcrent to repay
borrowings fully under all of our outstanding debt instruments if any of our debt instruments are accelerated upon an event of default, which could force
ris into bankruptcy or liquidation. In such an event, we may be unable to repay our obligations under the Senior Notes. In addition, in some instances,
this would ereale an evenl nfdefault under Ilte indenlure govemlng the Senior News.

We may lie unalile tn generate suﬂl‘cl'ent cash tn service all efeur indebtedness and meet nar rather nngeing liquidity needs- and may liefnrced
(I) take other actinns to satisfy nur obligations under nut indebtedness, which may he unsuccessful

Our ability to make scheduled payments or to reﬁnance our debt obligations and to fund our planned capital expenditures and other ongoing
liquidity needs depends on our financial and operating performance. which is subJect to prevailing ecoiromic and competitive conditions and to certain
financial, business and other factors beyond our control. We cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash ﬂow from operations or that
borrowrngs will be available to us to pay the principal, premium, if any, and interest on our indebtedness or to fund our other liquidity needs. We may
need to reﬁnance all or a portion of our debt on or before maturity. We may be rurable to reﬁnance any of our debt on commercially reasonable terms or at
all,

ln addition, we conduct substantially all of our operations through our subsidiaries, certain of which are not guarantors of our indebtedness.
Accordingly, repayment of our indebtedness is dependent on the generation of cash flow by our subsidiaries and their ability to make such cash available
to us, by divrdend, debt repayment or otherwrse. Unless they are guarantors of our indebtedness. our subsidiaries do not have any obligation to pay
amounts due on our indebtedness or- to make funds available for that purpose. Our subsidiaries may not be able to, or may not be permitted to, make
distributions to enable us to make payments in respect of our indebtedness. Each subsidiary is a distinct legal entity and. under certain circumstances,
legal and contractual restrictions may limit our ability to obtain cash from our subsidiaries. While the credit agreement governing our revolving credit
facility and the nrdenture govenring our Senior Notes limit the ability ofour subsidiaries to incur consensual restrictions on theirabilrty to pay dividends
or make other intercomparry payments to us. these limitations are subject to qualiﬁcations and exceptions. 1n the event that we do not receive distributions
from our subsidiaries, we may be unable to make required principal and interest payments on our indebtedness.

lfour cash ﬂows and capital resources are insufﬁcient to fund our debt service obligations, we may be forced to reduce or delay investments and
capital expenditures or to sell assets, seek additional capital or restructure or reﬁnance our indebtedness. Our ability to restructure or reﬁnance our debt
will depend on the condition of the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. Any refinancing of our debt could be at higher interest rates
and may require us to comply wrtlr more onerous covenants. wlrrch could further restrict our business operations. The terms of existing or future debt
instruments and the nrdenture governing our Senior Notes may restrict us from adopting some ofthese alternatives In addition, any failure to make
payments ofrnterest and principal on our outstanding indebtedness on a timely basis would likely result in a reduction of our credit rating, which could
harm our ability to incur additional indebtedness These altematrve measures may not be successful and may not pennrt us to meet our scheduled debt
service obligations
Indebtedness under our variable rate revolving credit agreement would subject us to interest rate risk, which could! cause our indebtedness
service abligarinns in increase significantly.

We have a s l 00 million revolving credit facility. under which no amounts were drawn as of the ﬁling date oftlris report. However. borrowings
under the Credit facility would be at variable mtes elf interest and expuse us tel interest rate risk. If interest rales Inerease. our debt service ubllgalions mt Ihe
variable rate indebtedness would increase even though the
amount borrowed remained the same, and our net income and cash flows, including cash available for servicing our indebtedness, would correspondingly
decrease. Assuming the revolving loan was fully drawn, each one percentage point change in interest rates would result in a $10 million change in annual
cash iirtercst expense on our credit facility.

Regulatory investigatiam mull adversely aﬂect memlpri‘czx.

According to recent news reports, the us, Commodity Futures Trading Commission is examining the setting of gold and silver prices in
London. lftlrat examination leads to a formal investigation, or ifother regulatory action is taken with respect to the setting of gold and silver prices, it
could have an adverse effect on those prices or the volatility of such prices and the market for precious metals.

1 l


0ur existing stockholders are effectively suhordinated to the holders ofour deht

In the event of our ltqutdatton or dtssolutton. smokhaldels’ entttletnent to share ratably tn any dtstrtbutton of ottr assets wottld be subordtnated to
the holders ofthe tndebtedness outstandtng uttder our Sentor Notes. Any rtghts that a stockholder may have tn the event ot'bankruptcy, ltnutdatton or a
reorgantzatton ofus or atty of our substdtartes. and atty consequent rtgltts of stockltolders to realtze on tlte proceeds from the sale of any of ottr or ottr
substdtanes assets, wtll be effecttvely subordtnated to tlte clatrns ofthe holders of such tndebtedness.
0ur Senior Notes and the guarantees thereafwill he effectively suhardinated to any ofour and our guarantors' Secured indebtedness to the
ectent ofthe value ofthe collateral securing that indebtedness

nte Sentor Notes and tlte guarantees thereof are ttot secured by any ofour assets or tlte assets of our sttbsidtaries. Tlte indettture governittg the
Sentor Notes penntts tts to tncur secured debt up to spectfted ltnnts, As a result. tlte Sentor Notes and tlte gttarantees are effecttvely subordtnated to our
attd our guarantors future secured tndebtedness wtth respect to the collateral that secures suclt tttdebtedness, tncludtng any borrowtngs uttder ottr
revolvtng credtt tactltty. Upon a default ttt payment on, or tlte acceleratton of. any of our secured tndebtedness, or tn the event of bankruptcy, tnsolvency,
liqutdatton, dtssolutton, reorganizatton or other tnsolvettcy proceedtttg involvtng tts or such guarantor, the proceeds from the sale of collateral secunng any
secttred tttdebtedness wtll be avatlable to pay obltgations on the Sentor Notes only aher such secured tndebtedness has been patd tn full, As a result. the
holders of the Sentor Notes rnay recetve less. ratably, than the holders of secured debt tn the event ofa bankruptcy, tnsolvency, ltqtttdatton, dtssolutton,
reorgantzatlon or other ittsolvency proceeding involving tts or such guarantor.

Our cunent credtt factltty allows us to draw up to 5100 rntlltott on a revolvtng basts, all of whtclt would be secured debt.
0ur Senior Notes are structurally suhordinated to all liabilities ofour non—guarantor suhsidiaries.

nte Sentor Notes are structurally subordtnated to the tndebtedttess and otlter ltabiltttes ofour substdianes that do not guarantee the Sentor Notes.
wlttch tnclude all of ottr non-dontesttc sttbstdtartes and certatn other substdtartes. Tltese non-guarantor substdtartes are separate and dtsttnct legal ettttttes
attd ltave no obltgatton. cottttngettt or otlterWtse, to pay any amounts due pursuant to tlte notes, or to tnake any funds avatlable therefor, wltether by
dtvtdends, loans, dtstrtbuttons or other payments. Any nght that we or the guarantors have to recetve any assets of any of the non—guarantor substdtartes
upon the liqtndatlon or reorgantzatlon of those substdtartes. attd the consequent rights of holders of Senior Notes to realize proceeds from tlte sale of any of
those substdtartes' assets wtll be eifecttvely sttbordtnated to tlte clatnts ofthose substdtartes credttors, tncludtng trade credttors and holders ofpreferred
equtty tnterests of those substdtanes. Accordingly, tn the event ofa bankruptcy, l|quldan0n or reorgantzatton of any of our non-guarantor substdtartes,
tltese non-guarantor substdtartes will pay the holders of their debts. holders of preferred eqtnty interests attd their trade credttors before tltey wtll be able to
dtstnbute any ot'thetr assets to us or any guat-antor. Unless they are guarantors ot' the Sentor Notes or our otlter tttdebtedness, our substdtanes do not have
any obltgatton to pay atttottnts due on the Senior Notes or our other tndebtedttess or to make funds avatlable for tltat purpose.

For the year ended December 31, 2013 , ottr non—guarantor substdianes represented 20% of our sales of tnetals and 26% of ottr otlter operattng
cxpcnscs. As of December 31, 2013. our non—guarantor substdtartes represented 16% of our total assets attd 22% of our total ltabtltttes. tncludtng trade
payables, deferred tax liablltttes and royalty obltgatlons but excluding intercotnpany liablltties.
itey ternts ofthe Senior Notes will he suspended ifthe Senior Notes achieve investment grade ratings and no default or event ofdefault has
occurred and is continuing.

Many of the covenants tn the tndenture govennng the Sentor Notes will be suspended iitlte Sentor Notes are rated tnvestntent grade by Standard &
Poois and Moody's provtded at suclt tune no default or event of default has occuned attd ts conttnutng, tncludtng those covenants tltat restrtct, arnottg
otlter tlnngs. ottr abtltty to pay dtvtdends, tncttr debt attd to enter tnto certatn other transacttons. There can be no assurance tltat the Sentor Notes wtll ever
be rated investment grade. l-lowever, suspension ofthese covenants would allow us to engage tn certatn transacttons that would not be permitted whtle these
covenants were tn force. and tlte effects of any such transactions will be pertnttted to rernattt tn place even tfthe Sentor Notes are subsequently
downgmdcd below invcsttncnt grade,

12


We may lre unahle to repurchase Senior Notes and any outstanding loans antler our revolving credit facility could be accelerated in the event
ofa change ofcootrol as required by the indenture.

Upon the occurrence ofcettaiu kinds ofchange ofcoutrol events speciﬁed in the indenture governing the Senior Notes. holders of the Senior Notes
will have the right to require us to repurchase all olthe Senior Notes at a repurchase price equal to 101% oltheir principal amount, plus accrued and
unpaid interest, if any, to the date of repurchase. Any change of control also would constitute a delaiilt under our revolving credit facility. Therefore, upon
the occurrence ofa change ofcontrol. the lenders under our revolving credit facility would have the right to accelerate any outstanding loans and. if so
accelerated. we would be required to repay all ofour outstanding obligations under such facility, We may not be able to pay the Senior Note holders the
required price for their notes at that time because we may not have available funds to pay the repurchase price. In addition. the terms of other existing or
future debt may prevent us from paying the Senior Note holders. There can be no assurance that we would be able to repay such other debt or obtain
consents lrom the holders ol such other debt to repurchase the Senior Notes. Any requirement to offer to purchase any Senior Notes may result in us
having to reﬁnance our outstanding indebtedness, which we may not be able to do. in addition. even ifwe were able to reﬁnance our outstanding
indebtedness, such ﬁnancing may be on terms unfavorable l0 its.
lilolilers ofthe Senior Notes may not he ahle to ileterniine when a change ofeoutrol giving rise to their right to have the Senior Notes
repurchmml has occurred following a Sale of "substantially all” ofour assets.

The deﬁnition of change ofcontrol in the indenture governing the Senior Notes includes a phrase relating to the sale of "all or substantially all" of
our assets. There is no precise established deﬁnition of the phrase "substantially all" under applicable law. Accordingly, the ability el a holder of Senior
Notes to require us to repurchase its notes as a result ofa sale ofless than all our assets to another person may be uncertain.

Federal and state fraudulent transfer laws may permit a court to void the Senior Notes or any ofthe guarantees thereof, autl ifthat occurs,
holilers ofthe Senior Notes may not receive any payments.

Federal and state fraudulent transfer and conveyance statutes may apply to the issuance of the Senior Notes and the iiicurteiice of any guarantees of
the Senior Notes. Under federal bankruptcy law and comparable provisions of state fraudulent transfer or conveyance laws, which may vary from state to
state, the Senior Notes or any guarantees thereof could be voided as a fraudulent transfer or conveyance ifwe or any extstiug or future subsidiary
guarantors. as applicable. (a) issued the Senior Notes or incurred such guarantee With the intent of hindering. delaying er defrauding creditors or (b)
received less than reasonably equivalent value or lair consideration in retiini lor either issuing the Senior Notes or incurring the guarantee and, in the case
of (b i only. one ofthc following is also tnie at the time thereof:

- we or the subsidiary guarantor, as applicable. were insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of the issuance of the Senior Notes or the ineurtenee
of the guarantee.

- the issuance elthe Senior Notes er the iiicurreiice ofthe guarantee leﬂ us or the subsidiary guarantor, as applicable, with an unreasonably small
amount ofcapilal or assets to carry on the business; or

- we or the subsidiary guarantor intended to, orbelieved that we or such subsidiary guarantor would, incur debts beyond our or such subsidiaiy
guarantors ability to pay as they mature.

As a general matter, value is given for a transfer or an obligation if. in exchange for the transfer or obligation, property is translerted or a valid
antecedent debt is satisﬁed. A court would likely ﬁnd that any subsidiary guarantor did not receive reasonably equivalent value or lair consideration lor its
guarantee to the extent such subsidiary guarantor did not obtain a reasonably equivalent beneﬁt from the issuance of the Senior Notes.

We cannot be certain as to the standards a court would use to determine whether or not we or any subsidiary guarantor was insolvent at the relevant
time or, regardless of the standard that a court uses, whether the Senior Notes or any guarantees would be subordinated to out or any subsidiary
guarantur‘s other debt. In general, however. a court would deem an entity insolvent if.

- the sum of its debts, including contingent and unliquidated liabilities, was greater than the fair saleable value of all of its assets;
- the present lair saleable value ol its assets was less than the amount that would be required to pay its probable liability on its extsting debts,
including contingent liabilities. as they become absolute and mature; or
- it could not pay its debts as they became due.
13


The subsidiaiy guarantees contain a "savings clause" intended to limit the subsidiary guarantor's liability to the maximum amount that it could
iiicur without causing the incunence orobligations under its subsidiary guarantee to be a fraudulent tiansrer. This provision may not be effective to protect
any subsidiary guarantees from being avoided under fraudulent transfer law, Furthermore, in Official Committee of Unsecured Creditors of TOUSA, Inc.
v Citicuip North America, Inc., the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in the Sumhem District ofFlbrida held that a savings clause similar to the savings clause
used in the indenture was unenforceable. As a result, the subsidiary guarantees were found to be fraudulent conveyances. The United States Court of
Appeals for the Eleventh circuit recently affinned the liability findings of the Bankruptcy Court witliout ruliiig directly on the enforceability of savings
clauses generally, Ifthe TOUSA decision were followed by other courts, the risk that the guarantees would be deemed fraudulent conveyances would be
significantly increased.

To the extent that any subsidiary guarantee is avoided. then, as to that subsidiary, the guaranty would not be enforceable,

Ifa court were to find that the Issuance oftlie Senior Notes or the incurreiice of any guarantee was a fraudulent transfer or conveyance, the court
could void the payment obligations under the Senior Notes or such guarantee, could subordinate the Senior Notes or such guarantee to presently existing
and future indebtedness of ours or oftlie related subsidiary guarantor or could require the holders ofthe Senior Notes to repay any amounts received with
respect to such guarantee. in the event ofa finding that a fraudulent transfer or conveyance occurred, holders of the Senior Notes may not receive any
repayment. Further. the avoidance of the Senior Notes could result iii an event of default with respect to our and our subsidiar‘ies‘ otlier debt that could
result in accclcration of that debt.

Finally. as a court of equity, the bankruptcy court may subordinate the claims in respect of the Senior Notes to other claims against us under the
principle of equitable subordination ifthe court determines that (I) the holders ofthe Senior Notes engaged in some type ofinequitable conduct, (2) the
inequitable conduct resulted in injury to our other creditors or conferred an unfair advantage upon the holders of Senior Notes and (3) equitable
subordination is not inconsistent wtth the provisions of the Bankruptcy Code.
0m credit ratings may run reflect all risks associate/I with an investment in Imr Senior Nines.

Credit rating agencies rate our debt securities on factors that include our results of opetations, actions that we take, their view of the general outlook
for our industry and their view oftlie general outlook for the economy. Actions taken by the rating agencies can include maintaining. upgrading, or
downgrading the current rating or placing us on a watch list for possible future downgrading. Downgrading the credit rating of our debt securities or
placing us on a watch list for possible future downgrading would likely increase our cost of financing, limit our access to the capital markets and have an
adverse effect on the market price ofour securities, including our Senior Notes.

OPERATION, DEVELOPDIENT, EXPLORATION AND ACQUISITION RISKS
Mining accidents ct other adverse evant at rm cperati'mi with! decrease our anticipated production.

Productioii may be reduced below our historical or estimated levels as a result of mining accidents; unfavorable ground conditions: work
stoppages or slow-downs; lower than expected ore grades; unexpected regulatory actions; ifthe metallurgical characteristics oforc are less economic than
anticipated: or because our equipment or facilities fail to operate properly or as expected. For example. in the second quarter ofzolo, ntiiiing activities at
the Lucky Friday mine stopped for approximately two weeks due to some deterioration of shaft infrastructure at the #2 Shaﬁ, which is the mines
secondary escape way. Upon completion of repairs to the be Shaft. the mine returned to normal production. in April 2011. a fatal accident occurred at the
Lucky Friday mine resulting in a cessation of operations at the mine for approximately ten days, In November 2011. an accident occurred as part ofthe
construction of the s4 Sliaﬁ at the Lucky Friday mine, resulting in the fatality of one coiitiactoi employee. In an unrelated incident, in December 2011. a
rock buist occurred in a primary access way at the Lucky Friday mine and Injured seven employees. Each of these events temporarily suspended
opeiatioiis at the Lucky Friday mine and adversely impacted production. Other closures or impacts on opeiatioiis or production may occur at any ofour
mines at any time, whether related to accidents, changes in conditions, changes to regulatory policy. or as precautionary measures.

At the end onDl l, MSIIA began a special impact inspection at the Lucky Friday mine, which resulted in an order closing down the Silver
Shaft, the pnmaiy access way from surface at the Lucky Friday mine. until we removed built—up cementitious material from the Silver Shaft. This
occurred despite the fact that the Silver Shaﬁ was not involved in any ofthe accidents at the mine in 2011, Underground access was limited as the work
was pertonneti, and production at the Lucky Fnday was suspended until early 2013 as a result. We resumed limited production at the Lucky Friday mine
in the first quarter ofzoi 3 aﬁer completing work on the Silver Shaﬁ and a bypass of the area impacted by the December 2011 rock burst, and returned to
historical full production levels in the third quarter of 20] 3.
14


On March 25. 20l3, pilot to IIecla's ownership, an accident at Aunznn’s Casa Beiardl mlne resulted In a falallly, and opemilans there were halted
temporarily. Wlnle operations resumed the follnwlng day, any similar incidents in the future could also result in suspensions of operations and other
consequences.

Accidenn am! inner eventi in our Lucky Friday mine could have additiiinul iii/verse cnniequences iii us.

IIecla lelled may face addlllonal enforcement acllnns; as well as additional orders from MSIIA, as a result DfMSIIA's lllspecllons and
investigations or events at our Lucky Friday mine, including the April 201 l fatal ground fall accident, the rack burst incident in December 2011. and the
urder closing the Silver Shaft for the removal ufbulli-up cemelllltlous material. Hecla Limited could also face addltlullal penallies (including monetary
penalties) fmm MSHA or other govenmicntal agencies relating to these incidents and any other orders or citations received by l-lecla Limited.

It is possible that Hecla Limited could face litigation relating to the zoll incidents at the Lucky Friday mine in addition to the Various lawsuits
currently pending against us, We may not resolve the exisilng or any new claims favorably, and each one or the foregoing possibilities could have a
material adverse impact on our cash ﬂows, results of operations or ﬁnancial condition, See Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Slaicmeitix.
0m operations may be adverser affected Iiy risky and hazards annotated with the mining industry that may not hefuliy cnvem/ by insurance.

Our business is capital intensive, requiring ongoing capital investment {or the replacement. modennzation or expansion of equipment and facilities.
Our mining and milling operalluns are subject to risks of process upsets and equipment malfunctions. Equipment and supplies may from time to time be
unavailable on a timely basis. Our business is subject to a number oiother risks and hazards including:

- environmental hazards;

- unusual or unexpected geologic fonnarions;

- rock bums and ground falls;

- seismic activity;

- underground tires or ﬂoods;

- unanticipated liydrologic conditions, including ﬂooding and periodic interruptions due to inclement or hazardous weather conditions;

- political and country nsks;

- civtl unrest or terrorism;

- industrial accidents,

- label disputes or strikes; and

- our operating mines have tailing ponds wlnch could fail or leak as a result of seismic activity, unusual weather or for other reasons.

Such risks could result in.
- personal Injury or falalllles;
- damage to or destruction ofmilleral properties or producing facilities;
1 5


- environmental damage and financial pellaltles;

- delays in exploration, development or mining;

- monetary losses:

- legal liability; and

- temporary or pennauerit closure offaellities.

We maintain insurance to prutecl against lusses that may result from some eftliese nsks, such as prupeny luss anti business interruption, in
amounts we believe to be reasonably consistent wttli our historical experience, industry practice and circumstances surrounding each identified nsk. Such
insurance, however, contains exclusions and limitations on coverage, particularly wttli respect to environmental llablllty and political risk. We have
received some payment for business interruption insurance claims related to the temporary suspension of operations at the Lucky Friday mine and
continue Io seek further reimbursement (sec Mining aLCiIIeIlIA‘ or other advent» tht’IllS at an ape-ration muld dare-axe our t1rlliclpalt’d171wdut’li0r1) ,
There can be no assurance that claims would be paid under such insurance policies in connection with a particular evelll. Insurance speciﬁc to
environmental risks is generally eitller unavallable at. we believe. too expenslve for us, and we Iherefore do not maintain environmenlal insurance.
Occurrence uf events fur which we are not insured may have an adverse effect on our business.

Our deveiopmem nfnew urelwdi'es amt other capital costs may be higher and provide [ess return than we estimated.

Capitalized development projects may cost more and provide less return than we estimate. lfwe are unable to realize a return on these investments,
we may lncur a related assel write-down that could adversely affect our ﬁnanelal resulls or condillon.

Our abillly to sustain or increase our current level of iuetals production partly depends on our abillly to develop new orebodies and/or expand
existing mining operations. Before we can begin a development project, we must ﬁrsl determine whether it is economically feasible to do so. Thls
deternlinatlon is based D“ estimales of several factors lllclliding:

- ore reserves.

- expected recovery mtes of metals from the are.

- future metals prices;

- facility and equipment costs;

- availability ofadequate stafﬁng:

- availability of affordable sources of power and adequacy of water supply;

- exploration and dnllmg success;

- capital and operating costs of a development project;

- environmental considerations and permlllmg:

- adequate access to the site, including competing land uses (such as agriculture);

- applicable tax rales:

- foreign currency lluctuation and inflation rates; and

- availability nl'rinancing.

l 6


These estimates aie based on geological and othei interpretive data, which may be impiecise, As a result, actual opeiatiiig and capital costs and
returns frotii a development project may differ substantially from our estitiiates, and, as such, it may not be economically feasible to continue with a
development project.

Our ore reserve estimates may he imprecise.

Our ore reserve ﬁgures and costs are primarily estimates and are not guarantees that we will recover the indicated quantities of these metals. You are
strongly cautioned not to place undue reliance on estimates ofreserves (or mineralized material or other resource estimates), Reserves are estimates made by
our professional technical personnel, and no assurance can be given that Il'le estimated amount of metal or the indicated level of recovery oi‘tliese metals
wlll be realized. Reserve estimation is an interpretive process based upon available data and various assumptions. oiir reserve estimates may change based
on actual productioti experience. Further, reserves are valued based on estimates orcosts and metals prices, which may not be consistent among our
properties. The economic value of ore reserves may be adv eisely affected by.

~ declines in the malkel price ofthe valiuus metals we mine;

- increased production or capital costs;

- reduetion in the grade or tonnage of the deposit;

- increase iii the dilution oftlie ore;

- reduced metal recovery; and

- changes in regulatory requirements,

Short-term operating factors relating to our ore reserves, such as the need to sequentially develop orebodies and the processing of new or different ore
grades. may adversely affect our cash flow, If the prices of metals that we produce decline substantially below the levels used to calculate reserves for an
extended period, we could experience.

- delays in new project development.

- nel losses;

- reduced cash flow;

- teductioiis in reserves;

- write-downs of asset values; and

~ mine closure.

Effnm to exp/(ml the ﬁnite lives efeur niines may not he successful or could result in signiﬁcant demands on our liquidity, which could
hinder our gmwlh and decrease the value afaur stack.

One ofthe risks we face is that mines are depleting assets, Thus, we must continually replace depleted ore reserves by locating and developing
additional ore. Our ability to expand or replace ore reserves primarily depends on the success of our exploration programs. Mineial exploration, particularly
for silver and gold, is highly speculative and expensive. It involves many nsks and is often non-productive. Even if we believe we have found a valuable
miiieial deposit, it may be several years befoie production from that deposit is possible. Duiiug that time, it may become no longei feasible to produce
tliose minerals for economic, regulatory, political or other reasons. As a result of high costs and other uncertainties, we may not be able to expand or replace
our existing ore reserves as they are depleted, which would adversely affect our business and financial position in the future.

The M Sllaﬁ project. an internal shaft at the Lucky Friday mine, is expected, upon its completion. to provtde deeper access in order to increase the
mme‘s production and operational life. We commenced engineering and construction activtties on #4 Shaft in late 2003. and our Board of Directors gave its
final approval of the project in August 20l l. The M Shah project. as currently designed, is expected to involve development down to the 8800 foot level
and capital expenditures of approximately $215 million, which includes approximately $130 million that has been spent on the project as of December 3 l,
2013. We believe that our current eapital resources will allow us to complete the proj'eet by its estimated completion target ofzme. However, there are a
number of factors that could affect completion of the project as currently desigiied, including. (i) a signiﬁcant decline in metals prices, in) a reduction in
available cash or credit. whether arising from decreased cash flow or other uses of available cash. (iii) iiicreased regulatory burdens, or (iv) a significant
increase in operating or capital costs. One or more of these factors could potentially require us to suspend the project, defer some of the planned
development, or access additional capital through debt financing. the sale of securities, or other external sources. This additional financing could be costly
in unavailable.


17


Oar/pint development and operating arrangements may not lte saccetsfal

We have in the past entered into, and may in the future enter into. Joinl venture arrangements in order to share the nsks and costs of developing and
operating propeities, In a typical Joint venture anangeinent, the partners own proponionate shares of the assets. are entitled to indemnification from each
other and are only responsible for any future liabilities in propoition to their interest in the Jolnl venture. If a party fails to petfonu its obligations under a
Jami venture agreement, we could incur liabilities and losses in excess ot‘our pro—tata share of the Jalnl venture. We make investments tn exploration and
development projects that may have to be written oi‘i‘in the event we do not proceed to a commercially viable mining operation. See Note 16 OfNUlL‘X [(1
Conralidalca Financial Siaterncnlr.

Our ability to market our nietalr production may lte affected by diaraptiont or clasures afoustom antelters and/or reﬁning facilities.

We sell substantially all of our metallic concentrates KD custom smelters. Our dore' bars are sent KD reﬁners for further processing before beiiig sold to
metal traders. If we are unable to sell concentrates to our contracted smeliers, our operations could be adversely affected. See Note 11 of Notes to
Conralidalca Financial Siazerncnlr for more information on the distnbutioit of our sales and out signiﬁcant customers,

We face inlietent roles in acquisitilms ofotner mining companiet orpropertiet that may advett-ely impact out growth strategy.

we are actively seeking to expand our mineral reserves by acquiring other miniug companies or properties. For example, on June 1, 2013, we
acquiied all of the outstanding common stock of Aurizon Mines, Ltd,, giving us 100% ownership of the Casa Bet-ardi mine and other mineral interests,
Although we are pursuing opportunities that we feel are in the best interest of our stockholders. these pursuits are costly and often unproductive. inherent
risks in acquisitions we may iiiidenake in the future could adversely atfect our current business and ﬁnancial condition and our growth.

There is a limited supply of desirable mineral properties available in the United States and foreign countnes where we would consider conducting
exploration and/or production activities, and any acquisition we may uniteitake is Subject to inherent risks, In addition to the risk associated with limited
tuine lives, we may uot realiee the value orthe compaiiies or properties that are acquired due to a possible decliue iii tuetals prices, railure to obtain
penuits. labor problems. changes in regulatory environment, failure to achieve anticipated synergies, an inability to obtain financing, and other factors
pi eviously described. Acquisitions oiother mining companies or pi opeities may also expose us to new geographic, political, operating, and geological
risks, In addition, we face strong competition for companies and properties from other mining coiiipantes, some of which have greater ﬁnancial resources
than we do, and we may be unable to acquire attractive companies and mining properties on terms tliat we consider aeeepiable.

Our business depend: on ﬁnding skillet! minert and maintaining good relations with our empluyees.

We are dependent upon the ability and experience of our executive ofﬁcers, managers, employees and other personnel, and there cati he no assurance
that we will be able to retain such employees. We compete with other companies both in and outside the miuing industry in recruiting and retaiuing
qualified employees knowledgeable ofthe mining business. From time to time. we have encountered. and may in the future eticouiiter, difﬁculty recruiting
skilled mining personnel at acceptable wage and beneﬁt levels in a competitive labor market. and may be required to utilize cotitractors, which can be more
costly. Temporaiy or extended lay—offs due to mine closures may exacerbate such issues and result in vacancies or the need to hire less skilled or efiicient
employees The loss of these persotis or our inability to attract and retaiti additional highly skilled employees could have ati adverse effect on our business
and future operations. The Lucky Friday mitie is oui only opeiatioti subject to a collective bargaining agreement. which expires on April 30. 2016.

In March 2012, IIeela Limited received nntice ofa complaint filed against it by the Uiiited Steel Workers, Lneal 5114. witli the US. Mine Safety
Health Review Commission for compensation for bargaining unit workers at the Lucky Friday tntne wlio were idled as a result of the temporary
suspension of production at the mine (see the Other Connngenctar section of Note 7 of Noicr I0 Conralidalca Finam'iul Statements for more
information).

18


Compcriiiiin finin other mining companies may harm our imsincsa

We campeie with oiher mining companies in airraci and reiain key execiiiives, skilled labor, caniraciors and other employees. We compeie wnh ailier
mining companies rcr ihe seryices oi skilled personnel and coniracicrs and ilicir specialized equipineni, componenis and supplies, such as drill rigs,
necessary fur exploraiion and develnpmeni. We also compeie wrih oiher mining companies ior righls io mine prnperiies. We may be unable in coniinue io
obiain lhe semces of skilled personnel and coniraciors or specialized equipnieni or supplies, or lo acquire addiiional righis io mine propenies.

We mlly be subject in ii nnniim 0funnnticipilted risks relate/I in inadequate infrastructurel

Mining, processing developmeni and exploralion aciivnies depend on adequaie infrasirucliire, Reliable roads, bridges, power sources and waier
supply are imponanl detennmamsi which affeci capiial and operaiing cosis. Unusual or iniiequeni weailier phenomena sabolage, oihei inierfeience in ilie
mainienance or proiiision oi such infrasirucrure, or govenimeni inierveniion, could adversely affeci our mining opeiaiions.

our/mign activities are .riiiijcci in iiiiiiiiiiiniii iniimni iii/ac.

On June 1, 2013, we compleied ilie acquisiiion DfAunan Mines Lid, giying us 100% ownership oiilie producing Casa Bemrdi mine, along wnh
inieresis in various uiher propemesi in Quebec Canada. See Note 16 offme to Consolidated Financial Statements for more informaiion. In addmon,
wc cimcnily conduct cxplararion and pm-dcvclopmcm projccis in MEXICO and conunuc to own asscis, including real csiaic and mineral inicrcsis ihcic. Wc
amicipalc lhal we will cuminue Io conduct opemtiuns in Canada, Mexicoi and possibly mher imemaﬁonal lucaliuns in I11: futurc. Becaus: we candich
operaiions Imcmaunnallyi we are subjeci Io pollucal and economic nsks such as:

- Ilie effects oflucal poliucal. labor and econumic develupmems and uiircsl;
- signiﬁcanr or abrupt changes in ilie applicable regulaiory or legal climaie;
- excliangc coinrols and expori rcsrricrians;
- expropriarion or iiaiionalizauon of assers wuli inadeqiiaie conipensaiion;
- currency ﬂuctuauonsi panicularly in ilie exchange raie beiween ilie Canadian dollar and us. dullar;
- reparrialinuresmclions;
- invalidalion and unavailabiliiy of govemmenml ordelsi penniis or agieemenls;
- properly ownership dispuies;
- renegouaiion or niilliricaiion of exisiing concessions, licenses, perniiis and cumracls;
- criminal acnwly, cDrrupIioni demands ior improper paymenlsi expropriaiion, and uncenam legal enforcemeni and physical securiiy;
- disadvaniages oicompeimg againsi companies irorn counmes lhai are noi subjscl in us. laws and regulalions;
- fuel or oiher commodiiy shonages:
- iiicgal ruining:
- laws or policies oiforeign coiiniries and ilie Uniied Siaies affeciing lrader invesnneni and iaxaiion;
- civil disturbances. war and mrmrisi actions; and
- seizures nfasseis.
l 9


Consequently, our exploration. development and production activities outside of the United States may be substantially affected by factors beyond
our control. any oiwliich could materially adversely affect our financial condition or results of operations. Fluctuations in exchange rates may impact our
earnings, the value of assets held abroad and our operating and capital costs in foreign Jurlsdwllons.

We may be ahaltle ta success/ally integrate the ayeratians efthe properties we acquire, including the Aurizlm properties.

Integration of thc operations oftlic properties wc acquire with our existing business will bc a complex. time-consuming and costly process. Failure to
successfully integrate the acquired properties and operations in a timely manner may have a material adverse effecl on our business. financial condition.
results of operations and cash flows. The dimculties oicombiniiig the acquired operations include. airiong other things.

- operating a larger organization;

- operating in multiple legal jurisdictions;

- coordinating geographically and linguistically disparate organizations, systeitis and facilities;
- adapting to additional regulatory and other legal requircrnents;

- integrating corporate. technological and administrative functions; and

- diverting management's attention from other business coiicenis.

The process of integrating our operations could cause an interruption of, or a slowdown in, the activities of our business. Members of our senior
management may be requircd to dcvotc considerable amounts oftimc to this integration process, which will decrease thc timc they will have to manage our
business. If our senior management is not able to effectively manage the integration process. or ifaiiy business activities are intemipted as a result of the
integration process, our business could suffer.

We may hat realize all afthe anticipated heneﬁtsfrem aar aeaaisitiaris, including the aeaaisitiah quurizun.

We may not realize all oithe anticipated benefits from the acquisition afAunzan or any future acquisitions. such as increased earnings, cost
sayings and revenue enhancements, for various reasons. including difficulties integrating operations and personnel. higher than expected acquisition and
operating costs or other difficulties, unltnowii liabilities, inaccurate reserve estimates and fluctuations in market prices.

The Aarizeri properties and any athers we may acquire may not ptariaee as otpeeteri, and we may be ahaltle ta determine reserve patential,
identifv liabilities associated with the aeqairedpmpertiet» or ahtairi prateetiari from sellers againstsach liabilities.

The properties we acquired in the acquisition oiAurizon or in other acquisitions may not produce as expected may be in an iuiexpected condition
and we may be subject to increased costs and liabilities, including environmental liabilities. Although we review properties prior to acquisition in a manner
consistent with industry practices, such reviews are not capable of identifying all potential adverse conditions, Generally it is not feasible to review in
depth every individual property involved in each acquisition. Even a detailed review of records and properties may not necessarily reveal existing or
potential problems or permit a buyer to become sufficiently familiar with the properties to fully assess their condition, any deficiencies, and development
potential,

The acaaisitiah anurizIm upnses as ta risks relating ta gtaarirl stability at the Casa Betardi mine.

As a result ofa history of ground instability and related incidents at the Casa Berardi mine prior to Aunznn‘s ownership and operations, Aurizoii
implemented strict ground control measures in connection with mine openings and underground development. since the mine was reopened iuider Aunzon
management, ground control incidents have been itiiiior for the most part, Nevertheless, ground instability is an inherent risk associated with the rock
environment in the areas being miiied that cannot be eliminated entirely. Consequently, the Casa l3erardi mine operations remain subjecl to this nsk.
liistability occurrences. including but not limited to. crown pillar collapse or stope failure, could result in loss of life or temporary or permanent cessation
uf uperalions, any of which could have a material adverse effect on the our ﬁnancial condition and results uf uperaﬁons.

20


The acquisition efA urizlm may expose us to additional political risks.

0m properties obtained through the acquisition of Aurizon are located in areas of Quebec. Canada which may be of particular interest or sensitivity
to one or more interest groups. including aboriginal groups. We now have mineral projects in Quebec that may be in areas with a First Nations presence. It
had been Aurizon’s practice to work closely with and to consult with First Nations in areas in which its projects are located or which could be impacted by
its activities. However, there is no assurance that relationships with such groups will be positive. Accordingly, it is possible that exploration or
development acrivities on these properties could be interrupted or otherwise adversely affected in the furure by polirical uncertainry. native land claims
eiiritlemeiirs. expropriarions of property, changes in applicable governmental policies and policies of relevant iiirerest groups, including those of First
Nations. Any changes in relations or shifts in political conditions may be beyond our control and may adversely affect our business and operations and if
significant. may result in the impairment or loss of mineral concessions or other mineral rights, or may make it impossible to continue our mineral
exploration and mining activities in the applicable area, any ofwliich could have an adverse effect on our financial conditions and results of operations,

LEGAL, REGULATORY AND MARKET RISKS
We are currently involved in ongoing legal aitputes that may materially adversely affect us.

There are several ongoing legal disputes in which we are involved. and additional actions may be filed against us. We may be subject to future
claims, including those relating to eriviioninental damage, safety conditions at oui mines, the two fatal accidents that occurred at the Lucky Fiiday mine
in 20] l, and otliei matteis. The outcomes at‘ these pending and potential claims are uncertain. We may not resolve these claims favorably. Depending on
the outcome, these actions could have adverse ﬁnancial effects or cause ieputational [mi in to us. If any of these disputes result in a substantial monetary
judgment against us. are settled on terms in excess of our current accruals, or otherwise impact our operations, our financial results or condition could be
materially adversely affected. For a description of some of the lawsuits in which we are involved, see Note 7 of Notex to Corlwll'dilit'd Financial
Sialameltir,

We are requirea to obtain governmental anti lessor approvals and permits in order to eonauer mining operations.

in the ordinary course of business, mining companies are required to seek governmental and other approvals and permits for continuation or
expansion of existing opcmtions or for the commencement of new operations. For example, we estimate rhar our Grccns Crcck railings impoilndnicnl area
has sufficient capacity to meet our needs through the end onOlé. in order to increase the tailings capacity at the mine, a permit is required. Obtaining the
necessary governmental permits is a complex. time-consuming and costly process. The duration and success of our effons to obtain permits are contingent
upon many variables not Within our control Obtaining environmental pennits. including the approval of reclamation plans, may increase costs and cause
delays or hair the continuation ofmining operations depending on rhe natiuc of rhe activiry to be permitted and tire interpreration ofapplieable rcquireinenrs
iinplemeiired by the permitting authoriry. Interested parties may seek to prevent issuance ofpeimits and intervene in the process or pursue extensive appeal
rights. i>ast or ongoing violations of government mining laws could provide a basis to revoke existing permits or to deny the issuance of additional permits.
in addition, evolving reclanrarioii or enviromnenral concerns may rhreateii our ability to renew existing pernrirs or obrain new permits in connection with
future development, expansions and operations. There can be no assurance that all necessary approvals and permits will be obtained and, ifobtained, that
the costs involved will not exceed those thar we previously estimated. It is possible rhat the costs and delays associated with the compliance wirh such
standards and regulations could become such that we would nor proceed wirh the development or operation. We are ofren required ro posr surety bonds or
cash collateral ro secure our reclamation obligations and we may be tumble to obtain the required surety bonds or may not have rhe resources to provide
cash cullatetal.

Wefaee substantial governmental regulation um! environmental risk.

Our business is subject to extensive us. and foreign, federal. state and local laws and regulations goveiriing development, production, labor
standards. health and safety, the environment and other matters. For example, in 2013 both of our operating mines in the United States received several
citations under the Mine Safely and Health Act, as administered by MSIIA, In addition. in November 2012, the Lucky Fnday mine received a potential
pattern of violation ("PPOV“) notice from MSHA. In March 2013, the mine was removed from PPOV status without receiving a notice of pattern of
violation ("NPOV"). Although a subsequent NPOV was not received, there can be no assurance that in the future we may not receive a NPOV. Further. we
have been and are currently involved in lawsuits or disputes in winch we have been accused of causing environmental damage. violating environmental
laws, or Violating envuoninental permits, and we may be subject to similar lawsuits or disputes in the future, See risk titled, " 0m environmental
()blignliom' inav (armed the provisionr we have made 

21


Exposure to these liabilities arises not only from our existing operations. but also from operations that have been closed, sold to third parties. or
properties in which we had a leasehold, joint venture. or other interest. with a history dating back to 1391. our exposure to environmental claims may be
greater because of the bankruptcy or dissolution of other mining companies which may have engaged in more signiﬁcant activities ofa mining site but
which are no longer available to make claims against or obtain Judgments from. similarly, the federal goveniment or private parties could seek to hold
Heela Limited or Hecla Mining Company liable for the actions of certain subsidiaries under “alter ego" or similar theories which seek to disregard the
scparatcncss ofcorporatc entities within our consolidated corporate group.

We are required to reclaim properties and speciﬁc requirements vary among Jurisdictions. In some cases, we may be required to provide financial
assurances as security for reclamation costs, which may exceed our estimates for such costs. Our historical operations and the historical operations of
entities and properties We lmvc acquired havc occasionally bccn allcgcd to gcncratc environmental contamination. We could also be hcld liable for worker
exposure to hazardous substances. There can be no assurance that we will at all times be in Compliance with all environmental, health and safety
regulations or that steps to achieve compliance would not materially adversely affect our business.

In addition to existing regulatory requirements. legislation and regulations may be adopted or permit limits reduced at any time that result in
additional exposure to liability. operating expense. capital expenditures or restrictions and delays in the mining, production or development of our
properties, Mining accidents and fatalities. whether or not at our mines or related to metals mining. may increase the likelihood of additional regulation or
changes in law, In addition. enforcement or regulatory tools and methods available to governmental regulators such as the EPA. which have not been or
have seldomly been used against us, could be used against us in the future. Federal or state environmental or mine safety regulatory agencies may order
certain of our mines to be temporarily or permanently closed. which may have a material adverse effect on our cash ﬂows, results of operations. or
ﬁnancial condition,

Legislative and regulatory measures to address climate change and greenhouse gas emissions are in various phases of consideration. Ifadopted,
such measures could increase our cost of environmental compliance and also delay or otherwrse negatively affect efforts to obtain permits and other
regulatory approvals with regard to existing and new facilities. Proposed measures could also result in increased cost of fuel and other consumables used at
our operations. including the dicscl gcncration ofclcctricity at our Crccns Crcck opcration. ifwc are unable to regularly access utility power. Climate change
legislation may also affect our smelter customers who burn fossil fuels. resulting in increased costs to us, and may affect the market for the metals we
produce with effects on prices that are not possible for us to predict.

From time to time, the us. Congress considers proposed amendments to the General Mining Law of 1872, as amended (the “General Mining
Law"), which governs mining claims and related activities on federal lands. The extent of any future changes is not known and the potential impact on us
as a result of us. Congressional action is difricult to predict. Changes to the General Mining Law, if adopted, could adversely affect our ability to
economically develop mineral reserves on federal lands. Although we are not currently mining on federal land. we do explore. and future mining could
occur, on federal land.

The Clean Water Act requires pennits for operations that discharge into waters of the United States. Sucli pennitting has been a frequent subject of
litigation by environmental advocacy groups, which has resulted, and may in the future result, in declines in such permits or extensive delays in receiving
them. This may result in delays in, or in some instances preclude, the commencement or continuation of development or production operations. Adverse
outcomes in lawsuits challenging perimts or failure to comply with applicable regulations could result in the suspension. denial. or revocation of required
permits. which could have a material adverse impact on our cash flows, results of operations. or ﬁnancial condition,

0." environmental obligations may exceed the prnvtu'nns we have mulle.

We are subject to significant environmental obligations. particularly in northern Idaho through our subsidiary Hecla Limited. At December 3 l,
2013. we had accrued $105.2 million as a provision for environmental obligations, including a total ot'SSSA million for our remaining obligation for
eiivironnienlal Claims with respect to the Coeur d‘Alene Basin in northern ldaho. A settlement of the Coeiir d‘Alene Basin eiivironnienlal litigation and
related claims was ﬁnalized with entry of the Consent Decree by the Court in September 2011. For information on our potential environmental liabilities,
see Note 4 and N019 7 of Nam 10 Conxalidazed Financial Statements,

22


Shipment efeurpratluois is sulrject to regulatory am! related risks.

Certarrr clthe products we slrrp to our customers are subject to regulatory requrrements regardrng packaging harrdlrng and shrpprng of products
that may be considercd dangerous to human hcnlth or the errvrronment Allhough we belrcvc we arc currcmly rn complrnncc \vllh all material regulations
applrcable to packagrng. handlrng and shrpprng our products the chemrcal pr-opertres cfour products or exlsllng regulatrons corrld change and carrse rrs to
fall out of complrancc. or force us to rrrcur srrbstantral addrtrorral experrdrtures to rnarntarn complrance wrth applrcable regulatrons. Further, we do not shrp
our own products but instead rely m1 third pany camers to ship our products to our customers. To the extent that any of our carriers are unable or
unwrlhng to shrp our products tn accordance wrth apphcable regulatrcns. rncludrng because cl drfliculty tn ohtarmng. or rncr-eased cost of: rnsurance, we
could he torced to ﬁnd altematrve shrpprng arrangements assumrng such alternatrves would be avarlable. Any such changes to our cun-ent shrpprng
arrangements could have a rnaterral adverse rrnpact on our operatrons and ﬁnancial results.

The titles tn xllmz n/‘uurprnperties may he rle/‘eelive nr ehellenged

Unpatented mrnrng clarms constrtute a srgnrticant portron of our undeveloped properly holdmgs, the vahdrty of whrch could be uncertarn and may
be contested. Although we have conducted trtle revrews of our property holdrngs, trtle revrew does not necessarrly preclude tlurd partres from challengrng
our trtle, In accordance wrth mrmng rndrrstry practrce. we do not generally obtarn trtle oprnrons rrntrl we decrde to develop a property. Theret'ore wlule we
have atternptcd to acquire satrsfactory trtle to our undevclopcd propcrtics, some titlcs may be dcfectivc.

Theprr'ee nfnur smelt hes u history rrfveluiility lmll enulrl rleeline in the future.

Shares ofour common and outstanding preferred stock are listed on the New York Stock Exchange, The market price for our stock has been
volatrle, oﬁcn based on:

- changes m metals prrces, partrcularly srlver and gold;

- our results ofoperatrorrs and ﬁnancial corrdrtrorr as reflected tn our publrc news releases or perrodrc frlrrrgs wrth the SEC;

- fluctuatrrrg proverr and probable reserves;

- factors unrelated to our ﬁnancial performance or future prospects, such as global economic developments, market perceptions of the

attractrveness clfpamcular lndllslnesr or the rehabrlrty of metals markets;

- pclrtrcal and regulatory nsk;

- the success of our exploranon. pre-dcvelopmem, and capital programs;

- abrhty to mect production estrmates;

- envrronmental, satety and legal r-rsk;

- the extent and nature ofarralytical coverage concerning our business; and

- the trading volume and general market interest in our securitres,

The market prrce of our stock at any grven pornt rn trme may not accurately reflect our Valuer and may prevent stockholders from realrzmg a profit
on lhcﬂ inVchCnL
Our Series B Preferred Stock has a liquidatinn preference of$50per share or $7. 9 million.

lfwe were liquidated, holders ofour preferred stock would be entitled to recetve approximalely $7.9 million (plus any accrued and unpaid
dividends) from any liquidation proceeds before holders ofour common stock would be entitled to receive arty proceeds brrt after holders of the Senior
Notcs rcccivcd any procecds,

We may not be ulrle to [my common or preferred smelt dividends in the future.

Between July 2005 and the thrrd quarter cl 2003 we patd regular quarterly drvrdends on our genes E Preferred Stock. Prrcr- to then, except for the
fourth quarter of2004; we had not declared dividends on Series B Preferred Stock sitrcc the second qrrarter ofzooo, We similarly deferred Series B
Preferred Stock dividends for the fourth quarter of 2002: through the third quarter olzotw, In January 2010 we paid all dividends in arrears, since then
we have paid all regular quarterly dividends on the Series B Preferred Stock. The auurral dividend payable on the Series B Preferred Stock is currently
son mrllron. IIoweveL there can he no assurance that we wrll contrnue to pay preferred stock drvrdends tn the future.


23


Our Board of Direciois adopied a common siock dwidend policy ihai has rwo componenis: (l) a dividend ihai links ihe amouni of dividends on
our common slack in our averagc quanerly realized silver price in ilie preceding quaneL and (2) a minimum annual dividend of $0.01 per share of
common sioclc in each case payable quanerlyi when declared. See Note 9 of holes lo Consolidalcd Financial Sialcmcnir for more inforniauon on
poieniial dwidend amounis under ihe firsi componeiii ofihe policy a1 various sllvcr prices. From ihe founli quaner ofzol 1 ﬂirough and including ilie
founh quaner onDl 3, our Buard of Direciois has declared a common siock dundend under ihe policy described above (ahhough in some cases only a
minimum dividend was dcclarcd and nonc rclaring io rhc avcragc rcalizcd price ofsilvcr due in the priccs noi incciing ilic policy ihrcshold), Tlic dcclararion
and paymeni ofcommon siock dwidends, wheilier puisuani io ihe policy or in addiiion ihereio, is ai ihe sole discreiion ofour Board of Direciors, and
iliere can be no assurance ihai we will connnue io declare and pay common siock dwidends in ihe fuiure. ln addiiion. ihe indeninre govemlng our Senior
Noies limii our abiliry io pay dividends in ihe fuiure.

Additional issuanccs ofequl'ty securities by us would dilute ilic ownership nfnur existing stockholders and could reduce our earnings per
share.

We may issue securilies in ihe fulure in coiineclion willi acquisiiious, sliaiegic iiansaciions or for oiher poi-poses. To ihe extent we issue any
addiuonal equity seciiiiiies (or secnnues conveiiible inio equiiy), ihe ownership ofoui- exlsnng siockholders would be diluied and our earnings per share
could be reduced. As of December 31. 2013, ihere were aulslandmg warranis 1o purchase 22301623 sliai-es ofour common siock. The wairanis expire
in June and Augusl 2014, and give ihe holders the righl 1o purchase our common siock a1 ihe following prices: 52.40 (5,200,519 shares), $2.51
(460,976 shares), and 52.45 (16,646,128 shares). See N012 9 ofNolcs lo Consolidalcd Financial Slalcinenls.

The issuance ofaddiiionaliliarcs ofour preferred or common sicclr in thefumrz could adversely affect lioldm ofcommon Mock.

The markei price of our common siock may be influenced by any prefened or common slack we may issue. Our board of direciors is auihonzed
io issue addmonal classes or series of preferred siock wiihoni any aciion on ihe pan of our siockliolders. This includes ihe power io sei ilie ierms of any
such classes or series of preferred siock ihai may be issued, including Vollng nghis, dundend rights and preferences over common siock wuh respeci io
dwidends or upon ilie liquidaiion. dissoluiion or Wmdmg up of ihe business and oiher ieuns. If we issue preferred siock in ihe furnre iliai lias preference
over our common siock wiih respeci io ihe paymeni ofduiidends or upon liquidaiion, dissoluiion or wmdmg up, or if we issue prefened siock wuh voting
rights ihai diluie ihe voung power of our common siock, ihe nghls of holders of ihe common sioch or ihe marker price of ihe common smck could be
adversely affccicd,

As described in Nola 9 of NI)I(’.\‘ m Consolidalod Financial Slolcmonli, we issued 18.9 million shares ofour common siock in January ofzol l
in conneciion wiih conversion of our 6.5% Mandaiory Convenible Prefened Smck.

Ifa large number nfshares ofour common sloclr are sold in the public market, the rules could reduce the iradingpricc ofcur common stock
and impode our ability In rariiefuiuro capiiaL

We canuol predici whai effeci. if any, fuiure issiiances by us ofour common siock or oiher equin will have on ihe maikei price of our common
sioch. Any sliares ihai we may issue may noi have any resale resinciions, and iherefbre could be immediaiely sold by ihe holders, The markei price of our
common siock could decline ifcenain large holders ofour common siock, or recipienis ofour common siock, sell all or a sigiiiﬁcani ponion ofiheii
shares of common siock or are perceived by ilie markei as inlendmg io sell ihese shares oiher ihan in an orderly manner. In addinon, ihese sales could also
impair our abiliiy io raise capiial Ilirough ihe sale of addiiional common siock in ihe capiial markers.

24


The [Imviu'tms in our certificate cfincorpnrutr'nn, Imr by-luws and Delaware law could! [Illuy or rteter tender offers nr takeover attempts.

Certarn provrsrons rn our certrrrcate of rncorporatrou. our bylaws and Delaware law could ruake rt more drmcult far a thrrd party to acqurre control

or us, even lfthal transactron corrld be beueﬁcral to stockholders. These rrupedrruents include:

- the classrt‘rcatron orour board ordrrectors rrrto three classes servrng staggered lhree-year teuus, which makes it rrrore drrl‘rcult to qurckly
replace board members:

- the abrlrty of our board or drrectors to rssue shares or preiened stock wrth rrghts as rt deerus approprrate wrthout stockholder approval:

- a provisrorr that special meetings otour board ordrrectors may be called only by our chiefexeculive ofﬁcer or a majorin oiour board or
du’ecmrsl

- a provrsron that specral meetrngs otstocklrolders ruay only be called pursrrarrt to a resolutron approved by a maronty of our board or direcmrs;

- a prolrrbrtron agarnst actrou by wrrtten consent of our stockholders;

- a provrsron that our board merubers may only be removed for cause and by an afﬁrmauve vote or at least 80% of the outstandrrrg votrng stock;

- a provrsron that our stockholders comply wrth advance—notrce provrsrorrs to brrng drrector rromrnatrons or other ruatters before rueetrngs oi our
stockholders,

- a prohibition against certain business combinations with an acquirer of 15% or more crour common stock for three years afler such
acqrrisiliorr unless llre stock acqrrisiliorr or llre business corubinalion is approved by our board prior to llre acquisition of the 15% interest, or
aher such acqrrrsrtron our board and the holders ofle-llllrds of the other common stock approve the busrness combinallon; and

- a prolrrbrtrorr agarnst our errterrng rrrto certarrr busrness combrnalrons wrtlr rrrterested stockholders wrthout the amrmanve vote of the holders of
at least 80% of the voting power of the then outstanding shares ufvoling stock.

Ifwe cennnt meet the New Yark Stock Exchange cnntinuett listing requirements, the NYSE may delirt 010‘ common stuck

Our corrrrrrorr stock is crrrrently listed on the NYSE. in the future, iirve are not be able to meet the continued listing requirements of the NYSE,
which require, arrrong other things, that the average closing price otoru common stock be above 3 l ,00 over 30 consecutive trading days, out common
stock ruay be delrsted. Our closrng stock prrce on February l4, 2014, was 5347.

lt‘we are unable to satist‘y the NYSE crrteria ior contrnrred lrstirtg. our common stock would be subject to delrstirtg, A delisting of our comrrron
stock could neganvely rmpact us by aruong other things, reducrng the qurrrdrty and market prrce of our common stock; reducmg the number ot'rnvestors
willing to hold or acquire ourcournron stock, which could negatively impact our abrlity to rarse equrty ﬁnancing, decreasmg the amorrrrl oinews and
analyst coverage for the Company; and lrmrtrng our abrlrty to rssue addrtronal securrlres or oblarn addrnonal tinancrng m the future, In addrtron, delrstrng
from the NYSE rnrght negatrvely rrnpact our reprrtatron and as a consequence our busrness.
Item in Unresolved StaiiCcmments

None.
item 2. Properties

OPERATING PROPERTIES

The Greens Creek Unit

Varrous of our subsrdranes own 100% oi the Greens Creek mrue located on Admrralty lsland near Juneau rn Southeast Alaska. Admrralty lsland rs
accessed by boat, tloat plane. or helicopter. On the rsland, the mrne srte and various surface facllmes are accessed by [3 rurles ofall-wealher gravel roads.
The Greens Creek rrrine ltas been in production srrtce 1939, with a temporary care artd maintenance period from April 1993 through July 19%. since
the start of producnon, Greens Creek has been owned and operated throrrgh varrorrs Jornt ventrrre arrangements. For approxrmately IS years prror to Aprrl
lo. 2002;, our wholly-owned subsidiary, Hecla Alaska LLC, owned an undrvided 29.7% joint venture interest in the assets of Greens Creek, On April
16, 2008, we completed the acquisition ufall 0f the equity oitrvo Rio Tinto srrbsidiaries holding a 70.3% interest in the Greens Creek mine. and which
previously operated the mine, for approximately $7585 million, The acquisition gave various oiour subsidiaries control oi 100% oithe Greens Creek
nrrnc,

2 5



The Greens Creek orebody coirrains silver, cine, gold and leads and lies wllllin ihe Admlrally lsland Narional MonrrmenL an environmeirrally
sensirire area The Greens Creek propeny includes (r39 rrnparenred lode rnining claims, 58 parenred lode clarrns and one paienrerl rrnll sire ln addrnon, ihe
(ireens Creek srie includes propenies under lease from ilre u s. Foresi Selvlce ("USFS") ﬁll a road righi.ol:way, mine porial and mill sire accessi camp
sue, mine wasie area and railings rmpoundmem, The USFS leases [rave varying cxplwllun terms Greens Creek 31le has mle Iu mineral righls Lm 7,301
acres offederal land acquired rhrough a land exchange wllll ihe USFS. We are errrrenrly exploring, brrr nor mining on such federal land.

The project conslsls ofllre mine, an or: concemlallng mllls a railings rmpuundmem areas a Ship-luadmg facility, camp facilirres. a ferry duck, and
niher relared infrasirucrure. The map below illusrr-arcs the locallon and access in Greens Creek:

Greens Creek, Admiralty Island, Alaska
A, : a
c... ‘; A ‘ ' "
...,. , e i 4,.
"" q 41 e ’ M" I
\\ k ' nos- on
r ' r . r a
1 . g
\— :I g. _, . A , h w i OJ
, , i m
l . 7 _ a r...“ on. .w
l ..i y .a
' ,’ ‘  imp.”
Mano m I'Vl'll'hﬁ
‘ r, «we l Harm-w a.- M “m
x... m
rm...
0 am on nine {NM urn-.-
l mum whips “m”
I ‘ - o swam
A M006!
* martini: nodr r a.“
u... mm:  Fury Rm l

The Greens Creek deposri is a polymeralhe siraiil‘onn. masslve sullirle deposii. The lrosi roek eonsisis ufpledumlnanlly rnarine sedimeniary and
inch lo ulrramal'ie volcanic and pluioiric rocks. which have been subjecied lo rnuliiple periods orderormarion, These deronnarional episodes have
imposed inrense recronic rabrics on ihe rocks. Minerallzaliou occurs inesr onen aloirg ihe eoirracr berween a srrucrural hanging wall orqrrarrc mica
carbonate phylliies and a srrucrrrral foolwall or graphiric and calcareous argillire. Major sulfide minerals are pyriie, sphaleriie, galena. aird
Iclmhcdnlc [cnnanilu

Pursuanl lo a 1996 land exchairge agreemenl, ihe jolnl venrure transferred privare propeﬂy equal lo a value OH] ,0 million io ihe us. Forest
Service and received explorariorr aird mining righrs io approximarely 7.500 acres of land wirh mining poreiriial surrounding ihe exlsllng mine.
Ally producriori from new ore discoveries on die exchanged lands wrll be srrbyecr ro a federal royalry included in ihe land exchange agreemeni. The royalry
is oirly due on any producrion from reserves ihar are iror pan omreeirs Creek‘s exrralareral righrs, Thus far, rhere has been no producrion rriggen‘ng
paymeni or‘rhe royalry. The royalry is 3% ir'rhe average value of ihe ore drrrrng a year is grearer ihan ihe benchmark and 0.75% ir'rhe value is equal io or
less iharr ihe benchmark. The benchmark ufSlZO per ion is adjusied annually according Io ihe (iross Dorrresiie Produei (GDP) lrrrplieii Price Dei‘laior
rrnrrl rhe year 2016i and ar December 31. 20m, was ar approxirnarely $154 per ron when applying ihe laresi GDP Impllclt Price Deﬂaror,

z o


Greens Creek is an underground mine which produces approximately 2,100 to 2,300 tens of ore per day, The pnmaiy mining methods are cut and
ﬁll and loiigliole stoping, The Greens Creek oie processing facility includes a SAG/ball ini11 grinding circuit to grind the run ufmine ore to liberate the
minerals and produce a slurry suitahle for differential ﬂotation ofminerdl concentrates. A gravity circuit recovers free gold that exists as electrum, a
gold/silver alloy in the ore. Dore and gravity concentrates are produced from this crrciirt priortd ﬂotation. Three ﬂotation concentrates are produced. a lead
concentrate which contains most of the silver recovered; a zinc concentrate which is low in precious metals content; and a zine-rich bulk concentrate that
contains gold. silver, zinc, and lead and must be marketed to an imperial smelter. In 201 3, oie was processed at an average inte of approximately 2,206
tons per day and mill recovery totaled approximately 71% silver, 74% Linc» 68% lead and ﬁlo/i, gold. The dore is rurther reﬁned by precious metal
reﬁners and sold to banks, and the three concentrate products are sold to a number of major smelteis worldwide. See Note 11 of Nalcx m Consolidated
Ftrmm'i'alSmtemeltti' for information on the significant customers for Greens Creek's products. Concentrates are shipped from the Hawk liilet marine
terminal about nine miles from the mill.

Underground exploration activities at the Greens Creek unit during 2013 focused on continued expansion nfthe Deep 200 South mineralized zone
along trend of the already-existing mineralization to the south. and at the Southwest Bench, 5250 and East Ore zones. Definition drilling of the Deep 200
South, 200 South and East Ore zones resulted in additions to reserves, The 2013 surface exploration program focused on the Killer Creek area and
consisted ofzxme feet ofeore drilling in 10 holes. Drilling revealed intersected broad mineralized zones up to 400 feet with stringer yeins locally grading
up to 10% copper and 10.4% combined iead-zrnc. widely spaced drrllirrg currently covers an area or2,500 feet by 2,500 feet and suggests zoned
niinemlizatiun with the target remaining open in all directions, Surface drilling at Killer Creek during 2014 is expected to consist nf20.000 feet and is
expected to better deﬁne the outward extent of the sinekwork area and also to evaluate the mine Contact at depth,

Electricity for the Greens Creek unit is provided through the purchase efsurplus hydroelectric power from Alaska Electric Light and Power
Company (“hemp”), to the extent it is available aﬁer the power needs ofJuneau and the surrounding area are met. when weather conditions are not
favorable to maintain lake water levels sufficient for all oftlie power needs at Greens Creek to be met by available hydroelectric power. the mine relies on
power provided by on-site diesel generators.

Tire employees at Greens Creek are employees ofHecla Greens Creek Mining Company. our wholly—owned subsidiary. and are not represented by a
bargaining agent. There were 403 employees at the Greens Creek unit at December 31.2013,

As ufDeeember 31, 2013. we have recorded a $34.5 milliun asset retirement obligation for reclamation and closure Costs. We maintained a $30
million reclamation build for Greens Creek as of December 31, 2013, The net book value of the Greens Creek iiiiit property and its associated plant,
equipment and mineral interests was approximately $683 million as of December 3 l, 2013.

27


Based on curreni ore reserve esiimaies, inc currenily known remaining mine life at Greens Creek is 9 years. lnfenuaiiou wuli respeci io preducuen,
average Cash Casi, Aller By-pmducl Credils. Per Silver Ounce and proven and prubable ore reserves is set forth 1n lhe following lable,
Years Ended December 31,

Prnduclinn 2013 2012 2011
Ore milled (ions) 805,322 789,569 772,069
Silver (ounces) 7,448,347 6,394,235 6,493,337
Geld(eunces) 57,457 55,496 56,318
ziuc (ions) 57,614 64,249 66,050
Lead (ions) 20,114 21 ,074 21,055
Average Cost Aher By-pmducl Credits Per Silver Ounce Pruducedﬂl
Casli Cusi, Ailer By-prorluci ci-erliis, Per Silver Ounce 8 4,42 3 2,70 3 (1.29)
Proven Ore Reservesilaliﬂiiaéill
Toial ions 14,100 12,000 7
Comained silver (ounces) 181,700 112,500 7
Coninined gold (ounces) 1,300 1,100 7
Contained zinc (ions) 1,150 930 7
Coniaincd lead (ions) 430 330 7
Probable Dre Reservesﬂéﬁéﬁll
Toial Ions 7,782,300 7,345,600 7,991,000
Silver (ounces pei ion) 1 1.9 12.0 12.3
Gold (ounces per Ion) D 09 0,09 0.09
Zinc (percem) 8.7 9.0 9.2
Lead (peiecni) 3 3 3 4 3,5
Comained silver (ounces) 92,333,300 94,481,200 93,383,300
Coninined gold (ounces) 710,900 713,400 742,400
Contained zinc (ions) 676,800 702,300 733,140
Comamed |ead(rons) 255,700 267,410 231,620
Total Pruven and Probable Dre ReservesG-éﬁéﬁll
Toial Ions 7,796,900 7,357,600 7,991,000
Silver (ounces pei ion) 1 1.9 12.0 12.3
Gold (ounces per Ion) D 09 0,09 0.09
Zinc (percem) 8.7 9.0 9.2
Lead (peiecni) 3 3 3 4 3,5
Comained silver (ounces) 92,520,000 94,593,700 93,383,300
Coninined gold (ounces) 712,700 719,500 742,400
Contained zinc (ions) 677,950 703,230 733,140
Comamed |ead(rons) 256,130 267,740 231,620
(1) Includes by-produci crediis from gold, lead and Z1“: produciion. Casli Cos-i, Ailer lay-product Crediis. Per Silver Ounce represenis a measuremem

rim is net in accordance wuli GAAP lliai managemenl uses io meniior and evaluaie ilie performance of our mining operaﬁons. We believe Casli Cosi.

Aller By-pmdum Credns, 1>er Silver Ounce proVides an indicaier of economic performance and efﬁciency aI eacli locaiiou and on a consolidaied

basis, as well as providing a meaningful basis io compare our resulis 1e inose of olher mining companies and oilier mining operaiing prupemes. A

reconclllallon ofthis non-GAAP measure to cost of sales and mller direct pruducnon cosls and depreclarion, depletlun and amortlzaliun, the mos!

comparable GAAP measure. can be found in [’art 1!, [10m 7. 7 i‘l/lmmgemﬁnl'x Divt'ua‘xian and Anulyxix afl-‘iiiauci'ol Condition and Rexullx of

Oporutiom, under Reconciliation of Coxh Cost, Before [iv-product ('mﬁn and Cash ('oxt, Aﬂﬁl‘ By-prodtict Creditx (rioIi-GAAI’) (0 Com of

Sakai and Olhﬁr Direct [’IYIdIAL'IlDVl Com and Depreciation, Doplction and Amortization (GA/11’),

28


[2) Estimates of proveii and probable ore reserves for the Greens Creek unit as of December 2013. 2012 and 201 1 are calculated and reviewed in-house
and are derived from successive generations oi reserve and feasibility analyses for different areas of the mine. using a separate assessment of metals
prices for each year. The average prices used for the Greens Creek unit were:

December 31,
2013 2012 201 1

Silver (per ounce) 3 20,00 $ 26.50 is 20.00

Gold (per ounce) 8 1.300 3 1.400 x; 1,100

Lead (per pound) s 0.90 $ 0.35 s 0.85

zinc (per pound) 3 0,80 3 0,225 $ 0.85

(3) Ore reserves represent in-place material. diluted and adjusted for expected rriiiiing recovery. Mill recoveries ofore reserve grades differ with are grades,
and the 2013 reserve model assumes average mill recoveries of71“/o for silver, 61% for gold. 84% for zinc and 75% for lead.

(A) The changes in reserves in 2013 versus 20 [2 ate due to continued depletion uftlte deposit through production and lower metals price assumptions,
partially offset by the addition ofdztta from new drill holes and development work. The changes in reserves in 2012 versus 201 l were due to
continued depletion of the deposit through production, partially olrset by the addition ordata from new drill holes and development work and
increases in tonnage due to higher inetals prices used for planning.

(5) Probable reserves at the Greens Creek unit are based on average drill spacing ofso to 100 feet. Proven reserves typically require that mining samples
are partly the basis orthe ore grade estimates used, while probable reserve grade estimates can be based entirely on drilling results. The proven
reserves reported for Greens Creek for mi 3 represents stockpiled ore. Cutoff grade assumptions vary by orebody and are developed based on reserve
metals price assumptions, anticipated mill recoveries and smelter payables and cash operating costs, Due to multiple ore metals, and complex
combinations oi‘bte types. metal ratios and metallurgical performances at Greens Creek, the eutoi‘f grade is expressed tn terms of net smelter ielun'i
(“NSR”). rather than metal grade. The cutoff grade was $190 per ton NSR.

[6) Greens Creek are reserve estimates were prepared by Robert Callaghan. Clilef Geologist, and Kerry Lear, Senior Resource Geologist (contractor) at the
Greens Creek unit and reviewed by Keith Blair, Senior Resource Geologist at Hecla Limited and Dean McDonald, Senior Vice President of
Exploration.

[7) An independent review by AMEC E&C, Inc, occurred in 2012. The review included the 2012 model containing a portion thhe 200 South zone that
is included in reserves. In addition, an independent review ufthe resource model for the Southwest Bench zone by AMEC E&C, lnc. occurred in
zou, with the ﬁlial report on the review pending.

2 9


The Lucky Friday Unit

Since 1958, we have owned and operated the Lucky Friday mine, a deep underground silver, lead and zinc miue located in the Coeur d'Alene
Mining District in northern Idaho. Lucky Friday Is one-quarter mile east DfMullan, Idaho, and is adjacent to US. Interstate 90. The mine site and
various surface facilities are accessed by paved roads from us. interstate 90. Below is a map illustrating the location and access to the Lucky Friday
unit:

Lucky Friday. Mullan, Idaho
- - . t t.
' a .  , x:
- ' . ' c.)
' ‘- z t 't r s in
' r‘ ' i‘» i...
. r a
' I- , ‘ “ i; , i
““h' N . ,. “ .,- unanim—
‘ V a
.5‘ a
w .r iii—
3?» ‘7’
E!
0 our, Fin-y ulna Q
0 813MB 9 a L
n - . . w I; ,s‘ W u 
ﬂ Sun/mm \L\_‘,. is 3
— WW 1. in... 1".
o in in ~
nit- Ai-z-i '5' x 53

There have been two ore-hearing structures mined at the Lucky Friday unit. The ﬁrst, mined through 2001, was the Lucky Friday vein, a fissure
vein «ypical orniany in «he Coeur d'Alene Mining District. The ore body is located in the Revett Fon‘naiion, which is known to provide excellent host
rocks for a number of ore bodies in the Coeur d'Alene Mining District. The Lucky Friday vein strikes nanheasterly and dips steeply to the south with an
average width ofsix to seven feet. Its pnueipal ore minerals are galena and terrahednte wrth minor amounts of sphalente and ehaieopynte, The ore occurs
as a single continuous ore body in and along the Lucky Friday vein. The major pan ofthe ore body has extended from 1,200 feet to 6,020 feet below
surface,

The second ore—bearing stmoture, known as «he Lucky Friday Expansion Area, or Gold Hunter, has been mined since 1997 pursuant to an
operating agreement with silver Hunter Mining Company (“Silver Hunter”), our wholly owned subsidiary, During 1991, we discovered several
inineralized structures containing some high—grade silver ores in an area known as the Gold Hunter propeny, approximately 5,000 feet northwest of the
then existing Lucky Friday workings. This discovery led to the development ot‘the Gold Hunter property on the 4900 level. At approximately 4,900 feet
below surface, the Gold Ilunter veins are hosted in a ZOO-fool Ihick siliceous lens within the Wallace Funnatiun that transitions to the SI. Regis Funnatiun
below 5.900 feet. The veins are sub-parallel, and are numbered consecutively from the hanging wall of the favorable horizon to the footwall, The strike of
the vein system is west-northwest with a dip of 85 degrees to the south, The 30-vein, which has demonstrated to contain higher silver grades, represents
approximately 53% of our current proven and probable ore reserve tonnages, while the remaining 42% of our reserves are contained in various intennediate
veins having lower silver grades than 30-vein. while the veins share many characteristics with «he Lucky Friday vein, the Gold 1-1unter area possesses
some mineralogical and rack mechanics differences that make it more favorable to mine at this time. On November 6, 2008, we, through Silver Hunter.
completed «he acquisition of substantially all or the assets of independence Lead Mines Company. which held an interest in «he Gold Hunter propeny. The
acquisition included all future interests or royalty obligations to independence and the mining claims pertaining to the operating agreement with 1-1ecla
Limited that was assigned to Silver Hunter.

The principal mining method at the Lucky Friday unit is ramp access, cut and ﬁll. This method utilizes rubber-tired equipment to access the veins
through ramps developed outside of the ore body. Once a cut is taken along the smke of the vein, r« is backﬁlled wrth cemented «ailings and the next cut is
accessed. either above or below, from the ramp system.

30


Ore at the Lucky Friday is processed using a convenrional lead/zinc notation ﬂowsheet, with process control guided by a real-time, on-line
analyzer. Run of urine ore is crushed in a conventional three stage crushing plant consisting ofa primary jaw crusher, and a secondary crushing circuit,
and tertiary cone crushing stage. Crushed ore is gmund in a hall mill. and the ground slurry repons to the lead ﬂotation circuit, The lead circuit tathrigs
repon to the zinc tlotation circuit. Lead and zinc concentrates are thickened and ﬁltered, and ﬁnal concentrate products are shipped to smelters for ﬁnal
processing. Current processing capacity oflhe Lucky Friday facility is approximately 1,000 tons per day, As discussed further below, production at
Lucky Friday was temporarily suspended during 2012, Lucky Friday resumed limited production in early 2013, and full production in late September
2013. In the founli quanei onDl3, ore was processed at an average rate of837 tons per day, During 2013. min recovery totaled approximately 93% silver.
91% lead, and 76% Zinc. All lead and zinc concentrate production during 2013 was shipped to Teck Comlnco Limited’s smelter in Trail, British
Columbia, Canada.

Underground explomtmn aclwmes were suspended at the Lucky Friday unit during 2013. Deﬁnmon dnlling from the 6200-56 Ramp station on the
east stde of the mine upgmded Bur conﬁdence m the mtnerallzatlon ofthe 30 Veln and the Intennedlale velns (41, 80 and 130 Vems) above the 7300 level.
Drilling from the 6500 1eyel at the ss—Rainp siinilarly upgraded the mineralization on the westem-central region of the 30 Vein ahoye the 6800 level. In
20 [3, a dnll continued deﬁmtmn dnlllng work beneath the planned advance of lS-slnpe below the 6500 level, whlch dnlltng work we expect to continue
in 2014. In 2014, we expect deﬁnition drilling to continue. with a primarily focus on completing 3D vein characterization below the east end of lS-stope
between the 6600 and 7200 levels.

31


Based on currenl eslimales of reserves, mlnerallzed material, and other resources, the currently expecled mine life al Ihe Lucky Friday is
approximately 27 years. Int‘unnatiurt With respect to the Lucky Friday unit's pruductlun, average Cash Cost, After By-pmducl Credits, Per Silver Ounce
and proven and probable ore reserves for the past three years is set funh in the table below,

Years Ended December 31,
Prndnclinn 2013 2012 2011
Ore milled (tons) 174,331 7 298,672
Silver (ounces) 1,459,000 7 2,985,339
Lead (tons) 10,260 7 18,095
ziiic (tons) 3,793 7 7,305
Average Cost Her Ounce 0f Silver Producedﬂl
Cash Cast, Afler By-pmduCI Credits, Per Silver Ounce S 19.21 $ 7 S 6.47
Pruven Ore Reservesﬂéﬁé-ﬂ
Total tons 3,707,800 2,206,600 2,345,500
Silver (ounces per ton) 12.1 12.1 12.6
Lead (percent) 73 7.4 78
Zinc (percent) 23 2.7 3 0
Contained silver (ounces) 44,891,500 26,778,900 29,573,900
Contarncd lead (tons) 270,150 163,350 183,100
Contained zine (tons) 86,360 58,560 70,160
Probable Dre Reservesﬂérﬂiiiﬂ
Total tons 2,698,000 1,931,700 1345,300
Silver (ounces per ton) 12.0 14.8 14.7
Lead (percent) 7.2 8.7 93
Zinc (percent) 2.6 3.2 3.2
Contarned silver (ounces) 32,351,800 28,676,000 19,746,200
Contained lead (tons) 193,110 167,390 124,720
Contained Zinc (tons) 69,180 62,300 42,890
Toml Praven and Probable Ore Reservesﬂéﬂéﬁl
Total tons 6,405,800 4,138,300 3,690,800
Silver (ounces per ton) 12.1 13.4 13,4
Lead (percent) 7.2 8.0 8.3
Zinc (percent) 2.4 2.9 3.1
Contained silver (ounces) 77,243,300 55,454,900 49,320,100
Contained lead (tons) 463,260 330.740 307,820
Contained zine (tons) 155,540 120,860 113,050
(1) Includes try-product credits from lead and Z1“: production. Cash Cost, Aller By-pmducl Credits, Per silver Ounce represents a measurement that is
not in accordance with GAAP that management uses to monitor and evaluate the performance ofour mmlng operations. We believe Cash Costs, Aﬁer
By—preduct Creditsper silver Ounce proirides an indicator or economic performance and efﬁclency at each location and on a consolidated basis, as
well as prov idlng a meaningful basis to compare our re<ull< to those of other mining companies and other mining operating properties. A reconciliation
ortliis non-GAAP measure to cost ofsales and other direct production costs and depreciation. depletion and amortization, the most comparable GAAP
measure, can be found in Item 7. 7 Management 2t- Dixt'uxxialt and Anulyxix rift-inane i'ol C(mdiltvrl and Roi-tilts afapcmlivm‘, untlei
Retanctliutl'tm ofth Cvxl, Bqﬁu‘c By-pmdtit-t Credits and Cox/t Cvxl, After By-pmdutt Credttx (mut-GAAP) ta Cam ofSalcs and Other
Dtm-t [’I‘vdltcnan Cam and Depreciation, Dtyzletimt and Amarttzutl'tm (GA/11’).
32


(2) Proven and probable ore reserves are calculated and reviewed in-hoiise and are subjecr to periodic audit by others, although arrdirs are nor performed
on an annual basis. Cutoff grade assumptions vary by ore body and are developed based on reserve metals price assrrrnptrons, anticipated mill
recoveries and smelter payables and cash operating costs. Due to multiple ore metals, and complex combinations of ore types, metal ratios and
metallurgical perforrrrances at the Lucky Friday, the cutofl grade is expressed in terms of net smelter retrrni (“NSR”), rather than metal grade. The
cutoff grade at the Lucky Friday ranges from $1 1 1 per ton NSR to $128 per ton NSR. Diir estrrnates ofproven and probable reserves are based on
the following mctals prices:

December 31,
2013 2012 201 1

Silver (per ounce) 3 20.00 $ 26.50 3 20.00

Lead (per porrnd) s 0.90 3 0,85 1; 0.85

Zinc (per pound) 3 0,80 s 0.25 s 0.85

(3) Reserves are in-place rnaterrals that incorporate estirrrates ofthe amount of waste that must be mined along with the ore and expected rnrniiig recovery.
M111 recoveries are expected to be 94% for silver, 94% for lead and 89% for zinc.

(A) The changes in reserves in 2013 versus 2012 are due to inclusion uftleﬁnition diilling infunnaiioii from 2013 and the advance of mine design and
planning at the lower and upper limits of the mine, partially offset by depletion of the deposit through production and lower metals pnce assumptions.
The changes in reserves in 2012 versus 201 l are primanly due to inclusion of additional areas into the mine plan as a result of additional drilling and
higher metals pnces used for planning.

(5) Lucky Friday ore reserve estimates were prepared by Terry DeVoe, Chief Geologist, and Joshua Putts. Resource Geologist, at the Lucky Friday unit
and reviewed by Keith Blair, Senior Resource Geologist at Hecla Limited and Dean McDonald, Senior Vice President of Exploralion.

(6) An independent audit by Roscoe Postle Associates Inc, was conrpleted in 2013 for the 2012 reserve model at rhe Lucky Friday rnrne.

A nurrrber of accidents and other events in 2011 and 2012 impacted operations. ln April 201 l, a fall ofgr-ound caused the tatality ofone errrployee,
resulting in cessation oroperations for approximately 10 days. in November 2011, an accident occurred as part ortlre construction 0W4 Shall and
resulted in lhe fatality of one contractor employee. In an unrelated incident, in December 201 1, a rock biirst occurring in a prirrrary access way injured
seven employees. At the end ul‘ZDl 1, MSI 1A began a special impact inspection which resulted in an order to remove built-rip cementitious material from
the Silver Shall, the primary access way from surface. In response, we submitted a plan to MSHA and received approval to remove the built-up
ceinenlilious material, and that work commenced in the ﬁrst quaner 012012. The plan also iircluded removal of unused ulililies, constniction of a water
ring to prevent ice from forrrrrng in the winter, the installation ofa metal brattice. repair ofshaft steel, and installation of a new power and ﬁber optic cable.
Once the shall cleanup was complete down lo the 4900 level, work on a haulage way bypassing the area at 5900 level impacted by the December 2011
rock burst commenced Work on the silver Shaﬂ and the lrarrlage way was completed in the ﬁrst qiianei of 2013. Underground access was temporarily
limited as this work was being peifunned, and piuducliun was suspended from late 201 1 until early 2013 as a result. Limited production commenced in
the first qiianer onDl 3 and the miiie resumed full production in Seplemher 2013.

During 2003. we iiirtiated engineering. procrrrement and development activities relating to construction of «4 Shaft, which, upon completion, would
provide access from the 4900 level down to the 8300 level, The projecl was temporarily placed on hold in the fourth quarter 012008 due to their prevailing
nictals prrccs. However, dctailcd engineering, long lead time procurement, and orhcr early»stage activities for the rntcrnal shah project resumed in 2009. +14
Shaﬂ sliiking activilles were lemporarlly suspended uiilil the rehabilllalion work in the Silver Shaﬂ, discussed above, was compleled in early 2013,
Activities relating to a4 Sliaﬁ project as of December 31, 2013 have rncluded engineering, erection ofa surface concrete batch plant, detailed shaﬂ design.
excavation of the hoist room and off shaﬂ development access Io sllai'l facilities. inslallation ofth hoist and head works. placement and receipt of orders
ibi major equipment purchases. advancement of a geoteclinical drill hole, 1,522 feet of vertical excavation, shaﬂ-sinking set-rip, and other cunslrucliun
activities, Upon completion, #4 Shaft should allow us to mine mineralized material below our current workings and provide deeper platforms for
exploration. Construction of #4 shaft is expected to be completed in 2010, and capital expenditures for the project are anticipated ICl total approximately
$215 million, including approximately $130 million spent on the project through December 31. 2013. However. there are a number of factors that could
all‘ect completion of the prujeci, including a signiﬁcant decline iir metals prices. a reduction in available cash or credit, increased regulatory burden, or a
significant increase in operating or capiral cosrs. An increase in rhe capital cost could potentially require rrs to suspend or change the scope of the project or
access additional capital though debt ﬁnancing, the sale of securities, or other external sources This additional financing could be costly or unavailable.

Reclamation activities are anticipated to include stabilization ol‘tarlrngs ponds and waste rock areas. Reclamation of two of the idle tailings ponds
was performed at Lucky Friday in 2013, and at December 31, 2013, an asset retirement obligation of appraxiinalely $0.9 million had been recorded for
reclamation and closure costs.

33


The net book value of the Lucky Friday unit property and its associated plant, equipment and mineral interests was approximately $300.4 million
as of December 31. 2013. The age afthe factlltles at Lucky Friday ranges from the 19505 ID 20]].

At December 31, 2013, there were 312 employees. The United Steel, Paper and Forestry, Rubber, Manufacturing, Energy, Allied Industrial, and
Service Workers Intemational Union is the bargaining agent for the Lucky Fnday‘s 245 hourly employees. The cun-ent labor agreement expires on April
30. 2016. As a result of the requirement to remove built-up cementitious material from the Silver Shah, which limited underground access and temporarily
suspended production, Ilecla Limited laid off 121 employees in Janltary 2012, with approximately 25 of those employees accepting temporary positions at
other l-lccla operations. Lucky Frlday completed the rccall/rehire of the laid off employees in January 2013.

Avista Corporation supplies electrical power to the Lucky Friday unit.

The Cam Berardl' Unit

In 2013, as a result oiour acquisition of Aurizon Mines, Ltd. ("Aiiiizon"). we acquired the Casa Berardi mine, located 95 kilometeis north qua
Satre in the Abitibi Region ofWestern Quebec, Canada, The tttining site is reached via a 3X kilometen all season gravel road which connects with the
provincial and national paved roads grid, The property is limited to the west by the Quebec/Ontario border and covers parts of Casa Berardi, Dieppe,
Raymond, D'Estiees, and Puiseaux townships. The project area extends east-west for more than 37 kilometers and reaches 3.5 kilometers in width, The
Casa Bcrardi mine gold deposits are located along a 5 kilometer east-west niineializcd corridor.

The nearest commercial airport to the Casa Berardi mine is located at Rouyn-Noranda. La Sane can be reached from RDuyn—Noranda via
provincial roads 101 and 1 1 l. The 38 kilometer all-season gravel road to the mine site branches otl‘ from the paved road hnking La Sane and the Selbaie
Mine through the village ai'VlllebDls. The branch ls approximately 21 kilometers north DfVlllebclts. A gravel mad links the East Mtne and the West Mlne
[which roughly represent the east-west boundanes of the mine). and a number of forestry roads provide access to the rest oithe project area. from east and
west,

Hecla's wholly owned subsidiary, Hecla Qiiehec Inc. owns a [00% interest in the mineral titles and mining leases that comprise the Casa Berardi
tnine, The Casa Berardi mine is composed of296 contiguous designated claims, covering a total area of approximately 3cm: acres, and two mining
leases, BM 76:; and EM 833, covering aieas omxl acies and 208 acres, respectively. The total propeny area is 37,849 acres. We believe the claims and
mining leases that comprise the Casa 13erardi mine are in good standing. Mining lease 768 expires in 201 x and mining lease 833 expires in 2015; however.
each lease is subject to renewal of three lD-year tei ins, which we expect to occur following an administiative procedure with the Quebec govemment in
accoi dance with the Quebec Mining Act. In 2007. Lake Shore Gold Coip. (“Lake Shore") was granted an option to eam a 50% joint venture interest in
most of the propeny excluding the two mining leases (which represent all of the mines current pruduetlon) by incumng exploration expenditures. To date,
Lake Shore has not been elected to the joint venture, The part orthe propeny impacted by this agreement, which is all exploration property and not
production, Includes 227 elalms adjacent to the east and west cli'the Casa Berardl mine, and covers an area of l [,630 hectares.

We also hold a non-exclusive lease ENE 25938 for a sattd and gravel pit, tailittgs lease 70218, and an additional 12 acres ufland contiguous to
mining lease EM 768 for rock waste material storage,

Under the Quebec Mining Act, claims are required to be renewed every two years. Statutorily prescribed minimum work commitments apply to all
claims and leases. The leases comprising part ofthe Casa Berardi mine have excess ofwork credits ofCADSl 1,9 mlllion (as of February 28, 2013),
Municipal taxes on the project are paid up to date.

34


The project consists of two shaﬁs; the West Mine shaﬁ reaching a vertical depth of 1045 meters at the end of 2013, and the unused East Mine shaﬁ
located 4.; kilometers to the east, and going down to a vertical depth of379 meters. A system of declines and galleries connecting both shaﬂs provide
access and underground services to ore zones. The surface infrastructures include a 2,800 tonnes per day (over 1,000,000 tonnes per year) cyanrdation
processing mill, tailings impoundment areas, and other facilities and Infrastructures Power supply to the site is provided by a 55 kilometer, lZDkV
power line from the Hydro-Quebec transformation station located in the town of Normetal. The map below illustrates the location and access to Casa
Beiardi:

Casa Berardi. Quebec, Canada
_ ,5 fz-cri‘ 5 , r 3‘3
' l x ' e " - ‘1'
pi, ’ i .‘t
J ‘ o, , . 2;. -
‘ t r: B " v
‘ -, r': '
. r 3—,
x1 g‘ . m
no r  
.5. ,. ‘
h
0 0|- a-riiti in-
o W W *
I ‘ - . a. not
" WW
— mum a it...
[—H
r m a t
- aut-r ' v

The Casa Berardi mine is located in the northern pan of the Ahitihi sub-province, a subdivision ofthe superior province, the Archean core ofthe
Canadian Shield. The Casa Berardi area belongs to the Harricana-Turgeon aelt, which is a pan ofthe North Volcanic Zone. The regional geology ts
characterized by a mixed assetnblage oflnaﬁc volcanics, ﬂysch-type sedimentary iron formations, and graphitie mudrocks that are titnited by a large
granodioritic to granitic hatholith. structurally, the area is enclosed in the Casa Berardi Tectonic Zone, 3 15 kilometers wide corridor that can be traced
over 200 kilometers. A network of east-west to east-southeast and west-northwest ductile high strain zones mainly follows the lithological contacts,

Casa Beiardi can be classiﬁed as an Archean sedimentary-hosted orogenrc gold deposit, Mineralization is found in large low-sulphide quartz Veins
developed against the Casa Berardi fault, and in disseminated sulfides and stockworlu ltmses associated with strongly carbonate-sericite altered ductile
defamation zones obliquely oriented to the Casa Berardi fault, and extending a few hundred metres on both side of the fault following northwest and
northeast orientations Gold mineralization emplacement was eoeval with the faults evolution and show a strong structural control and vertical extension,
even ifother factors such as the nature of some host rocks and lithological contacts seem to have favored gold deposition,

The Casa Berardi Fault is defined by a stratigraphic contact between a graphite-rich sediment sequence at the base of the Tarot domain, a northern
continuous intermediary fragmental volcanic unit, and a southern potymictic conglomerate unit. The mineralization system is composed otlarge, low-
sulﬁde quartz veins and low-grade stockworks and carbonate-mica replacement zones forming in the West Mine and Principale area. On the nonh side of
the Fault, a thick sequence of very homogeneous wacke belonging to the Taihi Group is affected by an amphibotites metamorphic grade. One kilometer
further north is the easterly elongated Recher batholiths which is pan of the north-westem boundary of the Abitibi greenstone belt.

Aurizon acquired the claims, leases and infrastructure rompnstng the Casa Beiardi mine project in 1998 from Tvx Gold Inc, Aurizon engaged in
exploration programs beginning in 199s, and production began in late 2006.

Prior to Aurizon's ownership, the Casa Berardi underground mine operated from 1988 to 1997, producing approximately 35 million tonnes of ore
ar an average gold grade of 7.1 grams/tonne from two sites, the West Mine and the East Mtne. Aurizan‘s operations from 2006 to 2012 produced
approximately 4.1 million tonnes of ore at an average gold grade of7,8 grams/tonne A total of 1,525,500 ounces of gold were recovered by the previous
operators prior to 2013. The mineral deposits cover a distance of more than 50 kilometers.


35


IIecla acquired Aurizon on June I, 2013 for approximately CAD$740.8 inilliDn (US$714.5 million). and has operated the Casa Beraidi mine since
the acquisition, The net book value of the Casa Beiaidi unit pi opeity and its associated plant, equipment and mineral interests was approximately $738
million as ofDeceniber 31. 2013.

Casa Berardi is an underground ti ackless mine accessed by declines and a shaft, which pi odiices approximately 1,900 tonnes otore per day. The
mining methods are longhcile transversal stoping in 10 metres or more mineralization width, and longitudinal retreat stoping in narrower are bodies, The
mineralized zones put in reserves are of varying thickness, ranging from a few tens of meters to 3 metres. which is the minimum mining width, Most of
the hanging walls are sub-vertical (55“ to 85°), wrth typically the gi-aphitic Casa Eeiardi fault at the t‘ootwall.

As of December 31, 2013, work crews have approximately 50 meters remaining on a project initiated 13y Aunzon to deepen the West Mine Shaﬁ.
Completion of the associated shatt int'rastnicture, including loading pockets, shat) lining, servrces and steel, is expected late in the third qiiaitet 0f 2014.
with commissioning to follow, This new shaﬁ is expected to lower operating costs in future years as the mining horizon deepens. Additionally. the new
sliaﬁ should eventually provide a platform for deeper exploiation.

The gold recovery process is based on the CIL (carbon in leacli) technology where gold is dissolved in a cyanide solution, and precipitated on
activated carbon grains put in suspension. The product is a dote bats poured in the mills retinery,

Current reserves at the Casa Betardi mine comprise eight zones at the West Mine. spread over a moderate horizontal distance from each other and
located at ditferent mine elevations, plus open pit and underground areas at the East More Zone 1 13, Lower Inter Zone, 1 [8-1 21 Zones, Principale Zones
(open pit and underground) and the East Mine comprise the bulk of the deposit tonnage. The zones are ot‘ varying thickness, ranging hour over 50 meters
to less than three meters, which is the minimum mining width. Most oflhe hanging walls are sub—vertical (55"10 85“) and exhibit similar wall
characteristics Willi the exception of the Lower Inter Zone, which in a number of places has relatively shallow hanging wall conﬁgurations (less than 45“).

A transverse blasthole open stoping mining method was selected for the Casa Beratdi mine to provide the desired production rate. Timely supply of
both cemented and unconsolidated backtill plays a crucial role in controlling dilution and maintaining a short stoping cycle. This mining method satisties
all oitlie geoteciinical requirements and constraints and. as a non-entry mining method, has proven to be safe and reliable in similar operations.

A very small pan of the mineral reserves is planned for longitudinal sequencing, limited to the fringes of the small zones, Longitudinal methods
have the advantage oflower waste development requirements; however, there is much less ﬂexibility in sequencing and in access, should ground
instabilities occur.

The transverse mining method is used in areas with wide mineralization (10 meters wrde or more) and good access from nearby development. The
blasthole longitudinal mining method will be used in areas with narrow mineralization. or long distances from development infrastructure.

The East Mine Crown Pillar ("East Mine") open pit, as currently designed, would be a smaller scale operation using conventional open pit mining
methods. The East Mine open pit is expected to run foi approximately 3 years or production. The average amount of matenal to be moved every six month
period is anticipated to be approximately 140,000 to i80.000 tonncs ofurC. with variable quantities ofwastc.

The Principale Zone open pit. as currently designed, would be mined using conventional open pit mining methods. The Principale Zone open pit is
expected to run for slightly over 3 full years of production. The average amount ufmatei'lal being moved every six month period is expected to approximate
500.000 to 550.000 tonnes of ore, with Variable quantities of waste.

The mine and mill complex were designed to process over l,000,000 toniies ofore per year at a rate or2,800 tonnes per day. Di mcult ground
conditions and bottlenecks in stope preparation currently limit underground production to 730,000 tonnes per year (2,000 tonnes per day). The current life
of mine plan is based on an average mill rate of 2200 tonnes per day until 2017 , From 2017 on, the mill capacity is expected to increase to 3,000 tonnes
per day for the remaining mine life. The increase in capacity is expected to allow for mining ofmine ore from open pits.

The current life of urine plan totals 8,2 million tonnes of ore grading 5,5 g/t Au , The proiected open pit production is anticipated to be used to
suppon a planned expansion of processing operations to approximately 3,000 tonnes per day. Such throughput is planned to occur fmin 2017 to 2020.

36


A1 Casa Berardl underground exploranon drilling involves evaluanng 1he down dip or down plunge projeclions of our exrsnng ore zones and across
major slrucrnral irends such as 1he Casn Faun. During 20131 a lornl afﬁve drills operaled underground 1o reﬁne currenl resources and smpe designs in lhe
l 13, l [8, 123 and 127 Zunes and extend mmenallzaﬁun m Ihe Pilncipalel34 and 140 Zunes funhei east Inward Ihe Easl Shaﬁ. Surface and undeigmund
exploraiion drilling rargcﬁng the down plunge extensions onhc 123 and 140 Zones below ihe known exmnsion shows a similar sryle ofnnnemlrzanon.

The proposed 2014 underground del'rmnon drlll program is expecred 1o appraise Ihe lngh grade ore shoois or 1he 1 13 and 123 Zones. Underground
exploraiion drilling is expecicd m evaluznc extensions onlrc 1 13. 118, 123, 124 and 140 Zones. Surface cxplumtlon drilling is expecred ro concentrarc on (he
deeper. down plunge exicnsions ofihe 123 and 140 Zones.

We cxpccr the mine plan will conunually be modiﬁed as new mineral resources are discovered and upgraded ro reserves.

The employees a1 Casa Berardr are employees of llecla Quebec Inc, our wholly-owned subsidiary, and are nal represenierl by a bargaining agem.
There were 506 employees al ﬂ1e Casa Berardl uni! a! December 31, 2013,

Information wilh respecl 1o [he Casa Berardi unil's producnen, average Cash Cost, Aﬂer By-pmducl Credils, Per Geld Ounce and proveu and
probable ore reserve: for 2013 i: <cl forth 111 I11: lab]: below.

Seven Mnnlhs
Ended December
31,

Prnducﬂon 2013

Ore milled (rons) 387,608

Gold (ounces) 62,532

Silver (ounces) 12,381

Average Con, After By-Ermlucn Per Gold Ounce Pmducedﬂl

Cash Casl, Aller By-pmducl Credllsr Per Gold Ounce $ 950.79

Pruven Ore Reservesilrlrlél

Tmal 1on5 1,106,300

Gold (ounces per (on) 0.17

Comained gold (ounces) 185,100

Probable Dre Reservesllrlaéél

Teral rons 7,932,800

Gold (ounces per lon) 0.15

Comaincd gold (ounces) 1,208,500

Total Proven and Probable Dre ReservesQ-éﬁél

Tolal mns 9,039,100

Gold (ounces per (on) 0.15

Comained gold (ounces) 1,393,500

(1) Includes by-pmdne( credirs from silver produencn. Cash Cosl, Aﬂer By-producl Credlls, Pei Gold Ounce represenls a measuremenl (liar is not in
accordance wirh GAAP 1ha1 managemem uses 10 1110111101 and evaluate 1he performance of our mmmg uperauons We believe Cash CDSL Aﬂel By-
producl Credns, Per Gold Ounce provrdes an indicator of economic per-ronnance aml emcrency a1 each locanon and on a consolidaled hasrs, as well
as provrdmg a meanlngful hasrs 11) Compare our resulls lo ihose ol'olher mrmng companies and mher mining opernnng propemes. A reconcrlranon of
rlns non-GAAP measure 1o ccsl of sales and other Lln‘ecl pmducllon cosis and deprecranon, deplenon and amcmzanon, (he mosi comparable GAAP
measure, can be found in Item 7. 7 Management '.1' Dixcuxxizm undAnuvats‘ ofFinunciul Condition and Resultx ofOpemliam', under
Rccannliulirm of Cash Coxl, Before Bu-pmriner cedar and Cerh Corr, After By-pmdml Creditx (non-GAAP) m Cox! ofSeIer and Other
Dir-(Tl [’I'vducnan Cam and Depreciation, qulctian and Amarnzmion (GA/11’).
37


(2) Proven and probable ore reserves are calculated and reviewed iii-house and are subject to periodic audit by others, although audits are not performed
on an annual basis. Cutofigrade assumptions vary by ore body and are developed based on reserve metals price assumptions, anticipated mill
recoveries and smelter payables and cash operating costs, Due to multiple ore metals, and complex combinations orore types, metal ratios and
metallurgical performances at Casa Berardi, the cutoff grade is expressed in terms efnet smeller relum (“NSR”). rather than metal grade. The culot‘f
grade at Casa Berardi is assumed to be 4 grams per tonne. Our estimates of proveri and probable reserves are based on prices of $1,300 per gold
ounce.

(3) Reserves are in-place materials that ineurporale estimates ofthe amount of waste that must be mined along with the ore and expected iiiiniiig recovery.
Mill iecoveries for gold are expeeled to be appioxirriateiy 9m,

(4) Casa Berardl ore reserve estimates were prepared by Sylvain Ricard, Chief Geologist. and Real Parent, Senior Resource Geologist. at the Casa Berardi
unit. An independent review uftlie 2013 Casa Berardi reserve model was performed by Roscoe Postle Associates Inc. Casa Berardi resource estimates
were reviewed by Keith Blair. Senior Resource Geologist at Heela Limited and Dean McDonaldY Senior Vice President ufExplorariuii,

(5) An independent review of the 2013 Casa Eemrdl reserve model was performed by Roscoe Pasile Associates inc,

Item 3, Legal Proceedings

For a discussion of our legal proceedings, see N015 7 of Notes 10 Consolidnled Financial Slalemcrits.
item 4. Mine Saiery Disclosures
The informaiiari concerning inine safely Viulariuns or other regulatory malrers required by Section 1503(a) uftlie Dodd-Fiank Wall SIreeI Refun‘n
and Consumer Protection Act and Item 104 ofRegulation S-K is included in exhibit 95 to this Annual Repon.
PART II
Item 5, Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and issuer Purchases ot' Equin Securities
Shares ofeur common stock are traded on the New York Slock Exchange, Inc. where II lrades under the symbol "IIL." As efFebruary 14. 2014,
there were 6.298 stockholders of record oi‘ our common stock, Our common stock quarterly high and low sale pnces for the pasl two yeais were as
follows:
Fuunh Third Second First
Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter
2013 rHigh S 3.47 S 3.98 S 410 S 6.15
rLow S 2.63 S 2.72 S 2.65 S 3.91
2012 rHigh S 6.81 S 6.94 S 4.96 S 5.99
rLow S 5.25 S 4.14 S 3.70 S 4.25
Quanerly dividends were paid on our Series B Preferred Stock for 2012 and 2013. and ne dividends are in arrears.
38


in September 201 l and February 2012. our Board at Directors adopted a common stock dividend policy that has two components (1) a dividend
that links the amount at dividends on our common stock to our average quai1erly realized silver price in the preceding quarter. and (2) a minimum annual
dividend of $0.01 per share of common stock. in each case. payable quarterly, when declared. See Note 9 privates (0 Consolidated Financial
Statements for more information on potential dividend amounts under the first component of the policy at various silver prices. The following table
summarizes the common stock dividends declared by our Board of Directors:

(A) (B) (C) (A+B+C)
Silver-price Minimum
linked annual Special Total dividend
component per component per dividend per Total dividend amount (in Month oi
Declaration date share share share per share millions) payment
November 8, 201 l S 0.02 S 7 S 7 S 0.02 S 5.6 December 2011
Febiiiaiy 17,2012 S 0.01 S 00025 S 7 S 0.0125 S 3.6 March 2012
May 8, 2012 S 0.02 S 00025 S 7 S 0.0225 S 6.4 June 2012
August 7, 2012 S 7 S 00025 S 7 S 0.0025 S 0.7 September 2012
November 2, 2012 S 0.02 S 00025 S 7 S 0.0225 S 6.4 December 2012
Febiiiaiy25,2013 S 7 S 00025 S 0.01 S 0.0125 S 3.6 March 2013
May 10, 2013 S 7 S 00025 S 7 S 00025 S 0.7 lune 2013
August 8, 2013 S 7 S 00025 S 7 S 0.0025 S 0.9 August 2013
November 5, 2013 S 7 S 00025 S 7 S 00025 S 0.9 December 2013

Because the average realized silver price for each quarter ﬁlm] and the second and fourth quarters of2012 was below the inlniinum threshold of
$30 according to the policy, no silver-price-linked component was declared or paid. iicwever, on February 25, 2013, our Board of Directors declared a
special common stock dividend Dt'S0.01 per share. in addition to the minimum dividend ot‘ 50.0025 per share, for an aggregate dividend ot's3.(r million.
Prior to 201 1, no dividends had been declared on our common stock since 1990. We cannot pay dividends on D|I|‘CD|\]|I]C1I‘1 stock ii'we fail to pay
dividends on our Series B Preferred Stock. The declaration and payment ofcoinmon stock dividends, whether pursuant to the policy or in addition
tliereto, Is at the sole discretion of olir Board of Directors. and there can be no assurance that we will continue to declare and pay common stock dividends
in the future.

The followmg table provides information as of December 3 l, 2013 regarding our compensation plans under winch equity securities are authorized
for issuance:

Number nl' Number of
Securities T0 Securities
Be issued Remaining
Upon Exercise iii" Available For
Outstanding Weighted-Average Future Issuance
Options. Exercise Price at Under Equity
Warrants and Outstanding Compensation
Rights Options Plans
Equity Compensation Plans Approved by Security Holders:
2010 Stock Incentive Plan 7 N/A 18,065,847
1995 Stock Incentive Plan 612,745 4.29 7
Stock Plan for Non-employee Directors 7 N/A 594,535
Key Employee Deferred Compensation Plan 7 N/A 1,019,948

Total 612,745 4.29 19,680,430

Sec Note A’ and Note 9 ofiVoies m Comah‘dtzlad Financial Statements for information regarding the above plans.

On Julie 1, 2013, we issued 56,997,790 unregistered shares cfcommon stock to the former holders of comliion stock ofAurizcli Mines Ltd.
("Aurizon") to partially fund the acquisition of AniiZDil (see Nit/i: 16 of Miles to (‘tmxtilidii/ail Fimuniu] Stu/emenls). The shares were not registered
under the Securities Act of 1933 pursuant to an exemption from registration under Section 3(a)[10) of such act. We did not issue any unregistered securities
in 2012. On December 12, 201 1, we issued 5,395,683 unregistered shares ofccmmon stock to the various parties listed in the Purchase and Sale
Agreement ﬁled as exhibit 10.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K ﬁled on December 13, 2011. The shares were not registered under the Securities Act of
1933 in reliance on Section 4(2) of such Act and Regulation D thereunder, as transactions by an issuer not involving any public otter-mg, and were issued
for the acquisition of the remaining 30% interest in the San Juan Silver project (see Nola 16 chtItox to Consolidated Financial Slit/amenity for
information).

39


The followmg performance graph compares 1hr: performance or our common smck during 1he period beginning December 31. 2008 and ending
December 31, 2013 lo lire S&P 500,1lre S&P 500 Gold Index, a peer group for 1116 year ending December 31, 2013 ("New Peer Gmup"), and a peer group
for lire year endrrrg December 31, 2012. The New Peer Group consms or 1116 following companies: Alarnos Gold Inc.. Allied Nevada Gold Corp, AuRico
Gold Inc, Cemena Gold, Inc, Coeur Mrnrng, 1ne., Eldorado Gold Corp, Endeavour silver Corp, F1151 Majesue silver Corp, Golden Siar Resources
L1d.. IAMGOLD Corporauon. New Gold Inc., Osisko Mining Corp, Pan Amencan silver CDrp., Srlver S1andard Resources Inc., Sullwmer Mining
Company, The Old Peer Group consisis or 1he following companies; Alarnos Gold 1nc,,Allred Nevada Gold Corp, Aunco Gold Inc, Cemerm Gold, Inc.,
Coeur Mrnmg, 1nc., Eldorado Gold Corp, Golden S1ar Resources L1d.. IAMGOLD Corporanon, New Gold Inc,, Pan American silver Corp. Sllllwmer
Mrnrng Company. The change m our 2013 peer group compared 1o 1he 2012 peer group was In add Endevour silver Corp, Fusr Majesuc Srlver Corp,
Dsrsko Minrng Corp., and Silver srandard Resources 1nc.. represenung addruonal companies 11ra1 we have de1ennrned 1o be wilhln an accepmblc revenue
range. The graph assumes a $100 invesmrem in our common s1oek and in each of me indexes and peer groups srnce 1he begrnning of 1he period, and a
rernvesmrem of drvrdends pard on such rnvesrrnems on a quanerly basis ilrroughom ilre perrod.

COMPARISON OF 5 YEAR CUMULAﬂVE TOTAL RETURN"
Among Heda Mining Co me 58F 5001noex me sop Colo Index,
01o Peel Gloup ano New Peel Glouc
“50
me
5150
non
$250
, s A
non a ’
_ , 4r ’ ’
ma ‘,_vgs.g:‘;-;'::*; 2:9...121:
-—:.::- 7'7"",  ' 
mo .1-,,—...., 6  .7 V
:50 "'0
so
woo um um am 12112 12m
+nocuuurngca —e- sarsoo “a” “pm
_._olaPeeerp +1-me Group
8321’ 500 2012 Old 2013 New
Date Hecla Mining saw 500 Gold 1ndex Peer Group Peer Group
December 2008 $ 100.00 3 100.00 3 100.00 $ 100.00 3 100.00
Deeembe12009 19 220.71 $ 126.46 8 117.27 $ 206.60 $ 213.43
DeeemberZOlO $ 402.14 S 14551 3 153.59 $ 308.95 S 305.68
DeeemberZOII 19 187.37 $ 148.59 8 152.54 $ 249.35 $ 243.18
December 2012 $ 211.35 3 172.37 3 121.41 $ 227.31 3 230.33
DecemberZOB 19 112.25 $ 228.19 8 62.51 $ 104.48 $ 124.61

The stock performance infonnaiion above is “fumished“ and shall nul be deemed 10 be “solicinng maienal“ or subjeci 10 Rule 14A of the Exchange
Ac1, shall nor be deemed ﬁled“ for purposes ofSecrion 18 of 1he Exchange AC1 or o1herwise subjecr 1o 1he habiluies of ma seem)“. and shall nor be
deemed incorporared by reference in any ﬁling under 1he Securitles Acl uf1933. as amended. or 1116 Exchange Act, whelher made before or aﬂer the dam of
rlris repon and irrespecnve of any general incorporarion by reference language in any such ﬁling. except to 1hr: exrenr 1ha1 11 speciﬁcally incorpormes 1he
rnfannarian by reference.

40


On May 3, 2012, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program. Under the program, we are authorized to
repurchase tip to 20 m|llmn shares of our outstanding common stock from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions See Nola 9 of
Nam m Como/Idumd I-‘i'uam-i'al Stu/Emi’ltl‘x for more iiifomiaiiori, We made no purchases of our outstanding common stock during the quarter ended
December 31, 2013,

Item 6. Selected Financial Data
The following table (in thousands, except per shaie amounts, common shaies issued, stockholders of record, and employees] sets forth selected

historical consolidated ﬁnancial data as of and for each ufthe yeais ended December 31, 200‘) through 2013, and is deiived from our audited ﬁnancial

statements The data set forth below should be read in conjunction with, and is qualiﬁed in its entirety by, our Consolidated Financial Statements and the

Notes ihcrcro,

2013 (7) 2012 (7) 2011 2010 2009

Sales ofproducts 3 332,539 3 321,143 3 477,634 3 413,313 3 312,543

thincunicUoss) 3 (25,130) 3 14,954 3 151,164 3 43,933 3 67,326

Preferred stock dividends 11(2) 3 (552) 3 (552) 3 (552) 3 (13,633) 3 (13,633)

Income (loss) applicable ra cainmnii stockholders 3 (25.682) 3 H.402 3 150.612 3 35,350 3 54,193

Basic income (loss) per common share 3 (1108) 3 0.05 $ 0-54 3 0.14 3 0.24

Diluted Income (loss) per common share 3 (1‘ OX) 3 0.03 3 0-51 3 0-13 3 0-23

EBITDA (3) 3 69,130 3 76,373 3 233,365 3 (12,103) 3 134,533

Tami mm, 3 2,232,119 3 1,373,290 3 1,396,090 3 1,332,493 3 1,046,734

Accrued melama‘mn & C155”: mm (4) 3 105,191 3 113,215 $ 153,811 3 318,797 3 131,201

Non-current portion ofdcbt and capital leases 3 505,058 3 1 1,935 3 (1,265 3 3,792 3 3,281

Cash dividends paid per common share (5) 3 0,02 3 0.06 3 0,02 3 7 3 7

Cmnmun sham "mad and oummmg 342,663,331 235,209,343 235,239,924 253,435,666 233,335,526

Stockholders of record 6,435 6,630 6,943 7,333 7,647

Etnployccslm 1,312 735 735 686 (756

(1) Duiing 2008, $04 million in Series B preferred dividends weie declared and paid, while $0.1 million in dividends foi the fouith quaner uf2008
were deferred, Series B preferred dividends for the first three quarters of2009, whicli totaled 30.4 million, were also deferred, In December 2009,
we declaied all dividends in arrears on out Series B preferred stock of30.6 million and the scheduled 30 1 million dividend foi the fourth quarter
of2009. These dividends were paid in cash in January 2010. Theiefore, dividends declaied on our Series E prefeiied shares of$0.7 million weie
included in the determination ofincuine applicable to common stuckholdeis for 2009 with no cash paid for Series B preferred dividends duiing
2009. We declaied and paid all quarterly dividends on our Series B pieferred shares for 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013 totaling 30.6 million for each
uftliosc years.

(Z) Dividends on out 6 5% Mandatory Convertible Prefeiied Stock totaling 313.1 million for the fouith quartet of2008 and the ﬁist three quartets of
2009 were deferred In December 2009, we declared the 313.1 million in dividends in arrears on our 6 5% Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock
and the scheduled $3.3 million dividend for the fourth quarter 012009. These dividends were paid in shares of our common stock in January
2010. Therefoie, dividends declared on our (3.5% Mandatoiy Convemble Prefeiied Stock ofSIZJ million were included in the deteiTnination of
income applicable to common stockholdeis for 211119 with no cash paid for 6.5% Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock dividends in 2009, We
declared and paid all quarterly dividends on our 6.5% Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock totaling $131 million for 2010. Dividends declared
for the first and second quarteis of2010 were paid in shai es ofour common stock and dividends for the third and fourth quarten of 2011) weie
paid in cash. The cash dividend declaied {oi the fourth quartet 632010, which was paid in January 201 1, repiesented the last dividend paid on
the 6 5% Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock, which automatically convened to shares of our common stock on January I, 201 l,

41


(3) Earnings before interest, taxes. depreciation, and amortization ("EEITDA") is a measurement that is not in accordance with (iAAP, EElTDA is
used by management, and is useful to investors. for evaluating our operational perfonnance. A reconciliation oftltis non-GAAP rrreasure to net
income (loss), the most comparable GAAP measure, can be round tn Item 7, 7 Memrgement'r Dis‘LlAd's‘ltm mldAnabti‘ix eth'nent-r'ei Condition
and tier-triu- of 017aruli0m‘, antler Recent-lithium afEurmngx Before Interest. rarer, Depreciation, um] Amortization (non—GMP) m Net
Income (Loss) (GAAP),

(A) In the fourtli quarter onOlO. we recorded an accrual ofS 1 93,2 million to reﬂect our liability for environmental obligations in Idaho's Coeur d'Aleiie
Basin pursuant to negotiations wttli the plaintiﬂ‘s tn the Coeur tl'Alene Basin environmental litigation and the State ofltlaho on the financial terms
of settlement ofthe litigation and related claims. The settlement was ﬁnalized in September 20] l,

(5) Sec Item 5. Mitt/retfor Regrrttant's Common Equttv, Related Stockholder Matters um] [steer Purchaser aquuin Securities for a summary
of the common stock dividends declared by ottr Board of Directors for the years presented.

[6) The increase in the number ot‘ employees in 2013 was due largely to the acquisition of Aurizctn Mines, Ltd, in June 2013, See Note 16 of Noted to
Conralidtzted Financial Statements for more information.

(7) As a iesult of an order from MSHA to remove built-up ceinentitious material from the Silver Shaft. production was temporarily suspended at the
Lucky Friday unit during all of 2012. Limited production resumed in early 2013, See Item 7, Mirnegementit Dir-earshot and Anilivxld‘ of
Financial Condition am] Resulti- efOperattent, The Lucky Friday Segment for more information.

Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations

Overview
Established in 1891 in northem Idaho's Silver Valley, we believe we are the oldest still—operating precious metals mining company in the United

States and the largest silver producer in the us. Our corporate omces are in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho and Vancouver, British Columbia, Our production

proﬁle includes:

- silver, gold, lead, and Zinc contained in concentrates shipped to various smelters; and

~ dore containing gold and silver, which is further reﬁlled before sale of the metals to precious metal traders.

Our operating propenies comprise our three business segments for ﬁnancial reporting purposes: the Greens Creek operating unit on Admiralty

Island tn Alaska the Lucky Friday operating unit in Idaho, and the Casa Bet-ardt operating unit in Quebec, Canada. since our operating intnes are located

in the US. and Canada, we believe they have low political risk, and less economic risk than mines located in other pans of the world, Our exploration

interests are located in the United States. Canada, and Mexico. jurisdictions with law or relatively moderate political and economic risk, and are located in
historically successtrrl mining drstncts,

our operating and strategic framework ts based on expanding our production and locating and developing new resotttce potential. In 2013, we

- Acquired Aurizon Mines Ltd. ("Aiiiizon") on June 1, which gave rrs ownership ofthe Casa Berardi gold mine and other miner-a1 interests in
Quebec, Canada (discussed t‘unher below), The acquisition was partially funded by $490 million tn net proceeds from our issuance ot‘Senior
Notes havtng an eight-year maturity and a coupon rate ot‘ 6.875%.

- Retumed our Lucky Friday trrtne to historical full production rates beginning in September 2013, As discussed in the Lucky chatty Segment
section below, production was suspended at Lucky Friday during all ot‘ 2012 as we completed rehabilitation work to address MSIIA orders.

- Achieved higher silver and gold production by 39% and 1 15% compared to 2012. The higher silver production is due to the return of
production at Lucky Friday and improved throughput and ore grades at Greens Creek, and the increase in gold production is due primarily to
the addition of the Casa Beiardi mine through the acquisition of Aurizon.

42


- Committed a record level olcapital expenditures (including iion-eash lease additions) crapproximately $162.6 million, including $57.1
million at Greens Creek, $55.9 milliuii at Lucky Friday, and $41.4 million at Casa Berardi,

- Increased overall proveu and probable silver and gold reserves at December 31. 2013 by 13% and 190%, respectively, compared to 2012, wltli
silver reserves reaching the highest level in oui history. The higher overall silver reserves is due to a 39% increase at Lucky Friday, partially
offset by a 2% decrease at Greens Creek. The increase in overall gold reserves is primarily the result of the acquisition of the Casa Berardi
mine. See Part 1, 11cm 2, Property Dcxniptimlx for additional infonuation on proven and probable reserves at each of our operating units.

- Maintained a signiﬁcant level of exploration and pre-development spending during the year, drilling targets at each of our ﬁve land packages in
Alaska, ldaho, Colorado, Quebec, and Mexico. We also advanced [ire-development projects at the San Sebastian urine in Mexico, and the
historic Bulldog mine in Creede, Colorado. where we obtained access tu the historical mine working through cunstriictioii ufa new decline
access way.

~ Paid common stock dividends totaling 560 million, or 5002 per share. See Note 9 quolas la Consolidated Financial Slulcmz'ms.

- Reduced oui balances for accrued reclamation and closure costs by 33.0 million. primarily as a iesult ofmaking the scheduled $15.0 million
payment pursuant to the teims of settlement oflhe Coeur d'Alene Basin litigation and advancement ofwork at the Grouse Creek site (a non-
opcraring property located in Idaho). where we have substantially completed reclamation,

- Scaled down discretionary capital. exploration, and [we-development expenditures starting in the fourth quarter onDl 3, with a plan to continue
the reduced spending levels in 2014, to address the recent reduction iii nretals prices.

~ Achieved the above milestones while maintaining a cash balance of $212.2 million as ofDecember 31, 2013.

Silver and gold prices declined to annual averages of$23.83 and $1,411, respectively, for 2013, from average prices of$31.15 (or silver and
$1,669 for gold for2012 and 335.1 1 for silver and $1,569 for gold in 2011. Average prices oflead recovered slightly in 2013 from the average price for
2012, which had decreased by 14% compared to 201 1. The prices of Zinc remained substantially level during 2013, aﬁer decreasing by 12% during 2012.
Lead and 2inc represent important by-produels at our Greens Creek and Lucky Friday segments, The decrease in precious metals prices negatively
impacted our operating results in spite ot‘increased production of silver, gold, lead, and zinc in 2013 compared to 2012 due to the retum ot‘production at
Lucky Friday. improved throughput at Greens Creek, and the addition of the Casa Bcrardi mine .

The factois driving metals prices are beyond our control and are difﬁcult to predict. As noted above, prices have been highly volatile in the last
three years and could be so in the future. Average prices in 2013 compared to those in 2012 and 201 l are illustrated in the Royalty qfOpcmrionx section
below. Moreover, the nretal grades olore mined are inrpacted by geology and mine planning emcieucies and operations. potentially creating constraints on
metals produced. Ore transportation and smelting schedules also impact the tinting of sales and ﬁnal settlement.

Sec the Resultx of Opermiom section below for a discussion onlie factors impacting income applicable to common stockholders for the tliree years
ended December 31. 2013, 2012 and 2011,

K (’v IA‘A‘IAEA‘

We intend to achieve our long-term strategy of incl easing production and expanding our proven and probable reserves through development and
exploration, as well as by future acquisitions, Our strategic plan requires that we manage several challenges and risks inherent in conducting mining,
development. exploration and metal sales at multiple locations,

One such risk iiivolves metals prices, uver which we have no cuntrul except through derivative and other contracts. As discussed in tlie (‘ri/t‘ctzl
Accounting Estimator section below, metals prices are inlluenced by a number of lactors beyond our conrrol, Average market prices of silver and gold in
2013 were lower than their levels in 2012. while lead and zinc prices were substantially the same. as illustrated by the table in chultx afOpcmtl'unx
below, While we believe current global economic and industnal rrcnds could result in growing demand, prices have been volatile over the last ﬁve years
and there can be no assurairce that current prices will continue.

43


On June 1. 2013, we completed the acquisltlon uf all uftlle issued and olltslandlllg common shares of Allrizon for tulal conslderation of
CAD$7403 mllliun (US$714.5 million), See Nam 16 ofl‘v’olcx 10 Coltxolidnled Financial Slalemcrltx for more lnfonnatlon. The acqulslllon gave us
100% ownership of the producing Casa Bemrdi gold mine, along with interests in various gold exploiation properties in the Abittbi region of north-western
Quebec, Canada. As we saw in 2013, the aequlsmun is expectedto significantly increase our annual gold production and gives us ownership ofan
operating gold mine with significant gold reserves, and provides access to a large land package with known mineralization. Nonetheless, we are faced with
tlte challenge ofcottttnuing the integration of, and the operating responsibility for Casa l3erardi and other Aunzon projects, In addltlull, as funher
discussed in Item 7A. Quantilnlivc and Qualimnve Discloriiros About Mar/(ﬁt Risk. the acquisition has increased our exposure to risks associated wtth
exchange fluctuations between the us. dollar and Canadian dollar. The acquisition was partially funded by $490 million in net proceeds from our
lssllallce ufSeniur Notes ill April 2013 [see Note ('7 of Norm l0 Conxalidulcd Fin/1min! Sluiemarlls  As discussed in the Fin/1min! Liquidity and
Capim] chaurccx sectlon below, we believe that we will be able to meet the nbligatlons associated with the acquisition ofAurizon and additmnal debt;
however. a number offactors could impact our ability to meet the debt obligations and fund our other projects.

We make out strategic plans in the context of signiﬁcant imcenainty about future opeiational capacity, which may impact new opponunities that
require many years and substantial cost from discovery to production. We approach this challenge by investing in exploration and capital in districts wtth
known mineralization, However, in an effort to address the recent decline in precious metals prices, we reduced our exploration and pie-development
spending in 2013. alter signiﬁcantly increasing our exploration arid pre-development activity in 2012 compared to 201 t, We anticipate a funher decrease in
exploiation and pre-developntent activity in the coming year as a part ofour continued plan to reduce spending on discretionary projects in tlte lower metals
price environment.

As further discussed in the LIA-Sky Friday Segmt’nl section below, we are in the process of constructing an internal shaﬂ at the Lucky Friday mine
("#4 Shall"), which, we believe, wlll signiﬁcantly increase produetloli and extend the life oftlie mine. The #4 Shall project will involve signiﬁcant
additional capital costs dunng the periods leading up to its expected completion date in 2016. Although we believe that our cunent capital resources Wlll
allow us to complete tlte f4 Shaft project, there are a number of factors that could affect its completion.

Volatility in global financial markets poses a significant challenge to our ability to access credit and equity markets, should we need to do so. and
to predict sales prices for our produels, As discussed in Note 9 of Nate-x Iv lexolidmcd Financialx Smtomcmx , we have established a commun stock
dividend policy whlell includes a component that is linked to our realized silver price. We utilize forward contracts to manage exposure to declines in the
prices orsilver, gold, zinc and lead contattied in our concentrates that have been shipped but have not yet settled, and zinc and lead contattied in our
forecasted future coiiceiitrate shipments. In addition, we have in place a three-year $100 million revolving credit agreement under which there were nu
borrowings during ml 3 and are no outstanding borrowings as of the ﬁling date of this annual report.

We strive to achieve excellent mine safety and health perfoimance. We seek to implement this goal by: training employees in safe work practices;
establishing following and improving safety standards, investigating accidetits, incidents and losses to avoid recurrence, involving etiiployees in the
establishment of safety standards; and panicipating in the National Mining Association's CURESH/ely program. We attempt to implement reasonable best
practices with respect to mine safety and emergency preparedness, See Part 1, Item 1A, Rtrk F iictorr and the Lut'ky F riduv Segment section below for
itironnation on accidents atid other events that impacted operations at our Lucky Friday unit. We work with MSHA to address issues outlitied in the
investigations oftltese incidents and continue to evaluate our safety practices.

Another challenge is the risk associated with envlrullmelltal matters and ongoing reclanlatlull actlvlties. As deserlbed in Risk Factors and N019 7 of
Natex m Consolidated Financial Snuemontx, it is posslble that our estimate oftltese liabilitles (and our ability to estimate liabilitles ln general) may
change in the future, affecting our strategic plans. We are involved in various environmental legal tiiatters with no assurance that the estimate ofour
eitvrroumental liabilities. liquidity needs, or strategic plans will not he significantly impacted as a result of these matters or new matters tltat may arise, We
strive to ensure that our activtties are conducted in compliance wtth applicable laws and regulations and attempt to resolve environmental litigation on as
favorable terms as possible,

Reserve estimation is a major risk inherent in mining, Our reseive estimates, which drive oiir mining and investment plans and many of oiir costs,
may change based on economic factors and actual production experience. Until ore is mined and processed. the volumes and grades ofoui- reserves mtist
be considered as estimates. Our reserves are depleted as we miite. Reserves cart also change as a result of changes in economic and operating asstmtptions.

44


As a result of industiy-wide fatal accidents in recent years, primarily at underground coal mines, there has been an increase in mine regulation. In
addition, under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Retbnn and Consiimei Protection Act, the SEC was directed to issue rules iegarding the disclosure ofmine
safety data. Moreover, because of the incidents in 201 1 at the Lucky Friday mine, we expect additional regulatoiy scrutiny, and our ability to achieve and
maintain compliance with MSHA regulations will be challenging and may increase oiu operating costs. See Part 1, Item 1A, Riv/t I-‘aemri- — Accidents and
other evenlx at our Lucky Friday rnine could have additional advent: consequent-ex m m‘ and We fat-e xuhxran/ial governmental regulation and
environmental risk,

Results nfOperaiiom
Sales of products by metal for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 201 lwere as fullows.
Year Ended December 31,

(in thuusands) 2013 2012 2011

Silver $ 170,534 3 174,379 3 286,637

Gold 137,<i03 72,757 59,954

Lead 50,751 30,074 59,452

zinc 74,683 91,998 107,585

Less: Smelter and reﬁning charges (51,092) (42,055) (55034)
Sales ufprottucts S 382,589 Ki 321,143 $ 477,634

For the year ended December 31, 2013, we reported a loss applicable to common stockholders ot13257 tiiillion cotiipared to incotiie ottl4.4
million in 2012 and $150.6 million in 201 l. The following factors led to the results for the year ended December 31, 2013 compared to 2012 and 20l1:

- Decreased average silver and gold prices in 2013 compared to 2012 and 2011. With average lead and Zinc prices also lower in 2013 compared

to 201 1. These price Variances are Illustrated In the table below.
Average price {or the year ended December 31,
2013 2012 201 1
Silver 7 London PM Fix ($/ounce) 3 23.83 S 31.15 3 35.11
Realized price per ounce 21.28 32.11 35.30
Gold 7 London PM Fix (SE/ounce) 1,411 1,559 1,559
Realized price pct ounce 1,317 1,687 1592
Lead 7 LME Final Cash Buyer (S/pound) 0.97 0.94 1.09
Realized price per pound 1.00 0.95 1.05
zinc 7 LME Final Cash Buyer (S/pound) 0.37 0.88 1.00
Realized price per pound 0 88 0.90 1.00
Average realized prices ditter from average market prices primarily because concentrate sales are generally recorded as revenues at the time of
shipment at forward prices for the estimated month of settlement. which differ from average market prices, Due to the time elapsed between
shipment of concentrates and final settlement with the smelters, we must estimate the prices at which sales of our metals will be
settled. Prev iously recorded sales are adjusted to estimated settlement metal prices each period through ﬁnal settlement. For 2013, we recorded
net negative price adjustments to provisional settlements of 517.0 million compared to net positive price adjustments to provisional settlements
oi$3.x million in 2012 and net negative price adjustments oitzo million in 201 1. The price adjustments related to zinc and lead contained
in 0111 concentrate shipments weie largely uthet by gains and losses on toiwnid contracts for those metals for each year, For 20 l 3, the price
adiustiuents ielated to silver and gold contained in out concentiate and dore sales were also partially offset by gains and losses on forward
contracts for those metals. as we began utilization of forward contracts for those metals in July 20 l 3 (see Note 10 of Nalex m Consolidated
Financial Sluicmams for more int‘cinnation). The gains and losses on these contracts are included in revenues and impact the realized prices
for silver, gold, lead and zinc. Realized prices are calculated by dividing gross revenues for each metal (which include the price adjustments
and gains and losses on the forward contracts discussed above) by the payable quantities ofeach metal included “I concentrate and dore’
shipped during the period.
45


- Decreased gross proﬁt at our Greens Creek unit to $69.7 million in 2013 compared to $143.3 million in 2012 and $188.5 million in
2011, We reported a gross loss for 2013 at the Lucky Friday unit of $4.9 million due to the restart of the mine, which had been closed for
rehabilitation in 2012, while we recognized grass prntit of 576.5 million at Lucky Friday in 2011. The lower gross profit at the Greens Creek
unit and the gross loss at the Lucky Friday unit were panially otrset by gross proﬁt at the newly acquired Casa Berardi unit of 513 million in
2013. See the Grccrld' Creek Segment, thcky I‘Hday Segment, and Cara chrdi Segment sections below for further discussion nfeperating
iesiilts.

~ Costs related to the acquisition of Aurizon of $26.4 million in 2013.

- Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, of $21.7 million in 2013 compared to $2.4 million in 2012 and $2.9 million in 2011. The
increase is due to the issuance of Senior Notes in April 2013. with the net proceeds used to partially fund the acquisition of Aurizon (see Mater
6 and 16 of Nam 10 Conxaliduled Financial Statements).

~ Higher geneial and administrative costs, which incieased to $28.9 million In 2013 flom $21.3 million in 2012 and $18.5 million in 2011 due
to increased stafﬁng and costs attiibutable to the acquisition of Aurizon.

- The temporary halt in production and suspension-related costs of $25.3 million incurred at our Lucky Friday unit in 2012 related to
maintenance of surface facilities and mine workings and rernrbisliing the mill in preparation for the return to production. See The Lut'kv
Friday Sz'gmcrlt section for more infnnnatinn on the temporary suspension of production during 2012.

- Net mark-to-market gains on base metal forward contracts ofSlSﬂ million in 2013 and $38.0 million in 2011, and net losses of$10.5
million in 2012. These gains and losses are related to financially-settled fciward contracts on i‘crecastcd zinc and lead production as part ofa
lisk management program. The gains in 2013 and 2011 iesulted from decreases in zinc and lead prices dunng those peiiods, with the losses
in 2012 due to increasing prices for those rnetals. We do not include silver and gold in this program.

- Exploration and pre-development expense decreased to $37.7 million in 2013 from $49.7 million in 2012. which represented a signiﬁcant
increase from 531.4 ""11an in 2011. Despite spending less in 2013, our activity in 2013 included a continuation of extensive exploration work
at our Greens Creek unit, on our land package near Durango, Mexrce, at our San Juan Silver project in the Creede district ot‘Coleradn, and in
the North ldalio's Cceur it'Alene Mining District near ciii Lucky Friday unit, as well as exploration work at the newly acquired Casa Berardi
mine and other projects on our land package in Quebec, Canada, "Pre-deyelepiiient expense" is deﬁned as costs incurred in the exploration
stage that may ultimately benefit production, such as underground ranip development, which are expensed due to the lack ofproven and
probable reserves. We advanced pre-development projects during 201 l, 2012, and 2013 at the Equity and Bulldog mines in the Creede district
and at the Star mine in the Coeur d'Alene distnct which have given its access I0 histciic workings and iiiitleigicund itrill platforms We have
also initiated pre-development work at the San Sebastian nilne in Mexico.

~ Reclassification of$3.0 million in unrealized losses on certain marketable securities from other comprehensive income to current eamings in
2013, compared to losses of $1.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, in 2012 and 201 l. The losses weie recognized in cunent eaniings in
each period because the securities were deemed to be other than temporarily impaired.

- Provision for closed operations and environmental matters decreased to $5.4 million in 2013 and $4.7 million in 2012 from $9.7 million in
201 l. The higher provision in 2011 was primaiily the result ot'a $4.7 mllllDrt increase to the liability for the (‘rrciise Creek site to reﬂect new
information on the remaining cost ofreclamarlon work there. Reclamation was substantially completed at Grouse Creek in 2013,

~ Income tax benefit ot‘$9.8 million in 2013 compared to income tax provisions of$8.9 million in 2012 and $82.0 million in 2011. The beneﬁt
in 2013 and the lower provision in 2012 compared to 2011 is the result ofredliced proﬁts, See Note 5 ofNotcx m Comolttlutctl Financial
Statememtr for more information.

46


Greens Creek Segment
Dallurx me in thousands (Exaipi‘pcr (Imch rindpcr mn umamllx) Years Ended December 31,
2013 2012 201 1
Sales S 263,263 320,895 342,906
Cost of sales and other direct production costs (133,261) (134.105) (1 13,393)
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (55,265) (43 ,522) (41,013)
Gross Prof“ 8 69,737 3 143,268 $ 188,500
Tons orore milled 805,322 789,569 772,069
Producnon:
Silver (ounces) 7,448,347 6,394,235 6,498,337
Gold (ounces) 57,457 55,496 56,318
zinc trons) 57,614 64,249 66,050
Lead (tons) 20,114 21 ,074 21,055
Payable rrretal quantities sold:
Silver (ounces) 6,675,459 5,430,252 5,314,232
Gold (ounces) 46,648 43,133 43,942
Z1nc(luns) 39,806 50,895 48,436
Lead (mus) 17,056 15,733 16,067
Ore grades:
Silver ounces per 1011 13,04 11.13 11.49
Gold ounces per Ion 0.12 0.12 I]. 12
Zinc percent 3 47 9,35 9.31
Lead pcrccnr 3 33 3,49 3.52
Mlmng cost per ion 8 613.43 3 64,05 3 49,31
Milling cost per ion 3 33.92 3 29.35 3 30.69
Cash Cost, Atler By—prodrrct Credits, Per silver Gunce in 8 4,42 3 2,70 3 (1.29)
(1) A reconclllalion ofthis non-GAAP measure (a cost of sales and ml1er direct pmduciion coils and depreciailun, deplenon and amonizauon. 111e musl
comparable GAAP measure, can be found in RcCaIiLiIiulirm Cash Car-z, Before By-pl'odtdt'l Credits‘ and Cash Cost, Aﬂcr Bv-prmluLi‘ Credits

(mm-GAAI’) m C(lex (fofSaIm‘ and Oi‘hﬁr Dim-z Pmdiit-ztmi CIM‘IA‘ and Depreciation, Depletion and Amorn’zmtmi (GAAP) .

The 373.5 million and 31 18.8 rnillion decrease in gross proﬁt for 2013 compared to 2012 and 201 1. respectively, were primarily the resrrlt ofthe
follmvlng factors.

- Lower average prices for silver, gold, and zinc. Average prices for silver and gold for 2013 were lower than in 2012 by 23% and 15%,
respectively, and lower than in 2011 by 32% and 10%, respeciively. Average lead prices in 2013 were also lower compared io 2011, bui were
l1lghe1 conipared ro 2012.

- Negative price adjustments to revenues of3 l o5 million in 2013 compared to positive prices adjusnnems of 33.5 million in 2012 and negative
adjustmems of30 5 million in 201 1. Pnce adjustmems to revenrres resrrlt from changes in metals prices between transfer oflllle oi‘concentiates
to buyers and final settlenients during the period, and are panially offset by gains and losses on fol ward contracts related to concentrates that
have been shipped.

- Higher mlmng and mllllng costs in 2013 compared to 2012 and 2011.

The Greens Creek operation is partially powered by diesel generators, and production cosls have historically been signiﬁcantly affected by
fluctuations in fuel prices and utility power availability, installed infrastnicture allows hydroelectric power to be supplied to Greens Creek by Alaska
Electric Light and Power (AELKLP) via a submarine cable from North Douglas Island, near Juneau, to Adrnn—alty Island, where Greens Creek is located,
This has reduced production costs at Greens Creek 11: the extent power has been available, In 201 1, due to lower precipitation, less hydroelectric power
was available. Dunng 2012. the mine began recelving an increased portion of rrs power needs from AEL&P; however, due to lower precipitanon levels and
111cl'eased local demand. less l1ydmeleclnc power was available 111 2013. When weaihel' condiilons are 1101 favumble to maintain lake waler levels, the mine
relies on diesel generated power. Fuel costs represented approxlmalely 313.3 million (11% of total production c0515) at Greens Creek in 2013 compared to
$6.8 million (cu/a ofpioduclion costs) in 2012 and $12.7 million (13% ofpioduclion costs) in 201 1, The cost ofhydioeleclric power was 347 million
(4% of production costs) in 2013, 36 8 million (6% of production costs) in 2012, and 33.9ini11ion (4% of production costs) in 2011.

47


Mining costs per ton increased in 2013 by 7% and 39% compared to 2012 and 201 1, respectively, The higher mining costs were due primarily to
higher cost of labor. Milling costs per ton increased in 2013 by 15% and 11% compared to 2012 and 201 1, respectively. Milling costs were up in 2013
compared to 2012 because we generated more power on-site in 2013 due to reduced avallablllty of less expensive hydroelectric power, resulting in higher
diesel costs, as discussed above. The increase in milling costs in 2013 compared to 201 1 is primarily Ihe result of an increase in Ihe cost ofdiesel fuel
from $3.40 in 2011 to $3.58 in 2013,

Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense was 27% and 35% more in 2013 compared to the same periods in 2012 and 2011, respectively,
due to increased assets in service and the effect on unils-uf—producliurl depreciation of weaker silver prices relative Io base metal prices.

The chart below illustrates the factors cnnlrlbuling to the variances in Cash Ccsl. Aﬂer By-pmducl Credlls. Per Silver Ounce for 2013 compared to
2012 and 2011:

Vurs Ended Deceli 3|

Mining and milling - 2013 1107

2012 n 53

2011 9 so
Omavcash cosls - 2013 596

NH 7 u

20“ e 59
Tlemmm cnsls - 2013 906

2012 1) A7

20" n it
Concentrate freight A 2013 115

2012 2 n

2011 2 as
Ey-ploduel credits - 2011 (22 set

2012 129 est

2011 131 E91

m: m m

Cult Cost, Atter Eypmducl
Credlu. pal Sllvel Ounco “.12 51410 ($1.29)

As sel foth above, Cash Cosl, Aﬂer By-producl Credils, per Silver Ounce in 2013 was $4.42, consisting of$27.32 ofCash Cosl, Before By-
product Credits, per Silver Ounce and $22.90 per ounce ofby-pmducl credits, compared Io $2.70 in 2012, consisting of $32.55 ofCash Cost, Before
By-pmducl Credits, per Silver Ounce and $29.85 per ounce ofby-pmduet credits. Cash Cost, Aﬁer By—product Credits, per SilverOunce in 201 1 was
negative $120, consisting of $30.40 Cash Cost, Before By.product Credits, per silver Ounce and $31.69 per ounce ufby-producl credits. The increase
in Cash Costs, Aﬁer By-pmducl Credits, per Silver Ounce for 2013 compared to 2012 and 2011 was the result ufllavlng lower lay-product credits, as
Cash Cost, Before By.product Credits, Per silver Ounce actually decreased by $5.23 and $3.03, respectively, Mining and milling costs per ounce were
higher in 2013 compared to 2012, but the other costs were lower. However, Cash Cost, Aﬁer By—produet Credits. per silver Ounce was higher in 2013 due
to by-preducl credits per silver ounce that were lower by $6.95 and $8.79. respectively, compared to 20 [2 and 2011.

43


Mining and rnilling cost decreased in 2013 compared to 2012 on a per .ounce basis. despite increasing on a per—ton basis as discussed above, due
primarily to higher srlver production resulting from improved silver grades. Mining and milling costs increased in 2013 compared to 201 1 due to higher
labor and power costs in 2013 corrrpared to 201 1, partially offset by the irrrpact of higher silver production.

Ollier coils for 2013 were lower compared to 2012 and 201] due to the effecl uf higher silver prodllclion and luwer miiie license lax. partially offset
by higher labor and power costs.

Treatment costs were lower in 2013 compared I0 2012 and ZlJl l as a result Dfreduced zinc and lead concentrate producllon and lower zinc prices.
Reduced average lead prices also contributed to the higher treatment costs in 2013 compared to 2011. Treatment costs include a price adjuslment
component tliat ﬂuctuates with change in base metal prices.

lay—product credits were lower in 2013 cornpar ed to 2012 and 201 1 due to lower gold prices, higher silver production due to increased silver ore
grades. and reduced Zinc and lead production as a result of lower ore grades for those metals, The decrease in by—product credits in 2013 versus 201 1 was
also due to lower zinc and lead prices.

Tire difference between what we report as "producliuii" and "payable metal quanlllies sold" is attributable to the difference between the quantities of
metals contained in the concentrate we produce versus the portion ot‘tliose metals actually payable by our smelter customers according to the tenrrs cfthe
srrrelter contracts. Ditterences can also arise from inventory changes incidental to stripping schedules The increase in payable quantities sold fur 2013
compared to 2012 and 2011 is due to the timing oiconcentrate shipments and increased production during 2013.

while revenue from zinc, lead and gold lay-products is significant. we believe that identiﬁcation of silver as the primary product of the Greens
Creek unit is appropriate because:

- silver has historically accounted for a higher proportion of revenrre than any other metal and is expected to do so in the future;

- we have historically presented Greens Creek as a producer primarily of silver. based on the original analysis that justiﬁed putting the project
into production, and believe that consistency irt disclosure is important to our investors regardless oithe relationships oimetals prices and
production from year to year:

- nictallrrrgical trcntnicnt maximizes silvcr recovery.

- the deposit is a massive sultide depcsrt containing an unusually high proportion cfsilver; and

- in most ofits working areas. Greeiis Creek utilizes selective mining methods in which srlver is the metal targeted for highest recovery.

Likewise. we believe the identiﬁcation of gold, lead and zinc as by-product credits is appropriate because of their lower economic value compared
in silver and due in the fact that silver is Il'le primary product we intend to produce. In addition, we do not receive sufficient revenue from any srrrgle by-
product metal to warrant classification cfsuch as a co-pr-cduct.

We periodically review our revenrres to ensure that reporting of primary products and by-products is appropriate. Because we consider zrnc, lead
and gold to be by-pmducls orour silver production, the values orthese metals oirset operating costs within our calculations oiCash Cost, Alter By-
product Credits. per- silver Ounce.

In the i‘uunlr qiianer of 2012. we updated our asset retirement obligation ("ARC") to reﬂect a preliminary revrsed reclamation and closure plan
having estirnated undiscounted costs of approxrmately $73.9 million, an increase horn the 3.534 million in the previorrs plan. A Record of Decision was
completed in late 2013 for proposed expaiisioii oitarlings capacity. In addition. in early 2014 we were engaged in negotiations with the us, Forest Service
and state agencies on their proposed revisions to our previously—submitted reclamation and closure plan. We have initiated work on an update orthe
closure plan which will include estimated costs related to tirture reclamation of the tailings expansion area and address the comrirents from the regulators.
As a resull, we anticipale recognizing an increase in the ARC! assel and liabilin in [he first quarter 0f2014. See Note 4 of Notes to Ctmwlidutad
Financial Slatamenls for more informalion on the ARO updale. As pan of Ilie revised closure plan, we will be required to increase our current $30 million
reclamation bond and are currently evaluating bonding options, The increase in required bonding will be a material amount. and there can be no assurance
that this bonding capacity will be available to us.

49


The Lucky Friday Segment
Dtlllurx my in l/lwdsarlds (oreopnper 014!ch undper mn umtmlm') Years Ended December 31,
2013 2012 201 1
Sales 3 44,204 $ 248 is [34,728
Cost of sales and other direct production costs (41.230) 7 (52,180)
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (7,833) 7 (5,053)
Gross proﬁt (loss) 8 (4.859) S 248 $ 76,495
Tons nforc milled 174.331 7 298,672
Producilon:
Silver (ounces) 1,459,000 7 2,985,339
Lead (tans) 10,260 7 18,095
zinc (tons) 3,793 7 7,305
Payable metal quantities sold:
Silver (ounces) 1,328,340 7 2,805,402
Lead (tans) 8,377 7 16,983
zinc (tons) 2,702 7 5,455
Ore gradcs:
Silver ounces per ton 8.99 7 10.69
Lead percent 6.19 7 6.51
Zinc pcrccm 2.69 7 2.82
Mining cost pei ion 3 100,49 5 7 is 60.76
Milling cost pcrion 3 29.74 s 7 X; 1696
Cash Cost, Afler By-pmduct Credits, Per Silver Ounce “1 S 19.21 $ 7 S 6.47
(1) A reconcilialion ofthis llon-GAAP measure to cost of sales and other direct production coils and depreciation, depletion and amortization. the 111051
comparable GAAP measure, can be found below in Reconciliation o/Coi-h Cor-l, lie/bra By-prodan Cl‘c'ditx and Caxh Cos-l, Aﬁe'r try-product

Crodtitr (non-GAAP/ to Cast ofSanx and Other Dtm-l Production Corn and Deproctati'on, Depletion and Amortization (GAAP).

The Lucky Friday segment reported no Significant sales, cost of sales and direct production costs. deprecmtiort, depletion, and amortization, or
mine production for 2012 due to the srispension ofproduction there i‘ortlie year, as discussed below, The decrease in gross proﬁts for 20l3 compared to
201 1 resulted primarily rrom lower prices for all three metals produced, as illustrated in the Roi-aha of Operatiom' section above, and reduced mill
throughput due to the iamp-up of production following the suspension of production, as discussed below,

At the end otzol l, MSHA began a special impact inspection which resulted in an order to remove built-up ceinentitious material from the Silver
Shall. The Silver Shall is an approximately one-mile deep, 18-foot diameter. concrete-lined shall from surface. It is the primary access to the underground
workings, In response to the MSHA order, we sribmitted a plan to MSHA and received approval to remove the built-up cementitious material, and that
work commenced in the first quarter 012012, The plan also included removal ofunused utilities. construction ofa water ring to prevenl ice li-oin farming
111 the winter, the lllslallallon ofa mela] braﬂice, repair of sllaﬁ steel, and illslallallon of a new power cable.

Production was suspended during all urzolz as the Silver Shal'l rehabilitation work was perlunned. During the suspension olproduction, the
smelter contracts related to treatment of concentrates were srispended based on fort-c mojomc. The shaft restoration project and other related work was
completed in early 2013, and limited production at the Lucky Friday iecoininenced in February 2013. During late September 2013. the mine reached its
historical full throughput rate of 900 tons per day. Once the Silver Shaﬂ rehabilitation work was completed down to the 4900 foot level, we commenced
coustiiictiou Ufa haulage way bypass around an area impacted by a Decembei 2011 iock burst, and completed the bypass in early 2013. Completion of
work on the Silver Shall to the 4900 foot level also enabled planning and other preliminary work to resume on the #4 Shall projecl (discussed below), and
we resumed Slllkmg of the «4 Shall in early 2013 upon completion of the Silver Shall work

50


Net suspension-related income in 2013 totaled $1.4 million, and includes $1.5 million recognized for business interruption insurance proceeds.
Suspension-related costs for 20 [2 totaled $25.3 million, including $6.3 million in depreciation, depletion, and amortization, This activity is included in a
separate line item under other ape-rating expenscx on thc Crmtrrlidrrmd Statement IfUpemliIIm‘ and Comprehcrixivc Iricame (Lats),

Cash Cost, Al'ler By-producl Credits, per Silver Ounce and mining and tnilling costs per ton (or 2013 were higher than levels realized during
historical periods when operating at full production. The higher per-unit costs were primarily due to lower production, as mine output was limited until
development, production, and backﬁlling became synchronized. We anticipate a reduction in per-unit costs in 2014 as a result of the retum to historical
full production levels. The suspension-related costs discussed above are excluded from the calculations of Cash Cost, Aﬂer By-product Credits, per Silver
Ounce and mining and milling costs per ton.

The $0.2 million in sales recognized in 2012 represents provisional price adjustments on prior—period concentrate shipments that were subject to
changes in metals prices during the ﬁrst quarter ofzolz until their final settlement.

The chart below Illustrates the factors contributing to the variances in Cash CastY Aﬂer Ey-producl Credits, Per Silver Ounce for 2013 and 2011:

Veer: Ended December 3i
Mining and Milling . 2m — is 56
2012
2011 1 7 7i
Othevcash cosls - 2013 — 1115
2012
2011 7 57
Treatment costs . 2m: — est;
2012
201 t 1 s 65
Concentrate height A 2013 I o n
2012
2011 1 a 6!
Ey-proaiici crearis - 2m it, 7;, _
20t2
2011 tie it) 1
m m: and
cm cw. Alter eycrortuci
Cledlu. pal S11v9! Gun“ 3192‘ $000 $6."

As reported above, Cash Cosl, Alter By-prodllcl Credits, per Silver Ounce in 2013 was $19.21 per ounce, consisting of $34.93 orCaslt Cost,
Before By-pmduct Credits, per silver Ounce and $15.72 per ounce of by-producl credits, compared to $6.47 in 201 1 consisting oi$22,o9 oiCash
Cost, Before By-product Credits, per Silver Ounce and $16.22 per ounce in by-product credits. The higher Cash Cost, After By-product Credits, per
Silver Ounce in 2013 compared to 2011 was the result of higher mining, milling, and other costs, due to costs associated Wllh the ramp-up ofprotluctien
alter the suspension of operations in 2012 and lower silver ore grades, and lower try—product credits due to lower lead and zinc prices.

5 l


similar to the Greens Creek segment, the difference between what we repon as “production” and "payable metal quantities sold" is due essentially
to the difference between the quantities ofmetals contained in the concentrates we produce versus the portion of those rnetals actually payable by our
smeller customers according to the terms of the smelter contracts.

While value from lead and Zinc is signiﬁeanl, we believe that identification of silver as the primary product of the Lucky Friday unit is appropriate
because:

- silver has historically accounted for a higher proponion of revenue than any other metal and is expected to do so in the future;
- this mining district is long associated with silver pmduclmn: and
- selective mining methods target silver production,

Likewise. we believe the identification oflead and Zinc as by-product credits is appropriate because oftherr low economic value compared to silver
and due to the fact that silver is the primary product we intend to produce, In addition, we do not receive siiﬂ‘icient revenue from any single by-produet
metal to warrant classification of such as a co—product.

The #4 shaft project, an intemal shaft at the Lucky Friday mine, is expected to, upon its completion, provide deeper access extending the mine's
operational life and expand silver production, We commenced engineering and construction activities on the #4 Shaft in 2008, and our Board of Directors
gave its ﬁnal approval of the project in August 2011. Construction ofthe #4 shaft as currently designed is expected to cost approximately $215 million,
including approximately $130 million already spent as of December 31. 2013, with completion anticipated in 2015. As discussed above, the «4 shah
sinking activities were temporarily suspended until rehabilitation work in the silver Shaft was completed in early 2013. We believe that our current capital
resources will allow us to complete the project. However, there are a number orractors tiiat could affect completion orthe project, including; (i) a
signiﬁcant decline in metals prices, (ii) a reduction in available cash or credit, whether arising from decreased cash flow or other uses ofavailahle cash.
(in) increased regulatory burden, or (iv) a significant increase in operating or capital costs.

Many oftlie employees at our Lucky Friday unit are represented by a union. The collective bargaining agreement With the union expires on April 30,
2016. As a resull oflhe requirement ll) remove loose material from [he Silver Shaft, which lliiiiled underground access, Hecla Limited laid off 121
employees in January 2012. with approximately 25 of those employees accepting temporary positions at other llecla operations. Employment at the Lucky
Friday unit has returned to roughly its level in 201 1.

In March 2012. Hecla Limited received notice Ufa complaint ﬁled againsl iI by the United Sieel Workers, Lucia] 5] l4. willi Ilie Federal Mine Safety
Health Review Commission for compensation for bargaining unit workers at the Lucky Friday mine who were idied as a result orthe previously.
annorrnced, temporary suspension of prodrrction at the mine. in addition, in April 2013, the family ofLarry Mar ek, an employee of Hecla Limited who
was fatally injured in the April 201 l accident, ﬁled a lawsuit against rrs and certain orour ofﬁcers and employees seeking damages for, among other
claims, wrongful death and infliction of emotional disti Also, in _December 2013, four employees of Hecia Limited who were injured in the December
201 1 rock burst riled a lawsrrit against its and certain orour enipioyees seeking damages for, among other claims, intentional and willful injury and
inﬂiction of emotional distress, Scc Ihe Other Contingencies section of Non: 7 of Notes to Conralidamd Financial Szarcmanzs for more information.
The Cast: Benin/i Segment

On June 1, 2013, we completed the acquisition of all oftlie issrred and outstanding cornriion shares of Arrrizon Mines, Ltd. ("Aurizon") for total
consideration ofCDN$740.8 million (US$714.5 million). See Note 16 DfNutex lu Cunxolidumd Financial Stummerltx for more liifon'nalion. The
acquisition gives us 100% ownership of the producing Casa Berardi mine, along with interests in various gold exploration propenies in the Abitibi region
uf north-western Quebec. Canada. The tabular informalion below reﬂects our ownership commencing on June I, 20] 3.

5 2


The following is infonnatiun an the upenﬂing testtlts and key production statistics uf our Cash Bentrtli segmenl (dullars are in thousands, except

for per Ion and per nunee nmnunts).
Year Ended
December 31, 2013 (1!

Sales $ 75,122
Cast of sales and mher direct production costs [55,825]
Dcpreclaiion, depletion and amnnizntion (18,030)
cit-ess- pt-utit 1; 1,267
Tons Dfure milled 387,608
Productlon:

Gold (uunees) 62,532

Sllvel' (ounces) 12,381
Payable metal quanlilles sold:

Gold (ounces) 57,840

Silver (ounces) 15,500
0m grades:

Gnld ounces per Ion 0,13

Sllver ounces per ton 0.036
Mining cost per Ion $ 127.56
Mllllng eusr per ton l; 23.02
Cash Cust, After By-pmducl Credits, per Gold Ounce (2) $ 95 1

(1) For the seven momh period commencing on June 1, 2013, the date of the acquisition,

(2) A reconciliation oftliis nun-GAAP measure to cast ui‘sales and othet threet production costs and depreciation, depletion and amunizaliun, the
masl eutnpuruble GAAP measure, eun be found below in Reconciliation of Cuxh Cut-z, Befme [By-product Credits um] Cut-h Cast, Arm By-
pmduct Credits (ntm-GAAP/ to Costs of SMIEX tutti Other Dtroct Production C(Ixtx om] Depreciation, Depletion tmd Amortization
(GAAP).

As of December 31, 2013, work crews have approximately 50 meters remaining on a project initiated by Aunzun Ia deepen the West Mine Shaﬁ.
Cutnpletton time associated shaﬂ infrastructure, including loading puekets, slum lining, semees and steel, is expeetett lale in the third quaner uf 2014,
with commissioning to follow, This new shaﬁ is expected to lower aperallng costs in future years as the mining hurizun deepens, Additionally, the new
slien is cxpcclcd to eventually provide 1| platform for deeper explumtion.

Recent tnine enhnneentenrs Include a new pnste ﬁll fnetltry and n eunerete planl, wlllch, we believe, will improve uperallonal emeteney.

53


The chart below illustrates the factors contributing to Cash Cost, Aﬁer By-product Credits, Per Gold Ounce for 2013:
You! to Date December 31. 2013
Mm — 79°72
Milling I iazsr
Other cash costs I n 59
By-ptoduct creams a is
Culi Con. Avior By-pvoducl
Credits. per Gold Ounce 595015
We believe the identiﬁcation ofsilver as a by-praduct credit is appropriate at Casa Berardi because of its lower economic value compared to gold
and due to the fact that gold is the primary product we intend to produce there. In addition. we do not receive sufﬁcient revenue from silver at Casa Berardi
to wanant classification of such as a co—produet. Because we consider silver to be a by-product of our gold production at Casa Berardi. the values of these
metals offset operating costs wuiiin our calculations ofCasii Cost. Aﬁer By-product Credits, per Gold Ounce.
Corporate Matters
Employee Beneﬁt Plans
Our defined benefit pension plans. while affording a signiﬁcant beneﬁt to our employees also represent a signiﬁcant liability. During 2013, the
funded status of our plans ciianged from a liability of$30.9 million at the first of the year to a liability of$32.i million at the end oftlie year. The
increased liability was attributable to service costs, interest costs, amortization of actuarial losses, and an adjustment for a plan amendment. totaling 561
million, that collectively exceeded returns on plan assets and our contributions. totaling $4.9 million. We expect to contribute $7.5 million to the plans in
2014 in cash. securities, or other assets. While the economic variables which will determine future cash requirements are uncertain, we expect
contributions to increase in future years under cunent plan provisions. and we penodicaliy examine the plans for affordability and competitiveness.
Effective July 1, 2013. we amended our pension plan. See Note 8 of Notes 10 Collxolidaled Financial Statements for more information.
lVlL'IIm-t’ T axed
We continue to have a nel deferred tax asset in the U,S., and as a result ofuur acquisition ofAiirizon. a net deferred tax liability in Canada, Our
US. iiel deferred lax asset at December 31, 2013 totaled $114.5 millioii, or 5% of total assets, 3 decrease “$1.3 million from the $115.8 millioii net
deferred tax asset at December 31, 2012. The largest component oftite deferred tax asset is net operating loss earryforwards wltielt are available to be
applied agamst future taxable income. The next largest eompouent is deferred reclamation, ofwliieli the majority should be realized in the next year,
assuming adequate taxable income. Eacii reporting period we assess our deferred tax assets utilizmg long-range forecasts to provide reasonable assuiance
that they will be realized through future earnings. At December 31, 2013, we retained a valuation allowance on US, deferred tax assets of $3.4 million
primarily for foreign tax credits. A $23.8 million valuation allowance remains on deferred tax assets in foreign jurisdictions.

Our net Canadian deferred tax liability at December 31, 2013 was $165.9 million, with no corresponding balance as of December 31, 2012. The
deferred tax liability is the result ofthe acquisition ofAurizon Completed on June 1, 2013. See Nola I6 ofNoch la Coniall'damd Financial Statements for
more infoniiation. The deferred tax liability is primarily related to the excess oflhe fair market value of the assets acquired over the tax bases oftltose
assets for Canadian tax reporting, wait the majority of that value allocated to mineral resources and reserves.

54


As discussed in Nata 5 ofNolcx 10 Conxalidaled Financial Slalemcrlts , our effectlve lax rate far 2013 was 28% Cumpared i0 37% for 2012. The
change in effective tax rate for 2013 was primarily the result of the U.S. deduction for percentage depletion, non-deductible transaction costs, and the
impact of taxation in foreign Jurisdlcnons. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions. The overall effective tax rate
wlll contrnrre to be dependent upon the geographic distribution of our eanirngs in different Jurisdictions, the us. deduction for percentage depletion, and
fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates. As a result, the 2014 effective tax rate corrld vary significantly from that of2013,

Fur the years 2013, 2012 and 2011, we had no umemllied fnrelgn exmlllgs. See N015 5 afNatz': (0 Consolidated Financial SIalamz’ms for men:
information.

Reconciliation of Cash Cost, Before By-pmtluct Credits and Cash Cast, After By—praduct Credits (nan-GAAP) to Cast off!!!” and Other
Direct Prat/action Costs am! Depreciation, Depletion and Amnrﬂ'mtilm (GAAP)

The tables below present reconciliations between the nun—GAAP measiiies of Cash Cost, Befeie By-pruduct Credits and Cash Cost, Aﬁer By-
product Credits to the GAAP measure of cost ofsales and other direct production costs and depreciation, depletion and amonrzation for our operations at
the Greens Creek, Lucky Friday, and Casa Berardi units for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 201 1 (In thousands, except costs per ounce).

Cash Cost, After By-pmdllct Credits is an important operating statistic ttrat we utilize to measure each tuine's operating performance it also
allows us to benchmark the performance ofeach of our irrines versrrs those ofonr competitors. As a primary silver mining company, we also use the
statistic an an aggregate basis - aggregating the Greens Creek and Lucky Friday mines, but rial Casa Eerardi, which is a primaiy gold mine - m cumpare
our performance with that of other primary silver mining companies. Similarly, the statistic is useful in identifying acquisition and investment
opportunities as it provides a common tool for measuring the financial performance ofother mines with varying geologic, rrretallurgicat and operating
characteristics.

Cash Cost. Before Ey-pmducl Credits include all direct and indirect operating cash costs related directly to the physical aetrvrties ofproduerng
metals, including mining, processing and other plant costs, mini—party reﬁning expense, on.site general and administrative costs, royalties and mining
production taxes. By-pmdllct credits include teverrrres earned from all metals other than the primary metal produced at each unit, Cash Cost, After By—
prodrrct Credits, per Ounce, provides management and investors an indication of operating cash flow, after consideration of the average price, received
from prodrrctron. Management also rises this measurement for the comparative monitoring ofperforrnaiice ofour mining operations perrod-to-period from a
cash flow perspective. Cash Cost, After By-prodnct Credits, per Ounce is a measure developed by precious metals companies (including the Silver
Institute) in an men to provide a uniform standard for compansutt purposes There can be no assiiiance, however, that our reporting of this non-GAAP
measure is the same as that reported by other mining companies.

The Casa Ber-ardi section below reports Cash Cost, After By-pmducl Credits, per Guld Ounce for the production of gold, its primary product,
and by-pmducl revenrres earned from silver, which is a byproduct at Casa Berardi, 0nly costs and ounces produced relating to units with the same
primary product are combiired to represent Cash Cost, After By-producl Credits, per Ounce, Thus, the gold produced at our Casa Berardl unit is not
included as a by-pmducl credit when calculating Cash Cost. After By—product Credits, per silver Ounce for the total of Greens Creek and Lucky Friday,
our combined silver properties.

5 5


A5 depieled in the Greens Creek Unit and the Lucky Friday Unit |abls5 below, by-producl credils comprise an essential elerueru ofour 5ilvcr
rum oosr slruomre d1sungulshlng our sIlver apemuans due lo we palymemlhc uurure onlreu- Drebodms. By-pmducl eredus meluded In our presemauan of
Cash C051, Aﬂsr By-pmducl Credlls, per Srlver Ouuee Include:

Total, Greens Creek and Lucky Friday Units
Year ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011

By-pmducl value, all silver propenles:

Zlnc 3 77,616 1; 84,087 1; 109,708
Gold 66,907 75,860 71,794
Lead 48.973 30,969 72,871
T0131 by-pmducl eredlrs $ 193,496 5 190,916 3 254,373
By-pmducl eredlrs per srlver ouuoe, all srlver propenles
Zlnc 3 8.71 1; 13.15 1; 11.57
Gold 7.51 11.86 7.57
Load 5.50 4.85 7.68
T0131 by-pmducl eredlrs $ 21.72 s 29. 86 3 26.82
By-prclducl credns meluded 1n our presenlalmn DfCash C051, Aﬂer By-pmducl Credlls. per Gold Ounce for our Casa Berardr Uml urolude;
Cusa Bernrdi Unit
(3)
Year ended
December 31,
2013
Sllver byepmdum value 5 252
Silver by-pmducl credns per gold ouuee 1; 4.19
5 6


Cusl nfsales and nrher d11‘ect predueunu costs and deprecraunu, deplenou and amomzallon rs r1re nrosr comparable ﬁnancial nreasure caleu1ared
1n accordance wuh GAAP r6 Cash Cesr,A11er By-preducr Credus, The sum omre cost of sales and orner drrecr producnan cesrs and deprecrauon.
dep1cnan and nruomznuon fur aur opernnng un1l< in rnc rnblcs belaw is prcsenrcd in our Consolidamd Slntcmcnl of oncrnuons and Cumprchcnuvc Incarue
(Less) (111 durusands),

Tmnl, Greens Creek and Lucky Friday Units
year ended December 31,
2015 2012 2011
Cash Cust, Before By-pmducl Credus 1 '1 s 254,460 $ 208,178 $ 265,306
By-producl credus (193,496) (190,916) (254,372)
Cnsh Cost, Aner By-pmducl Credus 60,964 17,262 10,934
Drvrded by sIlver nunces prnduced 8,907 6.394 9,483

Cash Casl, Before By-pmducl Credus, per sdver Ounce 28.56 32.55 2797

By-producl credus per srlver euuee (21 ,72) (29.85) (26.82)

Cash Casl, Aﬂar By—pmduct Cradns, per suver Ounce s 6.84 1‘» 2.70 s 1.15

Roconmllauon Io GAAP:

Cash Cost, Aﬁer Ey-pmducl Credits 8 60,964 $ 17,262 $ 10,934

Dcprccinuon. dcplclion and nmonizalion 63,098 43,522 47,066

Treatmenl ensrs (76,824) (73 ,355) (99,019)

By—prnducrcredus 193,496 190,916 254,372

Change 1n producr rnvenrory (246) (1,381) (4,805)

Suspensmn-relmed cosls 7 7 4,135

Reelannadnn and arner costs 2100 663 (44)

Cost of sales and ndrer drrecr producnon costs and deprecrnnon.

dcplcuon al1dnn1orl|za1|ul1(GAAP) S 242,588 $ 177,627 3 212.639

Greens Creek Unit
year ended December 31,
2015 2012 2011
Cash Cnsr, Befere by-Pmducl Credns «'1 s 203,496 $ 208,178 $ 197,574
By-producl credus (170,563) (190,916) (205,961)
Cnsh Cost, Aner By-pmducl Credus 32,933 17,262 (8,387)
Drvrded by sIlver nunces prnduced 7,448 6.394 6,498

Cash Casl, Before By-pmducl Credus, per sdver Ounce 2732 32.55 3041

By-producl credus per srlver euuee (2290) (29.85) (31.70)

Cash Casi, Aﬂar By—pmducl Credus, per Srlver Ounce S 4.42 $ 270 $ (119)

Rccencrlrauon IO (iAAP:

Cash Cost, Aﬁer Ey-pmducl Credits 8 32,933 $ 17,262 $ (8,387)

Dcprccinuon. dcplclion and nmonizalion 55,265 43,522 41,013

Treatmenl ensrs (67,341) (73,355) (79,134)

By—prnducr credus 170,563 190,916 205,961

Change 1n producr rnvenrory 159 (1,381) (4,966)

Reclnnnaneu and 011101 costs 1,947 663 (81)

Cost of sales and 011161 drreer producdcn costs and depreclaﬁon,

dcplcnon and nmoniza1iun(GAAP) S 193,526 $ 177,627 $ 154,406

5 7


Lucky Friday Unit (2)
Year ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011
Cash Cast, Before By-pmducl Credlls m 3 50,954 3 7 3 67,732
By-producl credns (22,9331 7 [48,411]
Cash Cost. Aﬂcr By-pmduct Credits 28,031 7 19,321
Dmded by sllver ounces produced 1,459 7 2,985
Cash Casi, Before By-pmducl Credlls, per sllver Ounce 34.93 7 22.59
By-producl credlls per <l|vcr ounce (15.721 7 (16.22]
cm Casl, Aﬂar By—pmduct Cradlls. per suver Ounce $ 19.21 s 7 s 6.47
Rccunclllauon Io GAAP:
Cash C051, Aﬁer Ey-pmducl Credns 3 28,031 3 7 3 19,321
Dcprccinllon. dcplclion and nrnonlzedon 7,333 7 5,053
Treatmenl cosls (9,432) 7 (19,835)
By-pmdum credlts 22,933 7 43,41 1
Change ln producl lnvenlory (405) 7 151
Suspellsloll»rcla1ed cusls 7 7 4,135
Reelnmullon and odor costs 153 7 37
Cost of sales and alllel’ dlrscl producuon costs and depreornuon
dcplcuon and nlllonlzauull (GAAP) 3 49,063 8 7 3 58,233
Cnsd Berardi Unit (3)
Year ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011
Cash Cosl, Before By—pmduct Cradlls <17 3 59,717 3 7 3 7
By-producl credns (262) 7 7
Cash Cast, Aﬁer by-pmducl credils 59,455 7 7
Dmded by gold ounces produced 62.53 7 7
Cash Casi, Before By—pmdum Crsdns, per Gold Ounce 954.98 7 7
By-product crcdlts per gold ounce (M9) 7 7
Cash Casi, Aﬁer By-pmducl Credils, per Gold Ounce 19 950.79 3 7 3 7
Rccunclllauon Io GAAP:
Cash C051, Aﬁer Ey-pmducl Credns 3 59,455 3 7 3 7
Dcprccinllon. dcplclion and nrnonlzedon 13,030 7 7
Treatmenl cosls (268) 7 7
By-pmdum credns 262 7 7
Change ln producl lnvenlory (3,766) 7 7
Roclnmunou and ulhcr costs 142 7 7
Cost of 5111:: and ulher dueel produmlon costs and depreerouonr
dcplcnon and nmoniza1iun(GAAP) 3 73,855 39 7 3 7
5 8


Total, All Locations
year ended Deeemher 31,
2013 2012 2011

Roconcihauon Io GAAP:

Cash Cost, Aﬂcl By—prunuet Credrts s 120,419 1; 17,262 8 10,934

Depreeratldn, depletion and amdruzauon 81,128 43,522 47,066

Treatment eosts (77,092) (73,355) (99,019)

By—pmducl eredrts 193,758 190,916 254,3 72

Change rn produet rnventory (4,012) (1,381) (4,805]

Suspensron-related costs 7 7 4,135

Reelamarron and other costs 2,242 663 (44)

Cast of sales and other dlreet produetron msls and depreeratrdn,

depletion and amonizaﬁon (GAAP) 3 316,443 $ 177,627 $ 212,639

l" Includes all drreet and rndrreet aperamlg costs related drrectly to the physreal aetrvrnes of praduclng rnetals, Including mlmng, processing and
011161 plant ensts, thud—party r-el'rnrng and rnarketrng expense, on-srte general and admrnrstratrre eosts, myaltres and mmmg prndnetrnn 1axes,
afler hy-produet revenues earned from all metals other than the prrrnary metal produced at each Huh,

‘2) Varrous aeertlents and other svenls resulted m temporary suspensrons ot‘produetrnn at the Lueky Frrtlay unll 11111ng 201 l and 1hmughum
2012, See the thLlrjr'FrIday Segment seetron ful funhcl drseussrun, As a result, Cash Cusl, Befure By-prutluet Crenrts and Cash C051, Atler
By—prodnet Credrts, Per Sllver 0nnee are not presented far 2012. Care.arrd-rnarnterranee, mrne r-ehahrlrratrorr, mvesugallon, and other costs
rnenrred during the srrspensron perlads not related to prodrretron have been exeluded from Cash Casi, Before By-pmducl Credrts and the
ealculatmn ofCash Cast, Alter By-pl‘oducl Credrts, Per Srlver Ounce produced.

‘3) On June I, 2013, we enrnpleted tlre aeqursrtron of Aurrzon Mrnes Ltd, whreh gave us 100% ownershrp of the Casa Berardl rurne rn Qnehee,
Canada. The lnformallon presented reﬂects our ownershrp ofCasa Berardr commenculg as of that date, See Note 16: Aeqar‘nnanr ofNalex to
Conxalidu/ctl Ftntzneitzl Statementx far more unbrmanon, The prlmary metal pmduced at Casa Berardr 1s gald, With a by-pmduct credlt for
the value uf sliver prodncuun.

Reconciliation vaarnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, andAmBrtiznn'tm (mm-GAAP) ta Net Int-ante (Loss) (GAAP)

The non-GAAP measure of eaurrngs before 1111:1651, taxes, depreeranon, and amanlza1lon("EBITDA") rs caleulated as net rnenrne (loss) before the
followlng rterns: rnter-est expense, 1ncame tax provlslon (beneﬁt), and depreuanon, depletron, and anmrtrzatrnn expense. Management belreves that, when
presented in eonjunetion with comparable GAAP measures, EBITDA is useful to investors in evaluatrng uur opelaling performance, The table below
[)1 eserrts reeuneiliatiuns belween the nun-GAAP rrreasrrre EBITDA to the (3AA? measure urnet lneurne (loss) for the years errtletl Deeemher 31, 2013,
2012, 201 l, 2010, and 2009 (in thousands),

Year ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
Net lneome (loss) (GAAP) 8 (25,130) 3 14,954 3 151,164 3 48,983 $ 67,826
lnterest expense, net ofamuum eaprtnlrzed 21,689 2,427 2,875 2,211 1 1,326
Income tax provislon (beneﬁt) (9,795) 8,879 81 ,978 (123,532) (7,680)
Depreciation, depletron, and amortrzarron 82,366 50,113 47,348 60,235 63,061
EBITDA 8 69,130 3 76,373 3 283,365 3 (12,103) $ 134,533
5 9


Financial Liquidity and Cupiru/ Rexourcex
Our liquid asseis include (in millions):
December 31, December 31, December 31,
2013 2012 201 1

Cash and cash equivalents held in U.S. dollars 3 166.5 3 190.5 S 266.4
Cash and cash equivalents held in loreign cuirency 45.7 o 4 0.1
Total cash and cash equivalents 212.2 190.9 266. 5
Marketable equny securities, non-current 7.0 9 .6 3.9
Total cash, Cash equivalents and investmenls 3 219.2 3 200.5 S 270.4

Cash and cash equivalents increased in 2013, as discussed below. Cash held in fore1gn currencies represent balances in Canad1an dollars and
Mexlcan pesos. The value of non-curreni marketable equity securities decreased by $2.6 million due to unrecognized losses on equity investments and the
sale orinvesrmenls having a cost basis orslo million, partially offset by the purchase cflnveslmenls for approximately $6.0 million and securiiies
obtained in the acquisiiion or Aurizoii having a value or approximately $0.3 million.

As further discussed in Mile )6 ofNotas m Comatidaicd Financial Smicmams. on June 1, 2013, we completed the acquisition ofAunzcii Mines
Ltd. for total cons1deralion ofUS$714.5 mill1on(CAD$740.81uillion), comprised ofcasli paid by Hecla ofUS$49b.2 niillion(CAD5514,5 million)
and issuance of 56.991790 shares of Hecla common stock valued at USSZIXS million (CAD$226.3). Aurizon’s cash and cash equivalents balances at
the close of the acqmsllmn miahng approximately ussmo million were transferred in us as pan unhe acquisiiion.

We may derer some capital invesltllenl and/or exploration and pre-developmeni aciiviiies, engage in asset sales or secure additional capiial if
necessary to maintain liquidity. We also may pursue additional acquisiiion opponuniiies, which could require additional equity issuances or ﬁnancing,
There can be no assurances that such ﬁnancing will be available to us.

On April 12. 2013, we coinpleied an oi'l‘eiing or Senioi Notes in ihe total principal amouni oru3$soo million, as discussed in Nola 6 ofNalL‘x tr)
Com-alidnied Financial Szuieruems. The net proceeds from the offering of the noies of $490 million were used to panially fund the acqiiisihon of Aurizon
and for general coiporaie purposes, including expenses relaied to the Aurizcn acquisition. The noies are due May 1, 2021 and bear interest at a rate of
6.875% per year from the date of original issuance 01 from the most recent payment date to which inter est has been paid or provided for. Interest on the
noies is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year. commencing November I. 2013.

In 201 l. we settled Hecla Limited’s Coeur d’Alene Basin environmental litigation and related claims pursuant to a Consent Decree entered by the
Conn on September 8. 201 1, Paymenis ofapproximately $168 million. $25 million, and $15 million (and related interest) iveie made in Ociober 201 l,
2012. and 2013, respectively, pursuant to the terms of the Consent Decree, Hecla Limited's remaining obligaiion under the Conseni Decree consists of
approxiinaiely $55.5 million due by Augusi 2014, payable in quarterly paymenis as proceeds from die exercise of any outstanding Senes l and Series 3
wanants are received (ifanyl, with the remaining balance. ifany, due in August 2014.

The #4 Shaft project, which is discussed runher in the Lucky Friday Segment seciion above, is expected io involve capital expenditures or
approximately $215 million. including approximately $130 million that has been speni on the project as checember 31. 2013.

Pursuant to our common stock div1dend policy described 1n Note 9 of Nomi to Canxahduicd Financial Statements , our Board of D1rectors
declared and paid common dividends totaling $5.6 million in 2011, $17,] million in 2012 and $6.0 million in 2013. Our dividend policy has a silver-
price-linked componeni which ties the amount ordeclared common sicck dividends to our realized silver price for the preceding quaner, Another
component olour common stock dividend policy anticipales paying an annual minimum dividend, The declaraiion and payment olconimcn Stock
dividends is at the sole d1screl1on of our board cfdireclcrs, and there can be no assurance that we will continue to declare and pay dividends on our
common stock in the future,

60


On May 8, 2012, we announced that our board of directors approved a stock repurchase program. Under the program, we are authorized to
repurchase up to 20 million shares of our outstanding common stock from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions, depending on
prevailing market conditions and other factors, The repurchase program may be modiﬁed, suspended or discontinued by us at any time. Whether or not
we engage in repuiclrases from time to time may depend on a variety of factor s, including not only price and cash resources, but custcniary black—out
restrictions, whether we have any material inside information. limitations on share repurchases or cash usage that may be imposed by our credit agreement
or in connection with issuances of securities, alternative uses for cash, applicable law, and other investment opportunities from time to time. As of
December 31, 2013, 400,300 shares have been repurchased under the program, at an average price of $5.55 per share, leaving 19,5 million shares that
may yet he purchased under the program. The closing price of our common stock at February 14, 2014. was $3.47 per share.

As discussed in The Cream Creek Segment section above, we anticipate that in early 2014 we wrll complete a revised plan for reclamation and
elosuie ufthe Greens Creek urine, Although ievision ufthe plan has not been completed, preliminary work has led us to believe that it will result in an
increase in estimated closure costs, which will require us to provide increased bond coverage, In the fourth quarter of 2012, we updated our asset
retirement obligation at Greens Creek to reflect a preliminary revised reclamation and closure plan having estimated undiscounted costs of approirimately
$73.9 million. As part ufthe revised closure plan, we will be required it) increase our current $30 million reclamation bond for Crreeiis Creek. Although we
do not know the amount of such increase, it likely will be a material amount, and there can be no assurance that this bonding capacity will be available to
us at that time.

As a result of our current cash balances. including cash obtained in the acquisition of Aunzon. the performance of our current operations, cur-rent
metals prices, and full availability cfour $100 million revolving credit agreement, we believe our caslr, cash equivalents, investments, projected cash
from operations, and availability of financing (including equity issuances) if needed will be adequate to meet our obligations during the next 12 months,
Tltese obligations include, but are not limited to. debt service obligations related to the Senior Notes issued in April 2013, the required environmental
settlement payments previously discussed, capital outlays for the #4 Shaft project and other capital expenditures, including with respect to projects
obtained in the acquisition ofAurizun, potential repurchases ofour common stock under the program described above, and payment of common stock
dividends, it‘ declared by our board of directors. We currently estimate that a total ot‘approximately $150 million will be spent on capital expenditures,
primarily for equipment, infrastructure, and development at our Lucky Friday, Greens Creek, and Casa Berardi units in 2014, We also estimate that
exploration and pre-developmeni expenditures will total approximately $18 million in 2014. However, capital, exploration, and pre-development
expenditures may change based upon our financial position, metals prices. and other considerations. Our ability to fund the activities described above will
depend on our operating performance, metals prices, our ability to estimate costs, sources of liquidity available to us, our ability to successfully integrate
operations acquired from Aurizuli, and other factors. However, a sustained downturn in metals prices or significant increase in operational or capital
costs, other uses of cash, or other factors beyond our control could impact our plans.

Year Ended December 31,
2013 2012 201 1
Cash provided by operating activities (in millions) s 26.6 s 69.0 s 69.9

Casli provided by operating activities decreased by $42.4 million in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to lower income, as adjusted for non.
cash items. As discussed in Rcrultr (lfOp-t’lur‘imlx above, the lower income is primarily attributable to lower precious metals prices, costs related to the
acquisition ofAurizon, and interest expeiise related to the Senior Notes issued in April 2013. Working capital and other operating asset and liability
changes resulted in a net cash ﬂow decrease of $33.1 million compared to a decrease in cash ﬂows ofS34.l million in 2012. Signiﬁcant variances in
working capital changes when comparing 2013 to 2012 included lower accounts payable balances due to reduced capital, exploration. and pre-development
spending at the end of 201 3, decreases in accrued taxes due to lower pre-tax income, as discussed above, and higher inventories primarily due to the timing
of shipments at Greens Creek, panially offset by small reductions of accrued reclamation and closure cost liabilities.

61


Cash provided by operating activities decreased by $0.9 million in 2012 compared to 2011 due to lower income, adjusted for non—casli items,
primarily resulting from the suspension of production at our Lucky Friday unit during 2012 (see the Lucky Friday Segment section above for more
information]. The variance in income was offset by working capital and otltei asset and liability clianges that decreased cash ﬂow by $34.1 million in
2012 compared to a $162.4 million decrease in 201 1. The larger decrease in 201 1 is primarily the result oftlie approximately $168 million litigation
settlement payment discussed further below.

Year Ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011

Cash used in investing aetiviu'es (in millions) s 475.5 S 118.0 s 79.8

We recognized a cash outﬂow for the acquisition ofAurizcn, net of cash acquired, 013321.] million, as discussed above. We also invested $150.7
million in capital expenditures in 201], exclusive of 512.3 million in non-cash capital lease additions, an increase cf$37.l’1 million compared to 2012. The
increase in Capital expenditiiies IS primarily due to the addition of the Casa Berardi unit. wheie we incurred capital expenditures of approximately $40.0
million since its acquisition. Dining 2013, we purchased marketable securities having a cost basis ofSol) million, and sold investments [raving a cost
basis 01111.6 million for proceeds 0131.8 million. We acquired securities for approximately $5.8 million in 2012, and acquired the Monte Cristo
properly in Nevada for approximately $4.5 million in July 2012.

Capital expenditures, excluding non—casli capital lease additions, for 2012 totaled 31 13.1 million. including $54.3 million at Lucky Friday and
$50.4 million at Greens Creek. compared to a total of$87.5 million in 2011, 2012 capital expenditures at Lucky Friday included approximately $26.4
million spent on rehabilitation of the Silver Shaft, compared to $35.8 million spent on the #4 Sliaft project in 201 l. Shaft sinkliig activities on the #4
snarl were temporarily suspended during 2012 as work on the silver snarl was being completed, as riirtlier discussed in the Lut-ky Friday Segment
section above. Capital expenditures were higher at Greens Creek in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily as a result or increased mine development. There was
essentially no change to our restricted cash balances in 2012 compared to a $6.2 million net decrease in 2011,

Year Ended December 31,
2013 2012 201 1
Cash provided by (used in) ﬁnancing activities (in millions) s 474.9 s (26.5) s (7.2)

We received proceeds from the issuance ofthe Senior Notes in April 2013, net of initial purcliaser dISCOUHL ct'$490,0 million, and incurred fees of
$1.5 million related to the issuance ofthe notes. During 2013, 2012, and 2011, vie paid cash dividends on our common stock totaling $6.0 million,
$17.1 million, and $5.6 million, respectively, We also paid casli dividends 0WD!) million on our Series B preferred stock during 2013 and 2012, and
$3.8 million in 2011. We made payments on our capital leases 0137.0 iiiillioii, $5.9 million, and $2.9 million, in 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively.
We also purchased shares ofour common stock for $0.3 million, 82.1 million, and $0.5 million in 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively, with $1.9
millan ofthe amount in 2012 related to our stock repurchase program discussed above.

62


Contractual Obligation.» um! Contingent Liabilities and C ommitmzntx
The table below presents our t'ixed, non—cancelahle contractual obligations and commitments primarily related to our outstanding purchase orders,
certain capital expenditures, our credit facility. and lease arrangements as of December 31, 2013 (in thousands):
Payments Due By Period
Less [him After
1 year 1—3 years 3-5 years 5 years Total

Purchase obligations U) 3 12,381 S 7 S 7 $ 7 S 12,381

Commitment fees 12) 500 292 7 7 792

Contractual obligations is) 16,990 2,927 7 7 19,917

Capital lease commitments 1“) 9,01 1 13,0131: 1,734 7 23.833

Opemting lease commitments (51 3,347 2,723 1,902 2 ,659 10,631

Cocur dAicnc Basin litigation settlement 16> 55,499 7 7 7 55,499

Surety maintenance tees (61 218 7 7 7 21 8

Deﬁned beneﬁt pension plans (7) 7,478 7 7 7 7,478

Supplemental executive retirement plan (7) 342 704 741 2,303 4,000

Senior Notes 18) 34.375 68,750 68,750 580,208 752,083

Casa Berardi reclamation deposit (9) 2,713 7 7 7 2,713

Total contractual cash obligations S; 142,854 $ 88,484 8 73,127 3 585,170 $ 889,63 5

(l) Consist of open purchase orders of approximately $1.8 million at the Greens Creek unit, $1.9 million at the Lucky Friday unit and $8.8
million at the CaSa Belaldi unit, Included in these amounts are approximately $1.5 million, $1.4 million, and $6.3 million related 10 various
capital projects at the Greens Creek, Lucky Friday and Casa Bei-ardi imits, respectively,

(2) We have a $100 million revolving credit agreement under which we are required to pay a standby fee of0,5'-/i, per annum on undrawn amounts
under the reyolving credit agreement. There was no amount drawn under the reyolving credit agreement as of December 3 i, 2013. and the
amounts above assume no amounts will be drawn during the agreements term, For more lnfun‘nation on our credit facility, see Note 6 cfivmci-
ta Comatidamd Financial Statementt.

(3) As of December 31, 2013, we were committed to approximately $9.7 million for various capital projects, Total contractual obligations at
December 31, 2013 also include approximately 11; 10.2 million for commitments relating to nullecapltal items.

(4) includes scheduled capital lease payments at‘$l9.6 million and $5.2 million (including interest), respectively, for equipment at our Greens
Creek and Lucky Fi-iday units. These leases have ﬁxed payment terms and contain bargain purchase options at the end cfthe lease penods. See
Note 6 ofNazcs la Consolidated Financial Sratcmcmtt for more information.

(5) We enter into operating leases in the normal course of business. Substantially all lease agreements have ﬁxed payment ieriiis based on the passage
ortime, Some lease agreements provide us with the option to renew the lease or purchase the leased property, Our future opcmting lease obligations
would changc irwc cxcreised these icnewai options and ifwc enteicd into additional operating lcasc arrangements,

(6) On September 8, ml l, a Consent Decree settling the Coeur d'Alene Basin envtrurtmertlal litigation and related claims was enteied by the us,
District Court in ldaho, As omeceiiiber 31, 2013, our remaining obligation under the teniis ofllle settlement includes approxliualely $55.5
million payable by August 2014, in the fonTl ufquanerly payments oithe proceeds from the exercise otany outstanding Series 1 and Series 3
warrants during the quarter, with the remaining balance, irany, due in August 2014. These payments are secured by a third party surety for
which llecla Limited pays an annual maintenance fee of 0.556% of the remaining obligation balance.

(7) We sponsor defined beneﬁt pension plans cuveiing substantially all us. employees and pioyide ceitain pust-ietireinent beneﬁts fut qualifying
retired employees, along with a supplemental executive retirement plan. These amounts represent our estimate of the future funding requirements
for these plans. We believe we will have funding requirements related to our deﬁned beneﬁt plans beyond one year; however, such obligations are
not ﬁxed in nature and are difﬁcult to estimate, as they involve signiﬁcant assumptions. See Nata 8 of Notex to Conmll'du/(Id Fillilllt’iﬂl
Statemcmx for more information,

63


(a) On April 12, 2013. we completed an offering or $500 million in aggregate pnucipal amount of our Senior Notes due May 1, 2021 (the "Ncltes").
See Note 6 ofNoier m Condcllxml Consolidator] F tnullLiuI Smtemcmx for more irrfonrratiort, The Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.875% per
year from the date of original issuance or from the most recent payiuent date to which interest has been paid or provided for. Interest on the Notes
is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year, commencing November I, 2013.

(9) We are required to provide deposits orapproximateiy CAD$2.9 iiiiiiioii to the Quebec provincial government in 2014 for funding orruture
reclamation at the Casa Eeratdi miiie.

We record liabilities for costs associated with mine closure, reclatiiation ofland and other environmental matters. At December 31, 2013, our
liabilities for these matters totaled $105.2 million, including $55.5 million for future payments relating to the Coeur d‘Alene River Basin litigation
settlement, See the Financial Liquidity and Capital Roxanna sectioti above for more information oil the ﬁnancial terms of the settlement. Future
expenditures related to closure, reclamation and environmental expenditures at our other sites are difficult to estimate, although we anticipate we will incur
expenditures relating to these obligations over the next 30 years. For additional information relating to our environmental obligations. sce Nola 4 qutllL‘d‘ to
Conraiidnicd Financial Simemcnir.

Off-Balance Sheer Arrangements

At December 3 l . 20 [3, we had no existing off-balance sheet anangements, as deﬁned under SEC regulations, that have or are reasonably likely to
have a current or future etl‘ect on our ﬁnancial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources
that is material to investors.

Critical Accounting Esii'm ate.»

Our signiﬁcant accoutiling policies are described in Note 1 of Notes to Ctmxolirluted Financial Stummcntx. As described in Note I, we are
required to make estituates and assumptions that arrect the reported amounts and related disclosures ofassets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Our
estimates are based on our experience and our interpretation or economic, political, regulatory. and other i‘actors that affect our business prospects. Actual
results may differ signiﬁcantly from our estimates.

We believe that our most critical accounting estimates are related to future metals prices. including the recoverability of long»ten‘n assets: obligations
for environmental, reclamation, and closure matters, mineral reserves, and accounting for business combinations, as they require us to make
assumptions that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimates were made and changes in them are reasonably likely to occur from period to
period. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of
Dilectors, and the Audit Committee has reviewed the disclosrrres presented below. In addition, there are other rtems within our ﬁnancral statements that
require estimation, but are not deemed to be critical. However, changes in estimates used in these and other items could have a material impact on our
financial statements.

Future Meialx Prit't's

Metals prices are key components in estimates that determine the valuation of some of our significant assets and liabilities, including properties,
plants and equipment, deferred tax assets, and certain accounts receivable. Metals prices are also an important component in the estimation of reserves. As
shown undel Part I, Item 1A. - Risk Factors, metals prices have historically been volatile, Silver demand arises from investment demand, particularly in
Exchange-Traded Funds, and industrial and consumer demand, while demand for gold is primarily driven by investment and consumer
demand. Investmellt demand for silver and gold has been relatively strong over the past three years and is inﬂuenced by various factors. including: the
value oithe us, Dollar and other cuneiicies, expanding us. budget deﬁcits, widening availability of exchange-traded commodity iuuds, interest rate
levels, the health ofcredit markets, and inﬂationary expectations. Uncertain economic conditions could result in continued investment demand for
precious metals. industrial demand for silver is closely linked to world Gross Domestic Product growth, Consumer demand is driven significantly by
demand for jewelry and similar retail products. We believe that global economic conditions are improving, though slowly and unevenly, and that industrial
trends, including urbanization and growth of the inlddle class in countries such as China and India, will result In continued demand growth for silver and
gold. However, there can be no assurance that these trends will continue or to how they will impact prices of the metals we produce. We are also impacted
by fluctuations in prices for- zinc and lead, which are also tied to economic conditions and the amount ofavailable supply. We have recorded impairments
to our asset carrying value in the past because of low prices. and we can offer no assurance that prices will either remain at their current levels or increase.

64


Processes supporting valuation of orii assets and liabilities that are most signiﬁcantly affected by prices include analysis ofasset carrying values,
depreciation, reserves, and deferred income taxes. On at least an annual basis - and more frequently if circumstances warrant - we examine our
depreciation rates, reserve estimates, and the valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets. We examine the carrying values of our assets as changes in
facts and circumstances warrant, in our analysis ofcanying values and defened taxes, we apply several pricing views to our forecasting model,
iircludiirg cuiTent prices, airalyst price estimates, forward—curve prices, and historical prices (see Mineral Reserves, below, regarding prices used for
reserve estimates). Using applicable accounting guidance and estimates of ﬁituie metals prices, we use the average of the various methods to determine
whether the values ofour assets are fairly stated, and to determine the level olvaluatiou allowances, ilany, on our deferred tax assets. In addition,
estimates of future metals prices are used in the valuation of cenain assets in the determination oi‘the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions (see
Bud'illcxd' Cumbimllium‘ below).

Sales of all metals products sold directly to smelters are recorded as revenues when title and risk of loss transfer to the smelter (generally at the tlnle
of shipment) at estimated forward metals prices for the estimated month of settlement. Due to the time elapsed between the time of shipment to the smelter
and ﬁlial settlement with the smelter, we estimate the prices at which sales ofour iuetals will be settled, Previously recorded sales and trade accounts
receivable are adjusted to estimated settlement metals prices until ﬁnal settlement by the smelter. Changes in metals prices between shipment and final
settlement result in changes to revenues and accorints receivable prevrously recorded upon shipment. As a result, our trade accounts receivable balances
are subject to changes iir metals prices until final settlement occurs. For more infonnation, see part 1v, Revenue Recognition of Note 1 of Nulcs‘ to
Conralidulcd Financial Statements.

We utiliae financially—settled forward contracts to manage our exposure to changes in the prices ofsilver, gold, zinc and lead contained in our
concentrates that have been shipped but not yet settled, and zinc and lead contained in our forecasted future concentrate shipments. See Item 7A.
Quann‘hriiva and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Rix/r . Commodity-Price Rix/r Management below for more information on our contract
programs. These contracts do not qualify for hedge accounting and are therefore marked-to-market though eamings each period. Changes in silver, gold.
zinc and lead prices between the dates that the contracts are entered into and their settlements will result in changes to the fair value asset or liability
associated with the contracts, with a corresponding gain or loss recognized in earnings.

Obligations for Environmental, Reclamation and Cloxara ll/Ialtms

One of the most signiﬁcant liabilities on our balance sheet is for accrued reclamation and closure costs. Of our 3 105.2 million total accrued
reclamation and closure cost balance as of December 3 l , 2013, approximately $55.5 million is fixed by the tenns of the Coeur d'Alene Basin litigation
settlement, with much of the remaining balance subject to uncertainty. We have estimated our liabilities under appropriate accounting guidance, and on at
least an annual basis - and more frequently ifwarranted - management reviews our liabilities with our Audit Committee. However, the ranges of liability
could exceed the liabilities recognized. If substantial damages were awarded, claims were settled, or remediation costs incurred in excess ofour accruals,
our financial results or condition could be materially adversely affected.

lVll'Iicml Rt’servci'

Critical estimates are inherent iii the process ofdetenniiring our reserves, Our reserves are affected largely by oiir assessment of future iuetals
prices, as well as by engineering and geological estimates of ore grade, accessibility and production cost. Metals prices are estimated at loiig-tenn averages,
as described in [torn Z, 7 Property Dexflipll'nlix. Our assessment of reserves occurs at least annually, and periodically utilizes extemal audits.

Reserves are a key component iir valuation ofour propenies, plants and equipment. Our estimates of reserves, iuineralized material, and other
resources at our operations are used in determining appropriate rates of units-of—production depreciation. with net book value of many assets depreciated
over the estimated mine lives. Reserves, mineralized material, and other resources included in our mine plans are also a key component in forecasts, with
which we compare future cash ﬂows to current asset values to ensure that canying values are reported appropriately. Estimates of reserves. mineralized
material, and other resources also play a key role in the valuation of cenain assets in the determination of the purchase price allocations for acquisitions
(see Emilio/xx Combinations below). Reserves are a culmination of many estimates and are not guarantees that we will recover the indicated quantities of
metals.

6 5


Business Combinations

We are requlred to allocate the purchase price of acqulred companies to the tangible and intangible assets acqulred and liabilities assumed based on
their estimated fair values at acquisition date. The valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requlres manageiueut to make significant estiiuates
and assumptions. especially with respect to long-lived assets, including estimates of future metals prices and mineral reserves, as discussed above. in
some cases, we use third—patty appraisers to determine the fair values and lives ofproperty and other identiﬁable assets. in addition, costs related to
business combinations are included in earnings as incurred. and our ﬁnancial results for periods in which business combinations are pursued could be
adversely affected as a result.
New Accounting Prannuncemcnts

In July 2013, the FASE issued ASU No. 2013-11.whrch requires eritrties to present unrecognized tax beneﬁts as a decrease in a net operating

loss. similar tax loss, or tax credit carryforward rfcertarn criteria are met. The guidance will eliminate the diversity in practice in the presentation of
ullrecognlzed tax beneﬁts but wlll not alter the way in wluch enttties assess deferred tax assets for realizabtllty, ASU No. 20] 3-1] is effectlve for annual
and interim reporting periods beginning alter December 15, 2013. We are currently evaluating the rinpact ofadoptirig this guidance but do not anticipate it
wlll have a material impact on our consolidated ﬁnancial statements.
Forward-Looking Statements

The foregoing discussion and analysis, as well as certain infom'lation contained elsewhere in this annual repon on Form lO-K. contain forward-
looklng statements wlthul tlle meanulg of Seetlon 27A of the Secuntles Act of 1933, as amended, and Sectton 21E of the Securltles Exchange Act of I934.
as amended, and are intettded to be covered by the safe harbor created thereby. See the discussion in Special Note on Fantlunl-Lottking Statements
iiicluded pnot to I’m! 1. Item 1.
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk

The followtng discussion about our risk-management activrties includes foiward-looking statements that involve risk and uncenainties. as well as
summatizes the ﬁnancial iustiiimeuts held by us at December 31, 2013, which are sensitive to changes in commodity prices and foreign exchange tales
and are not held for trading purposes. Actual results could differ materially froiu those projected in the forward-looking statements. In the normal course of
buslness. we also face rlsks that are eltller non-ﬁnancial or non-quantiﬁable (see Part I. Item 1A. 7 Risk Factors),
Provisional Sales

Sales of all metals products sold directly to sinclters. including by-product metals, are recorded as revenues when title and risk of loss transfers to
the smeltei (generally at the time of shipment) at forward prices for the estimated month of settlement. Due to the time elapsed between shipment to the
stttelter and the ﬁnal settlement with the smelter \ve tttttst estimate the prices at which sales ofuut metals will be settled. Previously tecorded sales are
adjusted to estimated settlement metals prices until ﬁnal settlement by the smelter. Changes in metals prices between shipment and ﬁnal settlement will
iesult in changes to revenues previously recorded upon shipment. Metals prices can and alien do fluctuate widely and are affected by numeicus factors
beyond our control (see Item 1A - Kirk Fllcftllit‘ - A substantial or extended decline in metals prices would have a material udverre effect all ur for
more tnfunrtation). At December 31. 2013, metals contained in concentrates and exposed to future price changes totaled approximately 0.8 rmllron ounces
of silver, 2.994 ounces ofgold. (r, 171 tons ofzrnc, and 2,127 tons of lead. 1fthe price for each metal were to change by ten percent, the change in the
total value of the concentrates sold would be approximately $3.4 million. We utilize a program designed to mitigate the risk of price adjustments with
ﬁnancially-settled forward contracts for our silver. gold, zinc and lead sales, as discussed in Commoditv-Prtce Risk Management below.
(‘omnmdior-I’rice RL’rlt Management

At times, we use ﬁnancially-settled forward contracts to manage our exposure to ﬂuctuation in the prices of certain metals that we produce Contract
positions are designed to ensure that we will receive a defined minimum price for certain quantities ofour production. thereby partially offsetting our
exposure to price fluctuations. These instruments do, however, expose us to (r) credit risk in the event of non-performance by counterpartres for contracts
in which the contract price exceeds the spot price ofa commodity and (ii) price risk to the extent that the spot price exceeds the contract price for quantities
of our production covered by contract positions.

6 6


We use financially—settled forward contracts to manage the exposure to changes in prices of silver, gold. zinc and lead contained in our concentrate
shipments between the time ofsale and final senlement. These contracts do not qualify for hedge accounting and are marked-to-maritet through eaniings
each period. At December 31. 2013 we recorded a negative cunent asset of approximately 50.5 million, which is included in other cunent assets, for the
fair value ofthe contracts, We recognized a $3.0 million net gain on the contracts during 2013, which is included in sales ofproducts. The net gains
recognized on the contracts offset price adjustments on our provisional concentrate sales related to changes to silver, gold, zinc and lead prices between the
time ofsalc and ﬁnal settlement.

We also rise ﬁnancially-settled forward contracts to manage the exposure to changes in prices of zinc and lead contained in our forecaslett future
concentrate shipments. These contracts also do not qualify for hedge accounting and are marked-Io-market through earnings each period. At
December 31, 2013 we recorded a cunent asset of $2.2 million, which is included in other cunent assets, and a non-current asset of$2.7 million, which
is included in otliei non-current assets, for the fair value of the contracts. We recognized a $18.0 million net gain on the contracts, which includes $16.5
million in gains realized on settled contracts during 2013, The net gains on these contracts are included as a separate line item under other income
(expense), as they relate to forecasted future shipments, as opposed to sales that have already taken place but are subject to final pricing. The gains
recognized during 2013 are the result of decreasing lead and zinc pnces through the end of the period. This program is designed and intended to mitigate
the impact of potential future declines in lead and zinc prices from the price levels established in the contracts (see average price information below).

The following table summarizes the quantities of metals committed uiider forward sales contracts at December 31, 2013:

Ounces pounds under contract (in 000’s) Average price per ounce/pound
Silver Gold Zinc Lcad Silver Gold Zinc Lead
(ounces) (ounces) (pounds) (pounds) (ounces) (ounces) (pounds) (pounds)

Contracts on provisional sales

2014 sctllcmcnts 673 1 11,188 3,472 X; 19.50 X; 1,205 K; 0.89 $ 1.00
Contracts on forecasted sales

2014 sctllcmcnts 7 7 31,967 34,282 N/A N/A 13 1.00 S 1.04

2015 settlements 7 7 39,683 36,982 N/A N/A 3; 0.96 $ 1.07

2016 settlements 7 7 3,803 30,589 N/A N/A 13 0.93 S 1.03

As further discussed iii Item 7, Management 2i- Discussmn tmd Armlyxix ofFintincnd Condition and Rm‘ulm' of operations, The Lucky Friday
Segment, production at the Lucky Friday urine was temporarily suspended. As a result, we liquidated forward contracts related to forecasted Lucky
Friday base metal sales for total net proceeds of $3.1 million.

Foreign Currentv

we operate or have mining interests in Canada and Mexico, which exposes us to risks associated with tiuctuations in the exchange rates orthe
currenCies involved, particularly between the US, dollar and Canadian dollar, On June 1, 2013, we completed the acquisition cfAurizon Mines Ltd,
which gave us ownership of the Casa Berardi mine and various miner a1 interests in Quebec, Canada, See Note 16 of Nomi m Comohdulcd Financial
Smiemcvm' for more infomation, We have deleniiined that the functional currency for our Canadian operations is the U.S. dollar. As such, foreign
exchange gains and losses associated with the re-measurenient of monetary assets and liabilities from Canadian dollars Io US. dollars are recorded to
earnings each period. For the year ended December 31, 2013, we recognized a net foreign exchange gain of $3.0 million. Foreign currency exchange rates are
inﬂuenced by a number of factors beyond our control, We currently do not utilize forward contracts or other contracts to manage our exposure to foreign
cuii ency ﬂuctuations, but we may do so in the future, See Item 1A. 7 Risk Fat-um - Ourﬁtrctgn activities are rub/(lei ((1 additional ill/talent rixki‘. A
one percent change in the exchange rate between the Us. dollar and Canadian dollar from the rate at December 31. 2013 would have resulted in a change of
approximately $1.4 million in our ner foreign exchange gain.
item 3. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data

Our Consolidated Financial Statements are included liereili beginning on page l--l. l-inancial statenient schedules are omitted as they are not
applicable or the information required is included in the Consolidated Financial Statements.

67


The following iaole sers foth supplemenrary ﬁnancial dnia (in rhousands, excepi per share amounls) for each quarrer oiilie years ended
December 31, 2013 and 2012, derived from our unaudited ﬁnancial slalemenls. The data set fonh below should be read in conjllnclion with and is
qualiﬁed in iis enlirery by reference i0 our Coilsolidaied Financial Sloiemenls.

Fuunh Third Second First
Quarter Quarter Quarter (21 Quarter Total
2013
Sales ufprudlicis 8 114,180 8 106,629 3 85,330 8 76,450 8 382,589
Gross prom 8 14,731 8 20,686 8 5,111 8 25,618 8 66,146
Nci income (loss) 8 (2,908) 8 (8,458) 3 (24,858) 8 11,094 8 (25,130)
Preferred siock dividends 8 (138) 8 (138) 8 (138) 8 (138) 8 (552)
Income (loss) applicable ro common srockliolders 8 (3.046) 8 (8,596) 3 (24,996) 8 10,956 8 (25,682)
Basic income per common share 8 (0,01) s (0 03) S (0.08) $ 0.04 8 (0,08)
Diluicd income per common share 8 (0 o l) 8 (0 03) S (0 08] 8 0.04 8 (0 08)
2012
Sales ofproducts 8 81,100 8 81,871 8 67,019 8 91,153 8 321,143
Gross proiii 8 34.037 8 37,309 3 23,968 8 48,202 8 143,516
Nei income (loss) Hi 8 743 8 (885) 8 2,524 8 12,572 8 14,954
Prei'en-ed siock dividends 8 (138) 8 (138) s (138) 8 (138) 8 (552)
Income (loss) applicable io common siockliolders 8 605 8 (1,023) 8 2,386 8 12,434 8 14,402
Basic income (loss) per common share 8 7 8 7 s 0.01 8 0.04 8 0.03
Diluled income (loss) per common shale S 7 S 7 S 0.01 $ 0.04 S 0.05
1) During 2012, we experienced a leinporaiy suspension ofpi-oduclimi ai our Lucky Friday unii, wliicli i-esiilled in reduced revenue in 2012
compared I0 2013. For addiiionol iilformaiion, see 1m" 7, Managemem‘h‘ Dixcuxxiali and Analyiii- oft-‘inancial Condiiion am] RESUIIX of
Operaaonx - The Luka Friday Segment,
2) On June 1, 2013, we acquired all ilie issued and oulsianding shares oi‘Aui-izon Mines, Lid. for cash and slack consideralion. Tlie acquisdion

gives us 100% owneisliip ufllle producing Casa Berardi gold mine, along wnli iiireresrs in Various gold explorallon propenies in the Abiiibi

region of nonh-wesiem Quebec, Canada. This infunnailon reﬂecis our ownership of Ihe Casa Berardl inlne and ulher lnieresis commencing D“

June I, 2013. See Note 16 Al'qlllA‘IIIOIlS ofNalz' the Consolidated Financial Stnlz'mem‘x
Item 91 Changes in and Disngreemenis Willi Accountants an Accnuming and Financial Disclosures

None.

Ilem 9A1 Controls and Procedures
Disclosure C antral; and Procedures

An evaluation was performed under ilie supervision and wdli ilie panicipoiion of our inanageinenl. including llie Chief Executive onicer (“CEO”)
and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer ("CFO"), ofllle effecilveness ofihe design and apelallan of our disclosure canlrols and procedures. Based on ihai evaluaiion,
mil CEO and CFO concluded ihai mil disclosure connols and piocedlnes were ell‘eciive as of December 31, 2013, in assuring them in a iimely mannei
ilial inaierial infun‘nailorl required io be disclosed in lhis repori has been properly recorded, processed. summarized and reporied,

Monogmeni’s Annual Report on Internal Cnntml om Financial Repam‘ng

Managemeni is responsible ior esiaolisliing and mainiaining adequaie iniemal model over mil ﬁnancial reponing, which is designed Iu provide
ieasunable assiiiance regal ding ilie reliabiliiy ufﬁnancial reponing and the preparation ui‘ﬁnancial slalemems for exienial pinpuses in accordance with
generally occcpred occouniiiig principles in inc Unlicd Siares ofAnicrica.

6 8


Because of its inherent limitations. any system of internal control over ﬁnanclal reponing, no matter how well designed, may not prevent or detect
misstatements due to the possibility that a control can be circumvented or overridden or that misstatements due to error or fraud may occur that are not
detected. Also, because of changes in conditions. internal control effectiveness may vary over time.

Management assessed rhe effectiveness afcur intemal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2013. using criteria established in lnternal
Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (“c030”) and concluded that
we have maintained effcerive internal control over ﬁnancial reponiiig as of December 31, 2013, based on these criteria.

An evaluation was perfcnned under the supervision and wllh the participation of management including the CEO and CFO, of the effectiveness of
the design and operation ofour disclosure controls atid procedures as required by Exchange Act Rules 13a. lste) and 15(d)-15(s) as of the end ofthe
reporting period covered by this repon. Based on that evaluation. our CEO and cm concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures, including
controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us is accumulated and communicated to our management
[includlng our CEO and cm], were effective as ofDecemher 31, 2013, in assuring thetii iii a timely mantier that material itifonnatioti required to be
disclosed in this report has been properly recorded, processed summarized and repcned.

Our inteuial control over ﬁnancial reporting as orDeceinber 31, 2013 has been audited by BDO USA, LLP, an independent registered public
accounting ﬁnn, as stated in the attestation repcn which is included herein.

Changes in Internal Contra! over Financial Reporting

There have been no changes in our intenial controls over financial reporting during tlte quarter ended December 31, 2013, that have materially
affected. or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal controls over financial reporting.

On June 1. 2013, we completed the acquisition of Almzon Mines Ltd. We included the newly—acquired Aunzon operations in our assessment of our
internal control over ﬁnancial reponiiig as of December 31, 2013. using the criteria established in lnternal Control—Integrated Framework issued by coso.

o 9


Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Board of Directors and Stockholders
l-lecla Mining Company
Cowl d‘AlenE. Idaho
We have audited Hecla Mining Company's intenial control over ﬁnancial reporting as ofDecember 31, 2013, based on criteria established in [mental
Carlin)! - Inlegmled Framework {2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (the C050 criteria). llecla
Mining Company's management is responsible for maintaining effective intenial control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness
of internal control over ﬁnancml reporting. included in the accompanying 1tem 9A. Managemenl's Annual Report on lnternal Control Over Financial
Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the company‘s intenial control over financial reporting based on our audit.
We conducted oiii audit in accordance with the standaids of the Public Company Accounting Oveisight Board (United States), Those standaids require
that we plan and peifoiin the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective intenial control ovei ﬁnancial reporting was maintained in all
iiiateiial rcspcms‘. Diii audit included obtaining an understanding ofintemal control over financial ieponing, assessing the risk that a material weakness
extsts. and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness ofintenial control based on the assessed risk. Our audit also included performing
such other proceduies as we considered necessary in the ciicnnistances. We believe that otir audit piovides a reasonable basis for otir opinion.
A company's intenial control over financial reponing is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation offinancial statements for extenial purposes in accordance wtth generally accepted accounting principles, A company‘s internal control
over ﬁnallclal reporting includes those policies and procedures that (l) penain to the maintenance of records that. in reasonable detail. accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositiotis ofthe assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
peimit prepaiation offinancial statements in accordance wttli generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures ofthe company
are being made otily in accordance with authorizations ofnianagetnent and directors of the company, and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding
pievention or tiiiiely detection of unauthorized acquisition, iise, oi disposition of the company‘s assets that could have a material effect on the ﬁnancial
slxmnenls.
Because of its inherent limitations, intenial conrrol over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, piojections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because ofchanges in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance With the policies or proccdttrcs may dctcrioratc,
In our opinion, Hecla Mining Company maintained, in all material respects. etlective internal control over financial ieponing as of December 31, 2013,
based on the C050 crilerla,
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight board (United Slates), the consolidated balance
sheets of Hecla Mining Company as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the related consolidated statements of opeiations and comprehensive income
(loss), changes in stockholders equity, and cash ﬂows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013 and our repon dated February
19. 2014 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
t's/ BDO USA, LLP
Spokane. Washington
February 19.2014

70


PART III

Item 10, Directors, Executive Ofﬁcers and Corporate G0vernance

In accordance with our Certificate of Incorporation. our Board of Directors |S divided into three classes, The tenns of ofﬁce of the directors in each
class expire at different times. The directors are elected for tliree-year terms, The Effective Dates listed below for each director indicate their current term of
otiice. All officers are elected for a term which ordrnanly expires on the date ofthe meeting of the Board of Directors immediately following the Annual
Meeting of Stockholders. The positions and ages listed below are as of the date ufuur next Annual Meeting of Stockholders in May 2014. There are no
arrangements or understandings between any ofthe directors or officers and any other persoii(s) pursuant to which such officers were elected.

Age at Position and Committee
May 22, 2014 Assignments Effective Dates
Phillips S. Baker, Jr. 54 President and CEO, 5/13 7 5/14
Director“) 5/1175/14

James A. Sabala 5 9 Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer 5/13 7 5/14

Lawrence P, Radford 53 Senior Vice President» Operations 5/13 7 5/14

Dr. Dean WA, McDonald 57 Senior Vice President 7 Exploration 5/13 7 5/14

Don Porrier 5 5 Vice Presideni 7 Corporate Development 5/13 7 5/14

David C. Sienko 45 Vice President and General Counsel 5/13 7 5/14

John H. Bowles 6 8 Director ([15) 5/12 7 5/15

Ted Cruiiiley o 9 Director and Chairman oftlre Board M) 5/1 3 7 5/16

George R. Nethereutt, Jr. 6 9 Director (3A) 5/12 7 5/15

Terry v. Rogers 67 Director «24.5) 5113 7 5/16

Charles E. Stanley 5 5 Director (L35) 5/13 7 5/16

Dr. Anthony P. Taylor 72 Director WU) 5/11 7 5/14

t1) Member of executive Cornmrttec

(2) Member ofAlldiI Committee

(3) Member ofCorpomIe Governance and Dircelors‘ Nominating Committee

(4) Member of Compensation Committee

(5] Member ofllealtli. Safety. Environmental and Technical Committee

Phillips S. Baker, Jr, has been our Chief Executive Officer since May 2003 and a director since November 2001, Prior to that, Mr. Baker held a
variety orotlier positions with us starting in May 2001 , Prior to Joining us, Mr. Baker served as vice President and ChiefFinaneial Ofﬁcer or Battle
Mountain tiold Company (a gold mining company) from March 1993 to January 2001. Mr. Baker served as a director of Questar Corporation ta U.s,
natural gas-focused exploration and production, interstate pipeline and local distribution company) from February 2004 to June 2010. and has served as a
director for QEP Resources, Inc. (a iiatliral gas and oil exploration and production company) since May 2010.

James A. Sabala was appointed ChiefFinaneial Ofﬁcer in May 2008 and Senior Vice Presrdetil iti March 2008. Prior to his employment Will|
Hecla, Mr. Sabala was Executive Vice President - Chief Financial Ofﬁcer of Coeur d‘Aleiie Mines Corporation (a mining company) fronl 2003 to February
2008. Mr. Sabala also sewed as Vice President - Chief Financial Officer of Stillwater Mining Company (a mining company) from 1998 to 2002.

Lawrence P, Radford ivas appointed vice President - Operations, in October 201 1. Prior to his appointment, Mi. Radford was Vice President of
South American Operations for KlnrDSS Gold Corporation at “5 South America operations (gold mining operations) from April 2010 to September 20] I.
Mr. Radfurd held vanuus other positions at Kinross from June 2007 to March 2010. He was General Manager for Barrick Gold Corporation at its Cowal
operation (a gold mining operation) iii West Wyalong, Nsw, Australia from January 2005 to May 2007. Mr, Radford also held various positions with
Barrick from 1990 to December 2005. Prior to that, he was Planning and Project Engineer torNeico Delaiiiai Company (a minng company) from 1988
to 1989 and Mining Engineer for Coeur d'Alene Mines Corporation from 1984 to 1988.

71


Dr. Dean WA. McDonald was appointed Senior vice President - Exploration in July 2013 and prior to that was vice President - Exploration from
August 2001’) to June 2013. Dr. McDonald was also appointed Senior vice President - Exploration ofour Canadian subsidiary, llecla Canada Ltd, in July
2013 and was Vice President - Exploration from January 2007 to June 2013. Prior to joining Hecla, Dr, McDonald was vice President Exploration and
Business Development for Committee Bay Resource Ltd. (a Canadian-based exploration and development company) from 2003 to August 200a and
Exploration Manager at Mnamar Mining Company,Northem Orion Explorations (an exploration company) from 1990 to 2003. Dr. McDonald also serves
as a Director for Cananlex Resources Corp. (a mineral exploration company), since August 2013.

Don Poitier was appointed vice President - Corporate Development tn July 2007. Mr. Poitier has also been our Vice President - Corporate
Development of our Canadian subsidiary, Hecia Canada Ltd. since January 2007. Prior to joining Hecla, Mr. Poirier was a mining analyst wrth
Blacknrorlt Capital [capital market specialists) from September 2002 to June 2007. Mr, Poirter lleld other mining analyst positions from I988 to 2002.

David C. Srenko was appointed vice President and General Counsel in January 2010. Pnoi- to lus appointment, Mr. Slenko was a partner with the
law ﬁrm K&L Crates LLP (formerly Bell, Boyd & Lloyd LLP) from 2004 to January 2010, where he specialized in securities, mergers and acquisitions,
and corporate governance. Mr, Sierrko was also an associate at Bell, Boyd A‘L Lloyd, LLP, from 2000 to 2004 and at Locke Lord from 1998 to 2000, as
well as an attoniey with the Securities arid Exchange Commission from 1995 to 1998.

Julln II. Bowles was elected by tile shareholders to IIecla's Board ofDirecturs ill May 2006, Mr. Bowles was a partner ill tlle Airdit and Assurance
Group of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (an accounting firm) from April 1976 until lus retirement in June 2006. He concentrated lus practice on public
companies operating in the mining industry. Mr, Bowles has been a Director at Mercator Minerals LTD. (a copper, molybdenum and silver producing
company) since April 201 1, Director of lludBay Minerals Inc. (a zinc, copper, gold and silver mining company) from May 2006 to March 2009. as well
as a Director ofBuss Power Corp, [a mineral exploration company) from September 2007 to November 2013. He holds Fellowships in butll the British
Columbia Institute of Chartered Accountants and the Canadian Instrtirte oerllrrlg and Metallurgy. Mr, Buwles was also tlle Treasurer ofMlnrllg
Suppliers Association efErltrsh Columbia (an association oi‘ providers of equipment, products and related services to the British Columbia mining
industry) from May 1999 to May 2012. He has been Director Emeritus oi‘ Ducks Unlimited Canada (a national, private, nonproﬁt wetland conservation
organization), since March I996. in 2006. Mr. Bowles was named Mining Person ofthe Year by the Mining Association ofBC.

Ted Crrrirrley has served as a director since 1995 and became Chainrran eftlre Board iir May 2006, Mr. Crrrmley served as the Executive Vice
President and Chief Financial Officer ofOtTrceMax Incorporated (a distributor of otYrce products) from January 2005 rrrrtil his retirement in December
2005, and as Senior Vice President from November 2004 to January 2005. Prior to that, Mr. Crrrirrley was Senior Vice President and ChiefFlnaircial
Ofﬁcer ofEelse Cascade Corporation (a wood and paper company). from 1994 to 2004.

George R. Nethercutt, Jr., was appointed to Hecla‘s Board of Directors in February 2005. Mr. Nethercutt has served as a principal of Nethercutt
Consulting LLC (a strategic planning arid consulting ﬁrm), since Janrrary 2007. Prior to that, Mr. Nethercutt was a principal of Liindqiiist, Nethercutt &
Grlles, LLc (a strategic planning and consulting ﬁrm) from February 2005 to January 2007. Mr, Nethercutt has also been a board member for the
Washington Policy Center (a public policy organization provtding high quality analysis on issues relating to the free market and government regulation)
since January 2005. In September 2010, Mr. Nethercutt was appointed Of Counsel with the law ﬁrm of Lee & Hayes PLLC. Mi. Nethercutt serves as a
board member orARCADls Corporation (an international company providing consultancy, engineering and management services), the Board of
Chancellors for the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Intematlonal (a charity and advocate ufjuvenlle diabetes research worldwide), and served as
U.S. Chain‘nan uftlle Permanent Joint Board on Defense - U.S./Canada from April 2005 to December 2009. He is tlle founder and Chairman of the George
Nethercutt Foundation (a charitable non-proﬁt educational foundation) formed in February 2007. Fioin I995 to 2005, Mr. Nethercutt served in the U.S.
House of Representatives, including House Appropriations subcommittees on Interior. Agncuiture and Defense and the Science Committees subcommittee
on Energy. He has been a member oitlie Washington State Bar Association since 1972.

Charles B. Stanley was elected to Heela’s Board ofDlrectors in May 2007, Mr. Stanley has beeir llre Chief Executive Ofﬁcer, President and
Director oiQEP Resources, Inc. (a natural gas and oil exploration and production company) since May 2010, and Chairman of QEP‘s board of directors
since May 2012. He has also served as Chairman, ChiefExecutive orncer, President and Director orQEP Midstream Partners, LP (a master limited
pannerslup that owns, operates. acquires and develops midstream energy assets) since 2013. lie served as Chief Operating otricer oi‘ Questar Corporation
(a U.S. natural gas—focused exploration and production, interstate pipeline and local distribution company) from March 2008 to June 2010, and also as its
Executive Vice President and Director from February 2002 to Jurle 2010,

72


Terry V, Rogers was elected to Ilecla's Board of Directors in May 2007. Mr, Rogers was the Semor vice President and Chiefoperatrng Ofﬁcer of
Cameco Corporation (a uranium producer) from Febmary 2003 until his retirement in June 2007, Mr, Rogers also served as President of Kumtor
Operating Company (a gold producing company and a dryrsion of Cameco Corporation) from 1999 to 2003. He has also served as a Director for Cemen-a
Gold Inc, (a gold mining company) since Pebmary 2003.

Dr. Anthony P. Taylor has served as a director since May 2002, Dr. Taylor has been the President. CEO and Director ofSelex Resources Ltd, (a
private Ontario Corporation engaged in mineral exploration) since January 2012. He previously served as Executive Chairman and Director ofCrown Gold
Corporation (a public Canadian minerals exploration company) from August 2010 to August 2012. and President, CEO and Director of Gold Summit
Corporation (a public Canadian minerals exploration company) from October 2003 to August 2010. He has served as President and Director of Caughlrn
Preschool Corporation (a private Nevada corporation that operates a preschool) since October 2001.

information with respect to our directors is set forth under the caption “Proposal 1 . Election ofDirectors" in our proxy statement to be ﬁled
pursuant to Regulation 14A for the annual meetriig scheduled to beheld on May 22, 2014 (the Proxy Statement). which rnfonnatron is incorporated herein
by reference.

Reference is nrade to the rnfonnarron set forth in the ﬁrst paragraph under the caption “Audit Committee Report - Memberslnp and Role oftlie Audit
Committee," and under the caption "Corporate Governance” in the Proxy statement to be ﬁled pursuant to Regulation 14A, which information is
incorporated herein by reference,

Reference is made to the information set forth under the caption “Section [6(a) Beneﬁcial Ownership Reporting Compliance“ in the Proxy Statement
to be ﬁled pursuant to Regulation 14A. wlnch information is incorporated herein by reference.

Reference is made to the information set forth under the caption “Available Information" in Item 1 for information about the Company's Code of
Business Conduct and Ethics, which Information Is incorporated herein by reference.

There have been no material changes to the procedures by which shareholders may recommend director nominees.

Item 11, Executive Compensation

Reference is tirade to the information set forth under the caption “Compensation ofNon-Managetnenl Directors" the caption “Compensation
Discussion and Analysts;" the caption “Compensation Committee lnterlocks and Insider Pantcipationz" the caption “Compensation Committee Repon,"
the caption “Compensation Tablesf‘ the first paragraph under the caption “Board of Directors and Committee Int'cln‘natlonf' and under the caption “Other
Beneﬁts“ in the Proxy Statement to be ﬁled pursuant to Regulation 14A, which information is incorporated herein by reference,

Iteln ll. Security Ownership of Certain Beneﬁcial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters

Reference is made to the information set forth under the caption “Security Ownership ofCertain Beneﬁcial Owners and Management" and the
caption “Equity Corrrpensatron Plan Information" in the Proxy Statement to be ﬁled pursuant to Regulation 14A, which iiifonnatron is incorporated herein
by reference.

Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence

Reference is made to the information set fonh in the Proxy Statement to be ﬁled ptttsttant to Regulation 14A, which information is incorporated
herein by reference.

Item l4t Principal Accountant Fees and Senices

Reference is made to the information set [0th under the caption “Audit Fees 7 Audit and Non—Audit Fees" in the Proxy Statement to be ﬁled
pursuant to Regulation 14A, which information is incorporated herein by reference. Reference is made to the information set forth under the caption “Audit
Fees 7 Policy on Audit Committee Pre-Approval of Audit and Non-Audit Services of Independent Auditor" in the Proxy Statement to be ﬁled pursuant to
Regulation 14A. which information is incorporated herein by reference.

73


PART IV
Item is. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules

(a) (1) Financial Slnlcmems

Sec Index in Financial Slammcnls on Page F-l
(a) (2) Financial Slnlcmem Schedulcs

Nm applicable
(:1) (3) Exhibits

Sec Exhibil Index following Ihc Financial Slntcmcms

74


Signatures
Piiisuant to the requiieiiients ut‘Sectiun 13 or 15(d) cit‘tlie Seciiiities Exchange Act at‘ 1934, the |€glslmnl has duly caused this report to be signed

on its belialfby the undersigned. thereuntu duly authorized,

lIECLA MINING COMPANY

By: /s/ Ph1llips 5.13aker,1i.

Ph1llips s, Baker, Jr, President,
Chief Exeeutive omeer and Director
Date: Februaiy 19, 2014
Piiisuant tn the iequiremcnls ut‘ the Securities Exchange Act uf1934,tliis iepurt has been signed beluw by the fulluwiiig persons on behalf ufthe
registrant and in the capacities and on the dales indicated.
'5/ Phillip» S. Baker, Jr, 2 19 2014 /s/ Ted Crumlcy 2/19/2014
Philhp» 5. Baker, Jr. Dare Dale
Presidcnl. Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and Director Ted Crumley
(principal executive ameer) Direetor
5/ James A. Sabala Z 19 2014 /s/ Chailes B, Stanley 2/19/2014
James A. Sabala Daic Dale
Samar Viee Pres1dem and Chief Finaiieia1 Ofﬁcer Charles B. Stanley
[principal ﬁnanmal and accounlmg otﬁeer) Direetor
5/ John 11. Bowles Z 19 2014 /s./ George R. Nclhctculi. JI, 2/19/2014
John H, Bowlcs Daic George R. Nethcrcutl, Jr, Dale
Director Director
5/ Terry v. Rugers 2 19 2014 /s/ Anthony P, Taylur 2/19/2014
Terry v. Roger: Dare Anlhuny P. Tay1u| Dale
Director Director
7 5


Index Io Consolidaled Financial Slalemenls
Page
Consolidaled Financial Slalcmems
Repun erlndependenl chlslcrcd Public Accountng Firm F-l
Consolidaled Balance sneels a1 Deccmber 31, 2013 and 2012 17.2
Consolldaled Slalemems af Operaﬁons and Cumprellenslve lnennne (Lass) for me Ycars Ended Deccmber 31, 2013, 2012 and 201 1 F73
Conmlidaled Slatemcnts er Cash Flows for me Ycars Ended Deeember 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 H
Consnlldaled Slalcmems of Changes In Slockholdcrs' Eqully for I116 Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 F-5
Nmes Io Censolidaled Financial Slalcmems F-b
7 6


Repnrt of independeni Registered Public Accounting Firm
Board of Directors and Sinckhnlders
i-lecia Mining Cninpany
Coeul d‘Alene. Idaho
We have audiied Ilie accompanying consulidaied balance sheeis ofHecla Mining Company as of December 31. 2013 and 2012 and ihe relaied consolidaled
siaieinenis efnperaiions and eninnreiiensive income (less), changes in siackhnlders' equilyi and cash ﬂows for each oflhe iiiree years in the period ended
December 31, 2013. These financial slaieinenis are iiie responsibiliiy cil'ilie Ceinpany's managemeni. Our responsibiliiy is in express an opinion on iiiese
ﬁnancial statements based on our audits.
We cunducied uur audiis in accuidance wiili lhc siandanls al‘ihe Public Company Accounting Oversighl Board (Uniled Siaies). Those slandards iequire
llial we plan and perform lhe audil lo obtain reasonable assurance about whether the ﬁnancial slalemeiils are free ofiiialerial misslaleiiienl. An audit
includes examining, on a Iesl basis evidence suppening iiie ninounls anil disclnsures in ihe ﬁnancial sialeinenis, assessing Ihe accouniing principles userl
and significanl esiiinaies made by manageineiil, as well as evaluating llie overall ﬁnancial slaierneni preseniaiiun, We believe iiiai our aiidiis pruvide a
reasnnable basis fnr nur Upinmn.
in our opinion» llie consolidated ﬁnancial Slaleiiienls referred lo above presenl laiiiy, in all niaieiiai iespecls, ll'le financial posillmi of Hecla Mining
Company al December 3 L 2013 and 2012, and [he resulis of iis operalions and its cash ﬂows for each Dflhe ihree years in the period ended December 3 L
2013, in conformity wiih aecouniiiig principles generally accepted in iiie Uniled Siaies of America.
We also have audiied, in accordance wiih lhe slandards ufihe Public Company Accouniing Oversight Buard (Unilell Siaies), Hecla Mining Company's
internal control over ﬁnancial reporting as of December 31, 2013, based on criteria established iii Interim! Control - Integrated Framework (2013)
issued by line Coiiimillee of Sponsoring Organizalinns orilie Treadway Commission (c050) and our repon daled February 19, 2014 expressed an
unqualiﬁed Opulan iiiereon.
i’s/ BDO USA, LLP
Spokane. Wasiiingiun
February 19.2014

F-l


Hecla Mining Compnny and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Balance Sheels
(ln thousands, except slim and per share data)
December 31,
2013 2012
AS SETS
Ciirreni assels:
Cash and cash equivalents S 212,175 3 190,984
Aceuums receivable:
Trade 17,672 17,555
Taxes 16,204 2,029
Other, nel 4,689 5,437
lriveuiorics:
Cancemrales, dare, sinckpiled are, and metals in iraiisii and iii-process 27,740 15,073
Malenuls and supplies 21,097 13,564
Cunenl deferred ineorne inxes 35,734 29,398
Oiher current assels 8,324 8.858
Talnl eunenl assets 343,635 282,898
Non-eunem investmenis 7.019 9.614
Non-eurrem reslricied cash and invesimenls 5,217 871
Properties, plains, equipiiieiii and mineral imeresis, iiei 1,791,001 9% ,6 59
Nuneurrenr deferred inennie taxes 78,780 86,365
Oiher null-eunem assets 5 ,867 1,883
Talul assels 3 2,232,119 3 1,378,290
LIABILITIES
Current liabilities:
Aeeaums payable and accrued l|ab11|l|es 3 51,152 3 43,162
Aeerued payroll and relnied beneliis 18,769 10,760
Accrued taxes 7.881 12,321
Currem panmn 61 eapiial lenses 8,471 5,564
Ciin~eri1pomori of accrued reelamaiiaii and closure cosis 58,42 5 19, 84 5
Other currenl liabilities 6,781 3,335
Total eurrenr liablliiles 151,479 94,987
Long-Ierm Capllal lenses 14,332 1 1,935
Accrued reelamatlml and elusure eosls 46,766 93,370
Long-term debt 490,726 7
Non-cllnenl deferred Inx liabilily 164,861 7
Oihel’ nun-current liabilllies 37,536 40.047
Total llZIlJlllUCS 905,700 240,339
Coiurniinienis and conlingencies (Noies 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, x, and 10)
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Preferred siock, 5,000,000 shares alllhonzed: Series B preferred slack, $0.25 par value, 157,816
shares issued and outstanding, liquidation preference 7 87,891 39 39
Common stock, 80.25 par Value, uuiliorizeil 500,000,000 shures; issued and uulslunding 2013
7 342,663,381 shares and 2012 7 285,209,848 shares 85,896 71,499
Capilal surplus 1,426,845 1,218,283
Aeeuinulnied deﬁeil (154,982) (123,288)
Aecnmulaled inner comprehensive loss, nei (26,299) (23,918)
Less rreasury smek, ai eusi; 2013 7 921,721 and 2012 7 788,288 shares issued and held in
treasury (5,0110) (4,664)
Toial slookhaldeis‘ equity 1,326,419 1,137,951
Total linbiliiies and sioekholders‘ equin S 2,232,l 19 3 1,378,290
The accompanying nnies are an lnlegml pan ofthe consulidaied ﬁnancial siaremenls.
F-2


Hecla Mining Compnlly and Subsidiaries
Consolidaied smernenis or Operaiions and Comprehensive Income (Loss)
(Dollars and shares in thousands, exeepi per share oniouuis)
Year Ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011

Sales afpmllucls 8 382,589 $ 321,143 1; 477,634

Cosi of sales and mher direei pi~odiiehori eosis 235,315 134,105 155,5 73

Depreeiolion. deplelion and amomzohon 81,127 43,522 47,055

Toial eosi afsales 316,443 177,627 212,539

Gross proﬁt 55,145 143,515 254,995

Olhcr operating expenses:

Gcneml and adiiiinisiiahve 28,925 21,253 18,540
Exploralion 23,502 31,822 25,959
Pre-developmenr 14,148 17,915 4,445
Oiiier operniing expense 1,641 4,423 7,55 8
(Gain) loss 1m dispasiiion of property, plants, equipmeni and mmeml inieresu (75] 275 7
Lucky Friday suspeiision-i-elaied (iiieome) eosis (1,401) 25,309 7
Aiirizan acquisiiion costs 26,397 7 7
valsmli for clmcd operaiions and environiiienial mailers 5,403 4,552 9,747

Toinl other operanng expense 98,540 105,550 57,350

liieoine (loss)froin operaiions (32.394) 37.866 197,645

Olhci ineome (expense):

Gain (loss) on derivahve eonimels 17,979 (10,457) 37,988
No! gain on sale of inveslmenls 197 7 61 1
Unrealized less rni iiivesniieriis (2,539) (1,171) (140)
Nei foreign exchange gain (less) 2,95 9 (53) (215)
inieresi and oiher ineonie 662 8 5 129
inreresi expense (21,689] (2,427) (2,875)
Toinl oiher ineome (expense): (2,531) (14.033) 35,497

income (loss) before ineorne Laxcs (34,925) 23,833 233,142

iiieornerax belicﬁl(pmvislon) 9.795 (8.879) (X1978)

N01 income (loss) (25,130) 14,954 151,154

Prefen‘ed sioek dwideiids (552) (552) (552)

Iiieome(1oss)opplieahleio common sioekholders 8 (25,682) $ 14,402 $ 150,612

Comprehensive ineoine(1oss):

Ncl ineoiiie (loss) 3 (25,130) 3 14.954 1; 151,154
Unrealized gain (loss) and amonizahon of poor service on pension plans 2,230 (1,644) (7,754)
Unrealized holding gains (losses) on invesirneins (7,249) 53 (767)
Reclassificaﬁon ofimpaimiem efinvesiiiienis included in nei iiieenie (less) 2,638 1,171 140

Total ehange in neeuniulaied other comprehensive income (loss), ner S (2,3811 3 (420) $ (8381)

Comprehensive iiieoine (loss) 8 (27,511] $ l4r534 $ 142.783

Basic ineorne (less) per common share aﬁer prelerred dividends S (0 081 S 0.05 18 0.54

Diliued income (loss) per common share arier preferred dividends S (0.08) $ 005 $ 0-51

Weigliied average number of eomnion shares oulsianding 7 basic 318.679 285,375 280,956

Weighied average number ofcummon shares oiusionding 7 diluied 318.679 297565 297.033

The aeeonipanyiiig holes are an iniegral pan ofth eonsnlidaied ﬁnancial siaienienls,
F73


Hecia Mining Company and Subsidiaries
Consnlidmed Statements oansh Flows
(in thousands)
Year Ended December 31,
20 13 20 12 ZDl 1
Operating activities:
Net income (loss) 3 (25,130) 3 14,954 is 151,164
Non—casii elements included in net income (loss):
Depreciation. depletion and :imoi’lizalion 82,366 50.1 13 47,348
Net gain on sale of investments (197) 7 (611)
Unrealized loss on investments 2,638 1,171 140
(Gain) loss on disposition of properties, plants, equipment and mineral interests (75] 275 7
Provision for reclamation and closure cosis 1,788 1,106 7,004
Deferred income Iaxes (5,893] 546 76,944
Stock compensation 4,461 3,101 2,073
Amonizaiion of loan origination fees 1,435 450 5 98
(0am) loss on derivative contracts (1,338] 29,627 (53,545)
Reversal of purchase price allocation to product inventory 550 7 7
Other non-cash items (341) 1,765 1,209
Change in assets and liabilities, net of business acquired:
Accounts receivable (1,313) (4,713) 16,531
inventories (6,507) (2,442) (7,064)
Other cui-i-enr and non-current assets 3,2131 610 2,164
Aeeounls payable and accrued liabilities (10,927) 4,927 1,466
Accmed payroll and related beneﬁls 539 (2.1 113) 2,090
Accrued taxes (4,775) 1,967 (5,688)
Accrued reclamation and closure cosls and other non-current llablllIlCS (13,418] (32.333) (171,932)
Net cash provided by operating activities 26,644 69,016 69, 891
1l\\ estiiig acni ities:
Additions to properties, plants, equipment and mineral interests (150,736) (1 13,096) (87,546)
Proceeds from sale of imestiiicnls 1,772 7 1.366
Proceeds from disposition of propenies. plants and cquipmcnl 460 886 l 13
Redemptions of restricted cash and investment balances 7 7 9,448
increases in restricted cash and investment balances 125 (5) (3,200)
Purchases ot‘ investments (6,001) (5,823) 7
Acquisition ofAunzon, net ot‘casii acquired (321,117) 7 7
Net cash used by investing actiVities (475,497) (118.03%) (79319)
Financing activities:
Proceeds from exercise nfwiiri‘aiiis and sloek oplions 61 7 5 ,786
Dividends paid to common stockholders (5,991) (17,121) (5,592)
Dividend paid to preferred srocklioiders (5521 (552) (31322)
Delit issuance and loan origination fees paid (1,244) (750) (180)
Acquisition ortreasiuy sliaies (2861 (2,144) (469)
Borrowings on debt 490.000 7 7
Repayments ofcapital lenses (7,0391 (5.2390) (2,9313)
Net cash provided by (used in) ﬁnancing activities 474,949 (26,457) (7,215)
cticet of exchange rates on cash (4,9051 7 7
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 21,191 (75,479) (17,143)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 190,984 266,463 283,606
Cash and cash equivalents at end at‘ year 3 212.175 $ 190.984 3 266,463
Supplemental disclosure ot‘casli ﬂow information:
Cash received (paid) during year for:
interest 3 (13,465) 3 (1.968) is (1,683)
income tax receipts (payments) 8 (1,402) 5 4.483 $ (17,874)
signiﬁcant uon-casli investing and financing activities:
Stock issued for acquisition of assets 8 218,302 $ 7 $ 33.83]
Capital leases acquired 3 12,344 3 13,1 19 is 6,93 5
Accounts payable citange relating to capital additions 3 (7,067] 5 3,727 $ 3,687


522 Noizx 2 and 9far additional nan-cash invzxting and ﬁnancing activities,
The accompanying nmes arc nn inlegral pnn Dflhe consalidmed ﬁnancial slalcmenls.
F4


Hccla Mining Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Smremems al'Cllanges in Smeklmlders' Equiry
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
(Dollars in thousands)
Series C
Mandatory Accumulated
Series B Convertible Additional Olher
Preferred Preferred Cummon Paid-In Accumulmed Comprehensive Treasury
Stuck Slack Stuck Capital Deﬁcit Loss, net Stock Total

Balances, January 1,2011 3 39 s 504 3 04,704 $1,179,751 3 (265,577) 5 (15,117) 3 (2,051) 3 962,253

iscrinconrc 151,154 151,104

Options granted 7 7

Opuulis cxcrclscd (78.000

shares) 19 400 479

Stock issued to directors (43,000

shares) 11 331 342

Series 13 deferred dlvldends

dcclarcd (552) (552)

Common stock dividends

declared ($0.02 per common

share) (5,592) (5,592)

Restricred stack units grallled 1,571 1.071

Restricted stuck uiiit

dlsmbmlans (321,000 shares) 30 (so) (469] (469)

Cummon stuck issued for assets

putchased (5,390,000 shares) 1,349 32,4142 33,531

Bonuses and other compensation

paid through stuck issuances

(8.000 shares) 2 5 8 60

65% Malldalory Convemble

Prefelled Stock dividends paid

in common stock (10,372,000

shares) (504) 4,719 (4,215) 7

Warrants exercised (2,147,000

shares) 536 4,771 5,307

Other cumprehcnuve loss (8,381) (8,381)
Balances, December 31, 2011 39 7 71,420 1,215,229 (120,557) (23,4911) (2,520) 1,140,113

her income 14.954 14,954

Stock issued to directors (73,000

shares) 19 336 355

Cummon slack dividends

declared (3,000 shares, 50 06

per coiumon share) 1 11 (17,133) (17,121)

Restricted stuck units granted 2,746 2,746

RCSH‘ICKCd slack llllll

distributions (235,000 shares) 5 9 (39) (203) (1113)

Series 13 Preferred Slack

dlvldends declared (552) (552)

Repurchase of comiuon shares

(350,000 shares) (1,941 ) (1,941)

Othei comprehensive loss (420) (420)
Balances, December 31, 2012 39 7 71,499 1,218,283 (123,288) (23,918) (4,504) 1,137,951
Net loss (25,130) (25,130)
Stock issued to directors (122,250
shares) 31 356 387
Series 13 Preferred Slock dlvldends
declared (552) (552)
Common stuck issued for assets
purchased (56,998,000 shares) 14,249 204,053 210,302
Restricted stock units gmmed 4,188 4,188


Resmctsd slack umt dlsmbunans
(494,000 5113155) 109 (109) (59) (59)
Repurchase of common shares
(50,000 Shams) (286) (286)
Wananls exermsed (25,000 shares) 6 5 5 51
Commun stock dividends declared
($0102 per cummnn share) 2 19 (6,012) (71) (6,062)
Omar comprchensivc less (238]) (2.38!)
Balances_ Deccmberglyzmg $ 39 s 7 $85,896 $1,426,845 3 (154,982) $ (26,299) $ (51080) $1,326,419

The accompanying nules m an mlegral pan ofth consuhdmed ﬁnancial slammems.

F-5


Hccla Mining Company and Subsidiaries
Nules m Cuiisulidated Financial Statements
Nate 1: Summary of Signiﬁcant Accounting Policies

A. Principles ofCons-olirlatimi 7 Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America, and include our accounts and our wholly-owned subsidianes' accounts. All signiﬁcant inter-company balances
and transactions have been eliminaled in consolidation.

B. Axxumptium‘ um] Mic OfEXltmutL'x 7 Preparing ﬁnancial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions Ihat affect the
reported amounts and relaled disclosure ofassels, liabilities, revenue and expenses 31 the dale ofllie consolidated ﬁnancial slalemenls and reporting
peliuds. We consider uni most critical accounting estimates to be future metals prices, obligations foi environmental, reclamaiion and closure rnattei
mineral reserves, and Valuation ofbusiness combinations. Other significant areas requiring ihe use oinianagenieni assumptions and esiiniaies relate to
ieseives for contingencies and liiigaiion, asset impainnents. including lung—lived assets and investments: valuation cfdeferred iax assets: inveniory nei
realizable value; and post—employment, post-retirement and other employee benefit assets and liabilities, We have based our estiinaies on historical
experience and on Various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. Accordingly. actual resulls may differ materially from these estimates under
different assuiiipiions or conditions.

c, Chi-h um] Cuxh Equivalcnis 7 Cash and cash equivalents consisl of all cash balances and highly liquid investments with a remaining
maturity of three months or less when purchased and are carried at fair value. Cash and cash equivalents are invested in money market funds, ceniﬁcates
of deposit, us. govenimeni and federal agency securiiies, municipal securities and corporate bonds.

D. lnvcxlmcmx and Securities Holdfm Sale 7 We deteiinine tlie appiopiiate classiﬁcation of our investments at the time ofpurcliase and re-
evaluate such determinations at each reponing date. Slion-tenn investments include ceniﬁcates of deposit and held-to-niatiiiity securities, based on our
intent and ability to hold the securities to maturity. Markelable equity securities are categurlzed as available for sale and carried at fair market value.

Realized gains and lusses on the sale ofsecurities are recognized an a specific identification basis. Unrealized gains and losses are included as a
component of accumulated ulher comprehensive income (loss). unless an other than temporary inipainnein in value has occurred or we have elected the fair
value option accounting melliod for eeriain Inveslmenls; in either of those cases, the unrealized gain or loss would be charged to cunent period net income
(loss), The fair value option allows for the fair value measurement ofspecified assets or liabilities on a case—by-case basis, with unrealized gains and
losses recorded to cunent period net income (loss). Uili’ealiLed gains and losses originally included in accumulated other comprehensive income are
reclassiﬁed to current period net income (loss) when the sale ofseciirnies, deierniinaiion dfan other than temporary impairment. or election of the fair value
nprioii accounting method occurs.

E. Inventories 7 Inventories are stated at the lower of average costs incurred or estimated net realizable value. Major types of inveniones include
materials and supplies and nieials pi oduct inventory, which is determined by the stage ai which ihe ore is in the production pi ocess (sluckpiletl ore and
ﬁnished goods). Inventories are valued al the lower of full cost ufproductiun or nel realizable value based on cllrrenl metals prices.

SID-:‘kpiled are inventory represents ore Ihat has been mined, hauled to the surface. and is available for further processing, Stockpiles are measured
by estimating the number oftoris added and removed from the stockpile, the number ofcoritairied metal ounces oi pounds (based on assay data) and the
estimated metallurgical recovery rates (based on the expected processing method). Costs are allocated to a stockpile based on ielative values of material
slockpiled and processed using current mining costs incurred up to the point of stockpiling the ore, including applicable overhead, depreciation. depletion
and amortization relating to mining operations, and removed at each sloekpile‘s average cost per recoverable unit.

Finished gaodi inveniory includes dore’ and concentrates ai our opelatiuns, dore in transit to reﬁners or at refiners ivaiiing to be processed, and
bullion in our accouiils at reﬁneries.

F, Rt’sll‘tut’d Cash 7 Restricted cash and investments primarily represent investments in money market funds. ceitii'icates of deposit, guaranteed
investment certiﬁcates (Canadian deposits). and bonds of US, government agencies and are restricted primanly i‘or reclamation funding or surety bonds.
Restricted cash balances are carried al fair value,

F-6


G. Properties, Promi- and Equipment 7 Costs are capllalized wheii it has been determined an ore body can be economically developed. The
development stage begins at new projects when ottt management and/or Board ofDirectors makes the decision to bring a mine into commercial production,
and ends when the production stage, or exploitation of reserves, begins. Expenditures incurred during the development and production stages for new
facilities or new assets that extend the useful lives ofexistiiig facilities and major mine development expenditures are capllalized, including primary
development costs such as costs of building access ways. sliaﬁ sinking. lateral development. dri'ﬁ development, lamps and infrastructure developments.
Costs to improve. alter. or rehabilitate primary development assets which appreciably extend the life, increase capacity. or improve the efhcrency or safety
ofsuch assets are also capitalized,

Costs for exploration, pre-developurent. secondary development at operating mines, and maintenance and repairs on capitalized property, plant and
equipment are charged to operations as incurred. Exploration costs include those relating to activtties camed out (a) in search of prevtously unidentiﬁed
iuineral deposits, (b) at undeveloped concessions, or (c) at operating niines already containing proven and probable reserves, where a determination
remains pending as to whether iiew target deposits outside of the existing reserve areas can be economically developed. Pre-development activities involve
costs incurred in the exploration stage that may ultimately benefit production. such as underground ramp development. which are expensed due to the lack
ofevidence ofeconomic development, which is necessary to demonstrate future recoverability ofthese expenses, At an underground mine, secondary
development costs are incurred for preparation of an ore body for production in a specific ore block, stope or work area, providing a relatively shon—hved
beneﬁt only to the mine area they relate to, and not to the ore body as a whole.

Drilling and related costs are either classified as exploration or secondary development, as defined above. and charged to operations as incurred, or
capitalized, based on the following criteria:

- Whether the costs are incurred to funher define mineralization at and adjacent to existing reserve areas or intended to assist with mine planning

within a reserve area;

~ Whether the drilling costs relate to an ore body that has been determined to be commercially mineable. and a decision has been made to put the

ore body into commercial production: and

- whether, at ttie tiiue that the cost is inculTed, ttie expenditure. ta) enibodies a probable future benefit that involves a capacity, singly or in

combination, wrtli other assets to contribute directly or ludiiectly to future net cash inﬂows, (b) we can obtain the benefit and control others'
access to it, and (c) the transaction or event giving rise to our right to or control of the benefit has already occurred.

lfall ofthese criteria are met, drilling and related costs are capitalized. Drilling costs not meeting all of these criteria are expensed as incurred. The
following factors are considered in determining whether or not the criteria listed above have been met, and capitalization of drilling costs is appropriate:

- Completion ofa favorable economic study and mine plan for the ore body targeted;

- Authorization ofdevelopinent ofthe ore body by management and or the Buard of Directors; and

- All permitting and/or contractual requirements necessaiy for us to have the rrglit to or control of the future benefit from the targeted ore body

have been met,

Drilling and related costs ufappruximately $8.0 million, $5.0 million, and $3.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011,
respectively, met our criteria for capitalization listed above, at our properties that are in the production stage.

When assets are retired or sold, the costs and related allowances for depreciation and amortization are eliminated from the accounts and any
resulting gain or loss is reflected in current period net income (loss), idle facilities placed on standby basis are canted at the lower of net carrying value or
estimated net realizable value. The net carrying values of idle facilities on standby are written-down to salvage value upon reaching the end of the economic
life. Therefore, with the exception of depreciation recorded on mobile equipment used in ongoing exploration and reclamation efforts at such properties, we
do not record depreciation on idle facilities when they are not in operation.

included in property, plant and equipment on our consolidated ﬁnancial statements are mineral interests, which are tangible assets tttat include
acquired undeveloped mineral interests and royalty interests. Undeveloped mineral interests Include: (i) inineralized material and other resources which are
measured, indicated or inferred with insufficient drill spacing or quality to qualify as proven and probable reserves; and (ii) inferred material not
immediately adjacent to existing proven and probable reserves but accessible within the immediate mine infrastructure. Residual values for undeveloped
mineral interests represents the expected fair value of the interests at the time we plan to convert. develop. further explore or dispose of the interests and are
evaluated at least annually.

F-7


H. Depreciation, Depiction um] Amortization 7 Capitalized costs are depreciated or depleted rising the straight-line method or unit-of—production
method at rates sufﬁcient to depreciate sueli eests over the shener of estimated productive lives of such facilities at the usetiil life of the Individual assets.
Productive lives range from 1 to 27 years, but do not exceed the useful life nt'the iiidividual asset. Determiiiatien efexpected useful lives for amortization
calculations are made on a property—by.property or asset-by-asset basis at least annually, Our estimates for reserves, tiiineralized material, and other
resources are a key component in determining our units ot‘production depreciation rates. Our estimates of proven and probable ore reserves, mineralized
material, arid other resources may change, possibly tn the irear term, resulting in changes to depreciation, depletion and amortization rates in future
reporting periods.

Undeveloped mineral interests and value beyond proven and probable reserves are not amortized ||nl|l such triiie as there are proven and probable
reserves or the related mineralized material is converted to proven and probable reserves. At that time. the basis of the mineral interest is anionized on a
iiiiits.of.production basis, Pursuant to our policy on impairment ofloug-lived assets (discussed further below), ifit is determined that an undeveloped
nilneml Interest eannot be economically Converted to proven and probable reserves, the basis of the mineral interest is redlieed to its net realizable Value and
air impairment loss is recorded to expense in the period in which it is determined to be unpaired.

1. Impairment qui'mg-Itver] Assets 7 Management reviews and evaluates the net carrying value ofall facilities, including idle facilities, for
impairment upon the occurrence of other events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. We
estimate the net realizable value of each property based on the estimated undiscounted future cash ﬂows that will be generated tioiii operations at each
property. the estimated salvage value oftlre surface plant and equipment, and the value associated with property interests.

Although management has made a reasonable estimate of tactors based on current conditions and information. assumptions underlying future cash
ﬂows are subject to signiﬁcant risks and uncertainties, Estimates ofundiscounted future cash ﬂows are dependent upon estimates of metals to be
recovered from proven and probable ore reserves, and to some extent, identiﬁed resources beyond proven and probable reserves, future production and
capital costs and estimated metals prices (considering current and historical prices, forward pricing curves and related factors) over the estimated
remaining mine life. It is reasonably possible that changes could occur in the near term that could adversely affect our estriiiate ot‘futui-e cash tlows to be
generated froiu our operating properties. it undiscounted cash flows including air asset’s fair value are less than the carrying value ofa property, an
rmpainnerri loss is recognized.

J. Pym/('11 arid Probable 0m Reserves 7 At least annually, management revrews the reserves used to estimate the quantities and grades of ore at
our mines which we believe can be recovered and sold economically. Management’s calculations ofproven and probable ore reserves are based on
engineering and geological estimates, including future nretals prices and operating costs. From time to time, mairagemeirt obtains external audits of reserves,
A partial third-party audit of 20 l2 reserves at Greens Creek and a third—party audit onU l 3 reserves at Lucky Friday were concluded during 2013. A third
party review onDl 3 reserves at Casa Berardr was performed during 2013.

Reserve estimates will change as existing reserves are depleted through production and as production costs and/0t metals prices change. A
significant drop in metals prices may reduce reserves by making some ponron of such ore uneconomic to develop and produce. Changes in reserves may
also reﬂect that actual grades ofore processed may be different from stated reserve grades because of variation in grades in areas mined, mining dilution
and other factors. Our reserve estriiiates may change based on actual production experience. It is reasonably possible that cenarn of our estriiiates of proven
and probable ore reserves will change in the iieai term, which could result in a change to estimated future cash flows, associated carrying values of the
asset and amortization rates in future reporting periods. among other things.

Declines in the market prices of metals, increased production or capital costs, reduction in the grade or tonnage of the deposit or an increase in the
dilutrorr oftlre ore or reduced recovery rates may render ore reserves uneconomic to exploit, lfour realized price for the metals we produce were to decline
substantially below the levels set for calculation of reserves for an extended period, there could be material delays in the development of new projects, net
losses, reduced cash ﬂow, restatemeiits or reductions ttI reserves and asset write—downs in the applicable accounting periods. Reserves should not be
interpreted as assurances of mine life or ofthe proﬁtability of ciiii ent or future operations, No assurance can be given that the estimate of the amount of
metzil er the indicated level nfreeuvery ufthese metzils will be realized.

K. Pension Plans and Other Past—retirenrenr Beneﬁts 7 We maintain pension plans covering substantially all U.S. employees and provide
certarrr post-retirement beneﬁts for qualifying retired employees. Canadian employees participate in Canada‘s public retirement income system. and are not
eligible to participate in the defined beneﬁt pension plans that we maintain for us. employees. Pension benefits under the plans we maintain generally
depend on length and level of service and age upon retirement, Substantially all benefits are paid through pension ti iists. We contributed approximately
$0.3 million per year related to our unfunded supplemental executive retirement plan in years 20l3, 2012 and 201 l, and expect to contribute 504 million
related to this plan in 2014. We contributed approximately $1.0 million and $1.1 million to our deﬁned beneﬁt pension plans in 2013 and 2012,
respectively, and expect to contribute approximately $7.5 million to our defrrred beneﬁt plans in 2014.

F-X


Regulations regarding employers accotuiting for deﬁned beneﬁt pension and other post-retirement plans among other things, require us Io:

~ Recognize the funded status of our deﬁned beneﬁl plans in our cuiiselidaled ﬁnancial statements; and

- Recognize as a component ofother comprehensive income (loss) the actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs and credits that arise

during the period but are not immediately recognized as components ofiiet periodic beneﬁt cost.

L. Income um] Production Taxes 7 We provide for federal, state and foreign income taxes currently payable, as well as those deferred due to
timing differences between reporting income and expenses for ﬁnancial statement purposes Versus tax purposes. Federal, state and foreign tax beneﬁts are
recorded as a reduction of income taxes, when applicable. We record deferred tax liabilities and assets for expected future tax consequences of temporary
differences belween llIe ﬁnancla] slalemenl carrying amcnnls and the lax bases oflhcse assels and llabililies, as well as cperaling loss and tax credit
carryforwards. using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse.

We evaluate uncertain tax positions in a two-step process, whereby (i) it is determined whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be
sustained based on the technical merits of the position and (it) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the largest
amount oftax beneﬁt that is greater than 50% likely ofbeing realized tipon ultiniate settlement with the related tax authority would be recognized.

We classify mine license taxes incurred in the states ofAlaska and ldalio as other direct production costs reported in our gross proﬁts. Our costs for
mine license Iaxes for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012, and 2011 were $2.2 mlllicn, $5.7 milllon, and $6.4 million, respectively.
Approximalely 98% or more ofthe taxes accrued in all three periods were for the State of Alaska. Resource taxes incurred in Quebec. Canada. which are
classiﬁed as income taxes, totaled approximately $06 million for the year ended December 31. 2013.

For additional information. see Note 5 ilnclum: Taxes.

M. Reclamation and Remediation Carts (Aster Retirement Obligatiom) 7 At our operating properties, we record a liability for the present value
cfunr estimaled environmental remediation cosls, and the relaled asset crealed wllh il, in [he period in which lhe liability is incurred. The liabllily is
accreted and the asset is depreciated over the life of the related assets. Adjustments for changes resulting from the passage oftinie and changes to either the
timing or amount of the original present value estimate underlying the obligation are made in the period incurred.

At our non-operating properties, we accrue costs associated wtth environmental remediation obligations when it is probable that such costs wtll be
incurred and they are reasonably estimable. Accruals for estimated losses from environmental remediation obligations have historically been recognized no
later than completion ofthe remedial feasibility study for such facility and are charged to current eamings under provision for closed operations and
environmental matters. Costs of future expendilures for environmental remediatlon are not discounted to their present value unless subjecl ID a
contractually obligated fixed payment schedule. Such costs are based on management‘s current estimate of amounts to be incuned when the remediation
work is perfumed, wtthin current laws and regulations,

Future closure, reclamation and environmental-related expenditures are difﬁcult to estimate in many circumstances, due to the early stage nature of
investigations, uncertainties associated with deﬁning the nature and extent of environmental contamination, the application oflaws and regulations by
regulatory authorities, and changes in reclamation or remediation technology. We periodically review accrued liabilities for such reclamation and
remediation costs as evidence becomes available indicating that our liabilities have potentially changed, Changes in estimates at oiir lion-operating
propenies are reﬂected in current period net income (loss).

Accruals for closure costs, reclamation and environmental matters for operating and non—operating properties totaled $105.2 million at
December 31, 2013, and approximately halfoi‘ these expenditures relating to these accruals will be made over the next year. It is reasonably possible the
ultimate cost ofreelamation and remediation could change in the future, and that changes to these estimates could have a material effect on future operating
results as new infonnallan becomes known.

F-9


N, Revenue Recognition and Smelter Accounts Receivable 7 Sales ofall metals products sold directly to smelteis, including lay-product metals,
are recDrded as revenues and accuunts recelvable wllen title and rlsk uf loss tmnsfer to tlle smelter (generally at tlle tlme Df shlpment) at estlmxted furward
prices for the anticipated month of settlement. Due to the time elapsed from shipment to the smelter and the ﬁnal settlement with the smelter, we must
estimate the prices at which sales ufuur metals will be settled. Previously recorded sales and accounts receivable are adjusted to estimated settlement metals
prices untll final settlement by the smelter.

Sales and accounts receivable for concentrate shipments to smelters are recorded net of charges by the smelters for treatment. reﬁning. smelting
losses, and other charges negotiated by us wuh the smelters Charges are estimated by us upon shipment ofconcentrates based on contractual terms, and
actual charges do not vary mater-rally from our estimates. Costs charged by smelters include ﬁxed treatment and refining costs per ton ofconeentiate, and
also include price escalators which allow the smelters to participate in the increase of lead and zinc prices above a negotiated baseline.

Changes in metals piices between shipment and ﬁnal settlement will iesiilt in adjustments to revenues and accounts receivable related to sales of
concentrate previously recorded upon shipment. Our concentrate sales and accounts receivable are based on provisional sales prices containing an
embedded derivative that is required to be separated from the host contract for accounting purposes. The host contract is the recelvable from the sale of the
concentrates at the forward price at the time ofthe sale, The embedded derivative, which does not qualify for hedge accounting, is adjusted to market
through earnings each period prior to ﬁnal settlement.

At December 31, 2011 metals cantulned ln concentrates and exposed to future pnce changes totaled 0.8 mllllan ounces UfSllVEl’, 2,994 ounces of
gold, 6,171 tons of zinc, and 2,127 tons of lead. However, as discussed in P, Risk Management C(Inll‘aﬂlx below, we utilize a program to mitigate the
risk of negative price adjustments with financially settled forward contracts for our sales.

Sales ufmetals in products tolled by reﬁners and sold dilectly by us. rather than sold to smelters, are recorded at contractual amounts when title
and risk of loss transfer to the buyer.

Changes in the market price ofmetals significantly affect our revenues, proﬁtability, and cash flow. Metals prices can and olleti do fluctuate
widely and are affected by numerous factors beyond our control, such as political and economic conditions, demand, forward selling by producers,
aggregation by metals speculators and others, expectations for inflation, central bank sales. custom smelter activities, the relative exchange rate of the us
dollar, purchases and lending. investor sentiment, and global mine production levels. The aggregate effect of tllese factors is impossible to predict. Because
our revenue is derived from the sale of silver, gold. lead. and zinc, our earnings are directly related to the prices of tllese metals.

F710


0. Foreign Curreiltv 7 The functional cun’ency for our operations located in the U.S,, Mexico and Canada was the U.S, dollar for all periods
presented. Accordingly, for the the Casa Berardi unit in Canada and San Sebastian project in Mexico, we have translated our monetary assets and
liabilities at the peliud—end exchange rate. and non-monetary assets and liabilities at historical rates, with income and expenses translated at the aver age
exchange rare for the current period. All rraiislation gains and losses have been included in the current period net income (loss).

For the year ended December 31, 2013. we recognized a total net foreign exchange gain of$3.0 million, and for the years ended December 31. 2012
and 2011, we recognized total net foreign exchange losses of $0.1 million and $0.2 million. respectively.

P. Risk Management Contraclx 7 We rise derivative financial instruments as pan of an overall nsk-manageineiit strategy that is used as a means
of managing exposure to base metals prices and inteiest rates, We do not hold or issue denvative ﬁnancial instmmeiits for speculative tiading purposes. As
of December 31, 2013 and 2012, none ofthese contracts qualiﬁed for hedge accounting alid all unrealized gains alid losses are therefore reported in
earnings.

We measure derivative contracts as assets or liabilities based on their fair value. Amounts recognized for the fair value of derivative asset and
liability positions With the same counter pany and which would he settled on a net basis are offset against each other on our consolidated balance sheets.
Gains or losses resulting from changes in the fair value of derivatives in each penod are recorded either in current earnings or other comprehensive income
(“OCI“), depending on the use of the derivative. whether 1t qualiﬁes for hedge accounting and whether that hedge is effective. Amounts deferred In OCI are
reclassified to sales of products (for metals price—related contracts) or interest expense (for interest rate-related contracts) when the hedged transaction has
occurred. ineffective portions ofany change in fair value ofa derivative are recorded in ciurenr period other operating income texpcnse).

We utilize two financially—settled forward coiitract programs to manage the exposure to changes in prices ofti) silver, gold. zinc. and lead contained
in our concentrate shipments between the time of sale and ﬁnal settlement and (ii) Zinc and lead contained in our forecasted future concentrate
shipments. The contracts under these programs do not qualify for hedge accounting, and are marked-tu-inarket through earnings each period. See Note
10 for additional infonriation on base metal derivative contracts, including open positions as ofDecember 31. 2013.

Q. Slack Based Compemulttm 7 The fair values of the equity instruments gianted to employees are expensed over vesting periods on a straight-
liue basis. We recognized stock—based compensation expense ufapploxini'ately $4.5 million, $3.1 million, and $2.1 million. respectively, duiiug 2013.
2012 and 201 l, which was recorded to general and administrative expenses, exploration and cost of sales and other direct production costs, As of
December 31, 2013. the majority of the instniments outstanding were fully vested,

For additional information on our employee stock option and unit compensation. see Note 9.

R. Legal Costa- 7 Legal costs incurred in connection with a potential loss contiiigeiicy are accmed and recorded to expense as incurred.

S. Bat-re and Diluted Income (Loss) Par Common Share 7 We calculate basic eaniings per share on the basis of the weighted average number of
common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is calculated using weighted average number of common shares outstanding
during the period plus the effect of potential dilutive common shares during the period using the treasury stock and if-converted methods.

Potential dilutive common shares include outstanding stock options, unvested restricted stock awards, stock units, warrants and convertible
preferred stock for periods in which we have reported tiet income. For periods in which we reported net losses, potential dilutive common shares are
excluded. as their conversion and exercise would be anti-dilutive. See Nam 13 for additional information,

T. Comprehemlve Income (Lost) 7 in addition to net income tloss). comprehensive income (loss) includes certain changes in equity during a
period, such as adjustments to minimum pension liabilities, adjustments to recognize the over-funded or undeifunded status ofour defined beneﬁt pension
plans. and cumulative unrecognized changes in the fair value of available for sale investments, net of tax. ifapphcalile,

F-l l


U. Fair Value MEHXMVIZ’IIIL‘IKIA‘ 7 We discluse the following infunnaiion for each class ufasseis and liabilities that are measured at fair value.

1. the fair value measurement:

2. the level wrtlrrn the fair value hrerarclry in which the fair value measurements In their entirety fall, segregating farr value measurements
using quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1), signiﬁcant other observable inputs (Level 2), and
significant unobservable inputs (Level 3);

3. (or an value measurements using signiricant unobservable inputs (Level 3), a reconciliation orthe beginning and ending balances,
separately presenting changes during the period anributable to the following:

a. total gains or losses for the period (realized and unrealized], segregating those gains or losses included in earnings, and a
description ofwhere those gains or losses included in earnings are reported in the statement of operations;

b. the amount ufiliese gains or losses attributable to the change in unrealized gains or losses relating to those assets or liabilities still
held at the reporting period date and a description of wlicrc those unrealized gains or losses are reported;

c. purchases, sales, issuances, and settlements (net), and

d. transfers into anti or out of Level 3.

4. the amount oi the total gains or losses for the period in (c)(1) included in earnings that are attributable to the change in unrealized gains or
losses relating to those assets and liabilities still held at the reporting date and a description ot‘where those unrealized gains or losses are
reported in the statement ofopemimns: and

5. in annual periods only, the valuation technique(s) used to measure fair value and a discussion at changes in valuation techniques, if any,
during the period,

V. New Accounting Pmnouncemenzs 7111 July 2013, the FASB issued ASU No. 2013—11, which requires entities to present unrecognized tax
beneﬁts as a decrease in a net operating loss. similar tax loss. or tax credit carryforward if certain criteria are met. The guidance will eliminate the diversity
in practice in the presentation of unrecognized tax beneﬁts but will not alter the way in which entities assess deterred tax assets for reahzabrlrty. ASU No,
2013—1 1 is effective for annual and interiiu reporting periods beginning aﬁer December 15, 2013. We are currently evaluating the impact at adopting this
guidance. but do not anticipate it will have a material impact on our consolidated ﬁnancial statements.

Note 2. Cash, investments, and Restricted Cash
Cash

Our cash is maintained in variuus ﬁnancial institulions, with a large majurity of our cash balances at December 31, 2013 invesletl in either U,S.
govemiuent paper [treasury or agency) or us. govemiuent or treasury money market funds which are not insured by the Federal Deposit insurance
Corporation (“FDIC”) or the Canada Deposit insurance Corporation ("CDIC"). A small ponion ofour cash balances are held in bank accounts insured
by the FDIC for up to $250,000 per institution and by the CDIC for up to $100,000 per institution. On December 31, 2012, the unlimited insurance
coverage for nonrnterest-bearirrg accounts provided under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protectron Act expired. U.S. deposits that
were previously insured for unlimited amounts are now aggregated With our interest bearing accounts and insured up to $250,000, We have not
experienced losses on cash balances exceeding the insured linilis, but there can be no assurance thai we will not experience such lusses iii the future.
[Ill/(’xlmcrilx

At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the fair value ofaur nan-current Investments was $7.0 "1|"an and 59.6 million, respectively, Markeiable equity
securities are carried at fair market value, as they are classiﬁed as “available-t‘ur-sale," The basis ot‘our non—current investments, representing equity
securities, was approximately $10.0 million and $8.1 million, respectively, at December 31,2013 and 2012. During the tomb quarters oi2013 and
2012, we recognized $3.0 million and $1.2 million losses, respectively, in current eamings on impairments oiequity shares, as we determined the
impaimients to be other—thanuemporary, in 2013, we acquired common stock in other mining companies for a total cost of $6.0 million, and obtained
additional securities through the acquisition of Aurizon having a value oi $0.3 million at the time of acquisition, which represents our costs basis (see Note
16). since the acquisition, we have obtained additional shares of Typhoon Exploration inc. ("Typhoon") having a cost basis of $0.5 million pursuant to
an agreeiuent between Aurizon and Typhoon, in addition, during 2013 we sold investments having a cost basis ufSl.5 million (or proceeds orsl.7
million.

At December 31, 2013, total unrealized loss positions of $3.1 million, net of unrealized gains of $56 thousand, for our non—current investments
were lnclllded in accumulated other ccunprehensive loss.

F-lZ


Our non—Ciirrenl investments balance as of December 31, 2013 includes our ownersliip of approximately 294% oftlte outstanding common
sliai es of Typhoon having a cost basis of $0.8 million and fair value of $1.1 million. We elected to apply the fair value option accounting method to tire
iiivesimeiit upon it meeting the criteria for equity metltod accounting during tlie second quaner of2013. We evaluate the accounting treatment ofour
individual investments based on whether we believe oui ownership percentage and other factois indicate that ive have the ability to exercise signiﬁcant
inﬂuence in the ﬁnancial and/or aperaiianal decisions ol'ilie inveslee. As ofDeceiiiber 31, 2013, we have determined llial no other inveslmems held by us
qualify for equity metliod accounting.

Rextricmd Car/t and lrlvcxlmcrllx
Various laws and penniis require that financial assurances be in place for certain environmental and reclamation obligations and other potential
liahililies. Restricted investments primarily iepresent investments in money market funds, ceniﬁcales of deposit, and guaranteed investment certiﬁcates
[Canadian deposits), These investments [which included cunent and non—current balances) are restricted primarily for reclamation funding or surety
bonds and were $5.2 million al December 31, 2013, and $0.9 million at December 31, 2012, The increase in 2013 from 2012 is due Io restricted
rcclainalion dcpusiis oblaincd in the acquisilion ofAiirizun (see Note [6 far more information).
Note 3: Properties, Plants, Equipment and Mineral interests, and Lease Commitments
l’raperlicx, I’Imilx, Equipment and l‘l/ltrmla] Interesti-
Our major components of pi-openies, plants. equipment, and mineral interests are tin thousands);
December 31,
2013 2012
Mining pioperties, including asset retirement obligations 5 312,692 8 294,573
Development costs 204,598 151,504
Plants and equipment 626,818 419,377
Land 15,799 15,788
Mineral interests 946,144 375,028
Construction in progress 200,921 176,925
2,306,972 1,433,195
Less accumulated depreciation, depleiiun and amonizaiiun 515,371 436,536
Net carrying value $ 1,791,601 is 996,659
During 2013. we incurred total capital expenditures. excluding additions acquired under capnal leases and adpistments to asset retirement
obligations, oiapproximately $1507 million, which included $54.5 million at the Lucky Friday unit, $46.1 million at the Ciieens Creek unit, and $41.4
million at Ilie Cass Bemrdi uni! since its acquisition on June I, 2013.
On June 1, 2013, we compleled Ilie acquisilion ofAurizan Mines, le, ("Aurizon") for CAD$740.8 iiiillion ($714.5 million). See Note 16 for more
information.
Capim] Leaxex
We entered into lease agreements for primarily equipment at our Greens Creek and Luclty Friday uiiits whieli we have determined to be capital
leases. As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, we have recorded $41.2 “1|”an and $28.9 million, respeclively, for ihe gross aii‘louni of asseis acquired
under the capital leases and $ 10.1 million and $5.3 million, respectively. in accumulated depreciation, classitied as plants and equipment in Properties,
plums, equipment and mineral micron-2i, Scc Nola o for information on future obligations related to our capital leases.
Fe 13


Operating Lama
We enlel inlu uperdlmg 1eases during me numlal ennrse ofbnsiness, Dunng Ihe yean ended December 31, 2013 , 2012 and 201 1, we incurred
expenses Df$3.1 Imllmn, 53.1 m|ll|on and $3.0 Inlllan, respecnvely, far rhese leases. AI December 3 l, 2013, fumre Dbhgauons under our non-cancelable
operaring 1esses wch as follows (in Ihuusands).
Year ending December 31x
2014 S 3,347
201 5 l ,3 53
2016 1,370
201 7 9 X 5
2018 917
Thcrcnﬁcr 2 , 6 5 9
Tom] S 10,63 1
Nale 4: Environmemal and Reclamalion Activities
The llabrllues accrued for our reclamauon and closure cosls ar December 31, 2013 and 2012, were as follows (11] thousands):
2013 2012
Operating properties.
Greens Creek S 34,530 S 32,856
Lucky Friday 919 1,459
Casa Berdrdl 7,795 7
Non-operaling propemcs.
San Sebastian 2011 2011
Grouse Creek 1,000 2,434
Coeur d'Alene 1385111 55 ,499 70,786
Repubhc 3,023 3,538
All other sires 2,225 1,882
Tmal 105,191 113,215
Reclamanon and closure costs, currenl (58,425] (19,845]
Reclamnuon and closure costs, long-term S 46,766 S 93,370
The aeliv1ly1|| uur accrued reclamation and closure c051 11abil1ly for the years ended December 31, 2013, 21112 and 2011, was as follows (in
umnsands):
Balance a1 January 1, 2011 5 318,797
Accmals far esnmmed cosls 7,869
Paymenl ofleelammion ubligauons (172,855)
Balance 3! December 31, 2011 153,811
Accrual: for esnmmed Costs 4,325
Revls1on of esumxted cash ﬂaws due 11: changes in reclamalion plans (3,738]
Paymenl ofreelammion ubligauons (41,133)
Balance al December 31, 2012 113,215
Accrual: for esnmmed Costs 2,250
L1ab1111y addmon due 10 acqmsmon oflhe Casa Beral’dl unll 7,998
Paymenl ofleelammion ubligauons (18,272)
Balance at Dccembcr31.2013 S 105,191
Fe 14


On September 8, 2011, a Consent Decree (the “Consent Decree") settling environmental litigation and related claims involving Hecla Limited
pertaining to historic releases of mining wastes in the Coeur d'Alene Basin was approved and entered by the us. District Court in ldaho, The Consent
Decree resolved all existing claims of the Plaintiffs against Hecla Limited and its afﬁliates under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 ("CERCLA") (and certain other statutes) ior past response costs, tiiture environmental remediation costs, and
natliral resolirce damages related to historic releases cfinining wastes in the Coeur d'Alene River Basin. The Consent Decree also resolved all remaining
obligations of Heeln Liinited under the 1994 Consent Decree relating to the “Box,” a rectangular 21 -square-inilc site located near Kellogg, Idaho within the
Bunker Hill Superfund site. The Consent Decree contains comprehensive tenns of settlement, including financial temis which require that Hecla Limited
pay. in the aggregate, $264.4 million to the Plaintiffs over approximately three years following the settlement. Payments of approximately $168 million,
$25 million, and $15 million (anti related interest) were made in October 2011. 2012, and 2013, respectively, pursuant to the terms of the Consent
Decree. l-lecla Limited remains obligated under the Consent Decree to pay approximately $55.5 million by August 2014, tn the form of quarterly
payments of the proceeds irom the exercise of any outstanding Series 1 and Series 3 warrants (which have an exercise price of between $2.40 and $2.51
per share) during the quaner, with the remaining balance, if any, due in August 2014, regardless of whether any of the remaining warrants are exercised.

The obligation requires third party surety for which lleela Limited pays an annual maintenance iee which will decrease as payments are made
according to the foregoing schedule. Annual maintenance fees of $0.6 million. $0.4 million. and 50.3 million were paid in October 2011, 2012, and 2013,
respectively.

Axxez Retirement Obligations

Below is a reconciliation as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 (in thousands) or the asset retirement obligations ("ARO") relating to our operating
properties, which are included in our total accrued reclamation and closure costs of$105,2 million and $1 132 million, respectively, discussed above,
The estimated reclamation and abandonment costs were discounted using credit adiusted, risk-free interest rates ranging i‘rom 6% to 8% from the time we
incurred the obligation to the time we expect to pay the retirement obligation,

2013 2012
Balance January 1 $3 34,325 S 37,643
Changes in obligations due to changes in reclamation plans 7 (3,720)
Addition due to acquisition of the Casa Berardi unit 7,998 7
Accretion expense 1,958 1,128
Payment of reclamation obligations (1,037) (726)
Balance at December 31 ll 43.244 3 34.325

The ARO for our Greens Creek mine of $36.1 million as of December 31, 2011 reﬂected a plan for reclamation and closlire ofthe mine at the end
ufits life having estimated undiscounted costs ofappruximately $53.4 million. In April 2012, the United States Forest Service ("Forest Service") and state
agencies issued a draﬁ Envrroiimeiital Impact Statement in connection with our proposal to increase tailings capacity at the Greens Creek mine. As pan of
that process and our regular (every 5 years) renewal of our Waste Management Permit with the State ofAlaska, we submitted an update of our reclamation
and closure plan haying estimated undiscounted closure costs cfapproxiurately $73.9 million. The increase in closure costs resulted primarily from the
inclusion of long term water treatment on an increased scale compared to what was included as pan of our prior permit renewals. This increase in scale is
the result of new interpretations of model data by the State that were not included in our prior perniit renewals. Although the revised closure plan was not
final, we believed that we had sufﬁcient iliformation to make a reasonable estimate ofthe change in the fair value ofthe ARO as of December 31, 2012. In
spite of the anticipated increase in undiscolinted costs discussed above, the ARO liability for Greens Creek was reduced by $4.4 million to a balance of
$32.9 million as of December 31, 2012, on a discounted basis, as a result of the update in the fourth quarter of2012. The ARC) decrease at December 31,
2012 was the result of (i) a large portion of the anticipated increase in overall undiscounted costs being related to long-term water treatment, which is
scheduled to take place in years rar out into the future, (it) the eriect of discounting the ARD layers associated with various plan updates using diriereiit
discount rates. and (iii) a delay in the timing of some orthe costs included in the prevtoiis reclamation and closure plan.

A Record ofDecision was completed in late 2013 for proposed expansion ortailings capacity at Greens Creek. In addition. in early 2014 we were
engaged in negotiations with the Forest Service and state agencies on their proposed revisions to our previously-submitted reclamation and closure plan. We
have initiated work on an update ofthe closure plan which will include estimated costs related to future reclamation of the taillngs expansion area and
address the comments irom the regulators, As a result, we anticipate recognizrng an increase in the ARC asset and liability ior Greens Creek in the first
quarter of 2014. As pan of the revised closlire plan, we will be required to increase our current $30 mlllIDII reclamation bond for Greens Creek, and we are
currently evaluating bonding options. The Increase in required bonding is likely to be a material amount. and there can be no assurance that this bonding
capacity will be available to us.

F- I 5


Nate 5: meme Taxes
Major Cumponents of our mcome (ax beneﬁ1(pmv|smn) for (he years ended Deeemher- 31, 2013. 2012 and 2011 are as follows (m thousands)
2013 2012 2011
Current:
Dmhesue 8 2,953 3 (7,0135) 3 (4.2132)
Forerg,“ (175) (459) (752)
Total currcm income Kax hehem (prouuun) 2,788 (7.545) (5.034)
Deferred:
Dmhesue 247 (1,334) (75,944)
Forerg,“ 5,750 7 7
Tulnl deferred income tax bcncﬁl (pmv1siun) 7,007 (1,334) (75,944)
Total income lax hehem (provision) 8 9,795 3 (8,879) $ (811978)
Demeshe and formgn componems ohncoms (15ss) before meome [axes far the years ended Deeemher 31. 2013, 2012 and 201 1, are as follows (11]
(housands):
2013 2012 2011
Damcsuc 5 (1,681] 3 37,025 3 244,333
Formgn (33.244) (13,192) (11.591)
Tom 5 (34,925) 3 23,833 3 233,142
The annual (ax benem (pruvismn) is different from Ihe amounl Ihat would he provided by applymg Ihe s1a1u151y rede. a1 meome |ax me 10 our
pretax 1110011160055), The reasuns fur the difference are (m rheusehds):
2013 2012 2011
Computed“slalumry”bcneﬁ1(provismn) 3 12,224 35% 3 (8.342) 35% 3 (31,500) 35%
rereehhge dcplcuon 3,945 11 5,575 (24) 13,751 (5)
Change in valuaﬁon allowance olher than
urihzeuor. (3,370) (11) (3.837) 15 (3,322) 2
Stale (axes, her of federal Inxcs 720 2 (1,1 10) 5 (10,390) 5
Transaclion 00515 (1,743) (5) 7 7 7 7
Formgn currency Iramlauon ofmunclary
asse1s 3,445 10 7 7 7 7
Ram diffcrcnlial eh foxmgn earnings (4,255) (12) (730) 3 (534) 7
Omar (672) (z) (385) 2 1.217 (1)
3 9,795 213% 3 (8,879) 37% 3 (81,978) 35%
We evahrared (he pdsrrwe and negative evrdence avmlable rd dererrmne the ammlnl ufvaln’dllon andwahee reqmred rm mu deferred lax assers, Ar
December 31. 2013 and 2012, rhe ha1anees of our Valuauon audwahees were 327 m|ll|on and 323 mdheh, respechve1y, pnmanly for fer-ergh he1 opening
1ess canytbrwards. The amoum enhe deferred lax asset cons1dered recoverable, however. could he reduced m (he near rerrr. 11' esumales 51' future Iaxable
mmmC are .edueed.
F- 1 5


At December 31, 2013. the net deferred tax liability was $51 million compared to the net deferred tax asset of 51 16 million at December 31. 2012,
The Change is due ptimanly to the acquisition ofAurizon am! the establishment ofa deferred tax liability related to the excess accounting bases over the
liisloncal tax bases oitlre assets acquired, The individual components ororrr net deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected in the table below (in
thousands).

December 31,
2013 2012
Deferred tax assets:
Accrued reclamation costs is 39,262 $ 45,653
Dcfcncd exploration 35,267 32,396
Foreign net operating losses 27,923 20,247
Domestic net operating losses 54,131 44,814
AMT credit canylorwards 22,15 5 24.503
Pension and beneﬁt obligation 10,3 54 12,488
Miscellaneous 31.077 17,437
Total deferred tax assets 220,219 197,538
Valuation allowance (27,155) (23,030)
Total defened tax assets 193,054 174,508
Deferred tax liabilities,
Miscellaneous (5,966) (1,252)
Properties. plants and equipmem (238,497) (57,583)
Total defencd tax liabilities (244,453) (58,845)
Net deferred tax asset (liability) 39 (514399) 3 115.763

We plan to permanently reinvest earnings from foreign subsidiaries wrth the exception of llecla Quebec Inc, our wholly—owned subsidiary which
owns our Casa Ber-ardi mine and other interests in Quebec, Canada For the years 2013, 2012 and 201 l. we had no unremitted fulelgn eaniings. Foreign
net operating losses canted forward are shown above as a deferred tax asset. with a partial valuation allowance as discussed below.

We recorded a valuation allowance to reﬂect the estimated amount of deferred tax assets, which may not be realized principally due to the expiration
ot‘ foreign net operating losses and foreign tax credit canyforwards. The changes in the valuation allowance for the years ended December 31, 2013,2012
and 201 l. are as follows (in thousands);

2013 2012 2011
Balance at beginning of year $ (23,030) $ (22,895) is (19,073)
lncrcasc related to non-utilization of net operating loss carryforwards and non»
recognition ufdcfcrrcd tax assets due to uncertainty of recovery (3,870) (3,837) (3.1322)
Decrease related to utilization and expiration ofdcfcn'cd tax assets, other (255) 3,702 7
Balance at end ofyear 8 (27,155) 3 (23.03") 3 (22.895)

As olDecember 31, 2013, for us. incotne tax purposes, we have federal and state net operating loss carrylorwards or5172 million and $38
million, respectively. These net operating loss Carryfurwards have a 20 year expiration period, the earliest of which could expire in 2020. We have foreign
and provincial net operating loss canyforwartts of approximately $95 million and $25 million, respectively, which expire between 2014 and 2033, We
have approximately $22 million in alternative minimum tax credit carryiorwards which do not expire and are eligible to reduce fulure U.s, tax
liabilities, Din utilization ems. net operating loss carryforwarrls may be subject to annual limitations ifthere is a change in control as deﬁned under
lntetnal kcvenuc Code Section 382.

At December 31, 2013 and 2012 we had $20 million and $19 million, respectively, oifetler a1 net operating loss carryovers relating to excess tax
beneﬁts from the exercise of employee stock options and the vesting of restricted stock awards. These amounts are not reﬂected in our defened tax asset for
net operating loss carryovers, We recognize the excess tax beneﬁts from the exercise of employee stock options and the vesting ofrestricted stock awards in
the period in which these tax beneﬁts reduce income taxes payable, aﬁer net operating loss carryforwards are fully utilized.

F-l7


We ﬁle income tax returns in the us. federal jurisdiction, various state and foreign Jurisdictions, We are no longer subject to income tax
examinations by us. federal and state tax authorities for years prior to 1997, or examinations by roretgn tax authorities for years prior to 2007, We
currently have no tax years under examination other than years 2008 through 201 I under routine exam by Revenue Quebec.

We had no unrecognized tax beneﬁts as ofDecember 31, 2013 or 2012. Due to the net operating loss carryover provision, coupled with the lack of
airy unrecognized tax beneﬁts, we have not provided for any interest or penalties associated witli any uncertain tax positions. Ifmterest and penalties were
to be assessed. our policy is to charge niterest to niterest expense, atid petialties to other operating expense. It is not anticipated that there will be atiy
signiﬁcant changes to luirecognized tax beneﬁts wrthin the next l2 nionths.

Note 6: Senior Notes, Credit Facilities and Capital Leases

Senior Notei‘

On April l2, 2013. we completed an offering of $500 million in aggregate principal amount ot‘ our Senior Notes due May l, 2021 (the “Netes") in
a private placement conducted pursuant to Rule 144A and Regulation 5 under the Securities Act oi 1933, as amended The Notes are governed by the
ltidenture, dated as of April 12, 2013 (the “lndetiture"), atiiong us atid certain of our subsidiaries and The Bank oiNew York Mellon Trust Company,
N.A.. as trustee.

The Notes are recorded net ofa 2% initial purchaser discount totaling $l0 million at the time Dfissuance and having an amortized balance ei'$9.3
million as ei'Decembei‘ 3L 20l3, The Notes bear interest at a rate of6,875"/n per year from the date oferiginal Issuance or from the most recent payment
date to which interest has been paid or provided for. lntei-est on the Notes is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year. coiiirnenerng November 1,
2013. During 20]], interest expense related to the notes and amortization ofthe initial purchaser discount and fees related to the lsslialice oftlie notes. net of
$6.5 million in capitalized interest, totaled $19.1 million,

The Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain of our subsidiaries (the "Guarantei‘s"). The Notes and the guarantees will be our
general senior unsecured obligations and W|ll be subordinated to all of our and the Guarantors' existing and future secured debt to the extent of the assets
securing that secured debt. In addition. the Notes Wlll be effectively subordinated to all of the liabilities of our subsidiaries that are not guaranteeing the
Notes, to the extent oftlie assets of those slibsldiarles.

The net proceeds from the offering of the Notes ($490 million) were used to partially fund the acquisition quurizutt and for general corporate
purposes, including expenses related to the Alirizon acquisition, See Note [6 for lnore information.

The Notes will be redeemable in whole oi in part. at any time and from time to time on or aiter May I, 2016, on the redemption dates and at the
iedeuiptiou prices speciﬁed in the Iiideutuie, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date oi‘redemption, Piioi to May 1, 2016, we may iedeeiii
some or all of the Notes at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, ifany, to the redemption date, plus a
“make whole" premium. We may redeem up to 35% ofthe Notes before May 1. 2016 with the net cash proceeds from certain equity offenngs

Upon the occurrence ofa change of control (as defined in the lndentiire), each holder ofNotes will have the right to require its to purchase all or a
portion of such lioldei's Notes pursuant to a change oicontrol offer (as defined in the Indenture). at a purchase price equal to 10! "/i, ofthe pnncipal
amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of purchase. subject to the rights of holders ofthe Notes on the relevant record date to
receive interest due on the relevant interest payment date.

In connection with the sale of the Notes, we entered iirto a Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of April 12,2013, pursuant to which we and the
Guarantors agreed to (i) ﬁle air exchange offer registration statement within 270 days after the issue date ofthe Notes to exchange the Notes for a new issue
ofdebt securities registered under the Securities Act, with terlns substantially identical to those ofthe Notes (except with respect to certain transfer
restrictions and certain obligations to pay special interest as described in the Notes); (ll) use our commercially reasonable efforts to cause the exchange offer
registration statement to be declared effective under the Securities Act within 330 days after the issue date oftlie Notes; (iii) use our commercially
reasonable effons to consummate tlie exchange offer within 365 days aﬁei tlie issue date oftlie Notes; and (iv) in cenain circumstances, ﬁle a shelf
registration statement for the resale of the Notes. On October 28, 2013. we ﬁled an exchange offer registration statement with the SEC to exchange the Notes
for a new issue ofdebt securities registered linder the Securities Act, and the exchange offer was completed in January 2014 with 99.99% of the Notes
tendered for exchange,

F-lX


Credit Facilities

We have a $ 100 million senior secured revolving credit facilityY which is collateralized by the shares ofcommon stock held in our material domestic
subsidiaries and by our Jotnl venture interests in the Greens Creek mine, all of our rights and interests in the joint venture agreement. and all ofour rights
and interests in the assets oftlieJoint venture. The credit facility in place at December 31. 2013 originated with a $60 million senior secured revolving
credit agreement entered into in October 2009 that has been amended sevcml times, On April 1, 2013 we amended the agreement to reduce the commitment
amount from $150 million to $100 million while also adjusting cenain covenants and limitations. The agreement was again amended on June 28, 2013 to
adjust certain covenants and limitations.

In February 2014. we entered into a new $100 million credit facility having the same terms of collateral as described in the previous paragraph and
which replaces oiir ptevlous facility in plaee at December 31, 2013. Amounts borrowed iuider the credit agreement are available for general eorporate
purposes. Below is informath on the interest rates. standby fee. and ﬁnancial covenant tenns under each oitlie credit factlities:

Previous Facility New Facility

interest rates:

Spread over the London Interbank foer Rate 3.00 e 4.50% 2.25 e 3.25%
Spread over alternative base rate 2.00 - 3.50% 1.25 - 2.25%

Standby fee per aimum on undrawn amounts 0.825 7 1,05% 0,50%

Covenant ﬁnancial ratios:

Senior leverage ratio (debt secured by lieiisiEEITDA) not more than 2.50:1
Leveiage iatio (total debt less unemeumbeied cash/EBITDA) not more than 4.00:1
interest Coverage ratio teBiTDA, iitterest expensel not less than 3.0:1

We were in compliance with all covenants under the credit agreement and no amounts were outstanding as of December 31. 2013. We have not
drawn funds on the current revolving credit facility as ofthe filing date ofthis Form 10-K,

Capital meex

We have entered into various lease agreements primarily for equipment at our Greens Creek and Lucky Friday units, which we have determined to
be capital leases. At December 31, 2013, the total liability associated wtth the capital leases. including eertain purchase option amounts. was $22.3
million. with $8.5 million of the liability classiﬁed as current and $14.3 million classiﬁed as non-current. At December 31, 2012. the total liability
balance associated with capital leases was $17.5 million. with $5.6 million ufthe liability classiﬁed as current and $1 1.9 million classiﬁed as non-
cuiTent. The total obligation for future minimum lease payments was $23.8 million at December 31, 2013, with $1.1 million attributed to interest.

At December 31. 2013. the annual maturities uicapital lease commitments, including interest, are (in thousands).

Twelve—mimth period ending December 31,

2014 l: 9,01 1

201 5 7,88 7

2016 5,201

2017 L734

Total 23,833
Less. imputed interest (1,093)

Net capital lease obligation $ 114740

F- l 9


Nate 7: Commitments, Contingencies, and Obligations
General

We follow the FASB Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation guidance in detenuiiung our accruals and disclosures with respect to loss contingencies,
and evaluate such accruals aud contingencies for each reporting period. Accordingly, estimated losses From loss contingencies are accrued by a charge to
income when information available prior to issuance of the financial statements indicates that it is probable that a liability could be incurred and the
amount of the loss cau be reasonably estimated. Legal expenses associated with the contiugency are expeused as incurred, Ifa loss contingency is not
probable or reasonably estimable. disclosure of the loss coutingeiicy is made in the Financial statements when it is at least reasonably possible that a
material loss could be incurred,

Rm Gralidc Silver Guaranty

Our wholly-owned subsidiary, Rio Grande Silver Inc, (“Rio”). is party to a Joint venture with Emerald Mining & Leasmg. LLC ("EML") and
certain other parties with respect to a Iaud package iu the Creede Miniug District of Colorado that is adjacent to other land held by Rio. Rio holds a 70%
interest in the joint venture. In connection with the joint Venture, we arc required to guarantcc certain environmental rcmcdiation-rclatcd obligations of EML
to a third party up to a maximum liability to us at $2.5 million. As of December 1 l, 20i1,we have not been required to make any payments pursuant to
the guaranty. We may be required to make payments in the Future, limited to the $2.5 million maximum liability, should EML fail to meet its obligations
to the third party. However, to the extent that any payments are made by us under the guaranty. EML, in addition to other parties. have jointly and
severally agreed to reimburse and indemnify us for any such payments. We have not recorded a liability relating to the guaranty as of December 31, 2013.
Lucky Friday Water Pﬁrmit Mazzerx

Over the last several years, the Lucky Friday unit has experienced several regulatory issues relating to its water discharge permits and water
management more gcncrally,

- In late 2008 and during 2009. I-Iecla Limited experienced a number ofalleged permit exceedauces for water discharges at the Lucky Friday

unit. These alleged violations resulted in Heela Limited entering into a Consent Agreement and Final Order (“CAFO”) aiid a Compliance
Order with the EPA in April 2009. which included an extended compliance time line, In connection with the CAFO. Heela Limited agreed to
pay the maximum administrative penalty to the EPA of $177,500 to settle any liability for such alleged exceedauces.

- In 2009, additional alleged permit exceedances for water discharges at the Lucky Friday unit occurred. In 2010, alleged unpermuted
discharges of pollutants occurred at the Lucky Friday unit. These alleged pennit exceedances and cenain alleged unpeimitted discharges
were the subject ofa December 201 0 Notice ofViolzition (“2010 NOV“) froin the EPA informing Hecla Liinited that the EPA was prepared to
seek civil penalties for these alleged Violations. 1n the 2010 NOV, the EPA invited Heela Limited to discuss these matters with them prior to
ﬁling a complaint. I-Iecla Limited disputes many of EPA‘s assertions, but initiated negotiations wuh the EPA in an attempt to resolve the
matter. There has not been any resolution ofthe 2010 NOV,

~ In 2012. the Lucky Friday unit had two weekly water samples. one of which in October exceeded the pennit concentration limit for lead (but
not the associated load limit), and one ofwhich in November exceeded permit limits for zinc. Also in October and November, heavy rains
resulted in alleged impacted storm water being discharged to a nearby river, After these incidents, in February 2013. the EPA issued a notice
ofviolation aiid request for information to Hecla Limited alleging that the October aiid November 2012 storm water incidents were each a
violation of Hecla Liniited's storm water permit.

The EPA referred the two alleged 2012 permit exceedances. along with the alleged Violations in the 2010 NOV and some additional alleged
unpermitted discharges from 2010 that were not included in the mi 0 Nov, to the us, Department ofJustice to possibly file a civil complaint by the
United States against Ileela Limited. In addition, it is possible that the United States may include the 2012 stonri water incidents and any additional
alleged unpennitted discharges in any complaint. There is the potential for larger civil penalties in the context ofa United States complaint than in an
administrative action by the EPA such as the 2009 CAFD.

F720


In December 2013. the EPA issued to Hecla Limited a Notice ofViolation (“2013 NOV") alleging certain storm water reporting violations under
Lucky Friday's Clean Water Act Multi-Sector General Stomiwater Permit for Industrial Activities. The 2013 NOV also contains a request for information
under Section 308 ofthe Clean Water Act directing Hecla Linlited to undertake a comprehensive groundwater Investigation of Lucky Friday‘s tailings pond
No. 3 to evaluate whether the pond is causing the discharge of pollutants via seepage to groundwater that is discharging to surface water. We cannot
ascertain wliat impacts, ifany, the 2013 NOV and request for information will have on the matters that were already pending with the United States,
including the 2010 NOV,

IIecla Limited strives to iriaintain its water discharges and water maiiageirient in general at the Lucky Friday unit in full compliance with its
permits and applicable laws. however we cannot provide assurances that it will be able to fully comply with the permit limits and other regulatory
requirements regarding water management in the future.

We believe that it is reasonably possible that Hecla Limited faces some liability for the above water issues; however. we cannot with reasonable
certainty estimate the amount ofany such liability because. for among other reasons, we have not completed the report called for by the request for
information contained in the 2013 NPDV. and we do not know what will be the impact oftliat repon.

Johnny M Mme Area near San Mateo, McKinley County, New Maxim)

In May 2011. the EPA made a formal request to Hecla Mining Company for information regarding the Johnny M Mine Area near San Mateo.
McKinley County. New Mexico, and assened that IIecla Mining Company may be responsible under CERCLA for environmental remediation and past
costs the EPA has incurred at the site. Mining at the Johnny M was conducted for a limited period oftime by a predecessor of our subsidiary, IIecIa
Limited, In August 2012, Hecla Limited and the EPA entered into a Settlement Agreement and Administrative Order on Consent for Removal Action
("Consent Decree"). pursuant to which I-Iecla Limited agreed to pay (1) $1 ,1 million to the EPA for its past response costs at the site and (it) any future
response costs at the site. ill exchange for a covenant not to sue by the EPA. The Consent Decree also describes additional work at the site to be conducted
by IIecla Limited. IIecla Limited paid the $1.1 million to the EPA for its past response costs in the fourth quarter onlJlZ, and our consolidated ﬁnancial
stateulents as of December 31, 2013 include an accrual balance by Hecla Limited of $0.3 million for investigation and planning costs, Hecla Limited
cannot reasonably estimate the amount of any additional liability it may face at the site until. at a minimum. the amount and type of remediation required
have been determined,

Carpenter Snow Crack Site, Cascade County. Momorra

In July 201 o, the EPA made a formal request to I-lecla Mining Company for information regarding the Carpenter Snow Creek Superfund site
located in Cascade County, Montana, The Carpenter Snow Creek Site is located in a historic mining district. and in the early 1980s llecla Limited leased
6 nlining clainls and performed linlited exploration activities at the site. Hecla Limited terminated the mining lease in 1988.

In June 2011, the EPA infon‘ned IIecla Limited that it believes IIecla Limited, among several other viable companies. may be liable for cleanup of
the site or for costs incurred by the EPA in cleaning up the site. The EPA stated in the June 2011 letter that it has incurred approximately $45 million in
response costs and estimated that total remediation costs may exceed $100 million. Because IIecla Limited had very limited activity at the site, we do not
believe that the outcome ofthe claitn will have a material adverse ett‘ect on our results from operations or ﬁnancial position, Hecla Limited cannot wtth
reasonable certainty estimate the ultimate liability. if any, relating to this matter.

Stator afSaulh Dakota aria Colorado Supelfiim] Sl'lex Related to CoCa Mines, Inc

In 1991. IIecla Limited acquired all ofthe outstanding common stock ofCoCa Mines. Inc. (“CoCa”). CoCa is alleged to have engaged in
exploration at the Gilt Edge Mine in South Dakota as well as in the area adjacent to the Nelson Tunnel property in Creede, Colorado.

Gilt Edge Mine Superfund Site

In August 2008. the EPA made a formal request to CoCa for information regarding the Gilt Edge Mine Site located in Lawrence County. South
Dakota. and asserted that CoCa may be liable for environmental cleanup at the site. The Gilt Edge Mine Site was explored and/or mined beginning in the
18905. In the early 1980s, CoCa was involved in a Joint venture that conducted a limited program of exploration work at the site. This joint venture
terminated in 1984, and by 1985 CoCa had divested itself of any interest in the property.

F-ZI


In July 2010 the United States informed CoCa that it intends to puisue CoCa and several other potentially responsible parties on a Joint and seveial
basis for liability for past and future response costs at Gilt Edge under CERCLA. Currently. the United States alleges that CoCa is liable based on
participation in the JDinI venture, and that CoCa has succeeded to the liabilities ofits predecessor at the site, Congdon 5c Carey, which may have held
certain ptopeny interests at the site,

As of April 2013. the United States has alleged estimated total costs associated witli the site of $200 million, including butli past and future
response costs. IIecla Limited did not acquire CoCa until 1991. well after CoCa discontinued its involvement witli the Gilt Edge site. In addition. CnCa
is and always has been a separate corporate entity from Hecla Liniited. Therefore, we believe that Hecla Limited is not liable for any cleanup at the Cult
Edge site. We believe that it is reasonably possible that CoCa faces some liability for the site; however. we cannot with reasonable certainty estimate the
ultimate amount of any such liability. Funhennore. in the event CoCa incurs a liability at this site, it has limited assets with which to satisfy any such
liability. Because of CoCa‘s limited assets. we believe that It Is possible that the United States will seek to recover some ofthe alleged $200 million in costs
associated with the site from Hecla Linllted, as the parent corporation oanCa. We believe Hecla Limited would have strong defenses to sucli a clainl and
would vigorously defend against any such claims. Settlement negotiations with the United States commenced in 2010 and are ongoing. but there can be no
assurance such negotiations will be successful. or that llecla Limited will not incur a material liability with respect to this site.

Nelson Tunnel/Commodore Waste Ruck Pile Superfund Site

In August 2009. the EPA made a formal request to CoCa for information regaiding the Nelson Tunnel/Cninmndoie Waste Rock Pile Superfund Site
in Creede. Colorado. A timely response was provided and the EPA later arranged to copy additional documents. CoCa was involved in exploration and
mining activities in Creede during the 1970s and the 19805. In September 2013. the EPA made a formal claim against CoCa for past response costs under
CERCLA as an ownei/opeiator of the site. and against llecla Limited as a corporate successoi to CoCa. The EPA is seeking a total of approximately $5
million for past response costs, plus an undetenniued amount of interest from CoCa, llecla Limited, and other potentially responsible parties. The EPA
stated that it is continuing its remedial investigation, feasibility study at the site, and once that is complete, it will begin remedial design and remedial action
for the site, Presumably. the EPA will also seek reimbursement ofat least some of those costs fronl viable potentially responsible parties. Hecla Limited did
not acquire CoCa until [99]. well aﬁer CnCa discontinued its historical activities in the \’|C|n“y ofthe site. In addition, CoCa is and always has been a
separate corporate entity from l-lecla Limited. Therefore. we believe that Hecla Limited is not liable for any cleaiiup, has strong defenses. and we will
vigorously defend against the claim. If CoCa is ultimately found to be liable, it has limited assets with which to satisfy any such liability. We cannot with
reasonablc certainty cstimatc the ultimate liability. if any, relating to this matter. and thcrcfore we have not recorded a liability rclating to thc site as of
December 31. 2013,

Senior Nomi

On January 6. 2014. we completed the offer to exchange up to 5500000000 aggregate principal amount of our new 6. 875% Senior Notes due 2021
for a like principal amount of our previously outstanding 6.875% Senior Notes due 2021. which were issued on April 12, 2013 ("Notes"), as funlier
discussed in Note 6. Interest on the Notes is payable on May 1 and Novembei 1 of each yeai. commeiicing November 1. 2013. The net proceeds from the
offering ofthe Notes were used to partially fund the acquisition of Aurizon and for general corporate purposes, including expenses related to the Aurizon
acquisition (sec Nom [6 for more information).

Other Commitmemx

Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2013 included approximately $9.7 million for commitments relating to capital items, along with
$10.2 million for various non-capital costs. In addition, our open purchase ordeis at December 31. 2013 included approximately $6.3 million, 515
million, and $1.4 million. respectively. for various capital items at the Casa Eerartti. Greens Creek, and Lucky Friday units, and approximately $2.5
million. $0.3 million, and $0.5 million, respectively, for various non-capital costs at such units. We also have total commitments ofapproxiuiately 523.3
million relating to scheduled payineuts on capital leases, including interest, pnmarily for equipment at our Greens Creek and Lucky Friday units (see
Note ('7 for more information), In addition, in 2011. we settled Hecla Liinited‘s Coeur d‘Alene Basin environmental litigation and related claims pursuant to
a Consent Decrec cntered by the Court on Septcmber x, 2011. l-lecla Limitcd rcinaiiis obligatcd under thc Consent Decrce to make paynicnts totaling
$55.5 million by August 2014, which would be funded by proceeds from our outstanding warrants, if exercised (see Note 9 for more information),
Under the terms oftlie Consent Decree, the proceeds from the exercise ofclur outstanding warrants will be paid to the United States and the Coeur d‘Alene
Indian Tribe within 30 days after the end of the quarter when exercised. lfthe warrants are not exercised. the company is responsible for its final payment
under the Consent Decree,

F-ZZ


We had letters of credit for approximately $1.3 million outstanding as of December 31, 2013 for workers‘ compensation insurance bondiiig.
Other Camingem'iex

On February I, 2012, a purported IIecla stockholder ﬁled a putative class action lawsuit in US, District Court for the District ofIdaho against
llecla and certain of our officers. one of whom is also a director. The complaint, purponedly brought on behalf of all purchasers of llecla common stock
fi‘om October 26, 2010 througll and including January 1 1, 2012. asserted claims under Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
and Rule lob-5 promulgated thereunder and sought, among other things, damages and costs and expenses. Speciﬁcally. the complaint alleged that llecla.
under the authority and control of the individual defendants, made certain false and misleading statements and allegedly omitted certain material
iiifornlation related to operational issues at the Lucky Friday mine. The complaint alleged rhat these actions artiﬁcially inﬂated the market price of l-lecla
common stock during the class period, thus purportedly harming investors who purchased shares during that time. A second suit was filed on February
14, 2012. alleging virtually identical claims. These complaints were consolidated into a single case, a lead plaintrfr and lead counsel were appointed by the
Court (Bricklayers ofWestern Peniisylvaiiia Pension Plan, et a]. v. llecla Mining Company et al., Case No. 12-0042 (D. Idaho», and a consolidated
amended complaint was ﬁled on October 16, 2012. In January 2013, we ﬁled a motion to dismiss the complaint. On September 21’), 2013, the Court
granted our motion to dismiss. and on November 5, 2013. the Court issued a final order dismissing the lawsuit wtth pi-eiudice.

Related to the above described class action lawsuit. Hecla is named as a nominal defendant in a pending stockholder derivative lawsuit which
names as defendants certain Hecla executives and members ofHecla‘s Board ofDirectors. The case is In Re Hecla Mining Company Derivative
Shareholder Litigation, Case No. 2: 12-cV-00097 (D, Idaho). In general terms. this lawsuit alleges breaches of fiduciary duties by the individual
defendants and seeks damages, purportedly on behalfofllecla, In January 2013, a consolidated amended complaint was ﬁled and in February 2013, we
ﬁled a motion to dismiss the complaint. On September 25, 2012 and April 30, 2013. two other state court derivative actions were dismissed in Delaware
aiid in Idaho. respectively, In addition, the Board ofDirectors has received two letters on belialfof purported stockholders demanding that Hecla
commence litigation against certain executives and directors on substantially similar grounds. Hecla’s board has concluded the actions requested by both
demaiids would be contrary to the Company's best interest given the pendency of other, related litigation against the Company.

In March 2012. Hecla Limited received notice ofa complaint ﬁled against it by the United Steel Workers, Local 5114, with the Federal Mine
Safety and llealth Review Commission for comperisatrori for bargaining unit workers at the Lucky Friday mirie idled as a result ofthe temporary
suspension ofproductiori at the mine. The complaint alleges the bargaining unit workers are entitled to compensation under Section 111 of the Federal
Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 from November 16, 2011 - the date an order was issued by the Mine Safety Ilealtli Administration ("MSIIA") to
Hecla Limited - until such time as the order is ternlinated. We submitted a motion for summary decision to the adnlinistrative lawjudge within the Federal
Mine Safety and Health Review Commission, which was denied in Decenlber 2012. Currently we are awaiting further proceedings. We believe the claim is
without merit, and that all wages due under Section 111, which was an immaterial amount. have already been paid. Therefore, we have not recorded a
liability relating to the clainl as of December 31, 2013. The value ofthe union's claim is estinlated to be in the range of$0 to $10 million.

We are subject to other legal proceedings and claims which arise from time to time, These can include, bur are nor limited to, legal proceedings
and/or claims pertaining to environmental or safety matters, For example, in April 2011, a fatal accident occurred at the Lucky Friday mine which was
investigated by MSIIA. In November 201 1, an accident occurred as part of the construction of #4 Shaﬁ which resulted in the fatality of one contractor
employee. In an unrelated incident, in December 2011, a rock burst occurred in a primary access way at the Lucky Friday mine and Injured seven
employees, none fatally. At the end of 201 1, MSHA began a special impact investigation at the Lucky Friday mine which resulted in an order to remove
built-up cementitious material From the silver Shaﬁ, the primary access way from the surface at the Lucky Friday mine. As a result ofMSIIA's
investigations related to these events, 1-1ec1a Limited has been issued monetary penalties (iione ofwliich are material, individually or iii the aggregate), and
may face additional ciiforcenicnt acrioiis. including additional monetary pciialtics from MSHA or other governmental agcncics. Although rhcre can bc no
assurance as to the ultimate disposition of these other matters. we believe they will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or
financial position.

On April 12, 2013, the family of Larry Marek, an employee ofllecla Lirnrted who was fatally Injured in the April 2011 accident, filed a lawsuit
against us and cenain of our ofricers and employees seeking damages for. among other claims, wrongful death and infliction of emotional distress. No
dollar amount of damages is claimed in the complaint, which was filed in state court in Idaho (Kootenai County District Court). We cannot reasonably
predict the outcome of this matter, however. we believe the case is without merit and intend to vigorously defend this lawsuit,

F723


On December 11, 2013, four employees of l lecla Limited who were lnjul’ed in the December 201 1 rock burst, ﬁled a lawsuit against us and certain
of our employees seeking damages {on among other claims, intentional and Willful mjury and inﬂiction of emotional distress. The plaintiffs seek damages
in excess «$1,000,000, as claimed in the complainti which was ﬁled in state court in Idaho (Kootenai County District Court). We cannot reasonably
predict the outcome ofrhis matter. however. we believe the case is wtrhour merit and intend to vigorously defend this lawsuit.

Note 11: Employee Beneﬁt Plans
Pensions and Other Past-retirement Plum

We sponsor deﬁned beneﬁt pension plans covering substantially all US. employees. The following tables provtde a reconciliation of the changes in
the plans' beneﬁt obligations and fair value of assets ever the two-year period ended December 311 2013, and the t‘undetl status as of December 31, 2013
and December 31, 2012 (in thousands):

Pension Beneﬁts
2013 2012
Change in beneﬁt obligation.
Beneﬁt obligation at beginning ofyczlr is 99,367 1; 87,895
Service east 4,025 3,974
interest east 3,889 4,059
Panicipants' contributions 7 2 9
Amendments (4.208) 7
Actuanal loss 2,428 7,450
Beneﬁts paid (4.346) (4,050]
Beneﬁl obligation at end ofyear 101,155 99,367
Change in fair value ot‘plan assets"
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year 62,515 65,082
Actual retuni (loss) on plan assets 3,479 5,007
Employer contributions 1,403 1,447
Panicipants' contributions 7 2 9
Beneﬁts paid (4,346) (4050)
Fairvalne ofplan assets at end otyear 59,051 68,515
Funded status at end of year 3 (32,104) 3 (304852)
The following table provides the amounts recognued in [he consolidated balance sheets as ufDecetttber 31, 2013 and December 31, 2012 (in
thousands):
Pension Beneﬁts
2013 2012

Current liabilities:

Accrucd bcncﬁt liability K; (342) 1; (322]
Other non- current liabilities:

Accrucd bcncﬁt liability (31.763) (30.530)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss 2 9, 76 8 33,545
Net ainaunt recognized 19 (2.337) 3 2,693

F724


nie beneﬁt nblignucn and prepaid beneﬁt costs were calculated by applylng the followmg weighted average nssumprinus:
Pensinn Beneﬁts
2013 2012
Discount rate: net periodic pension cost 400% 4.75%
Discount rate: projected beneﬁt nblrgatien 4.81% 4.00%
Expected rate of retunl on plan assets 7.20% 7.20%
Rate of compensation increase 400% 4.00%

The above assumptions were calculated based on infor‘malion as uf December 31, 2013 and December 31. 2012, the measurement dates for the
plans. The discuunt rate is based on the yield curve fur investment-grade curpurate bands as published by the us. Treasury Depanment. The expected
rate ofretum on plan assets is based upon consideration otthe plan's current asset mix, historlcal long-term rerum rates and the plan's historical
perfennnnce. our cunent expected rate on plan assets of7.2% is based on historical returns over the past ten years.

Net periodic pensmn cost for the plans consrsted eflhe following In 20131 2012. and 201 1 [1n thousands]:

Pensinn Beneﬁts
2013 2012 201 1
Service cost is 4,025 3 3,974 3 3,277
Interest cost 3,889 4,068 4,114
Expected retunl on plan assets (4,741) (4,581) (5,481)
Amortization of prior service cost 6 6 401 403
Amomznuon ufnet gain (loss) from earller periods 3,152 2,826 880
Net periodic pen<l0n cost $ 6,391 $ 6,688 8 3,793
The allocatlons of investments at December 3L 2013 and December 31, 20121 the measurement dates of the plan by asset caleguiy in the Hecla
Mmmg Company Reurement Plan and the Lucky Friday Pension Plan are as folluws:
Heela Lucky Friday
2013 2012 2013 2012

Cash 1% 1% 1% 2%
Large cap us, equities 9% 1 1% 9% 120/o
Small cup us equities 5% 4% 6% 6%
Nen-U.S.equ1t1es 9% 10% 9% 10%
Fixed income 32% 33% 32% 10%
Real estate 20% 18% 20% 19%
Absolute relurn hedge funds 1 5% 13% 1 5% 14%
kcal return 8% 10% 8% 7%

Tom 100% 100% 100% 100%

The "Real retum" asset categury in the table abuve includes uur cummun stuck in the amuunts uf$1,(1 milliun and $29 milliun at December 31,
2013 and December 311 2012. These investments represent approximately 2% oflhe total combined assets oflhe plans at December 31, 2013 and
approxrnintcly 4% in December 31. 201 z,

F-25


Our statement of investment policy delineates the responsibilities of the board, the management investment committee, the investment manager(s),
and investment adviser/consultant, and provides guldelines on investment management. Investment objectives are established for each ofthe asset
categories included in the pension plans with comparisons orperloi-mance against appropriate benchmarks. Our policy calls for investments to be
supervised by qualiﬁed investment managers. The investment managers are monitored on an ongoing basis by our outside consultant, with formal
reponing to us and the consultant performed each quarter. The policy sets forth the folluwlng allocation ufassets:

Target Minimum Maximum
Large cap 11.5. equities 10% 7% 13%
Small cap us. equities 5 “,4, 4% 6%
Nun-US. quIItles 10% 8% 12%
Fixed tneumc 35% 29% 43%
Real estate 15% 12% 18%
Absolute return hedge funds 1 5% 12% 18%
Real return 10% 8% 12%
Out statement of investment policy and abjectlves aspires to achieve the assumed lung term rate ufretum on plan assets established by the plan‘s
actuary plus one percent.
Accounting guidance has established a hierarchy urassets measni ed at t‘aii value on a recurring basis. The three levels included in the hierarchy
arc,
Level I. quored prices In aetlve markets for identical assets or llabllltles
Level 2. significant other observable inputs
Level 3: signiﬁcant unobservable inputs
The faIr values by asset category in each plan, along vvitli their liierarchy levels, are as follows as of December 31, 2013 (m thousands):
Hcclu Lucky Friday
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Tntnl
Interest-bearing cash $ 5 9 6 S 7 $ 7 S 5 9 6 $ 393 $ 7 $ 7 $ 393
Common stock 1,220 7 7 1,220 31 l 7 7 31 1
Real estate 7 7 111,797 10,797 7 7 2,865 2,865
Common collecrlve funds 7 9,654 7,970 17,624 7 2,982 2,174 5,156
Mutual funds 23,252 7 7 23,252 6,837 7 7 6,837
Tom] pmvalue r 25,068 3 9,654 1; 18,767 1; 53,4239 3 7,541 1; 2,982 r 5,039 1; 15,562
The folluwlng Is a roll-forward ofassets in Level 3 ofthe fair value hierarchy (In thuusands):
Hecla Lucky Friday
Beginning balance at January 1, 2013 $ 16,862 1» 4,491
Net unrealized gains on assets held at the reporting date 1,486 399
Purchases 419 149
Ending balance at December 31, 2013 3 18,767 $ 5,039
Ofthe 523,8 mllllun In plan assets classlﬁetl as level 3, $13.7 mllllun was Invested In Ieal estate, and the IeInalnIng 510,1 mllllun was Invested In
collective Investment funds,
F-26


The falr values by asset category in each plan, along with their hierarchy levels, were as follows as ofDecember 31. 2012 t in thousands):
Heclu Lucky Friday
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Tmnl
Interest-bearing cash $ 683 S 7 $ 7 S 683 $ 198 $ 7 $ 7 $ 198
Cummun stock 2,309 7 7 2,309 588 7 7 588
neatestate 7 7 9,511 9,511 7 7 2,513 2,513
Common collective funds 7 10,095 7,251 17,345 7 2,459 1,978 4.447
Mutual funds 24,183 7 7 24,183 6,637 7 7 6,637
Tom] {3" value 3 27,175 8 10,095 $ 16,862 X; 54,132 3 7,423 $ 2,469 3 4,491 $ 14,383
The folluwlng IS a roll-forward ofassets in Level 3 ofthe fair value hieramhy (in thuusands):
Hecla Lucky Friday

Beginning balance at December 31, 2011 $ 13,300 $ 3,555

Net unrealized gains on assets lield at the reporting date 838 187

Purchases 2,724 738

Ending balance at December 31, 2012 K9 16,862 3 4,491

()ftlie $21.4 million in plan assets classiﬁed as Level 3, $121 milliun was invested in teal estate, wltile $9.2 million was invested in culleetive
investment funds.

Generally, investments aie valued based on information piuvided by fund managers to our trustee as ieviewed by management and its investment
advisers. Mutual funds and equities are valued based on available exchange data. Cumminglett equity funds consist of publicly-traded investments. Faii
value for real estate and private eqully partnerships is primarily based on valuation methodologies that include third—party appraisals, comparable
tiansactibns, and discounted cash ﬂow valuation models

Future beneﬁt payments, which reﬂect expected future service as appropriate, are estimates orwhat will be paid in the following years (In
thousands):

Pensinn
Year Ending December 31, Plans
2014 3 5,040
2015 5,215
2016 5,454
2017 5,758
2018 5,201
Years 2019-2023 36,384

We expect to contribute approximately $7.5 million in cash, securities, or other assets to our funded pension plans and $0.3 million to our
unfunded supplemental cxceunvc retirement plan during 2014.

The fulluwing table describes plans to. which accumulated beneﬁt obligations ("A130") were in excess oiplan assets, and for which plan assets
cxcccdcd A130 (in thousands).

December 31, 2013 December 3], 2012
A30 Exceeds Plan Assets ABO Exceeds Plan Assets
Pliiii Assets Exceed ABC! Plan Assets Exceed A30

Projected beneﬁt obligation is 101,155 $ 7 3 99,367 3 7

Accumulated beneﬁt obligation 97,937 7 92,590 7

Falrvalue oiplan assets 59,051 7 68,515 7

F-Z7


For the pension plans and other beneiit plans, the followmg amounts are included in "Accumulated other comprehensive loss. net" on our balance
sheet as of December 31, 2013, that have not yet been recognized as components of net periodic beneﬁt cost (in thousands):

Pensinn

Beneﬁts
Unamortized net (gnin)/1Dss is 32,065
utiamortized prtor servtee cost (2,255)

The amounts in "Accumulated other comprehensive loss, iiet" expected to be recognized as components of net periodic beneﬁt cost during 2014 are
(in thousands):

Pensinn

Beneﬁts
Amortization of net (gain)/luss $ 2,724
Alnunlzanun of prior service cost 352

We do not expect to have any oftlie platis‘ assets returned during 2014.

Effective July 1. 2013. we amended the l-lecla Mining Company Retirement Plan (the "Hecla plan") to change the pension beneﬁt formula and other
plan provisions. The amendment resulted in the following changes to the Hecla plan:

- The deﬁnition of pensionable compensation was changed to exclude oiie-halfof any performance—based or annual iiicenttve bontts, fringe
beneﬁts. reimbursements or other expense alluwances. moving expenses. health and welfare beneﬁts, slock awards, incume realized fmm stock
options or restricted stock, income from cenain property arrangements, long term incentive awards. premium pay rates for ovenime,
contribuunns [a Dr distribuuuns from a nonquallﬁed deferred cumpensaunn plan, and shlfl 0r lucxunn differentials. Under the terms uhhe
amended l-lecla plan, pensionable compensation includes an employee's base salary and other payments ofcompensation for services performed
during the course of etnploytnent. elective deferrals not ineludable in the gross income of the employee under the internal Revenue Service Code
Sections 125, 132(f)(4), 402(e)(3). 402(h), 403(b) and 457, one-lialfof any perfonrtance—based or annual incentive bonus, one-halfof any cash
safety iiicenttve award, paid time off other than for disability leave, and compensation for overtime at the employee's regular hourly rate of pay
for each hour worked.

- For new employees litred after June 30. 2013. pension beneﬁts will be calculated based on the highest average of any ﬁve consecutive years [60
months) of pensionable compensation during the ﬁnal ten years of service instead of three consecutive years during the ﬁnal ten years of service
for employees hired before July 1. 2013.

- Prior to July 1, 2013, we credited each participant's account annually wtth an amount equal to 6.0% of pensionable compensation, plus an
additional 5.7% oftlie participant's pensionable compensation in excess of the Social Security taxable wage base ("the cash balance pay credit").
Beginning July 1, 2013, the cash balance pay credit will consist oftlie 6.0% of pensionable compensation without the 57% additional credit,

- Access to cash balance accounts following a termination ofetnploynient prior to early or normal retiretnent age has been limited. Prior to the
amendment, a cash balance panicipant could elect to receive a distribution oftlie vested portion oflits or her account at any age following a
termination of employment. This change applies only to amounts credited to a cash balance accottnt after June 30.2013.

- For new employees hired after June 30, 2013, the cash balance pay credit will be eanied based on years of plan participation. 3% for 1 through 5
years; 45% lot 6 through 10 years; 6% after 10 yeats.

Canadian employees participate in Canada's pttblic retirement income system, and are not eligible to participate in the deﬁned beneﬁt peiiston plans
that we maintain for us. employees. Canada's public retirement income system includes the followmg components: (i) the Canada (or Quebec) Pension
Plan, which is a cottttibtttety, eamings-related social insurance program. (ii) the Registeted Retirement Savings Plan, which is a tax—deferred inttivirlttal
savings plan, and (iii) the Old Age Secunty program.

F-ZX


Capital A(‘£'umult1(ian Plans

otn employees' Capital Accumulation (401(k)) Plan is available to all us, salaried and certain hourly employees and applies immediately upon
einploytnent. Employees may contribute from 1% to 50% ottheir annual compensation to the plait (subject to statutory liittits). We make a matching
contnbutiou of 100% of an employee‘s contribution up to 6% of the employee's eamings. otir matching contributions were approximately $3.0 million in
2013, $2.5 million iii 2012, and $2.2 million in 2011.

Commencing Januaiy 2014, we expect our matching cuntributiuns to the Hecla 401 (k) plan will be made in Hecla common stock on a quarterly
basis in order to conserve cash. Prior to 2014, contributions were made in cash on a payroll-to-payroll basis.

We also maiiitaiii an employees ’ 401(k) plan, which is available to all hourly employees at the Lucky Enday unit aher completion of SIX months of
serVioe. Employees may contribute front 2% to 50% of their compensation to the plan [subjecl to statutory limits). The matching ooiitnbution is 55% of
an employee‘s contribution up to. but not exceeding. 5% of the employee‘s earnings. oiir contributions were approximately 0293000 in 2013. $407,000
in 2012, and $246,000 in 2011.

Nate 9: Sinckholders’ Equity
Common Stock

We are aiitlioiized to issue 500000000 shares ot‘ common stock, $0.25 par value per sliaie, oiwhich 343,585,101 sliai es of common stock were
issued as of December 31, 2013. All otour eunentiy outstanding shares otcommon stock are listed on the New Yurk Stock Exchange under the symbol
"IIL".

Subject to tlte rights orthe holders orany outstanding shares orprererred stock» each share oreommott stock is entitled to: (i) one vote oit all
matteis presented la the stockholders, with no cumulative voting rights; (ii) receive such dividends as may be declared by the Euaid 0f Diiectcis out of
funds legally available therefor; and (iii) in the event of our liquidation or dissolution. share ratably in any distribution of our assets.

Dividends

In September 201 l and February 2012, our Board ot‘ Directors adopted a common stock dividend policy that has two components; (I) a dividend
that links the amount ot‘ dividends on our common stock to our average quanerly realized silver price in the preceding quaner. and (2) a minimum annual
dividend of$0.01 per share ofoommon stock, in each case, payable quarterly, when declared. For illustrative purposes only. the table below suinmanzes
potential per share dividciid amounts at different quarterly average realized price levels according to the ﬁrst component ofﬂic policy:

Quarterly average realized silver

price per ounce Quarterly dividend per share Annual dividend per share
$ 30 S 0.01 S 0.04
S 35 S 0.02 S 0.08
$ 40 S 0 03 S 0.12
S 45 S O 04 S 0.16
$ 50 S 0.05 S 0.20
S 5 5 S 0.06 S 0.24
$ 60 S 0.07 S 0.28
F-Z‘J


The following table summarizes the common stock dividends declared by our Board ofDirectors:
(A) (B) (C) (A+B+C)
silver-price- Minimum
linlted annual Special Total dividend
component per component per dividend per Total dividend amount (in
Declaration date share share share per share milliims) Month or payment
November 8, 201 l 5 0,02 5 7 5 7 5 0.02 5 5 .6 December 2011
Febiuaiy 17,2012 5 0,01 5 0.0025 5 7 5 0,0125 3 3.6 Maicli2012
May 8, 2012 5 0,02 5 0.0025 5 7 5 0.0225 5 6.4 June 2012
August 7, 2012 5 7 5 0.0025 5 7 5 0.0025 s 0.7 September 2012
November 2, 2012 5 0,02 5 0.0025 5 7 5 0.0225 5 6.4 December 2012
Febiuaiy 25, 2013 5 7 5 0.0025 5 0,01 5 0,0125 3 3.6 March 2013
May 10, 2013 5 7 5 0.0025 5 7 5 0.0025 5 0.7 June 2013
August 13, 2013 5 7 5 0.0025 5 7 5 0.0025 s 0.9 August 2013
November 5, 2013 5 7 5 0.0025 5 7 5 0.0025 5 0.9 December 2013
Because the average realized silver prices for the second and fourth quarters ufZOlZ, along with all periods in 2013. were below the minimum
threshold of 530 according to the policy, no silver-price-lmked component was declared or paid, However, on February 25, 2013, our Board of Directors
declared a special common stock leldelld of 5001 per share, in addition to the minimum dividend of 50.0025 per share, for an aggregate dividend of
$3.0 million payable in March 2013. Poor to 2011, no diVideuds had been declared on our common stock since 1990 The declaiation and payment of
common stock dividends is at the sole discretion of our Board of Directors.
Common Stock Repurchase Program
On May 8, 2012, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program. Under the program, we are authorized to
repurchase up to 20 million shares of our outstanding common stock fmm time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions. depending on
prevailing market conditions and other tactors, The repurchase program may be modified, suspended or discontinued by us at any time. As of
December 31, 2013. 400,300 shares have been repurchased under the program, at an average price af$5.56 per share, leavmg 19.6 million shares that
may yet be piuchased under the program The closing price oi‘ our common stock at Februaiy 14, 2014. was $3.47 per share.
5mm of Warranty
In February 2009, we issued 36.8 milliun shares ufcummon stock and Series 3 warrants t0 purchase 18.4 million shares of common stock, Each
oltliese issuances were made pursuant to a slielfregistration statement ﬁled in September 2007. The folluwlng table summarizes certain information about
our stock purchase warrants at December 31. 2013:
Warrants Outstanding Warrants Exercise Price Expiration Date
Series 1 warrants 5,200,519 5 2.40 lune 2014
Series 1 warrants 460,976 2.51 June 2014
Series 3 warrants 16,646,128 2.45 Auguﬂ 2014
Total warrants outstanding 223307.523
No warrants were exercised during 2012. During 2013, warrants to purchase 25,000 shares of our common stock were exercised, resulting in net
proceeds to us “5861.000, Under the terms of the Consent Decree settling the Cocur d‘Aleiic Basin litigation, the proceeds from the exercise of our
outstanding warrants will be paid to the Plaintiffs within 30 days alter the end oltlie quarter when exercised, As such, proceeds fmm Series 1 and Series 3
warraiit exercises totaling approximately 561.000 were paid to the Plaintiffs in the ﬁrst quarter 0f2014.
F730


Preferred Stock

Our certiﬁcate ofineorporation authorizes us ID issue 5,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.25 per share. The preferred stock is
issuable in series with such voting rights. if any, designations, powen, preferences and other rights and such qualifications, limitations and restrictions
as may be determined by our Board of Directors. The Board may fix the number of shares constituting each series and increase or decrease the number of
shares of any series. As of December 31. 2013, [57.8 [6 shares of Series B preferred stock were outstanding. Our Series B preferred stock is listed on the
New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “IIL PE."

Rankin !

The Series B preferred stock ranks seuior to our commou stock and any shares ofSeries A junior participating preferred stock (none ofwhicli
have ever been issued) with respect to payment of dividends, and amounts upon liquidation, dissolution or Windlng up.

while any shares of Series B prefen ed stock are outstanding, we may not authorize the creation or issue of any class or series of stock that ranks
senior to the Series B preferred stock as to dividends or upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up Without the consent of the holders of 66 25% of the
outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock and any other series of preferred stock ranking on a parity with respect to the Series B preferred stock as to
dividends and upon liquidation, dissolution or Windlng tip. Voting as a single class wrthcut regard to series,

Dividends

Series B preferred stockholders are entitled to receive. when, as and ifdeelared by the Board of Directors out of our assets legally available therefor,
cumulative cash dividends at the rate per annum of $350 per share of Series B preferred stock. Dividends on the Series B preferred stock are payable
quarterly in arreais on October 1, January 1, Apnl l and July 1 of each year (and, in the case cfany undeclared and unpaid dividends, at such additional
times and for such interim periods. ifany, as detenninetl by the Board of Directors), at such annual rate Dividends are cumulative from the date of the
original issuance cfthe Series l3 prefened stcck. whether or not in any dividend period or periods we have assets legally available for the payment of such
dividends, Aeeuinulations ofdividends on shares of Series B preferred stock do not bear interest.

All quarterly dividends on our Series E preferred stock for 2012 and 20 [3 were declared and paid in cash.

Redemption

The Series B preferred stock is redeemable at our option, in whole or in part, at $50 per share. plus all dividends undeclared and uupaid on the
Series B preferred stock up to the date ﬁxed for redemption.

Liquidation Piefcrenee

The Series B preferred stockholders are entitled to receive, in the event that we are liquidated, dissolved or wound up, whether voluntary or
involuntary, 3.50 pei share ofSeiies B preferred stock plus an aiuciiut per share equal to all dividends undeclared and unpaid thereon to the date oftiual
distribution to such holders [the “Liquidation Preference”), and no more. Until the Series B preferred stockholders have been paid the Liquidation
Preference in full, no payment will be made to any hclder of Junior Stock upon our liquidation, dissolution or Wmdlng up. The tenn "Junior stock" means
our common stock and any other class ofour capital stock issued and outstanding that ranks junior as to the payment of dividends or arnouuts payable
upon liquidation, dissolution and winding up to the Series B preferred stock. As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, our Series B preferred stock had a
liquidation preference of $7.9 million,

Voting Rights

Except in certain circumstances and as ctherwrse from time to time required by applicable law. the Series B preferred stockholders have no Voting
tights and their consent is not required for taking any corporate action. When and it‘ the Series B preferred stockholders are entitled to vote, each huldei
will be cntuicd to one vote per share.

Conversion

Each share ofSerles B preferred stock is convertible, in whole or in part at the option oflhe holders thereof, into shares ofeomtuon stock at a
conversion price ef$15.55 per share ofcorntuon stock (equivalent to a conversion rate of3.2154 shares ofcotiimon stock for each share ofSeries B
preferred stock), The right to convert shares of Series B preferred stock called foi redemption will terminate at the close of business on the day pieceding a
redemption dare (tuiless we default in payment of the redemption price).

F731


Stock Award Plum

We use stock-based compensation plans to aid us in attracting, retaining and motivating our employees. as well as to provtde us wtth the ability to
provide incentives more directly linked to increases in stockholder value. These plans proVide l‘or Ihe gi‘anl ut‘options to purchase shares of our cammun
stock and the issuance of restricted share units of our common stock.

Stock—based compensation expense amounts recognized for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 were approximately 54.5 million,
$3.1 million, and $2.1 million, respectively. Over the next twelve months, we expect to recognize approximately 52.4 million in additional compensation
expense as the remaining options and units vest.

Stock [nceiilive Plans

During the second quarter or2010, our stockholders voted to approve the adoption of our 2010 Stock Incentive Plan and to reserve up to
20,000,000 shares of common stock for issuance under the plan. The Board of Directors committee that administers the 2010 plan has broad authority to
ﬁx the terms and conditions of individual agreements with panicipants, including the duration oithe award and any vesting requirements. As or
December 31, 2013, there were 18,005,847 shares available for future grant under the 2010 plan.

Direcinrs' Stock Plan

In 1995. we adopted the Hecla Mining Company Stock Plan for non—employee Directors (Ihe "Diieclars' Stock Plan"), which may be tenninaled
by our Board of Directors at any time. Each non—employee director is to be credited un May 30 of each year with that number of shares detennined by
dividing 524000 by the average closing price fDr our common stock on the New York Stock Exchange for the prior calendar year. All credited shares are
held in trust for the beneﬁt cfeach director iiiitil delivered to the director. Delivery cfihe shares from the trust ccciirs upun the earliest uf: (1) death ur
disability; (2)ret1rement: (3) a cessation of the director's service for any other reason; or 14) a change in control. The shares of our common stock credited
to non-employee directors pursuant to the Directors' Stock Plan may not be sold until at least six months follnwing the date they are delivered. A maximum
of one million shares ofcornmon stock may be granted pursuanl to the Directors’ Stock Plan. During, 2013, 2012, and 201 1, respectively, 28,050,
18.492, and 22.11114 shares were credited to the non—employee directors, During 2013. 2012 and 2011, $1 1 1,000, 380.000. and $194,000, respectively,
were charged to operations associated with the Directors' Stock Plan. At December 31, 2013, there were 594,635 shares available fut grant in the future
under the plan.

In addition to the foregoing. in May of each year. each non-employee director was also granted additional common stock under our 2010 stock
Incentive Plan . For 2013, 2012, and 201 1, respectively, 94,200, 59,484. and 19,752 shares were credited to the non-employee directors, and $276,000,
$275,000, and $147.000 respectively. were charged Io operations associated with the 2010 Sloek Incentive Plan.
31mm ()fSlat'k ()ph‘om

No stock options have been granted since 2010. The aggregate intrinsic value ufoptions outstanding and exercisable as of December 31. 2013 before
applicable income taxes was zero, based on our closing stock price of $3.08 per common share at December 31, 2013. All options outstanding were iiilly
vested at December 31, 2013.

Transactions concerning stock options pursuant to our stock option plans are summarized as follows:

Shares Subject to Weighted Average
Options Exercise Price
Outstanding, December 31, 2012 938,408 3 6.23
Expired (325,663) 8 9.88
Outstanding, December 31, 2013 612.745 3 4-29
F732


All cfrhe outstanding options above were exercisable at December 31, 2013. The weighted average remaining contractual rei-m otcptions
outstanding and exercisable at December 31. 2013 was one year.

There were no options exercised during 2013 or 2012. The aggregate intrinsic value or options exercised during the year ended December 31, 2011
was $0.6 million,

Rex/riﬂed Stack Unitr
uiivested restricted stock units granted by the board or directors to employees are summarized as follows:
Weighted Average
Gram Dale Fair
Shares Value per Share
Unvested, January 1, 2013 1,037,146 3 5.1 1
Granted 1,592,708 s 2.93
Canceled (17,962) 3 3.34
Dismbuted (526,591) 8 4.70
Unvested, December 31,2013 2,0854301 S 3-56
The 2,085,301unvesled unils al December El, 2013 Wlll vest as follows:
180,732 in March 2014
1,095,355 inlune 2014
465,058 in June 2015
318,145 inJune 201o
26,000 in August 2016

Remainlng units will be distnbuiable based on predeiemiined dates as elecied by the partieipanis, unless participants forfeit their units through
tennination of employment in advance of vesting. We have recognized approximately so3 million in compensaiion expense since giant date, and will
record an additional $3.6 million in compensation expense over the remaining vesting period related to these units.

In connection with the vesting of restricted stock units, employees have in the past, at their election and when permitted by us, chosen to satisfy
their tax Withholding obligations through net share settlement. pursuant to which the Company withholds the nuinbei of shares necessary to satisfy such
withholding obligations. As a result, in 2013 we repurchased 84,433 shares for 50.2 million. or approximately $2.86 per share.

Note 10: Derivative Instruments

At times, we use ﬁnancially-settled forward contracts to manage our exposure to fluctuation in the prices ofcenain metals that we produce.
Contract positions are designed to ensure that we will receive a defined minimum price for cenain quantities ofour production. thereby panially offsetting
our exposure to price fluctuations. These instruments do. however. expose us to ti) credit risk in the event oriion-perfonnance by counterparties for
contracts in which the contiaet price exceeds the spot price ofa commodity and (ii) pricc risk to the extent that the spot price exceeds the contract price for
quantities of our production covered by contract positions.

We use ﬁnanclally-sellled forward contracts to manage the exposure to changes in metal prices afsllver, gold, Zinc and lead contained in our dore
and concentrate shipments between the time of sale and ﬁnal settlement, These contracts do not qualify for hedge accounting and ate rnaiked-to-market
through earnings each period. AI December 31, 2013 we reduced our other cunent asset by approximately $0.5 million for the fair value DfIhe
contracts. The reduction to the other current asset balance is net ofapproxiiiiately $0.1 million for contracts that were in a fair value asset position at
December 31. 2013. We recognized a $3.0 million net gain on the contracts dunng 2013, which is included in sales of products, The net gain recognized
on the contracts offsets price adjustmenls on our provtsional concentrate sales related to changes to silver, gold, lead and zinc prices between the time of
sale and ﬁnal settlemem.

F733


In addition, we use ﬁnancially-settled forward contracts to manage the exposure to changes in prices ofzmc and lead (but not silver and gold)
contained in our forecasted future concentrate shipments. These contracts also do not qualify for hedge accounting and are marked—to-market tlirough
earnings each period. At December 31. 2013 we recorded a current asset of$2.2 million, which is included in other current assets. and a nori-currerit asset
0182.7 million, which is Included iil ether non-current assets. for the fair value of the centiacts. The current asset and non-current asset balances are ilet
of approximately $0.6 million and $1.1 million, respectively, for contracts that were in a fair value liability position at December 3 l, 2013. We recognized
a $18.0 millioil net gain on tile contracts during 2013, which included $16.5 "1|"an in gains realized on settled centiacts. The net gain on these contracts
is included as a separate hue item under other Income (expense), as they relate to forecasted future shipments. as opposed to sales that have already taken
place but are subject to final pricing, This program is designed to mitigate the impact of potential future declines in lead and zinc prices from the price
levels established in tlie eontmets (see average price information below).

The following tables summarize the quantities of metals committed under forward sales contracts at December 31, 2013 and December 31. 2012.
December 31, 2013 Ounces/pounds under contract (in 000's) Average price per ounce/pound
Silver Gnld Zinc Leild Silver Gnld Zinc Lead
(ounces) (nunces) (puunds) (puunds) (nunces) (ounces) (puunds) (pounds)
Contracts on provisional sales
2014 settlements 673 3 11,188 3,472 8 19.50 8 1,205 8 0.89 K; 1.00
Contracts on forecasted sales

2014 settlements 7 7 31,967 34,282 N/A N/A 3 1.00 S 1.04

2015 settlements 7 7 39,683 36,982 N/A N/A 8 0.96 K; 1.07

2016 settlements 7 7 3,803 30,589 N/A N/A 3 0.93 S 1.03

December 3 l. 2012 Ounces/pounds under contract (in 000's) Average price per ounce/pound
Silver Gold Zinc Lend Silver Gold Zine Lead
(ounces) (ounces) (puunds) (puunds) (ounces) (ounces) (pounds) (puunds)
Contracts on provisional sales
2013 settlements 7 7 14,991 6,945 N/A N/A K; 0.95 S 1.00
Contracts on forecasted sales

2013 settlements 7 7 35,935 32,794 N/A N/A 3 0.96 S 1.11

2014 settlements 7 7 311,203 33,069 N/A N/A 1) 0.98 S 1.03

2015 settlements 7 7 3,307 23 ,534 N/A N/A 3 1.01 S 1.06

Production at the Lucky Friday mine was temporarily suspended in 2012, so we liquidated forward contracts teluted to t‘ctecusted Lucky Friday
base metal sales for total net proceeds elf $3.1 lnillion.

Our concentrate sales are based on a provisional sales price containing an embedded derivative that is required to be separated from the host
contract for accounting purposes. The host contract is the receivable from the sale ofthe concentrates at the forward price at the tune ofthe sale. The
embedded derivative, which does not qualify for hedge accounting, is adjusted to market through eaniings each period prior to ﬁnal settlement.

F734


Note 11: Business Segments nud Signiﬁcant Customers

We discover, acquire, develop, produce, and market concentrates and me containing sihet, gold, lead and zinc: our products consist orbottt
mela] cottcenlt‘ales, \vhtclt we sell 10 custom smellers, and unreﬁned bullion bars (doré), “1111011 may be sold as doré or {utther reﬁtted before sale 10
precious metals traders, We are currently organized and managed by lhree segments, which tepresettt out operating unils: the Greens cieek unit, the
Lucky Fiiday unit and the Casa Betaidi unit. As funher discussed in Nam 16, we completed the acquisition ot‘Aurizon on June 1, 2013, givtng us 100%
ownership ot‘ the Casa Beiatdi mine in Quebec, Canada. As a |e=u|L we added a new reporting segment in 20 I 3 for the Casa Betardi unit.

General corporate aetmties not associated wttli operating units and their Vanuus exploration actiVities, as well as discontinued operations and idle
properties, are presented as “other " Interest expense, interest income and income taxes are considered general corporate “Ems, and are not allocated to out
segments.

Sales ot‘metal concentrates and metal pioducts are made principally to custom sinelteis and metals tiadets The peicentage ot‘sales contiibuted by
each segment is tcﬂcctcd iii thc following table:

Year Ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011
Greens Creek 68.8% 100.0% 71.8%
Lucky Friday 1 16% 7% 28.2%
Casa Betattti l 96% 7% 7%
100% 100% 100%
The tables below present infonnation about reportable segments as at and For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 201 l (in thousands).
2013 2012 2011
Net sales to unafﬁliated customers:
Greens Creek S 263,263 5 320.895 15 342,906
Lucky Friday 44,204 243 134,728
Casa Betatdl 75,122 7 7
s 382,589 $ 321,143 1; 477,634
income 1 loss) from operations:
Greens Creek 8 62,178 $ 138,245 $ 181,116
Lucky Friday (3,563) (25,179) 75,608
Casa Betatdi (15,708] 7 7
Other (75,301) (75,200) (59,079)
3 (32,394) 5 37,866 1; 197,645
Capital additions (including non-cash additions):
Greens Creek 3 57,119 5 62,184 1; 41,657
Lucky Friday 55,902 55.998 60,454
Casa Berardi 41,425 7 7
Olliel 8,162 11,760 35,274
8 162,608 $ 129,942 $ 137,385
Depreciation. depletion and amortization:
Greens Creek S 55.265 5 43,522 15 41,013
Lucky Friday 7,333 7 6,053
Casa Beiaidi 18,030 7 7
3 81,128 5 43,522 1; 47,066
Other signiﬁcant non-cash items:
Greens Creek 3 1,961 5 4.037 1; 2,326
Lucky Friday 9 6 92 14
Casa Betatdi 474 7 7
Olliel 1,512 33,922 31,470
8 4.043 $ 38,051 1; 33.810
identifiable assets:
Greens Creek 8 744,027 $ 741,666 $ 729,289
Lucky Friday 313,793 226,196 213,285
Casa Berardi 821,058 7 7
Other 353,241 410,428 453,516


3 2,232,119 $ 1,373,290 3 1,395,090
F-35


The Lucky Friday segmenl had nominal sales during 2012 due Io lhe llall ofproducllon mosl oflhe year. At lhe end of201 1, MSIIA began a
special impacl inspecuon al lhe Lucky Friday mine which resuhed in an order 1c remove bullI-up cemenmious malenal fmm lhe silver Shall. in response,
we submmed a plan lo MSIIA and received approval 1c remove lhe malerral, and lhrs work commenced in 1he ﬁrsl quarler or 2012. in addrucn, lhe plan
included removal of unused ulihues, conslrucucn or a waler ring Io prevenl ice fmm forming in 1he winler, lhe inslallauon ofa melal branice, repair of
shall sleel, and mslallanon of a new power cable. The silver Shall work was compleled in early 2013, and hmued producnon al lhe Lucky Fnday began
in February. We experienced a ramp-up in mine oulpul during lhe year, as addiuonal producncn areas onhe mine came on line, unul we reached full
producliull levels in Seplember 2013, The smelrer conlracrs relared m rrealmenl of Lucky Friday concenrrares have been suspended during the care-and.
mainlenauce period based on form rim/cure. Once rhe Silver Sllaﬁ work was ccunplered down lo lhe 4900 four level, we commenced work on a haulage
way bypassing an area a1 lhe 5900 level unpacled by a rock bursl in December 201 1, and lhe bypass was compleled In early 2013.

The followlllg is sales mformallun by geographic area based on the localion orsmcllers (rorcoucenlrale shipmenls) and the localiou olparcul
companies (for dore sales lo melals rraders) fanlle years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 (m lhousands);

2013 2012 2011
leled Slales 3 22,361 3 25,438 3 24,409
Canada 170,532 34,441 240,569
Japan 50,039 70,371 60,963
Korea 86,035 120,105 92,919
China 50,479 72,133 51,635
Tolal, excluding gains losses on forward comracls S 379,546 3 3227489 3 470,495

Sales 0f producls for 2013 also include a nel gain of 33.0 million on ﬁnancially-senled forward conlracls for silver, gold, lead and zinc conlarned
in our concenlrale sales, 2012 sales included a nel loss ofSl.3 million and 201 1 sales included a nel gain of 37.1 million on 1he conlracls for lead and
zinc. Soc Note 10 for more informariuu,

The lollowing are our long-lived assels by geographic area as of December 31,2013 and 2012 (in lhcusands):

2013 2012
leled Slales 3 1,053,374 3 996,405
Canada 738,172 198
Mexico 5 5 5 s
3 1,791,601 3 996,659
F-36


Sales from cuntinulng upeiatiuns tu signiﬁcant metals customers as a peiceiitage uftotal sales were as follows fur the yeais ended December 3 l,
2013. 2012 and 20l 1:
Year Ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011
Teck Metals Ltd. 250% 10.7% 51.1%
Korea Zillc 22.5% 37.2% 18.4%
Traﬁgura AG 8.8% 22.4% 12.4%
MS Zinc 7.5% 12.3% 6.9%
CIBC 10.9% 7% 7%
Note 12: Fair Value lVleasllrellleIll
The table below sets {0th our assets and liabllltles (1n thousands) that were accounted for at falr value on a recurring basls and the fair value
calculation Input nieiareliy level that we have determined applies to each asset and llability category. See Nola 8 for information an the {air values ofour
deﬁned beneﬁt penslull plan assets.
Balance at Balance at 1iipiit
December 31, December 31, Hierarchy
Z013 2012 Level
Assets:
Cash and cash equivalents:
Money market funds and utller hank depuslts S 212,175 3 190,9 84 Level 1
Available for sale securities:
Equity securities a mining industry 7,019 9,514 chcl 1
Trade accounts receivable:
Receivables from provisiaual concentmtc sales 17,572 17,5 55 Level 2
Derivative contracts:
Base metal forward eentracts 4,451 5,606 chcl 2
Restricted easll balances:
Certiﬁcates of deposit and other bank depastts 5.217 871 Level 1
Total asset,- S 246,544 3 224,630
Liabilities:
Derivative contracts:
Base metal forward contracts $ 7 $ 2,483 chcl 2
F737


Cash and cash equivalents consist primarily of money market funds and ate valued at cost, which approximates t‘aii valiie.

Cun’ent and non-current restricted cash balances consist primarily of certificates ofdeposit and us, Treasury securities and are valued at cost,
which approximates fair value.

Our current and non-current investments consist of marketable equity securities which are valued using quoted market prices for each security
multiplied by the number shares held by us.

Trade accounts receivable consist of amounts due to us for shipments of concentrates and dare sold to smelters altd refiners, Revenues altd the
con esponding accounts receivable for sales of metals piodiicts are iecorded when title and risk of loss transt‘ei to the customer (generally at the time of
shipment). Sales of concentrates are recorded using estimated forward prices lot the anticipated month of settlement applied to our estimate of payable
metal quantities contained in each shipment. Sales aie recorded net otestimated treatment and reﬁning charges. which are also impacted by changes in
metals prices and quantities of contained metals. We must estimate the plices at which sales of out concentrates will be settled due to the time elapsed
between shipment and final settlement with the smelter, Receivables for previously recorded concentrate sales are adjusted to retleet estimated settlement
metals prices at the end of each period until final settlement by the smelter. We obtain the forward metals prices used each period from a pricing
service. Changes in metal prices between shipment and ﬁnal settlement will result in changes to revenues previously recorded upon shipment. The
embedded derivative contained in our concentrate sales is adjusted to fair market value through earnings each period prior to ﬁnal settlement.

During the second quaner ofzoi 0, we began utrlizuig ﬁnancially-settled forward contracts to manage the exposure of changes in pnces ofzuic and
lead contained in out concentrate shipments that have not leached ﬁnal settlement, We also began utilizing ﬁnancially—settled forward contracts in the
second quarter of 2010 to manage the exposure ofchanges in prices ofzrnc and lead contained in our t‘orecasted future concentrate shipments. In the third
quarter of 2013 we began to utilize financially-settled forward contracts to manage the exposure olclianges in prices of silver and gold. as well as lead and
zinc in our concentrate shipments (see Nice 10 for more infonuation).These contracts do not qualify for hedge accounting. and are marked-to-market
through earrirngs each period, The fair value ofeach contract represents the difference between the forward metal price for the contract settlement period as
oftlie measurement date and the contract settlement nietal price. multiplied by the quantity of metal involved in the contract.

Our Senior Notes issued in April 2013, which were recorded at their carrying value of $490.7 million, net ofunamoi’tized initial purchaser
discount at December 31, 2013, had a fair Value cf$4822 million at December 31. 2013, Third-party quotes, whlcll we consider to be Level 2 inputs, are
utilized to estimate fair Values ofthc Senior Notes. See Note 6 for more ilifon‘nation.

Assets alid liabilities illeasured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis during the year ended December 31. 2013 were related to our acquisition of
Aurlzon, See Note 16 for information on assets acquired and liabilities assumed, which were measured at fair value as oftlie acquisition date, and were
measured at farr value on a nonrecurrrrig basis aﬁer the acquisition date. We had no signiﬁcant assets or liabilities measured at farr value on a
nonrecurrrng basis during the year ended December 31. 2012 .

Note 13: Income (Loss) per Common Share

We are authorized to issue 500,000.000 shares chcmmon stock, 50.25 par value per share. At December 31. 2013. there were 343,585,102 shares
of our common stock issued and 921.721 shares issued and held in treasury, for a net uf342,663,381 shares outstanding,

We calculate basic eamings per share using, as the denominator, the weighted average number ofcornrnon shares outstanding during the period.
Diluted eanrings per share uses, as its denominator, the weighted average number ofcorniuon shares orrtstandiirg during the period plus the effect of
potential dilutive common shares during the period using the treasury stock method for options, warrants, and restricted stock units, and if-converted
method for convertible preferred shares.

Potential dilutive common shares include outstanding stock options. restricted stock awards, stock units. wairants and convertible preferred stock
fol periods in which we have reported net income. Fol periods in which we reponed net losses, potential dilutive common shares are excluded. as their
conversion and exercise would not reduce earnings per share. Under the if-converted method. preferred shares would not dilute eamings per share In any of
the periods presented.

F738


A [Mal af157,816 shares of preferred srock were errrsrandurg al December 31, 2013.
The folluwlng table represerns rrer inccrne per Cummull slrare 7 basic and drlured (1n thousands exeepr eamlngs per share).
Year ended December 31,
2013 2012 2011
Numeramr
Net income (1055) 8 (25,131)) 3 14,954 1; 151,164
Preferred sreek drvrderrds (552) (552) (552)
Net rncome (1055) applicable [u ccrnmon shares 8 (25,682) 3 14,402 19 150.612
Denaminamr
anlc werglrred average cummon shares 318,679 285,375 280,956
Dilulive stuck up1iuns, reslnclerl slack, and wanams 7 12,191 16,077
Dllurcd welglrrcd average commbrr shares 318,679 297,566 297,033
Basic earnings (loss) per- common share s (0.08) s 0105 5 0,54
Diluted earnings (loss) per common slrrrre s (0.08) s 0105 s 0.51
Fer rlre year ended December 1 1, 2013, all Dmslandmg eprrens. resrr-rcred slrare unlls, and wunums were excluded from rlre comprrrurron of dlluled
eamrugs (1055) per share. as crur reporred net lusses fur rlrnr perrod would cause rlrelr ccrmerslcru and exercrse ro have nu effect an rlre calcularlon breamrugs
(less) per share. For the years enderl December 311 2012 uml 2011 , we excluded eprrcrns wlrcrse exercrse prices exceeded rlre average prices ufour srock
durlng rlre perleds, as rlrelr exercise wuuld nor have reduced earmugs per share. The folluwlng epuons were excluded:
Ycrrr ended Deeernber 31,
2012 2011
srock oplions 570,005 552,388
m9


Nate 14; Other Cnmprehensive 1neame(Luss)
The fallowlng table 11sts the begmmng balance, yearly acuvtly and endmg balance ofeach eompnnent of"Accumu1ated other comprehenslve loss,
net" (tn thousands):
Tmul
Unrealized Accumulated
Gains Other
(Losses) Adjuslntenls Comprehensive
On Securities For Penbiun Plans Loss, Net
Balance January 1,2011 3 1,462 3 (16,579) 1» (15,117)
2011 change (627) (7,754) (8,381)
Balance December 31, 201 1 835 (24,333) (23,4911)
2012 change 1,224 (1,644) (420)
Balance December 31, 2012 2,059 (25,977) (23,918)
2011 change (4,611) 2,230 (2,381)
Balance December 31, 2013 3 (2.552) 3 (23.747) 5 (26.299)

The $41: m1llion change 1n unrealized gains (losses) on secutities 111 2013 is net of $3.0 million for the reclassiﬁcation to currenl earnings of
unpainnents ut‘ eqtttty seeurtttes, as we deemed the unpainnents Iu be other-than-tempurary, The amounts abuve are net of the meme tax effect 01‘ such
balances and aclwtty as summanzed tn the followmg table (In thousands)

Income Tax Effect 01':
Total
Unrealized Accumulated
Gains Other
(Losses) Adjustments Comprehensive
Dn Securilies For Pensiun Plans Loss, Net
Balance January 1,2011 $ 75 $ 883 $ 958
2011 change 382 5,263 5,645
Balance December 3 1, 2011 457 6,146 6,603
2012 change 145 11130 1,275
Balance December 31, 2012 602 7,276 7,878
2011 change 17 (1.512) (1.495)
Balance December 31, 2013 s 619 3 5.764 S 6.383
See Note 2 for mare utformatmn on our marketable seettnnes and Note 8 for more tnfomtntton on our employee beneﬁt plans.
Note 15: Related Party Transactions
During 2003, we estabtrshen the Heela Charitable Foundation to operate excluswely tbr charitable and educational purposes, w1lh a paniculat
emphasis in Ihose communilies in whtch we have employees or operalions, and donated 550,000 shares of our common stock, valued at $5.1
nullton. Cash camnbtmons Iotalmg $2.0 m1111an were made by lleela m the Ilecla Chamable Foundauon dunng 201 l. The llecla Chanlable Foundaan
was estabhshed by IIeeln as a nut-far—pmﬁt organlz'rmun wlueh has obtatned 501(c)(3) status (mm the Intemal Revenue Servtee. Its ﬁnnnetal statements
are net eonsohdnted by Hec1a,
F740


Note 16: Acquisitions

Acquisition a/A m'tzan ll/Iilicx Ltd.

On June 1, 2013, IIecla and Aurizon consummated the Acqulsmon Agreement pursuant to which Ilecla acquired all nithe issued and outstanding
common shares of Aurizon for consideration Valued at US$4.32 (CABS/$.47) per share (the "Acquisitioii"), Under Ihe Ieims oflhe Acquisition, each
holder anurizon common shares [a “Shareholder") had the option of electing to receive either CABS/$.75 in cash (the “Cash Alternative") or 0,995] of a
IIecla share (the “Share Alteniative") per Aurizon share, subject in each case to proralion. Each Shareholder received CAD$3JI (US$3.00) in cash and
0.3442 Ufa Hecla share for each Aurizuii share. with limited exceptiuns in which certain sinckhulders received 100% ofiheir considemtiun in Hecla shares.
Aunan hail 164,83 8377 issued and outstanding common shares Immediately prior to consummation oflhe Acquisition, An additional 747,132 Aurizon
coinnion shares were issued iniinedintely prior to consummation of the Acquisition related to the conversion efin-tlie-inniiey Auriznn stock options,
resulting in a total of 165,585,509 issued and outstanding Aunzon common shares at the time of consummation of the Acquisition. Cunsideraliuri
transferred to ccnsiiininnie the Acquisition was comprised of cash pald by l-lecln of CADSS 14,5 inillicn (US$496.2 million) and issuance ci‘
56,997,790 shares of Hecla common slack valued at CAD$2263 (US$2183 million) for Iolal consideration ofCAD$74(J.8 million (US$714.5
niilhon)_based on the USS to CADS exchange rale {#139645 at the time of consummation. The value ofllecl'd stack issued as consideralion was based
upon the closing price at the time cfccnsummalion oi' CAD$3.97 (US$3.83) pei share.

The cash ponion nithe Acquisition was pninniily funded by the issuance of Senior Notes in April 2013 {oi net proceeds of $490 million. See Note
6 for more information,

On August 23, 2013, Aiinzon transferred its Junsdlctmn ofinccmointicn by Canlmumg t'ioin Bniisli Columbia tn the Canadian tedenil
jurisdiction. Aiirizon IS now governed by the Canadian Buxinexx Cm‘pal‘atimix Act. Concurrently with the continuation, Aurizon changed its name to
Hcclzi Quebec lnc.

F741


The following summarizes ihe allocaiiou or purchase price 11: ihe fair value or asseis acquired and liabiliiies assumed as of 1he daie of acquisiiiou
(iii ihousanus):
Consideration:
c-asli paymeius 1; 495,21 1
Hecla slack issued (56,997,790 shares at $3.83 per share) 218,302
Toial consideraiion $ 714513
Fair value of net asseis acquired:
Assets:
Cash $ 1 77 ,5 8 7
Accoums recelvable 14,307
Inveniory - bullion and siockpiled are 8,090
Invemory . supplies 5,704
Diller currem assets 7,036
Pmpemes, plants, equipment and mineral inleresis, nei 715,391
Noll-currem resmcied cash and Investments 4,471
Ollier nan-currem assets 7 9 5
Tmal assets 933,381
Liabilllies:
Accoums payable 22,227
Accrued payioll and ielaied beneﬁls 7,613
Accrued Inxcs 5 09
Non-currenl deferred lax llabillty 177,016
Non-currcm rcclainauon l 1,1 13
Olher nun-curler“ liabilliies 390
Tonal llabllillcs 218,868
Net asseis S 714,513

The $715.4 million fair value for "Properly, plains, equipmem, and iiiineial inieiesis, iiei" is comprised “$1 1.1 million for ihe assei reui-emeni
ubllgallon assei, $127.8 million for plum and equipiiieni, and 557615 millicn fci- develcpmeni, value beyund proveii and pmbable reserves, and oilier
niineial iniercsis.

The unaudiied pro funna ﬁnancial informauon below represenis ilie combined resulis of our opel'allulls as iflhe Acquisiiion had occurred ai 1he
beginning ofihe periods presenied. The iinaudiied pro foniia financial infonnauou is presenied for infonnaiioual purposes only and is uoi indicaiive of 1he
resulis uf operaiions ihai would have occurred inhe acquisillon had iaken place ai ihe beginnlng of ilie periods presenied. nor is ii mdicanve of ruiiire
upcraiing resulls.

Twelve Months Ended
December 31,
(in 1hciisands, excepi per share arriciinis) 2013 2012
Sales nfproducts 5 458,755 5 544,770
Net incomcaoss) (9,539) 28,194
Income (loss) applicable io common siockholders (10,091) 27,642
Basic and diluied income (loss) per common share (a as) 0.03

The pro forina ﬁnancial mformallon includes adjusmlems 1o reneci 1he depreciaiion and amonizaiion of asseis acquired, an esiiinaie of inieresi

expense relaled m “13 Senior Noies than would have been Incurred, and ille issuance of Hecla slack as Cullsidemtiull ill Ille acqulsliion.
F742


San Juan Silver Mining Joint Venture 30% Acquisition

On December 12‘ 201 ll we announced that our wholly-owned subsidiary, RIO Grande silver lnc. (“Rio“), entered into a Purchase and Sale
Agreemenl wrth Emerald Mmrng & Leasing, LLC ("EML"), Golden 3 Mmrng, LLC ("as"), and Agx Resources, Inc. ("AgX"), (EMLr ex, and Agx are
collectively referred to as the "Sellers"). Under the terms or the Agreement, Rio purchased the Scllcls’ remaining 30% undivided interest in certain properties
that had been govenred by a 1mm Venture Agreement ("2008 IVA") entered rrrto between EML. GS. and km on February 21. 2003, in return fur the
issuance of 5,395,683 shares of Hecla common stock valued at $33.3 mrlhon on the date that the transactron was completed The number afcammon
shares rssued was based on 90% of the volume-weighted average price of our common shares on the New Yolk Stuck Exchange fur the 20 trading days
immediately preceding and rrreluding Deeember 2, 2011.

The original 2008 JVA between EML. G8. and R10 was terminated and a new Joint Venture Agreement for the exploration. evaluation and possible
development and mrrrmg ofmllleral resources on certain properties in Mineral County, Colorado was entered into. EML, ex, and Rio will manage and
operate under the name San Juan silver Mining Joint Venture, and Rra wlll be the rnrtial operator.

F41


Note 17: Guarantor Subsidiaries

Presented below me Hecla Mining Company's condensed consolidating ﬁnancial statements as iequired by Rule 3.10 of Regulation s—x of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. as amended. resulting from the guarantees by certain of our subsidiaries (the "Guarantors") of the $500 million aggregate
piincipal amount ufthe Company's 6.875% Senior Notes due on May I, 2021 (the "Notes", see Nata 6 for more information). The Guarantors consist of
the following of our 100%-0Wn6d subsidiaries: Hecla Limited; Silver Hunter Mining Company; Rio Grande Silver. Inc.; RHL Holdings, Inc.; Hecla MC
Subsidiary, LLC: Hecla Silver Valley, Inc.; Burke Trading, Inc.; Heela Alaska LLC: Hecla Greens Creek Mining Company; Hecla Admiralty
Company, and l-lecla Juneau Mining Company, We completed the offering ofthe Notes on April 21, 2013, and a related exchange offer for virtually
identical notes registered with the SEC on January 3, 2014.

The condensed consolidating tinancial statements below have been prepared from our ﬁnancial intonuation on the same basis of accounting as the
consolidated ﬁnancial statements. investments tn the subsidiaries are accounted for under the equity method. Accordingly, the entries necessary to
consolidate Hecla Mining Company and the (iiiaiantois are ietlected in the intercompany eliminations column, In the course of preparing consolidated
ﬁnancial statements, we eliminate the effects of various transactions conducted between our siibsidiaiies, While valid at an individual subsidiary level,
such activities are eliminated in consolidation because, when taken as a whole, they do not represent business activity with third-party customers,
vendors, and other parties. Examples of such eliminations include the following.

- Investments in subsidiaries. The acquisition ofa company results in an investment on the records of the parent company and a contribution of
capital on the records of the subsidiary. Such investments and capital contributions are eliminated in consolidation.

- Capital contributions. Other of our subsidiaries do not generate cash ﬂow, and their cash requirements are routinely met with inter—company
advances fioin their parent companies. On an annual basis, the boards of directois of such parent companies declare contributions of capital to
their subsidiary companies, which increase the parent's investment and the subsidiaries' additional paid-in capital. ln consolidation, investiuents
iii subsidiaries and related additional paid-in capital are eliminated,

- Deferred taxes. Our ability to realize deferred tax assets and liabilities is considered on a consolidated basis for subsidiaries within the United
States, with all subsidiaries' estimated future taxable income contributing to the ability to realize all such assets and liabilities, However, when
our subsidiaries are viewed independently, we use the scpumtc return method to assess the realizability of each subsidiaiy's deferred tax assets
and whether a valuation allowance is reqiiiied against such deferred tax assets. In some instances. a parent company or subsidiaiy may possess
deferred tax assets wliose realization depends on the future taxable incomes of other subsidiaries on a consolidated-return basis, but would not be
considered realizable ifsuch parent or subsidiary filed on a separate stand-alone basis. In such a situation, a valuation allowance is assessed on
that subsidiary's deferred tax assets, with the resulting adjustment reponed in the elimination: column ofthe guarantor and parent’s ﬁnancial
statements, as is the case in the ﬁnancial statements set forth below. The separate Ictum method can result in signiﬁcant eliminations of
deferred tax assets and liabilities and related income tax provisions and beneﬁts, Non-current deferred tax asset balances are included in other
non—current assets on the condensed consolidating balance sheets and make up a large portion of that item, particularly for the miarantor
balances.

F44


Cundensed Cumuuamng 131111.166 51.6615
As of December 31,2013
Non-
Parent Guarnnlor Gummar Eliminations Cnnsulidamd
(in 11.01.361.119
Assets
Can-hand68506000616111; 3 126,271 3 40,009 6 45,895 3 7 3 212,175
Olher 61mm asscls 4,795 75,083 33,129 18,453 131,460
Propemes, planls, and sqummsm . n61 803 1,052,102 738,696 7 1,791,601
Intermmpnny receivable (payable) 547,074 (131,599) (464,634) 49,159 7
Investments .11 4013511113116.- 1,176,293 7 7 (1,176,293) 7
011m non-currem assets 5,248 164,563 1 1,1 15 (84,043) 96,883
Totalassets 3 1,860,484 3 1,200,158 6 364,201 3 (1,192,724) 3 2,232,119
Llnbililies mm Stockholders' Equity
Cummmmnm 3 10,058 3 117,422 6 24,000 3 7 3 151,480
Long-term dcbl 490,726 14,292 40 7 505,058
Non-currem puniun 6366mm reclamauon 7 38,426 8,340 7 46,766
Non-cuncnl deferred m 11ab1111y 7 16,430 164,861 (16,431) 164,860
Oxhcr 6611760116111 1181111106,: 33,281 4,043 212 7 37,536
Slackhnlders' cquny 1,326,419 1,009,545 166,748 (1,176,293) 1,326,419
Tomunbumesnnd“ockholdmveqmw 3 1,860,484 3 1,200,158 6 364,201 3 (1,192,724) 3 2,232,119
3.45


As of December 31, 2012
Non»
Parent Guarnnlor Guam-nor Eliminations Cnnsulidated
(in mommis)

Assets

Cashandcashcquivalenls 1; 132,266 1; 57,075 8 1,643 3 7 1; 190,984
Olhercurremasscls 7,399 65,658 766 18,091 91,914
Properties, planls, and sqiupmsm . net 7 991,476 5,183 7 996 ,6 59
Intermmpany receivable (payable) 113,234 (64,893) (74,450) 26,109 7
Investments in subsidiaues 918,526 7 7 (918,526) 7
Omar nun-currem assets 3,059 164,913 7,600 (76,839) 98,733
Tomlassm 1; 1,174,484 1; 1,214,229 8 (59,258) 3 (951,165) 1; 1,378,290
Llnbililies mm Stockholders' Equity

Cumiilmbiiims 1; 3,726 1; 121,221 8 1,016 3 (30,976) 1; 94,987
Long-term dcbl 7 1 1,875 60 7 1 1,935
Non-currem puniun ofaccmd reclamalion 7 92,825 545 7 93,370
011m nun-current liabililies 32,807 8,651 252 (1,663) 40,047
Slockhulders'squily 1,137,951 979,657 (61,131) (918,526) 1,137,951
Totalllahllltlesandstuckhulders'equily 3 1,174,484 $ 1,214,229 3 (59,258) $ (9514165) 3» 1.3734290

F-46


Condensed Consulidaﬁng SIMemems of Operation:
Year Ended December 31, 2013
Non-
Parent Guarnnlor Guarantor Eliminnlians Cnnsulidamd
(1n mousands)
Revenues 8 3,044 $ 304,423 3 75,122 3 7 $ 382,589
Cos1ofsn1es 7 (179,491) (55,825) 7 (235,316)
Depreciauon, depleuon, amomznuon 7 (63,097) (18030) 7 (81,127)
GeneraI and admlmsrmuve (14,441) (13,174) (1,310) 7 (28,925)
Explumuon and pre-deve1onnnen1 (576) (24,990) (12,084) 7 (37,650)
Gam 6n derwadve culmacls 17,979 7 7 7 17,979
Aunznn acqulsllmn casts (14,444) 7 (11,953) 7 (26,397)
Equin m cammgs ofsubsidiancs (15,807) 7 7 15,807 7
OLhcr (expense) meerne (885) 1,345 (9,616) (16,922) (26,078)
Income (lms) before .neorne [axes (25,130) 25,016 (33,696) (1,115) (34,925)
(Prov15iun) beneﬁr from meme (axes 7 (14,171) 7,044 16,922 9,795
Net inenme (1055) (25,130) 10,845 (26,652) 15,807 (25,130)
Preferred smck dwrdends (552) 7 7 7 (552)
Income (1055) appllcablc r6 cummun smckhuldcrs (254682) 104845 (26,652) 15,807 (25,682)
Ne! inenme (1055) (25,130) 10,845 (26,652) 15,807 (25,130)
Changes in enmnrenensive income (1055) (2,381) (7) (4,587) 4,594 (2381)
Comprehensive mm: (105;) 8 (27,511) $ 10,838 3 (31,239) 3 20,401 $ (27,511)
F747


Year Ended December 31, 2012
Non-
Parent Guarnnlor Guarantor Eliminnlians Consnlidnled
(in ﬂmumnds)
Revenues 0 (1,346) $ 322,489 $ 7 s 7 0 321,143
C051 of sales 7 (134,105) 7 7 (134,105)
Depreciauon, depleuon, amomznuon 7 (43 ,522) 7 7 (43,522)
General and adnnmsrmuve (11,519) (9,519) (215) 7 (21,253)
Explumuon and pro-development (1,262) (33,700) (9,776) 7 (49,738)
Loss on dcrwauve eeiumeis (10,457) 7 7 7 (10,457)
Closed uperaliuns 7 (2,259) (2,393) 7 (4,652)
Equin m cammgs of subsidiones 21,246 7 7 (21,246) 7
OLhcr (expensc) meeme 18,292 (27,747) (3,207) (20,921) (33,583)
1neome (loss) before meomc [axes 14,954 66,637 ( 15,591) (42,167) 23,833
(Prov15iun) benem from meome (axes 7 (29,802) 7 20,923 (8,879)
Ncl income (1055) 14,954 36,835 ( 15,591) (21,244) 14,954
Preferred smck dwidends (552) 7 7 7 (552)
Income (loss) appllcable in common sroekno1ders 141402 36,835 ( 15.591) (21,244) 141402
Net income (loss) 14,954 36,835 (15,591) (21,244) 14,954
Changes in eomprenensive income (less) (420) (91 1) 1,438 (527) (420)
Comprehensive mm: (1055) 0 14,534 $ 35,924 $ (14,153) $ (21,771) 0 14,534
F748


Year Ended December 31, 2011
Non»
Parent Guarantor Guarantor Eliminnlians Consolidated
(in thousands)
Revenues 8 7,140 8 470,494 3 7 8 7 8 477,634
Cost ofsales 7 (165.573) 7 7 (165,573)
Depreciation. dep1etion. amomznuon 7 (47,066) 7 7 (47,066)
Genei-aI and adiiiinistianve (10.355) (7,909) (276) 7 (18,540)
Exploration and pre-deveiopment (407) (23,548) (7,450) 7 (31,405)
Cam on derivative eoiiimets 37,988 7 7 7 37,988
c1osed uperaliuns 7 (8,961) (786) 7 (9,747)
Equin in cammgs ofsiihsidiories 254,902 7 7 (254,902) 7
Other (expense) ineome (138.104) 4,920 (3,391) 126,426 (10,149)
hieome (loss) before inemne taxes 151, 164 222,357 (11.903) (128,476) 233,142
(Provision) beneﬁt from income taxes 7 44.448 7 (126,426) (81,978)
Ncl ineoiiie(1oss) 151,164 266.805 (11.903) (254,902) 151,164
Preferred stock dividends (552) 7 7 7 (552)
Iiieoiiie(loss)app1iea1ileio eoinmoii stockholders 1507612 266.805 (11.903) (2547902) 150,612
Net income (loss) 151,164 266,805 (11,903) (254,902) 151 ,164
Changes in comprehensive income (loss) (8,381) (3,0139) (679) 3,768 (8381)
Comprehensive mm“: (1055) 8 142,783 8 263,716 3 (12,582) 8 (251,134) 8 142,783
Condensed Consolidating Statements of Cash Flows
year Ended December 31, 2013
Non-
Parent Guarantor Guarantor Eliminations Consolidated
(in thousands)

Cash ﬂows from Dpemnng activiltes 8 (9,95 8) 8 17,940 3 (20,129) 8 38,791 8 26,644
Cash ﬂows from Invesung oetivities;

Additions to properties, p1aiits. and equipment (1,535) (107,893) (41,308) 7 (150,736)

Aeqiiisitioii DfAHnZOn Mines Ltd (498.705) 7 177,588 7 (321.117)

Other investing activities, net 7 (1 1) (3.633) 7 (3,644)
Cash ﬂows from ﬁnancmg activities;

Dividends paid to stoekhn1ders (6,543) 7 7 7 (6,543)

Burfowmgs on debt 490.000 7 7 7 490,000

Payments on debt 7 (7,039) 7 7 (7,039)

Other riiianeiiig activity 20,746 79,937 (63.361) (38,791) (1,469)
Changes in cash and cash equivalents (5,995) (17,066) 49,157 7 26,096
meet ofcxchangc iate ehaiiges on eash 7 7 (4.905) 7 (4,905)
Beginning cash and cash equiva1eiits 132,266 57,075 1,643 7 190,984
Ending Cash and cash equivalents S 120,271 $ 40.009 8 45,895 S 7 S 212,175

v.49


Year Ended December 31, 2012
Non-
Parent Guarnnlor Guarnnmr Eliminminns Cnnsulidated
(1n momnds)

Cash ﬂows from Dpemnng activilles 5 49,295 5 42,957 3 (14,296) 5 (8,940) 5 69,016
Cash ﬂows from 1nvesl1ng aclwmes:

Addmons 16 properties, 615.115, and equipment (618) (107,425) (5,053) 7 (113,096)

011m inveqing acxivilles, 1m (48.815) 891 (5,835) 48,817 (4,942)
Cash ﬂows from ﬁnancmg acuvmes:

Dlvldends [5811116 51661116101215 (17.673) 7 7 7 (17,673)

Paymems on debt 7 (5,878) (12) 7 (5,890)

Other ﬁnanmng acuvny 52,227 (41,903) 26,659 (39,877) (2,894)
Changes in cash and cash equivalents 34,416 (1 11,358) 1,463 7 (75,479)
Begmnmg cash and cash eqmvalems 97,850 168,433 180 7 266,463
Ending cash and cash equivalents S 132,266 $ 57,075 8 1,643 3 7 $ 190,984

Year Ended December 31, 20]]
Non»
Parent Guarnnlor Guarantor Eliminminns Consnlidnled
(1n momnds)

Cash ﬂows from Dpemnng activilles 5 105,740 5 79,166 5 (12,449) 3 (102,566) 5 69, 891
Cash ﬂows from 1nvesl1ng aclwmes:

Addmons to properties, plants, and equipmam (2) (87,454) (90) 7 (87,546)

Other Invcslingaellullcs (38.356) (1,659) 1 47.741 7,727
Cash ﬂows from ﬁnancmg acuvmes:

Dlvldends [2811110 stockholders (9.414) 7 7 7 (9.414)

Paymems on debt 7 (2,938) 7 7 (2,938)

Other ﬁnanmng acuvny (150,118) 88.193 12,237 54,825 5,137
Changes in cash and cash equivalents (92,150) 75,308 (301) 7 (17,143)
Begmnmg cash and cash eqmvalenls 190,000 93.125 481 7 283,606
Ending cash and cash equivalents 3 97,850 3 1681433 3 130 S 7 3 2557453

F-50


llecla Mmmg Company and Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
Form lO-K 7 December 31. 2013
Index (o Exhibits

2,1 Amngemenl Agreeinem da(ed as of March 3, 2013, by and among llecla Mining Company, i(s wholly owned subsidiary. 0963708 BC.
LTD., and Aunzon Mines le. Filed as exhlbll 2.1 (o Reglsminl's Cnrrem Reporl on Form 8-K on March 4, 2013 (File No. [-8491), and
incorporaled herein by ieference.

3.1 Ceriificale of lncorpora(ian of ihe Registrant as amended (c da(c. Filed as cxhibll 31 (o kegislianrs Form 100 for lhe quancr ended June 30,
2010 (File No. 1.84911. and incorporaled herein by reference.

3.2 Bylaws aflhe Regisirani as amended io dale. Filed as exhibil 3.1 lo Regisnanrs Ciirrenl Repun on Form 8-K filed on December 6, 2007
(File No. 143491131111 incorporaled herein by reference.

4,1(a1 Ceriificale of Designaiions, Preferences and nghls of Series A Jiinicr Pamclpallng Preferred Slock aflhc kegisnam. Filed as exhibil 3.1 in
Regislrani‘s Form lO-Q for (he qiiarler ended June 30. 2010 (File No. 1.84911. and incorpoialed herein by reference.

4.1(b1 Ceriiﬁcaie afDesignalions, Preferences and nghls of Series 13 Cumulanve Convenible Preferred Slock oflhe Regislranl. Filed as exhibil 3.1
(o Regislranl's Form 100 for (he qnaner ended Jime 30, 2010 (File No. 1.13491 1, and incorporaled herein by reference.

4,2(a1 Fonn efSeries 1 Common Slock Purchase Wanam. Filed as exlnbil 4.1 (o Reglslmm's Ciirrenl Repori on Form 8-K filed on Decembei 11.
2008 (File No. 1.84911. and incorporaled herein by reference.

4.2(b1 Form efSeries 3 Common Slock Purchase Wanam. Filed as exhlbn 41 lo Regislranrs Ciirrenl Repen on Form 8-K ﬁled on February 9,
2009 (File No. 1.3491 1, and incorporaled herein by reference,

4.3(a1 lndenlnre, da(ed April 12,2013, among Hecla Mlnlng Company, as lssiiei-, ceriain subsidiaries of Hecla Mining company. as Gnaranlors,
and The Bank of New York Melon Tins( Company, N.A.. as Tmslee. Filed as exhibil 10.1 lo Regisli-am's ciin~en( Repori on Form 8-K
filed on April 15.2013 (File No. 1.34911, and incorpora(ed herein by reference.

4.3( b1 Reglslmunn Righls Agreemem, daled as oprnl 12.2013. among llecla Mlmng Company. as lssner, cerlain subsidiaries ofllecla Mmlng
Company, as Gnaramois (herele, and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Sinnh lncorpera(ed and Scona Capilal (USA) Inc, Represemalives
of (he lnilial Piiichasers. Filed as exhibil 10.3 lb Regislranl‘s ciirrenl Reporl on Form 8-K ﬁled on Apnl 15,2013 (File No. 1.34911. and
incorporamd hereby by reference.

4.3(e1 Escrow Agreemem, da(ed April 12. 2013, among llecla Mmlng Company, cenain snbsidianes cfllecla Mmlng Company, as Gnaramois.
The Bank of New York Mellon Trns( Company, N.A., as Escrow Agent and Secniilies ln(errnediary, and The Bank of New York Mellon
Triisl Company, N,A.. as Trns(ee nnder (he lndenlnre. Filed as exhibn 10.2 lo Regislram's Cnirenl Repon on Form 8-K filed on Apnl 15.
2013 (File No. 1.84911. and incorporaled herein by reference.

10.1 Third Amended and Resla(ed Credil Agreemenl effecliye February 14, 2014. by and amung Hecla Mimng Company, l-lecla Limiled, l-lecla
Alaska LLC, Hecla Greens Cieek Mining Company, and l-lecla Juneau Mlnlng Company, as (he Bonowers, The Bank ofNova Sco(ia, as
(he Adminislralive Agenl for (he Lenders, and Vanous Lenders. Filed as exhibil 10.1 lo Regislranl‘s Cnrrem Reporl on Form 8-K filed on
February 13. 2014 (File No. [-84911, and incorporaled herein by ieference,

10.2 Employmenl Agreemenl daled June 1. 2007, belween Regislranl and Phillips 5. Baker, 1r. Regislram has siibs(anlially idenlical agreenienl
wilh Dean w. McDonald (also daled June 1, 20071, Don Poirier on July 9, 2007, James A. Sabala on March 26, 20011, and David C.
Sienko on January 29. 2010. Filed as exhlbn 10.1 (o Reglslmm‘s Qnarlerly Repori on Form 10-Q for lhe qnarler ended June 30. 2007
(File No. 1-84911. and incorporaled herein by reference. (11

10.3 Employineni Agreemcm enleicd in(o on January 23, 2013, bclwcen chislranl and Lawrence P. Radfard. Filed as exhibil 10.2 lo Registrant's
Qiiarierly Repon on Form 100 for (he quaner ended March 31,2013 (File No. [-84911, and incorporaled herein by reference. (11

Ml


10.4 Form oflndeinniﬁcation Agreement dated November 3, 2000, between Registrant and Phillips S. Baker, Jr., Dean McDonald, Ted Crumley,
John H. Euwlcs. George R. Nethercutt, Jr.. and Anthony P. Taylor. identical lndemnifieation Agreements were entered into between the
Registrant and Charles B. Stanley and Teny V. Rogers on May 4, 2007, Dun Pomer on July 9, 2007, James A. Sabala on March 26, 2008.
Davuf C. Sienko on January 29. 2010, and Lawrence P. Radford on October 19,2011. Filed as exhibit 10.7 to Registrant‘s Quarterly
Report on Form IO»Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2006 (File No. 143491), and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.5 Hecla Mmlng Company Executive and Senior Management Long-Term Performance Payment Plan. Filed as exhibit 10.16(a) to Registrant's
Form 10.1< for the period ended December 31. 2008 (File No. 10491), and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.6 Hecla Mining Company Perfortnance Pay Compensation Plan. Filed as Exhibit 10.5(a) to Registrants Form [0-K for the period ended
December 31, 2004 (File No. 1-8491). and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.7 Hecla Mining Company Stock Plan for Non—employee Directors. as amended. Filed as exhibit 10.6 to Reglslranl‘s Fortn lO-K for the period
ended December 31, 2012 (File No. 1.3491). and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.8 Hecla Mining Company Key Employee Deferred Compensation Plan. as amended. Filed as exhibit 10.16(e) to Registrants Form [0-K for
the year ended December 31, 2008 (File No. 143491), and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.9 Hecla Mining Company 2010 Stock incentive Plan. Filed as exhibit 10.1 to Rtgistrant‘s Annual Report on Form lO-K for the year ended
December 31. 2010 (File No. 1-8491) and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.10 Hecla Mining Company Retirement Plan for Employees and Supplemental Retirement and Death Beneﬁt Plan. Filed as exhibit 10.17(a) to
Registrant's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (File No. 143491), and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.1 1 Supplemental Excess Retirement Master Plan Documents. Filed as exhibit 10.5(b) to Registrant‘s Annual Report on Form lO-K/A-l for the
year ended December 31, 1994 (File No. 1-8491), and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

10.12 Hecla Mining Company Nonqualified Plans Master Trust Agreemem. Filed as exhibit 10.5(c) to Registrant‘s Annual Report on Fortn 10.
K/A-l for the year ended December 31. 1994 (File No. 1-8491). and incorporated herein by reference. (1)

12.1 Computation ofRatio ufEamings to Fixed Clixrges.‘

21 List of subsidiaries of Registrant"

23.1 Consent of BDO USA, LLP.‘

23.2 Consent of AMEC E&C Sertriees, Inc.‘

23.3 Consent of Roseoe Postle Assoeiates lnc.*

31.1 Certiﬁcation pursuant to Section 302 ofthe Sarbanes-Oxley Act uf2002.*

31.2 Certiﬁcation pursuant to Section 302 ofthe Sarbanes-Oxley Act uf2002.*

32.1 Certification pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes—oxley Act of2002.*

32.2 Certification pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes—oxley Act of2002.*

9 5 Mine safety information listed in Section 1503 of the Budd-Frank Act. *

101.le XBRL instance.u

101.SC1-1 XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema."

101.CA1_ XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation.“

101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Deﬁnition.W

101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Extension Labels.“

101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Extension Prcsemaﬁon.”


(1) Indxcates a managemem contract or Cumpensalory plan or amngemem.
‘ Filed hcrcwnh
** XBRL infommlmn is fumxshed and um ﬁled or a pan ofa registralion slalemenl or prospectus for purposes of Sections 11 or 12 of the
Secumies and Exchange Ad of 1933‘ as amended, .5 deemed um ﬁled an pumuses 0f Section 18 uflhe Secmilies and Exchange Act of 1934‘ as
amendem and mherwlse is nul subjecl m liabllny under mese secnons.
5 2


Exhibit 12,1
Heels Mining Company
Fixed Charge and Preferred Dividend Coverage Ralin Calculmion
For me Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012, 2011, 2010 11nd 2009
Year Ended Deeernirer 31,
2013 2012 2011 2010 20119

Ncl ineome (1oss) bcfmc ineerne Inxcs 3 (34,925) 3 23,833 3 233,142 3 (74,549) 3 60,146
l'ixcd chaigcs.

lnieresr penien ofrcnlals 1,592 1,044 1,014 6 9 5 814

T6161 inrei-esr edsis 28,174 2,427 2,875 2,211 13,244
Total ﬁxed charges 29,766 3,471 3,889 2,906 14,058
Tm] eammg, (1m) 3 (5,159) 3 27,304 3 237,031 3 (71,643) 3 74,204
preferred stuck dividend requiremerns 3 5 52 3 5 52 s 5 5 2 3 13,633 3 13,633
Ratio ofpreirx .nmme (1oss) 10 re. meme does) 3 0.72 3 1.59 s 1.54 3 (1.52) 3 0.89
preferred smck div1dend fdemr 3 5 52 3 878 s 850 3 13,633 3 13,633
Ratio ofcamings in ﬁxed charges (In) 7.9 609 (na) 53
R3110 ufanmings in ﬁxed charges and preferred dmdends (nd) 63 50.0 (na) 27
Covcmgc deﬁeii.

06 ﬁxed charges 3 34,925 3 7 s 7 3 74,549 3 7

06 ﬁxed merges and preferred dividends 35,477 7 7 88,182 7


Exhibit 21
LIST OF HECLA MINING COMPANY SUBSIDIARIES
List or Subsidiaries
l-leela Lumled, a Delaware curpumtlon
Hecla Admimlty Company, a Delaware corporanon
IIecla Canada le., a Federal Canadlan corporallon
Heela Sllwcl Valley, me. a Delaware corporallon
Silver Ilumer Minmg Company, a Delaware corporalion
Rio Grand: Srlver, lnc.. a Delaware curporallon
RHL Huldlngs. Inc,, a Delaware eerparauan
IILTr Inc, a Delaware corpurauon
2140238 Dmarra erued, an omarre Canadran corpamuon
Aunzan Mmes 2013 14¢, a Federal Canadlan corpurauon
Ileela Quebcc, Inc“ a Federal Canadran corpurauon
Hecla Nevada Geld LLC. a Delaware curpuranun


Exhibit 23.1
Conscnl uflndcpcndcm chmcrcd Public Accnnniinc Firm

IIecla Mining Cumpany
Cocur d‘Alcnc. Idaho
We hcreby consem to the lucorporaﬁon by rtfertnce in I11: Registrallon smicmenls on ann 3.4 (No. 333-191935h Form 3.3 (No. 333. 1 59966. and 333.
186681) and Fonn 5.8 (No. 333-96995, 33-60095, ZZZ-169030, and 333476364) nrHccln Mining Cumpany afoul rennin dnicd February 19,2014,
relanng m the consolidaicd ﬁnnncinl slaicmenls, and I11: :ffecnveness of Hecla Mining Company‘s imemal comm] over ﬁnancial repumng , which appems
in this ann lD-K.
S/ BDO USA, LLP
Spokanc, WA
February 19.2014


Exhibit 23.2

THIRD PARTY REVIEWER CONSENT
We consent tn the reference to us In the Annual Report an Farm lD-K for I110 year ended December 31. 2013. and the Registration Stalcmcnls on Form 8-!)
(No. 333-191935),Fonn s—3(Nn.333—1599<r<r,nnd BEE-186681) and Farm 5.8 (File Nu. 333-96995, 33-60095, 333-169030 and 333-176364)of
Hecla Mining Company. In gmng this consent we do not admit thar we are whth the category of persons whose consent Is reanred by Section 7 of rhe
Seenrines Acl mm or the rules and regulancns of Ike Secnrrnes and Exchange Commrssicn.
Dale: February 19, 2014
 AMEC E&C Services, Inc.


Exhibit 23.3

THIRD PARTY REVIEWER CONSENT
We consent to the reference to us In the Annual Report on Form lD-K for I110 year ended December 31. 2013. and the Registration Stalcmcnls on Form 8-!)
(No. 333-191935),Fonn s—3(Nn.333—1599<r<r,nnd BEE-186681) and Form 5.8 (File Nu. 333-96995, 33-60095, 333-169030 and 333-176364)of
Hecla Mining Company. In gmng this consent we do not admit thar we are whth the category of persons whose consent Is reanred by Section 7 of rhe
Seenrines Acl mm or the rules and regulanons of Ike Secnrrnes and Exchange Commrssion.
Dale: February 19, 2014
,s/ Roscoe Rosue Assnclams Inc.


Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATIONS

1, Phillips 5, Bakei, Jr,, Cenify that:

l, I have reviewed lhis annual repon on Form 10-K of l-lecla Milling Company:

2, Based on my knowledge, lhrs annual reporl does nol comain any unlrue slalemenl ufa malerial facl or omil lo slale a malerral facl necessary in
make ihe slaieirienis made, in lighi onlie circuinslances under which such siaienienls were made, nol misleading wilh respeci lo lhe period
covered by lhis reporl;

3. Based an my knowledge, ilie ﬁnancial siaieinenis, and olhei- ﬁnancial infoi-iiiaiion included in ihis annual repun, fairly preseni in all iiiaienal
respecis ilie ﬁnancial candiiion, resiills of opei-aiions and cash ﬂows oflhe regisiranl as of, and for, die periods pi-esenied in ihis report;

4. The regisrranl's oilier ceriiiying ofﬁcer and I are responsible fur eslablishing and inainiaining disclosure conirols and procedures (as deﬁned in
Exchange Aci Rules l3a- l 5(e) and 15d-15(e)) and inieriial conlrol over ﬁnancial reponing (as deﬁned in Exchange Acl Rules Uzi-15m and
l5d- mm for ihe regisiranl and we have:

3) Designed such disclosure conli-uls and procedures, or caused such disclosure cunirols and procedures Io be designed under cur supervrsirni,
lo ensure iliai inalerial iiil'orrnaiion relaiing io ihe regislrani, including ils consolidaied subsidiaries is made known lo us by olhers wuhin
lhrrse ennlies, paniciilarly dunng lhe period in which ihis repori is being prepared;

b] Designed sucli inrernal conirol over ﬁnancial reponing, or caused such inrenial conirol over ﬁnancial reponing lo be designed under our
supervision, Io provide reasonable assurance regarding ihe reliabiliiy of financial reporling and ihe preparaiion ofﬁnallclal sialeinenls for
exiernal purposes in accordance wirh generally accepied accouniing principles;

1:) Evaluaied ihe effecuvelless ofth registrant‘s disclosure comrols and procedures and presenied in rhis reporl our conclusions aboul lhe
eirecliveness oflhe disclosure conrrols and pmceduresr as onhe end oflhe period covered by rhis reporl based on such evaluaiion; and

d] Disclosed in lhrs reporl any change in llie reglslranl‘s inlemal cumrel over ﬁnancial repomng lhal occurred during llie regislranl‘s mesl
recenl ﬁscal quaner (ihe regisiranl‘s founli quaner in die case of an annual repon) ﬁrm has iriaierially aiiecled, or is reasonably likely lo
maierially affecL ihe regisirani's lmemal conrrol over financial repunmg; and

5. The regisirani‘s orher cernrying ofﬁcer and I have disclosed, based on our inosi receni evaluaiion ofinrernal conirol over ﬁnancial reponing, Io
rhe regisrrani's audiiors and ihe aiidii coininirlee onlie regisrrani‘s board of direclors (or persons performing ihe equivalenr ﬁinciions):

a) All signiﬁcaiir deﬁciencies and marerial weaknesses in die design or ciperarian of inleriial control over ﬁnancial reparling which are
reasonably likely io adversely affeci ilie regislrani's ability lo recurd, pracessr suiinnarize and reporl ﬁnancial ini'orrnaiion; and

b] Any fraud, whether or am niarerial. dial Involves inanagenieni ar oilier employees who have a signiﬁcanr role in ihe regisrrani‘s iniernal
control oycr ﬁnancial rcporling,

Dalc, February 19. 2014

M Phillips S. Baker, Jr.
Phillips S. Baker, Jr,
PIESIdEnI. CIIIEf EXECHIIVC Ofﬁctr and Direcior


Exhibit 31.2
CERTIFICATIONS

1, James A, Sabala, centfy that:

1, I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of i-iecia Mining Company:

2, Based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue statement ofa material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made. in light oftiie circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report:

3. Based on my knowledge. the ﬁnancial statements. and other financial information included in this annual repoit. fairiy present in all matenai
respects the ﬁnancial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for. the periods presented in this repoit;

4. The registrant's other certifying ofﬁcer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as deﬁned in
Exchange Act Rules i3a- i 5(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over ﬁnancial reporting (as deﬁned in Exchange Act Rules i3a-i5ti) and
i5d- ism) for the registrant and we have:

3) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries. is made known to us by others wiIIiin
those entities. particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;

b] Designed such internal control over ﬁnancial reporting, or caused such inteniai control over ﬁnancial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of ﬁnancial reporting and the preparation ofﬁnancial statements for
exlemal purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;

c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant‘s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures as ofthe end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and

d] Disclosed in this report any change in tlie registrant‘s internal control over ﬁnancial reporting that occurred during the registrant‘s most
recent ﬁscal quarter (the registrants fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected. or is reasonably likely to
materially affect. the registrant's internal control over ﬁnancial reporting; and

5. The registrant‘s other certifying ofﬁcer and I have disclosed. based on our most recent evaluation ofintemai control over ﬁnancial reporting, to
the registrant's auditors and the audit committee oftiie registrant‘s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):

a) All signiﬁcant deﬁciencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over ﬁnancial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process. summarize and report ﬁnancial information; and

b] Any fraud. whether or not material. that involves management or other employees who have a signiﬁcant role in the registrants internal
control over ﬁnancial rcporting.

Datc, February 19. 2014

/5/ James A, Sabala
James A. Sabala
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer


Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATIONS
I, Phillips 5. Baker. In. Presideni, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and Direcior of I Iecla Mining Company (“IIecla”), ceriin iliat to my knowledge:
I, This annual report orI-Iecla on Form lO-K (“repuri“) fully complies wiIh ihe reqiiirenieiiis orseciiun 13(a) or 15(d) ufﬂle Securities Exchange
Act or m4; and

2, The iniorniaiion coniained in the repon fairly presents, in all material respects the financial condiiion and results of operations or IIeela.
Daic. Febiuary 19. 2014

/s' Phillips 5. Baker, Jr.

Phillips 5. Baker, Ir.

Prcsidcm. Chief Executive Officer and Director
A signed origiiial ufthis writien statemeiii required by Section 906, or other document mlﬂlemicxungr acknowledging or oihemise adupiing the signaiure
tliai appears in iyped form Wﬂhln ihe elecironic version of iliis wrmen siateiiient required by Section 906 has been provided io IIecla Mining Company
and W|ll be retained by lIecla and riiiiiished tn the Securities and Exchange Coniiiiission or its staff iipon reqiiesi,
The furegulng certiﬁcation is being furnished in accordance wlIh Securities and Exchange Cuiiiinission Release No. 34—4755! and shall noi he considered
ﬁled as pan oithe Form lO-K.


Exhibit 32.2
CERTIFICATIONS
I, James A. Sabala, Ssnior Viee Preside!“ and Chief Financial omeer quIecla Mining Cumpany (“IIecla”), eenify mm In my knowledge:
I, This annual Icpon orI-Iecia on Form lO-K (“repen“) fully complies wiIh die requiremems ofsecnun 13(3) of 15(d) emie Stcuriues Exchange
Act a! 1934; and
2, The Informalion conlxmed m Ihe repen fairly presems, In all matcrial iespecis Ihe ﬁnancial condilion and results of opemiens uf IIecla.
mm; Februaiy 19, 2014
/s/ James A. Sabala
James A. Sabala
Senior Vice Presidem and Chief Financial Ofﬁce!
A signed original ufthis wrinen smemem [equimd by Secuon 906, or mher document amhemicaung acknuwledging or odiemse aduplmg the slgnalure
iiiai appears In iyped form wniim die eiememc Versmn of lhls wrmen smemem required by Secuun 906 has been provided m lleclx Mlmng Company
and Will be retained by llecla and rumisiied m the Seeumies and Exchange Commission or Its staff upon iequesi,
The foregoing cemﬁcaﬁon IS being furnishcd in accordance wIIh Secumies and Exchang: Commission Release No. 3447551 and shall nul be considered
ﬁled as pan uhhe Form lO-K.


Exhibit 95
Mine Safety Disclosures

Our mines are opcmtcd subject to the regulation ofthe Federal Mine Safely and Health Administration (“MSHA”). under Ihe Federal Mine Safety
and Health Act of 1977 (the “Mine Act“). In July 2010i tlie Dodd-Fraiik Wall Slreel Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the “Dodd-Frank Act") was
signed into law. and amended in December 201 l. The followmg mine safety data is proVided pursuant to the Dodd-Frarik Act.

When MSIIA believes a yiolatioii oithe Mine Act has occurred, it may issue a citation for such yiolatioii. including a Civil penalty or ﬁne, and the
mine operator must ahate the alleged VlDlatan. During the year ended December 3 l, 2013. MSHA proposed 3914.435 in penalty assessments at the Greens
Creek mine and $455,866 in penalty assessments at the Lucky Friday mine. llecla has not yet received all penalty assessments related to the citations
issued in 2013. We have the opponunity to contest or appeal these penalties.

During the year ended December 31. 2013, MSHA Issued the Greens Creek illlne 8 citations pursuant to Section 104 ofthe Mine Act for violations
of mandatory health or safety standards that could signiﬁcantly and substantially contribute to the cause and effect of a mine safety or health hazard, and
7 such citations to the Lucky Friday 111an

The Greens Creek mine has 1 legal actions pending before the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission, regarding citations for which
penalties have been assessed.

The Lucky Friday Mine has 45 actioiis pending before the Federal Mine Safety and Health ReView Commission, including 30 actions for which
proposed penalties assessment have not been issued, 14 actions regarding citations and orders for which penalty assessments have been issued, and 1
action pending under Section 1 l 1.

As required by Ilie reporting requirements of the Dodd-Frank Acl. as alnended, the table below presents the following information for the year ended
December 31. 2013,

Received
Receiied Notice of
Total Notice of Potential Legal
Seclion Total Dollar Number Pattem of to have Actions Legal Legal
104(d) Value of of Violations Patterns Pending Acllons Actions
Section Section Citations Section Section Ms] (A Mining Under Undei as of Last initiated Reson ed
104 5&5 104(1)) and llDtb)(Z) 107(n) Assessments Related Section Section Day of During During
Mine citations Drders Orders violations oi-rleis Proposed Falzllltles 104(e) 104(e) Period Pcriod Period
Greens Creek 8 D (l 7 7 $14,435 7 no no 1 0 2
Lucky Friday 7 0 0 7 7 $455,866 7 no no 45 4 l


