
Newmont Board Approves Conga Project in Peru and 
Tanami Shaft Project in Australia
Production Expected in Late 2014 to Early 2015  
 
DENVER, July 27, 2011 – Newmont Mining Corporation (NYSE: NEM) (“Newmont” or the “Company”) 
today announced that its Board of Directors approved full funding for the Conga project in Peru and the 
Tanami Shaft project in Australia.  Combined, the two projects are expected to add approximately 
400,000 attributable ounces of gold and up to 100 million pounds of copper production per year once 
commercial operations commence in late 2014 to early 2015.   
 
Conga Project Highlights (51.35% attributable to Newmont):
  6.1 million and 1.6 million ounces of gold in Reserves and Non-Reserve Mineralization (“NRM”)
attributable to Newmont, respectively,1;
  1.7 billion and 0.5 billion pounds of copper in Reserves and NRM attributable to Newmont,
respectively;
  Potential to add as much as 50% of current gold and copper reserves over next 10 years; 
  First production expected in late 2014 to early 2015, with approximately 6 months expected for
ramp-up to commercial production;
  Annual attributable production for the first five years of 300,000 to 350,000 ounces of gold and 80
to 120 million pounds of copper;
  Estimated attributable capital costs of $2.0 to $2.4 billion2; 
  Estimated strip ratio of 1.0 to 1.5:1; 
  Life of mine approximately 19 years; 
  Estimated average costs applicable to sales for the first five years of $400 to $450 per ounce of
gold and $1.25 - $1.75 per pound of copper; and
  Copper revenues at a $3.00 copper price sufficient to offset gold operating costs, resulting in by-
product costs applicable to sales of approximately $0 per ounce.
Tanami Shaft Project Highlights (100% attributable to Newmont):
  Shaft will support underground expansion at the Callie and Auron ore bodies, reduce cut-off
grade, enhance productivity and facilitate possible additional mine expansion;
  Potential incremental additions of up to 2 million ounces of gold3; 
  Estimated additional average annual production for the first five years of 60,000 to 90,000 ounces
of gold; bringing total annual production at Tanami to approximately 340,000 to 400,000 ounces;
1 Based on Newmont’s year-end Reserves and NRM Report as of 12/31/2010.     
2 Risk Factors that could impact capital expenditure estimates include labor costs, input costs, project delays, among others. 
3 None of which is in current Reserves or NRM.  For additional information on Newmont’s Reserves and NRM, see Newmont’s 
Reserve and NRM Report available at www.newmont.com/our-investors/reserves-and-resources.
  First production expected in late 2014 to early 2015, with approximately 3 months expected for
ramp-up to commercial production;
  Project extends life of mine by 5 years to 2027;4 
  Estimated capital costs of $400 to $450 million based on current Australian dollar exchange rate;
and
  Lower costs applicable to sales for the first five years by approximately $100 per ounce.
“We are pleased to announce full funds approval of the Conga and Tanami Shaft projects, representing a 
commitment to invest between $2.4 and $2.9 billion of capital.  This substantial investment in our recently 
announced growth plan represents over 400 thousand ounces of incremental annual gold production and 
an additional 100 million pounds of annual copper production capacity between these two projects,” 
commented Richard O’Brien, President and Chief Executive Officer.  “In addition to offering an operating 
cost profile of $400 to $450 per ounce, well below the industry average, Conga will provide a stable long 
term operating platform in Peru for several decades to come.  Similarly, the Tanami Shaft project will 
increase gold production at our Tanami mine in Australia up to approximately 400 thousand ounces per 
annum and extend our operating platform in the region.”
With today’s Board decision, the path forward for Conga and Tanami will include procurement of critical 
long lead items, the awarding of critical contracts, completion of detailed engineering, and site 
mobilization.
Investor Contacts 
John Seaberg 
Karli Anderson 
Monica Brisnehan 
 
Media Contacts 
Omar Jabara 
Diane Reberger
# # #
303.837.5743 
303.837.6049 
303.837.5836
303.837.5114 
303.967.9455
john.seaberg@newmont.com  
karli.anderson@newmont.com 
monica.brisnehan@newmont.com
omar.jabara@newmont.com  
diane.reberger@newmont.com
Cautionary Statement  
This release contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, 
and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended which are intended to be covered by the safe harbor created 
by such sections and other applicable laws.  Such forward-looking statements may include, without limitation: (i) estimates of future 
mineral production and sales; (ii) estimates of future costs applicable to sales; (iii) estimates of future capital expenditures; and (iv) 
expectations regarding the development, growth and exploration potential of the Company’s projects, including, without limitation, 
Conga and Tamani Shaft.  Estimates or expectations of future events or results are based upon certain assumptions, which may 
prove to be incorrect.  Such assumptions, include, but are not limited to: (i) there being no significant change to current geotechnical, 
metallurgical, hydrological and other physical conditions; (ii) permitting, development, operations and expansion of the Company’s 
projects being consistent with current expectations and mine plans; (iii) political developments in any jurisdiction in which the 
Company operates being consistent with its current expectations; (iv) certain exchange rate assumptions for the Australian dollar to 
the U.S. dollar, as well as other the exchange rates being approximately consistent with current levels; (v) certain price assumptions 
for gold, copper and oil; (vi) prices for key supplies being approximately consistent with current levels; and (vii) the accuracy of our 
current mineral reserve and mineral resource estimates. Where the Company expresses or implies an expectation or belief as to 
future events or results, such expectation or belief is expressed in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis.  However, 
such statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, which could cause actual results to differ materially from future 
results expressed, projected or implied by the “forward-looking statements”.  Such risks include, but are not limited to, gold and other 
metals price volatility, currency fluctuations, increased production costs and variances in ore grade or recovery rates from those 
assumed in mining plans, political and operational risks in the countries in which we operate, and governmental regulation and 
judicial outcomes.  For a more detailed discussion of such risks and other factors, see the Company’s 2010 Annual Report on Form 
10-K, filed on February 24, 2011, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as the Company’s other SEC filings.  The 
Company does not undertake any obligation to release publicly revisions to any “forward-looking statement,” including, without 
limitation, outlook, to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this news release, or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated 
events, except as may be required under applicable securities laws.  Investors should not assume that any lack of update to a 
previously issued “forward-looking statement” constitutes a reaffirmation of that statement. Continued reliance on “forward-looking 
statements” is at investors' own risk. 
 
 
                                                 
4 Current mine life is based on current reserves and NRM.