
UNITED'STATES'
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
[ X ] ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2014
[] TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from ___________ to ______________
LIBERTY SILVER CORP.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nevada
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation)
333-150028
(Commission File Number)
181 Bay Street, Suite 2330
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3 
(Address of principal executive offices)
32-0196442 
(IRS Employer
Identification Number)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: 888-749-4916
Securities registered under Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act:  
None 
Securities registered under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act:      None 
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act 
[] Yes [X ] No 
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the [ 
]Yes [X ] No 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of 
the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934  during  the  past  12  months  (or  for  such  shorter  period  that  the  registrant  was 
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. [X] Yes [  ] No  
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if 
any,  every  Interactive  Data  File  required  to  be  submitted  and  posted  pursuant  to  Rule  405  of  Regulation  S-T 
(§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required 
to submit and post such files). [X] Yes [  ] No. 
 
Indicate  by  check  mark  if  disclosure  of  delinquent  filers  pursuant  to  Item  405  of  Regulation  S-K  is  not  contained 
herein,  and  will  not  be  contained,  to  the  best  of  the  registrant’s  knowledge,  in  definitive  proxy  or  information 
statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K. [  ]  
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, 
or  a  smaller  reporting  company.    See  the  definitions  of  “large  accelerated  filer,”  “accelerated  filer”  and  smaller 
reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. 
Large accelerated filer [ ] 
Non-accelerated filer [ ]  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company) 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). [ ]
Accelerated filer [ ] 
Smaller reporting company [ X ]
1
Yes  [X ] No 
 
State the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting  common  equity  held  by  non-affiliates  computed  by 
reference to the price at which the common equity was last sold, or the average bid and asked price of the last business 
day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter $1,898,244. 
 
As  of  September  29,  2014  the  Issuer  had  84,723,945  shares  of  common  stock  issued  and  outstanding.
2
PART I
BUSINESS
ITEM 1.  
 
The Corporation 
 
Liberty Silver Corp. (“Liberty Silver” or the “Company” or the “Corporation”) was incorporated under 
the  laws  of  the  state  of  Nevada,  U.S.A  on  February  20,  2007  under  the  name  Lincoln  Mining  Corp.  
Pursuant  to  a  Certificate  of  Amendment  dated  February  11,  2010,  the  Company  changed  its  name  to 
Liberty  Silver  Corp.    The  Company’s  registered  office  is  located  at  1802  N.  Carson  Street,  Suite  212, 
Carson City Nevada 89701, and its head office is located at 181 Bay Street, Suite 2330, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada, M5J 2T3, and its telephone number is 888-749-4916. 
 
Current Operations 
 
Overview 
 
The Company was incorporated for the purpose of engaging in mineral exploration activities, and on May 
24, 2007, purchased the Zone Lode mining claim located in Elko County, Nevada, for a purchase price of 
$10,000.  The objective was to conduct mineral exploration activities on the Zone Lode claim to assess 
whether it contained economic reserves of copper, gold, silver, molybdenum or zinc.  The Company was 
not able to determine whether this property contained reserves that were economically recoverable and as 
a  result,  ceased  to  explore  this  property.    The  Company’s  current  business  operations  are  focused  on 
exploring  and developing  the Trinity Silver property located in Pershing County, Nevada (the “Trinity 
Project”). 
 
The Company acquired its interest in the Trinity Project through an Exploration Earn-In Agreement (the 
“Earn-In Agreement”), discussed below in Item 2 - Properties.  On March 29, 2010, the Company entered 
into the Earn-In Agreement relating to the Trinity Project with AuEx, Inc., a Nevada company providing 
the Company with a right to earn a 70% undivided interest in rights of AuEx, Inc. in the Trinity Project 
(the  “70%  Interest”);  as  discussed  below,  the  70%  Interest  is  subject  to  the  rights  and  obligations  of 
AuEx, Inc. and its successors and assigns under a Minerals Lease and Sublease between AuEx, Inc. and 
Newmont Mining USA Limited.  AuEx, Inc. is beneficially owned by another Nevada company AuEx 
Ventures, Inc.  AuEx, Inc. held an exclusive interest in the Trinity Project by way of a Minerals Lease and 
Sublease with Newmont Mining USA Limited, a Delaware corporation who owns or leases the various 
unpatented mining claims and portions of private land comprising the Trinity Project; the Minerals Lease 
and Sublease is discussed below.  As part of a restructuring transaction by AuEx Ventures, Inc., another 
Nevada company, Renaissance Gold Inc. (“Renaissance”), was spun out, and on July 1, 2010 AuEx, Inc. 
assigned all of its interest in the Trinity Project and the Earn-In Agreement to Renaissance, who currently 
holds a 100% leasehold interest in the Trinity Project pursuant to the Minerals Lease and Sublease.  The 
Company’s  rights  in  the  Trinity  Project  are  derived  from  and  based  upon  the  rights  of  Renaissance 
through the Minerals Lease and Sublease.  The Minerals Lease and Sublease grants to Newmont, a right 
of first offer on any transfer of AuEx, Inc.’s interests in the Trinity Project to any non-affiliate of AuEx, 
Inc., and also gives Newmont a right to either enter into a joint venture agreement covering the Trinity 
Project and any other real property interests that AuEx, Inc. holds or acquires within the Trinity Project, 
or receive a royalty on all mineral production from such properties.  Currently the rights to the Trinity 
Project  are  held  100%  by  Renaissance,  pursuant  to  an  assignment  of  such  rights  from  AuEx,  Inc.  The 
Company  entered  into  the  Earn-In  Agreement  providing  the  Company  with  a  right  to  earn  a  70% 
undivided interest in rights of Renaissance in the Trinity Project.
3
The Trinity Project consists of a total of approximately 10,020 acres, including 5,676 acres of fee land 
and 253 unpatented mining claims.  Under the Earn-In Agreement, the Company may earn-in the 70% 
Interest in the Trinity Project during a 6-year period in consideration of (1) a signing payment of $25,000, 
which  has  been  made,  (2)  an  expenditure  of  a  cumulative  total  of  $5,000,000  in  exploration  and 
development  expenses  on  the  Trinity  Project  by  March  29,  2016,  including  a  minimum  of  $500,000 
which must be expended within one year from the effective date of the Agreement, and (3) completion of 
a bankable feasibility study on the Trinity Project on or before the 7th anniversary date of the Agreement.   
Item (1) has been completed by the Company, and the Company also satisfied item (2), and reported its 
compliance as of March 29, 2013, which was the end of the third year from the inception of the Earn-in 
Agreement. 
 
The Company’s business operations are currently focused on efforts to explore the Trinity Project.  The 
Company has not yet commenced development stage activities, but intends to engage in efforts to develop 
the Trinity Project in the future.  The Company foresees future operations at the Trinity Project consisting 
of (i) an effort to expand the known mineralized material through drilling, (ii) permitting for operation, if 
deemed economically viable, (iii) metallurgical studies aimed at enhancing the recovery of the silver and 
by-product  lead  and  zinc,  and  (iv)  engineering  design  related  to  potential  construction  of  a  new  mine. 
Exploration of the property would be conducted simultaneously with the mine development in order to 
locate additional mineralized materials. 
 
Products 
 
The Company’s anticipated product will be precious and base metal-bearing concentrates and/or precious 
metal bullion produced from ores from mineral deposits which it hopes to discover and exploit through 
exploration and acquisition.   The Company anticipates such products will be silver, lead and zinc. 
 
Trinity Project Location 
 
The  Trinity  Project  is  located  along  the  west  flank  of  the  Trinity  Range  in  Pershing  County,  Nevada, 
approximately 25 miles by road northwest of Lovelock, NV, the county seat.  The Trinity Project consists 
of approximately 10,020 acres, which includes 253 unpatented lode mining claims and portions of nine 
sections of private land.  The specific location of the Trinity Project is discussed in more detail the section 
entitled “Properties” herein. 
 
Infrastructure 
 
The  Trinity  Project  is  situated  in  western  Nevada,  a  locale  that  is  host  to  many  metal  mines,  mining 
equipment  companies,  drilling  companies,  mining  and  metallurgical  consulting  expertise,  and 
experienced  mining  personnel.    Its  location  is  accessible  by  all-weather  road  through  an  area  of  very 
sparse population.  There is no infrastructure on the property.  All buildings have been removed, all wells 
have  been  properly  abandoned,  and  there  is  no  equipment  on  site.    The  mine  site  has  been  totally 
reclaimed to the satisfaction of the State of Nevada.  The need for power and water would be defined by a 
feasibility study and mine plan, both of which are premature at this point in time.
4
Agency 
 
Nevada Division of Minerals 
State Inspector of Mines 
Nevada Bureau of Waste Management 
Nevada Bureau of Waste Management 
Nevada Bureau of Pollution Control 
State Fire Marshal 
State Fire Marshal 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms 
Mine Safety and Health Administration 
Federal Communications Commission
Permit/notification 
 
- Mine registry 
- Mine Opening notification 
- Solid Waste Landfill 
- Hazardous Waste Management Permit 
- General Storm Water Permit 
- Hazardous material Permit 
- Fire and Life Safety 
- Explosives Permit 
- Notification of Commencement of Operations 
- Radio License
Government Regulation and Approval 
 
The following permits will be necessary to put the Trinity Project into production. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All of the Company's drilling operations to date have been on private land and, as a result, have not been 
subject  to  U.S.  Bureau  of  Land  Management  jurisdiction.    On  private  land  in  Nevada,  the  Company's 
activities are regulated by The Nevada Division of Environmental Protection and the Nevada Bureau of 
Mining  Regulation  and  Reclamation  (“NBMRR”)  and  no  permit  is  needed  as  long  as  the  disturbance 
created is less than five acres.  The total disturbance to date has been less than four acres, much of which 
has  already  been  reclaimed,  and  as  a  result,  the  Company  has  not  yet  applied  for  a  NBMRR  permit.  
However,  as  a  matter  of  courtesy,  the  Company  has  provided  written  correspondence  to  NBMRR  to 
advise them of its activities. 
 
Environmental Regulations 
 
The  current  exploration  activities  and  any  future  mining  operations  (of  which  currently  there  are  none 
planned), are subject to extensive laws and regulations governing the protection of the environment, waste 
disposal,  worker  safety,  mine  construction,  and  protection  of  endangered  and  protected  species.  The 
Company has made, and expects to make in the future, significant expenditures to comply with such laws 
and  regulations.    Future  changes  in  applicable  laws,  regulations  and  permits  or  changes  in  their 
enforcement  or  regulatory  interpretation  could  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  Company’s  financial 
condition  or  results  of  operations.    In  the  event  that  a  mineral  discovery  is  made  and  it  is  decided  to 
proceed to production, the costs and delays associated with compliance with these laws and regulations 
could  stop  the  Company  from  proceeding  with  a  project  or  the  operation  or  further  improvement  of  a 
mine or increase the costs of improvement or production.  
 
It is anticipated that the following environmental permits will be necessary for the anticipated operations:
!  Permit for Reclamation 
!  Water Pollution Control Permit   
!  Air Quality Operating Permit 
!  Industrial Artificial pond permit 
!  Water Rights
The Company anticipates that, subject to the availability of funds or financing, it will begin soliciting bids 
for the programs necessary to obtain these permits during the fiscal year ending June 30, 2015.  The cost, 
timing, and work schedules are not yet available.
5
Competition 
 
The Company competes with other mining and exploration companies in connection with the acquisition 
of  mining  claims  and  leases  on  silver  and  other  precious  metals  prospects  and  in  connection  with  the 
recruitment and retention of qualified employees.  Many of these companies are much larger than Liberty 
Silver, have greater financial resources and have been in the mining business for much longer than it has.  
As such, these competitors may be in a better position through size, finances and experience to acquire 
suitable exploration properties.  Liberty Silver may not be able to compete against these companies in 
acquiring  new  properties  and/or  qualified  people  to  work  on  its  current  Trinity  Project,  or  any  other 
properties that may be acquired in the future.
Given the size of the world market for precious metals such as silver and gold relative to the number of 
individual producers and consumers, it is believed that no single company has sufficient market influence 
to significantly affect the price or supply of precious metals such as silver and gold in the world market.  
 
Employees 
 
The Company currently has seven employees: R. Geoffrey Browne, the President and Chief Executive 
Officer and a Director of the Board; Manish Z. Kshatriya, the Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice 
President;  William  Tafuri,  the  Project  Manager  for  the  Trinity  Project;  and,  four  independent  directors 
serving on the Company’s board of directors. 
 
Reports to Security Holders 
 
The Company files reports with the SEC under section 15d of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  The 
reports will be filed electronically.  All copies of any materials filed with the SEC may be read at the 
SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549.  Information 
on  the  operation  of  the  Public  Reference  Room  may  be  obtained  by  calling  the  SEC  at 
1-800-SEC-0330.  The SEC also maintains an Internet site that will contain copies of the reports that are 
filed electronically.  The address for the SEC Internet site is http://www.sec.gov. 
 
ITEM 1A.  
 
Not Applicable. 
 
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
 
Not Applicable.
RISK FACTORS
6
PROPERTIES.
ITEM 2. 
 
Office Space 
 
The Company has a lease agreement for office space at 181 Bay Street, Suite 2330, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada,  M5J  2T3.  The  telephone  number  is:  888-749-4916.    The  monthly  base  rent  is  CDN  $4,007 
(approximately US $4,000).  The term of the lease is for fifty-four months and terminates on April 28, 
2016. 
 
The Company has a lease agreement for a field office at 808 Packer Way, Sparks, NV 89431.  The phone 
number  there  is:  775-352-9375.    The  monthly  base  rent  is  USD  $2,477.25  plus  Common  Area 
Reimbursement of USD $370 and Property Tax of USD $250. The term of the lease is for twenty-four 
months and terminates on January 31, 2015. 
 
Trinity Project 
 
Trinity Project Location  
 
The  Trinity  Project  is  situated  approximately  25  road  miles  north-northwest  of  Lovelock,  Nevada,  in 
Pershing County, Nevada, on the northwest flank of the Trinity Range, in the Trinity mining district.  The 
latitude-longitude coordinates of the mine site are 40o 23’ 47” N, 118o 36’ 38” W.  The JV area is situated 
in sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, 16, and 17, Township 29 North, Range 30 East, MDB&M and 
sections 26-28, 33, 34, and 35, Township 30 North, Range 30 East, MDB&M. 
 
The Trinity Project includes located public and leased/subleased fee land consisting of the following 253 
unpatented mining claims and tracts of fee land:
(1)  248  unpatented  lode  mining  claims  consisting  of:  The  Seka  1-6,  8-16,  61-64,  73-76,  95-112 
claims, the TS 1-18 claims, and the XXX claims located in secs. 4, 10, 16 and 21 in T29N, R30E. 
The Elm 1-183 in secs. 2, 4, 10, 16 T29N, R30E and secs. 26 28, 34, and 35 in T30N, R30E. The 
claims are located on public land open to mineral entry, currently valid, and subject to Bureau of 
land management regulations. The total area covered is approximately 5,120 acres.
(2)  Hi Ho Silver 3, 5, 9, 10, and 11 unpatented lode mining claims located in sec. 10, T29N, R30E
MDB&M covering approx. 100 acres.
(3)   Approximately 4,480 acres of fee land leased by Newmont Mining Corp. from Southern Pacific 
Land Co., and its successors, and from Santa Fe Pacific Minerals Corporation, and its successors 
located in sections 3, 5, 11, and 17, Township 29 North, Range 30 East, and sections 27, 33, and 
35, Township 30 North, Range 30 East MDB&M.
(4)   Approximately 1,280 acres of fee land owned by Newmont Mining Corp. located in sections 9
and 15, Township 29 North, Range 30 East, MDB&M.
The Company’s joint venture area of interest is currently sections 2-5, 8-11, 15-17, and 21 Township 29 
North,  Range  30  East,  MDB&M,  and  sections,  26-28,  33-35,  Township  30  North,  Range  30  East, 
MDB&M.    The  Company’s  rights,  which  apply  to  all  of  the  above  properties  include  exploration, 
development, and production of valuable minerals except geothermal, hydrocarbons, and sand/gravel, and 
also include the authority to apply for all necessary permits, licenses and other approvals from the United 
States  of  America,  the  State  of  Nevada  or  any  other  governmental  or  other  entity  having  regulatory 
authority over any part of the Trinity Project.
7
Each claim filed with the BLM has an associated maintenance fee of $140 per year for each assessment 
year (which runs from September 1 through August 31). This fee must be paid by midnight on August 31 
of each year to maintain the claim's validity for the succeeding assessment year.  The fees for the claims 
comprising  the  Trinity  Project  are  paid  by  Renaissance  in  accordance  with  the  Lease  they  hold  with 
Newmont.  The Company reimburses Renaissance for this expenditure.  All of the fees have been paid to 
the  BLM  for  the  2013-2014  assessment  year  and  all  filings  are  current.    There  are  253  claims,  which 
based upon current maintenance fees, costs approximately $35,420 per assessment year to maintain. 
 
To  protect  and  verify  our  claims  and  interests  in  the  Trinity  Project,  the  Company  has  completed 
examinations of legal title to the property making up the Trinity Project, which has been determined to be 
satisfactory.  In addition, a Memorandum of Exploration Earn-In Agreement, effective March 29, 2010, 
has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Pershing County, Nevada.  
 
Location and Access  
 
The  following  maps  identify  the  location  and  access  of  the  Trinity  Project  located  in  Pershing  County 
Nevada:
8
‘ “WW “mum wrer NH“
“WW mama
Park
Valle-1
1 Henry
 Anums W3 Drovada ' 3:
H LAkealde ‘u
m
a“ Winnzmucca 6
MD Elke 6
E
usanvrlle a so” -- Gum
3 L |.l< ' - - ﬁm- mu 1:
i We“ TrInIty Srlver reject _
H Trcur ‘
Creek
Reno M» Ausnin Eureka Sugarvrlle
Carson J—m ' E” UAAH
CRY w Wk
6
3 NEVADA ~ ‘
i 3? 1‘:
“‘Kamhame
33
3°” ‘ Bridgeport
@ jump“ Pioche 6
G Mr Id -
3 o n m mm m cm
I " Guy 3‘
l Merced Sam ‘
George
Fresno ,rndowr‘danca  Amargosa
‘ I van” Mounr
H Trumbull
Visalia LiaS
3 ' Ve as,‘ ‘
1 99 g
Jidgecvesl 508 M m
' 39 re lg
“m Bakersﬁeld J V
W CAUFOPNIA Crrna ‘
. Kingmﬁn
5’3, Barglow ‘A
‘ 051020 Lancasrer 6 ARIZON
IZ-Miles ﬂ
‘ M‘" “"“““" r‘HIhHm mnhw
9


W 7 I 7  M _ g r w:
1*"; IT 1  } a; g; ‘ ‘
 12  '9‘ 1 ‘ 3 imam-:22." E: ’
V—e— “_._.r_ _,‘ QREgg V 1 “2‘2"”: * _.___,_‘ W:
’ ~><  ‘ 3;:“2‘23 W»;  3 - 61! _
 MAI” SHOWING LOCATION OF THE TRINITY SILVER 
‘ OPEN PIT MINE, PERSI’IING COUNTY, NEVADA “2‘
 _   1 ' ‘ ~ I  5 . ‘
 ;- 3m"! . , :33 ﬂ ﬁm 1W x  7
 H §\ ,E ,  ,_/ t K .m. , a n \ ,
t   ; \\ ' 2-----.-.-:.«; 1:4.“  * ‘ /  L j; 
‘4‘ y    m‘}  .L’”‘"'ér.:*°q S"  " J}: ,mmm  9'7".»
V;  ‘ 7‘ BMW“ u °,’ 151‘”? E o f;  n' WWT 1‘6"“
L ¢LWA s n 2:“! AW”! ‘  5: f  mgﬁ/ﬂw ‘
7:: '   ‘ ‘
“ a! ’ a j r “- _ '
, E,  HM" ; sue" _ ‘5 ->_
=: g . i ,    §, H    ,  a:
< N 2; I ,p- ‘  ' r  i \_
‘14:) 0i   P " E A 'ﬁmﬂTS'LE “w 5;!»  3m“ y"? ‘ 7"
W] i ' 45mm. IM-x‘ ‘ “mi: , 1- _\ (.5  3/ n
 f) 't    :\ t: (312/ j;
‘ 1'5. .1171? ' ‘ ‘Trhi‘YSi'V" “inc-“.I/ '3' l ‘ 3
will  VLAW i I)  ,mmaflmh. if Egg/,‘/§\{y: //~m .  5 "‘H
ﬂauggyg gm:  ‘}§ IN3:  m“
7777 I: ‘71,.“ L" mm  ‘ 3_ Mr  i ,, Um
 1 ) L  1  n n n-
Vir “f, Mv-gg i'   n 33%: H l L u’L V, 
'9‘“  F *5 “a -"-"-'-= g 7 »  £335“ g m :m';
, sum“  , w .9“ .4 a . .; IL w- 4,»? v, i 2', ‘
A  fwﬁm “f:  1355""  :2: §,_ 3%) A,
,,,‘1-. Ls'raﬁEY/ 5;" [v a“, 02‘ mm»; ‘ f ’1 \‘ ﬂ“ ‘W ’ i, 
,zu:  {Fa   \  swam“, ' v?
r”17~"'.m. m" ”’ sow'u " 5 "w m. “My; “’ “W a} 5" \ 1‘
=  id  W“ n:   i " ‘ *
PLACER”:  yell“ =‘wz::'1w.‘m..:::::Lr.. vs  7mm; 1 w n «27" S;
"M ‘r‘i‘wznécgggij 1“ 1355 3:22?  g" ’ -— 33
Vi1r;::;'f§7"kj_é‘aj V II 7 1:7 jig}, .2 m
w," ; #1451 uouams ‘ AA /A MWV g 11 “:55:
~ 3:;ny," 7 x w-mr ~* ' a 
59 Mix ' “\sz @.  (“3] v m 20:3“:— ,"'§,;£'C‘
3 *Nevada sme road mlp base, 1998.; Th,» ' = m 2“ w m Mm- ﬁg?“
l. 7"" A ,..w"\f517‘,_...“11 ' ‘ ’\ ,.\ ’ " 71
10


Trinity Project Agreements 
 
The  Company  acquired  its  interest  in  the  Trinity  Project  through  an  Exploration  Earn-In  Agreement, 
discussed below.  On March 29, 2010, the Company entered into the Earn-In Agreement relating to the 
Trinity  Project  with  AuEx,  Inc.,  a  Nevada  company  beneficially  owned  by  another  Nevada  company 
AuEx Ventures, Inc.  AuEx, Inc. held an exclusive interest in the Trinity Project by way of a Minerals 
Lease and Sublease with Newmont Mining USA Limited, a Delaware corporation who owns or leases the 
various  unpatented  mining  claims  and  portions  of  private  land  comprising  the  Trinity  Project;  the 
Minerals  Lease  and  Sublease  is  discussed  below.    As  part  of  a  restructuring  transaction  by  AuEx 
Ventures, Inc., another Nevada company Renaissance Exploration Inc. (“Renaissance”) was spun out, and 
on July 1, 2010, pursuant to a letter agreement by and between AuEx, Inc., Renaissance Exploration, Inc., 
and Liberty Silver Corp., AuEx, Inc. assigned all of its rights in the Exploration Earn-In Agreement to 
Renaissance,  which  currently  holds  a  100%  leasehold  interest  in  the  Trinity  Project  pursuant  to  the 
Minerals Lease and Sublease.  Pursuant to the letter agreement, all parties consented to the assignment, 
and as a result, the Company’s rights in the Trinity Project under the Earn-In Agreement are enforceable 
against  Renaissance  Exploration,  Inc.,  and  are  derived  from  and  based  upon  the  rights  of  Renaissance 
under the Minerals Lease and Sublease; a copy of the Letter Agreement effective July 1, 2010 was filed 
as  Exhibit  10.18  to  the  Company’s  S-1  filed  on  January  24,  2013.    Additionally,  a  Memorandum  of 
Exploration  Earn-In  effective  March  29,  2010,  has  been  recorded  in  the  Office  of  the  Recorder  of 
Pershing County, Nevada. 
 
Lease and Sublease Agreement 
 
Renaissance’s rights in the Trinity Project are derived through a Minerals Lease and Sublease dated July 
29,  2005  (the  “Lease”)  by  and  between  Newmont  Mining  USA  Limited,  a  Delaware  corporation 
(“Newmont”) and AuEx, Inc., a Nevada corporation.  
 
Consideration 
 
The Lease was granted to Renaissance for the following consideration:
a)  Renaissance agreed to pay Newmont a claim fee reimbursement of $10,955 concurrently with
the execution of the Lease (this amount was paid);
b)  Renaissance is required to expend a total of $2,000,000 in ascertaining the existence, location, 
quantity, quality or commercial value of a deposit of minerals within the Trinity Project on or 
before the seventh anniversary of the Lease;
c)  Prior  to  the  commencement  of  any  commercial  production,  Renaissance  shall  supply
Newmont with a feasibility study with respect to the Trinity Project.
In the event the Company does not meet its minimum expenditure obligation in any year, it is obligated 
under  the  terms  of  the  Earn-In  Agreement  to  pay  the  amount  of  any  deficiency  to  Renaissance 
Exploration,  Inc.   During  each  of  the  first  three  years,  the  Company  had  exceeded  its  minimum 
expenditure obligation and has not been obligated to pay any amounts to Renaissance.  The Company had 
an excess of approximately $133,000 in expenditures over the minimum requirement in the first year, an 
excess of approximately $162,000 in expenditures over the minimum requirement in the second year, and 
an excess of approximately $2,856,430 in the third year.  The Company has satisfied its entire $5,000,000 
expenditure  commitment  by  the  end  of  the  third  year,  when  it  had  incurred  a  total  of  approximately 
$5,652,397.   As  a  result,  the  Company  will  not  be  obligated  to  pay  any  deficiency  amounts  to 
Renaissance for any future years.
11
Joint Venture / Royalty  
 
The  Lease  gives  Newmont  a  right  to  either  enter  into  a  joint  venture  with  Renaissance  covering  the 
Trinity Project and any other real property interests that Renaissance holds or acquires within the Trinity 
Project, or receive a royalty on all mineral production from such properties.  
 
Joint Venture: The Lease contemplates the following schedule with respect to Newmont’s rights to enter 
into a joint venture with Renaissance:
12
a)  Before Renaissance spends $5 million and provides a feasibility study, Newmont can elect at 
any time to enter into a joint venture in which event Newmont would be required to pay all 
future joint venture expenses up to 250% of the expenditures made by Renaissance as of the 
date of Newmont’s election to enter into the joint venture.
b)  Upon  Renaissance  spending  $5  million,  but  before  the  feasibility  study,  Renaissance  shall 
deliver  written  notice  to  Newmont  containing  a  summary  of  the  expenditures  made  by 
Renaissance on the Trinity Project. Newmont may thereafter elect to enter into a joint venture 
by notifying Renaissance in writing of such election within 60 days of Newmont’s receipt of 
Renaissance’s initial notice. Under the joint venture, Newmont would be required to pay all 
future joint venture expenses up to 250% of the expenditures made by Renaissance as of the 
date of Newmont’s election to enter into the joint venture.
c)  After Renaissance spending $5 million, but before the feasibility study, at any time after the 
expiration of the 60 day period identified in section b above, Newmont can elect to enter into a 
joint  venture  in  which  event  Newmont  would  be  required  to  pay  Renaissance  50%  of  the 
expenditures made in the Trinity Project up to the date of Newmont’s election to participate in 
a joint venture, and all future joint venture expenses up to 200% of such expenditures.
d)  At  any  time  within  60  days  after  Renaissance’s  delivery  of  feasibility  study,  Newmont  can 
elect  to  enter  into  a  joint  venture  at  which  time  Newmont  would  be  required  to  pay 
Renaissance 200% of expenditures made by Renaissance as of the date of Newmont’s election 
to enter into the joint venture. Additionally, Renaissance can elect to have Newmont finance 
Renaissance’s  share  of  the  joint  venture  expenses  until  the  Trinity  Project  is  put  into 
commercial  production.  Following  the  commencement  of  commercial  production,  Newmont 
shall be entitled to recover such paid expenses with interest at the London Interbank Offering 
Rate. If Newmont fails to elect to participate in the Joint Venture within 60 days following the 
delivery  of  the  feasibility  study,  Newmont’s  right  to  participate  in  a  joint  venture  shall 
terminate.
Should Newmont elect to participate in a joint venture with Renaissance, pursuant to the Lease, and its 
payment terms, Newmont will serve as the manager of the joint venture and own 51% of the joint venture 
with  an  option  to  acquire  an  additional  14%  for  additional  payments  to  Renaissance  (for  a  total 
participating  interest  of  65%).  Pursuant  to  the  Earn-In  Agreement,  the  Company  is  entitled  to  70% 
interest in the Trinity Project, subject only to the Newmont interest.  Accordingly, if Newmont exercised 
all of its joint venture options under the Lease, the Company would own a 35% interest in the Trinity 
Project.  
 
Royalty: In the event Newmont does not elect to participate in a joint venture, then Newmont shall have 
the right to receive a royalty on all mineral production from the Trinity Project.  Pursuant to the Lease, if
Newmont elects to not participate in the joint venture, then Renaissance shall pay to Newmont $1 million 
and  the  Lease  shall  terminate  and  Newmont  shall  transfer  title  to  all  property  comprising  the  Trinity 
Project to Renaissance, and thereafter receive a royalty payment of up to 5% of the net smelter returns 
generated from the properties comprising the Trinity Project. 
 
Buyout Option 
 
The Lease provides Renaissance with a buyout option pursuant to which Renaissance holds the right to 
purchase Newmont’s rights in the Trinity Project through the payment of $1 million to Newmont.  In the 
event  Renaissance  elects  the  buyout  option,  Newmont  would  transfer  title  to  the  Trinity  Project  to 
Renaissance through quit claim deed while retaining certain rights in the Trinity Project; such rights may 
include some form of joint venture or a royalty interest. 
 
Ownership Interest – Earn-In Agreement 
 
As noted above, the rights to the Trinity Project are held 100% by Renaissance, pursuant to an assignment 
of  such  rights  from  AuEx,  Inc.    The  Company  entered  into  the  Earn-In  Agreement  providing  the 
Company with a right to earn a 70% undivided interest in rights of Renaissance in the Trinity Project (the 
“70% Interest”), as set out below.  The following is intended to be a summary of the material terms of the 
Earn-In  Agreement,  and  is  subject  to,  and  qualified  in  its  entirety,  by  the  full  text  of  the  Earn-In 
Agreement. 
 
Consideration 
 
The exclusive right to acquire the 70% Interest in the Trinity Project was granted to the Company for the 
following consideration:
a)  The Company agreed to pay $25,000 upon execution of the Earn-In Agreement (this
amount was paid);
b)  In order to obtain the 70% Interest in the Trinity Project, the Company is required to 
(i)  produce  a  bankable  feasibility  study  by  March  29,  2017  and  (ii)  to  expend  a 
minimum of $5,000,000 in exploration on the Trinity Project as follows: $500,000 in 
the first year; $1,000,000 in the second year; $1,000,000 in the third year; $1,000,000 
in the fourth year; $1,000,000 in the fifth year; and $500,000 in the sixth year.
Any  excess  expenditure  in  any  year  shall  be  carried  forward  and  applied  to  the  subsequent  year’s 
expenditure  requirement,  and  the  Company  may  accelerate  the  expenditures  at  its  discretion.    If  the 
Company elects not to meet the minimum expenditure obligation during any year but wishes to maintain 
the  Earn-In  Agreement  in  full  force  and  effect,  or  if  it  is  subsequently  determined  that  the  minimum 
amount  was  not  expended  in  any  given  year,  the  Company  shall  pay  the  amount  of  any  deficiency  to 
Renaissance. 
 
In the event the Company does not meet its minimum expenditure obligation in any year, it is obligated 
under  the  terms  of  the  Earn-In  Agreement  to  pay  the  amount  of  any  deficiency  to  Renaissance 
Exploration, Inc.  During each of the first two years, the Company exceeded its minimum expenditure 
obligation and has not been obligated to pay any amounts to Renaissance.  The Company had an excess of 
approximately $133,000 in expenditures over the minimum requirement in the first year, and an excess of 
approximately $162,000 in expenditures over the minimum requirement in the second year and an excess 
of approximately $2,856,430 in the third year.  The Company satisfied its entire $5,000,000 expenditure 
commitment by March 29, 2013, which was the end of the third year, and as a result, will not be obligated 
to pay any deficiency amounts to Renaissance for the third year or any future years.
13
Work Program 
 
The Company shall be the operator and shall have full control over the content of work programs and 
annual  expenditure  amounts  during  the  earn-in  period,  including  having  the  authority  to  apply  for  all 
necessary  permits,  licenses  and  other  approvals  from  the  U.S.,  the  State  of  Nevada  or  any  other 
governmental or other entity having regulatory authority over any part of the Trinity Project. 
 
Joint Venture 
 
Upon the Company having acquired the 70% Interest in the Trinity Project by satisfying the minimum 
expenditure  amounts  and  producing  a  bankable  feasibility  study,  the  Company  and  Renaissance  shall 
enter into a formal joint venture agreement, and the Company will be the operator of the joint venture. 
 
At  such  time  as  the  Company  earns  the  70%  Interest  in  the  Trinity  Project,  the  parties  will  thereafter 
participate in expenditures on the Trinity Project in accordance with their respective interests therein, or 
have  their  interest  diluted  in  accordance  with  a  straight-line  dilution  formula,  as  set  forth  in  the  joint 
venture agreement. 
 
If  through  dilution,  the  interest  of  a  party  is  reduced  to  less  than  10%,  then  that  party’s  participating 
interest shall automatically be converted to a 3% net smelter returns royalty interest.  Should third party 
claims be acquired with royalties within the area of interest, the 3% royalty described above would be 
reduced by the amount of such royalty but not below 1%.  This reduction does not apply to the royalty 
described under the heading “Royalty upon Termination of Interest” below. 
 
Royalty upon Termination of Interest 
 
If the Company elects to terminate its right to earn an interest in the Trinity Project prior to completing a 
bankable feasibility study by March 29, 2017, but has expended at least $3,000,000, the Company shall 
be entitled to a 4% net smelter returns royalty capped at twice its expenditure on the Trinity Project. 
 
Termination 
 
The Company may in its sole discretion terminate the Earn-In Agreement at any time by giving not less 
than 30 days prior written notice to that effect to Renaissance.  Upon expiry of the 30-day notice period, 
the Earn-In Agreement will be of no further force and effect.  Upon such termination, the Company shall 
have no further obligation to incur expenses on or for the benefit of the Trinity Project and shall have no 
further obligations or liabilities to Renaissance under the Earn-In Agreement or with respect to the Trinity 
Project (including without limitation liability for lost profits or consequential damages as a result of an 
election by the Company to terminate the agreement), other than (a) as set forth below, and (b) to reclaim 
(in accordance with applicable law) any disturbances of the Trinity Project made by the Company.  
 
At any time the Company may, at its option, terminate its interest in some but less than all of the claims 
comprising the Trinity Project by written notice to Renaissance, provided that if such notice (or notice of 
termination of the Earn-In Agreement in its entirety) is received by Renaissance after June 30th of any 
year, the Company shall remain obligated to pay the claim maintenance fees (and make all filings and 
recordings required in connection therewith) for those claims to which such termination applies for the 
upcoming assessment year.  To the extent the Company terminates its interest in some but less than all of 
the  claims,  the  Earn-In  Agreement  shall  remain  in  full  force  and  effect  with  respect  to  the  remaining 
claims.
14
In  the  event  the  Company  is  in  default  in  the  observance  or  performance  of  any  of  the  Company’s 
covenants, agreements or obligations under the Earn-In Agreement, Renaissance may give written notice 
of such alleged default specifying the details of same.  The Company shall have 30 days following receipt 
of  said  notice  within  which  to  remedy  any  such  default  described  therein,  or  to  diligently  commence 
action in good faith to remedy such default.  If the Company does not cure or diligently commence to cure 
such default by the end of the applicable 30-day period, then Renaissance shall have the right to terminate 
the Earn-In Agreement by providing 30 days advance written notice to the Company. 
 
Confidentiality 
 
All data and information coming into possession of Renaissance or the Company by virtue of the Earn-In 
Agreement with respect to the business or operations of the other party, or the Trinity Project generally, 
shall be kept confidential and shall not be disclosed to any person not a party thereto without the prior 
written consent of the other party, except: (a) as required by law, rule, regulation or policy of any stock 
exchange or securities commission having jurisdiction over a party; (b) as may be required by a party in 
the prosecution or defense of a lawsuit or other legal or administrative proceedings; (c) as required by a 
financial  institution  in  connection  with  a  request  for  financing  relating  to  development  or  mining 
activities;  or  (d)  as  may  be  required  in  connection  with  a  proposed  conveyance  to  a  third  party  of  an 
interest in the Trinity Project or the Earn-In Agreement, provided such third party agrees in writing in a 
manner enforceable by the other party to abide by all of the applicable confidentiality provisions of the 
Earn-In Agreement with respect to such data and information.  
 
To the extent either party intends to disclose data or information via press release or other similar format 
as may be required, the disclosing party shall provide the other party with not less than five business days 
notice of the text of the proposed disclosure, and the other party shall have the right to comment on the 
same. 
 
Deed With Reservation of Royalty Hi Ho Silver Claims. 
 
On  October  15,  2012,  the  Company  entered  into  and  closed  a  Purchase  Agreement  (the  “Purchase 
Agreement”)  with  Primus  Resources,  L.C.  and  James  A.  Freeman  (collectively  “Seller”)  to  acquire 
unpatented  mining  claims,  Nevada  BLM  Serial  No.  799907,  799908,  799909,  799910,  and  799911 
covering approximately 100 acres of property located adjacent to the former Trinity Silver mine on the 
Company’s  Trinity  Project  (the  “Hi  Ho  Properties”).    The  Hi  Ho  Properties  were  previously  the  only 
acreage not controlled by the Company or its joint venture partner Renaissance Exploration Inc. in the 
Trinity Project.  Under the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company provided cash consideration 
of US$250,000 and issued 2,583,333 restricted shares of common stock of the Company to Seller.  In 
addition the Seller was granted a 2% net smelter royalty on future production from the Hi Ho Properties 
pursuant to the terms of a Deed With Reservation of Royalty Hi Ho Silver Claims.  
 
In  conjunction  with  the  entry  into  the  Purchase  Agreement,  the  Company  entered  into  a  Registration 
Rights  Agreement  (the  “Registration  Rights  Agreement”)  with  Seller,  pursuant  to  which  the  Company 
agreed  to  file  a  registration  statement  on  Form  S-1  with  the  United  States  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission, within thirty (30) days of the closing, which registers the common stock issued to the Seller 
pursuant to the Purchase Agreement.  Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement the Company was 
obliged to pay Seller additional consideration as follows:
•
if the registration statement was declared effective by the United States Securities Exchange 
Commission  by  March  1,  2013,  Liberty  Silver  would  issue  an  additional  277,778  Liberty 
Silver  common  shares  to  Primus,  thereby  increasing  the  total  aggregate  number  of  shares 
issued to 2,861,111 shares; or
15
•
if the registration statement is not declared effective by the United States Securities Exchange 
Commission by March 1, 2013, Liberty Silver will pay Primus US$200,000.  As well, if the 
five-day weighted average trading price of Liberty Silver’s common shares on the Toronto 
Stock  Exchange  as  of  March  1,  2013  (the  “Market  Price”)  exceeds  US$0.72  per  share, 
Liberty  Silver  will  issue  an  additional  number  of  Liberty  Silver  common  shares  to  Primus 
equal to (a) 277,778 less (b) US$200,000 divided by the Market Price.
The registration statement was declared effective by the United States Securities Exchange Commission 
on  March  1,  2013  and  as  a  result,  the  Company  issued  an  additional  277,778  Liberty  Silver  common 
shares to Primus, thereby increasing the total aggregate number of shares issued to 2,861,111 shares. 
 
Trinity Project Technical Report 
 
In the process of compiling and synthesizing information on the Trinity Project, on February 15, 2011, the 
Company completed an independently verified mineralized materials estimate on the Trinity Project (the 
“Trinity  Project  Technical  Report”);  the  report  was  publicly  released  by  the  Company  on  March  2, 
2011.  The Technical Report for the Trinity mine project was prepared in accordance with the Canadian 
Securities Administrators’ National Instrument 43-101 (“NI 43-101”) by Mine Development Associates 
of Reno, Nevada, and has been reviewed by the Toronto Stock Exchange.  The Trinity Project Technical 
Report  may  be  viewed  on  the  Company’s  website  at  www.libertysilvercorp.com,  and  also  on 
www.SEDAR.com,  where  it  has  been  filed.   Mineralized  materials  defined  in  the  Trinity  Project 
Technical Report are not recognized by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. 
 
 
Mining history 
 
The  following  disclosure  regarding  the  mining  history  of  the  Trinity  Project  has  been  derived  from 
information contained in the Trinity Project Technical Report.  
 
The Trinity Project lies in the Trinity mining district, which had limited production of silver, lead, zinc, 
and gold from 1864 through 1942, primarily from the east side of the Trinity Range.  In the vicinity of the 
Trinity  project,  which  is  located  on  the  west  side  of  the  range,  there  was  historic  prospecting  with 
unrecorded but presumed minor silver production.  
 
Minor exploration activity took place in the vicinity of the Trinity project in the 1950s, and in the 1960s 
Phelps Dodge Corporation completed trenching, IP surveying, and limited drilling in the area.  
 
U. S. Borax and Chemical Corp. (“Borax”) became interested in what is now the Trinity project in 1982 
on the basis of reconnaissance geochemical sampling that indicated the presence of anomalous lead and 
silver in the Willow Canyon area.  By 1984, Borax had acquired a property position and had entered into 
a joint venture with Southern Pacific Land Company (later Santa Fe Pacific Mining, Inc. (“SFPM”) and 
still later Newmont Mining Corp. (“Newmont”), in which Borax was the operator.  From 1982 to 1986, 
Borax and its joint-venture partner explored the property and developed the Trinity mine.  Borax operated 
the  open  pit  heap-leaching  mine,  through  a  mining  contractor,  on  behalf  of  the  joint  venture  from 
September 3, 1987 to August 29, 1988, with leaching continuing into 1989.  During this period, the mine 
produced  about  five  and  a  half  million  ounces  of  silver  from  about  1.1  million  tons  of  oxidized  ore 
grading  approximately  six  and  a  half  ounces  of  silver  per  ton.   Borax  drilled  and  conducted  extensive 
metallurgical testing on the sulfide mineralization, but metal prices at the time were too low to support 
mining of this material.
16
In 1984-1985, 1987-1989, and 1990, SFPM conducted exploration and drilling on their property in the 
vicinity  of  the  joint-venture  lands.    In  1991,  SFPM  acquired  sole  interest  in  the  joint-venture  lands, 
including  Borax’s  claims,  and  conducted  further  exploration  through  1992.    SFPM’s  1990-1992 
exploration work concentrated on down-dip and lateral extensions of mineralization underlying the oxide 
pit  and  the  sulfide  mineralization,  as  well  as  extensions  of  mineralization  outside  the  immediate  mine 
area.  
 
There was no exploration on the Trinity property from 1993 to 2005.  In August 2005, Renaissance leased 
the property from Newmont, who had acquired SFPM’s Nevada holdings.  Under an earn-in agreement 
with Piedmont Mining Company, Renaissance explored the property from September 2005 through July 
2009, including limited drilling in 2006 and 2007 that encountered high-grade silver values below and 
adjacent to the open pit.  
 
Liberty  Silver  entered  into  an  earn-in  agreement  with  Renaissance  in  March,  2010.    To  date,  Liberty 
Silver has conducted extensive data compilation and has completed geophysical surveys consisting of a 
magnetotelluric survey, a gravity survey, and an induced polarization survey over portions the project. 
The Company has also drilled approximately 20,000 ft of reverse circulation rotary drilling consisting of 
20 holes, 18 of which were drilled in the vicinity of the Trinity mine.  The database of technical data for 
the property, developed since 1982, includes the results of soil and rock surveys, geophysical surveys, 
geologic  mapping,  lithology  logging  and  multi-element  analyses  for  about  400  drill  holes,  and 
metallurgical  work,  as  well  as  data  derived  from  the  previous  production  of  heap-leach  silver.    The 
Magnetotelluric  Survey  was  initiated  in  June  of  2010  and  completed  in  August  of  2010.    The  Gravity 
survey was initiated in February of 2012 completed in March of 2012.  The Induced Polarization Survey 
was initiated in April of 2012 completed in May of 2012.  The drill program was started in January of 
2012 and completed in April of 2012. 
 
Work Completed by Company & Plan of Operation 
 
As of the date of this Form 10-K, the Company has completed the following items: (a) a magnetotelluric 
geophysical survey has been completed; (b) the drill hole database has been digitized; (c) a mineralized 
material estimate for the original deposit identified in the Earn-In Agreement; in addition, environmental 
and permitting work has commenced, and all of the past geologic data has been compiled.   
 
Past exploration activities consisted of a magnetotelluric survey that was completed in August of 2010, a 
gravity survey that was completed in March of 2012, an induced polarization survey that was completed 
in May of 2012 and a drill program that was started in January of 2012 and completed in April of 2012, 
consisting of 20 reverse circulation holes comprising 22,565 ft of drill hole.  The Magnetotelluric Survey 
was  initiated  in  June  of  2010  and  completed  in  August  of  2010.    The  Gravity  survey  was  initiated  in 
February of 2012 completed in March of 2012.  The Induced Polarization Survey was initiated in April of 
2012  completed  in  May  of  2012.   The  drill  program  was  started  in  January  of  2012  and  completed  in 
April of 2012. 
 
It  is  estimated  that  during  the  fiscal  year  ending  June  30,  2011,  the  Company  incurred  approximately 
$554,145  in  exploration  expenses,  and  that  during  the  fiscal  year  ending  June  30,  2012,  the  Company 
incurred approximately $1,667,497 in exploration expenses, and that during the fiscal year ending June 
30, 2013, the Company incurred approximately $3,234,201 in exploration expenses, and that during the 
fiscal year ending June 30, 2014, the Company incurred approximately $493,184 in exploration expenses.  
These amounts include both direct exploration costs as well as various indirect costs related to exploration 
and  the  costs  of  acquiring  mineral  properties,  which  under  the  terms  of  the  Earn-In  Agreement,  are 
included  in  the  calculations  for  purposes  of  determining  whether  the  Company  has  met  its  minimum 
annual expenditure commitment.
17
It is anticipated, subject to the availability of financing, that additional exploration work will be needed 
during the 2015 fiscal year, although specific plans for this additional work have not yet been finalized.  It 
is  currently  anticipated  that  the  additional  exploration  work  to  be  completed  will  include  additional 
drilling to upgrade the level of confidence in the mineralization and to expand the mineralized area, as 
well  as  drilling  to  collect  metallurgical  samples.    The  estimated  budget  for  this  additional  drilling  is 
approximately $1,500,000.  Metallurgical testing, which is budgeted to cost approximately $300,000, is 
expected to be undertaken for the purpose of defining the estimated silver recovery of the mineralized 
rock.  Engineering design work, budgeted at approximately $500,000, is expected to be undertaken for the 
purpose  of  studying  the  feasibility  of  developing  a  mine,  and  as  soon  as  design  work  is  completed, 
permitting will need to start.  The budget for permitting work is expected to be approximately $100,000.  
No further geophysical work is currently planned. 
 
Geology and Mineralization of Trinity Project 
 
The  following  disclosure  regarding  the  Geology  and  Mineralization  of  the  Trinity  Project  has  been 
derived from information contained in the Trinity Project Technical Report.   
 
The Trinity Project lies on the western flank of the Trinity Range, one of the generally north-trending 
ranges formed during Tertiary extension of the Basin and Range Province.  
 
Within  the  Trinity  Range,  the  basement  rocks  are  comprised  of  the  Middle  Triassic  to  Early  Jurassic 
near-shore  deltaic  deposits  of  the  Auld  Lang  Syne  Group,  which  are  represented  by  phyllite,  argillite, 
quartzite, and dirty limestone at the Trinity Project.  The best-represented pre-Cenozoic deformation in 
this  portion  of  the  Trinity  Range  is  the  Jurassic  and  Cretaceous  Nevadan  Orogeny,  which  resulted  in 
low-grade regional metamorphism, variably directed folding, and thrust faulting.  A Cretaceous intrusive 
episode  culminated  the  Nevadan  Orogeny  and  is  exemplified  by  a  Cretaceous  granodiorite  stock  just 
northeast of the Trinity project.  
 
Tertiary  volcanic  and  sedimentary  rocks  and  Quaternary  sediments  are  abundant  in  the  Trinity  project 
area.  There is a thin Tertiary rhyolite sequence along the central north-south axis of the property that 
includes the mineralized material area.  These volcanic rocks overlie the Mesozoic phyllite and argillite, 
exposed to the east, but are separated by an argillite breccia that is closely associated with faulting.  The 
rhyolite  includes  interbedded  rhyolitic  flows,  welded  tuffs,  air-fall  tuffs,  epiclastic  tuffs,  and  lacustrine 
deposits.    Several  rhyolite  domes,  dikes,  and  sills  have  also  been  identified  on  the  property,  some  of 
which may be related to mineralization.  Early Tertiary north- to northwest-trending faults are present in 
the Trinity project area, as are younger north- to northeast-trending normal faults.  Late Tertiary and/or 
Quaternary  bench  and  channel  gravel  deposits  and  Quaternary  alluvium  and  outwash  unconformably 
overly the rhyolites and cover the western part of the property.  
 
Rhyolite  porphyry,  aphanitic  rhyolite,  and  volcaniclastic  rocks  are  the  principal  host  rocks  for 
mineralization in the Trinity mine area.  Silicification and quartz-adularia-sericite alteration are associated 
with  the  mineralization.    Tertiary  rhyolitic  tuffs  and  flows  were  extensively  altered  and  form  a  halo 
extending  1.6  miles  beyond  the  main  mineralized  area.    This  alteration  affected  the  Auld  Lang  Syne 
Group only locally along faults and breccia zones.  
 
Mineralization at the Trinity Project is controlled by a northeast-trending zone of normal faults.  Silver, 
lead,  and  zinc  mineralization  occurs  in  fractures  and  bedding  planes  in  Tertiary  rhyolite  in  the 
hanging-wall block of the fault zone.  Although mineralization continues downward into the underlying 
Triassic rocks, it is more tightly constrained to fractures that host higher-grade vein mineralization.  The 
original Trinity silver deposit can generally be divided into two parts: a sulfide zone below the current pit
18
and to the northeast, and an overlying oxide zone.  Borax’s mining in the late 1980s focused on a portion 
of the oxide zone.  
 
Mineralization  occurs  as  oxidized  and  unoxidized  sulfides 
in  veinlets,  as  fracture-controlled 
mineralization,  and  as  disseminations  within  the  host  rocks,  including  breccia  matrix.    Sulfide 
mineralization  consists  mainly  of  pyrite,  sphalerite,  galena,  marcasite,  and  minor  arsenopyrite  with 
various  silver  minerals,  including  tetrahedrite-freibergite,  pyrargyrite,  minor  argentite,  and  rare  native 
silver,  with  traces  of  gold,  pyrrhotite,  stannite,  and  chalcopyrite.    Low-grade  lead  and  zinc  have  the 
potential to add value as byproducts. 
 
Index of Geologic Terms
TERM 
Adularia 
Air-fall tuffs
Alluvium 
Aphanitic 
Argillite 
Argillization 
Arsenopyrite 
Breccia
Cenozoic
Chalcopyrite 
Cretaceous 
Deltaic 
Dikes 
Domes
Epiclastic  
Freibergite 
Galena 
Grandiorite
Hydrothermal 
Jurassic 
Lacustrine 
Metal Sulfides 
Mesozoic 
Mineral
Mineralization 
Miocene 
Nevadan Orogeny
Ore 
Orthoclase 
Oxidized 
 Phyllite,
DEFINITION 
A variety of transparent or translucent orthoclase. 
Ash  exploded  out  of  a  volcano,  which  falls  through  the  air  and  settles  in  beds,  called  tuffs  when 
consolidated. 
Loose, unconsolidated (not cemented together into a solid rock) soil or sediments 
Igneous rock in which the grain or crystalline structure is too fine to be seen by the unaided eye 
A fine-grained sedimentary rock composed predominantly of indurated muds and oozes. 
The replacement or alteration of feldspars to form clay minerals.   
The most prevalent mineral containing the element arsenic. 
 A rock composed of broken fragments of minerals or rock cemented together by a fine-grained 
matrix, which can be either similar to or different from the composition of the fragments. 
The current and most recent geological era and covers the period from 65.5 million years ago to the 
present 
A major ore mineral containing copper, iron, and sulfur.  
A geologic period from 145 to 65 million years ago. 
Pertaining to, or like a delta. 
A type of sheet intrusion referring to any geologic body that cuts discordantly across rock structures. 
A roughly circular mound-shaped protrusion resulting from the slow extrusion of viscous lava from a 
volcano. 
Formed at the surface of the earth by consolidation of fragments of preexisting rocks. 
A complex sulfosalt mineral of silver, copper, iron, antimony, arsenic, and sulfur. 
The natural mineral form of lead sulfide. 
A visibly crystalline plutonic rock composed chiefly of sodic plagioclase, alkali feldspar, quartz, and 
subordinate dark-colored minerals. 
Relating to or produced by hot water, especially water heated underground by the Earth's internal heat.   
The geologic period that extends from about 200  to 145 million years ago.  
Of or relating to lakes. 
A group of minerals containing both metals and sulfur.  
A geologic era that extends from 251 to  65 million years ago 
A  mineral  is  a  naturally  occurring  solid  chemical  substance  having  characteristic  chemical 
composition, highly ordered atomic structure, and specific  
The act or process of mineralizing. 
A geological epoch that extends from about 23.8 to 5.3 million years ago. 
A major mountain building event that took place along the western edge of ancient North America 
between the mid to late Jurassic.  
Mineralized material that can be mined and processed at a positive cash flow. 
A variety of feldspar, essentially potassium aluminum silicate, which forms igneous rock. 
A process whereby the sulfur in a mineral has been removed and replaced by oxygen.  
A type of foliated metamorphic rock primarily composed of quartz, muscovite mica, and chlorite
19
Pliocene 
Porphyry 
Pyrargyrite 
Pyrite
Pyrrhotite 
Quartzite 
Rhyolite 
Sercitization
Silicification
Sills
Sphalerite 
Stannite 
Sulfides 
Tetrahedrite 
Triassic 
Volcanic 
Volcaniclastic
Welded tuffs
The geologic epoch that extends from about 5.3 million to 1.8 million years ago.  
A variety of igneous rock consisting of large-grained crystals suspended in a fine grained matrix 
A sulfosalt mineral consisting of silver, arsenic, and sulfur.  
A very common sulfide mineral consisting of iron and sulfur found in a wide variety of geological 
occurrences.  Commonly known as “Fools Gold” 
An unusual iron sulfide mineral with a variable iron content. 
A hard metamorphic rock which was originally sandstone 
A fine-grained volcanic rock, similar to granite in composition 
A hydrothermal or metamorphic process involving the introduction of, alteration to, or replacement by 
white, fine-grained potassium mica. 
A hydrothermal or metamorphic process involving the introduction of, alteration to, or replacement by 
silica.  
A tabular sheet intrusion that has intruded between older layers of sedimentary rock, beds of volcanic 
lava or tuff. 
A mineral containing zinc and sulfur.  
A mineral containing copper, iron, tin, and sulfur.  
Sulfide minerals are a class of minerals containing sulfur with sulfide (S2−) as the major anion. 
A sulfosalt mineral containing  copper, antimony, and sulfur. 
A geologic period that extends from about 251 to 200 million years ago. 
A rock formed from magma erupted from a volcano. 
Volcanic material which been transported and reworked through mechanical action, such as by wind 
or water. 
Rock composed of compacted volcanic ejected materials.
Subsequent Events 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Company announced that the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) had determined to 
delist the Company’s common shares effective the close of business on August 5, 2014 as a result of the 
failure by the Company to meet the continued listing requirements of the TSX.  The Company appealed 
that  decision,  and  on  August  11,  2014,  it  was  announced  that  the  Appeals  Committee  of  the  TSX 
determined that the Company’s shares would not be relisted. 
 
On July 14, 2014, the Company received notice from the firm of Morrill & Associates, LLC, 1448 North 
2000 West, Suite 3, Clinton, Utah 84015, (“Morrill”), that as a result of its merger with another public 
accounting firm, which is not registered with the Canadian Public Accountability Board, it had resigned 
as the principal independent accountant to audit the Registrant’s financial statements for the fiscal year 
ending  June  30,  2014.    Effective  September  2,  2014,  the  Company  appointed  the  firm  of  MNP,  LLP, 
Chartered Professional Accountants, as the Company’s new independent audit firm.  
 
ITEM 3.  
 
On September 12, 2013, the Company and certain of its current and former officers and directors (the 
“Liberty  Silver  Parties”)  were  named  as  defendants  in  a  proposed  securities  class  action  lawsuit  filed 
against  Robert  Genovese,  certain  individuals  alleged  to  have  collaborated  with  Mr.  Genovese,  and  an 
offshore 
(the  “Action,”  Case  No. 
9:13-cv-80923-KLR,  Stanaford  v.  Genovese  et  al.).    The  action  contains  various  claims  alleging 
violations  of  the  United  States  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934  and  rules  thereunder  relating  to 
anomalous trading activity and fluctuations in the Company’s share price from August through October 
2012.  The  plaintiff  purported  to  bring  suit  on  behalf  of  all  who  purchased  or  otherwise  acquired  the 
Company’s common shares from April 1, 2008, through and including October 5, 2012.  An amended
firm  allegedly  controlled  by  Mr.  Genovese
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
investment
20
complaint was filed on September 27, 2013. 
 
On  January  22,  2014,  the  Court  appointed  Jerald  Todd  Stanaford  and  Philip  Hobel  lead  plaintiffs  and 
approved Federman & Sherwood as Lead Counsel and Menzer & Hill, PA as Liaison Counsel.  On March 
24, 2014, Plaintiffs filed a Second Amended Consolidated Class Action Complaint.  On May 8, 2014, the 
Liberty Silver Parties moved to dismiss the Complaint.  The Liberty Silver Parties intend to vigorously 
defend the Action.  It is not possible at this time to predict whether the Company will incur any liability 
as a result of the Action, or to estimate the damages, or the range of damages, if any, that the Company 
might incur in connection with the Action. 
 
Neither the Company nor its property is the subject of any other pending legal proceedings, and no other 
such proceeding is known to be contemplated by any governmental authority.  The Company is not aware 
of any other legal proceedings in which any director, officer or affiliate of the Company, any owner of 
record or beneficially of more than 5% of any class of our voting securities, or any associate of any such 
director, officer, affiliate or security holder of the Company, is a party adverse to the Company or any of 
its subsidiaries or has a material interest adverse to the Company or any of its subsidiaries. 
 
ITEM 4. 
 
The recently enacted Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (“the Act”) requires 
the  operators  of  mines  to  include  in  each  periodic  report  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission certain specified disclosures regarding the Company’s history of mine safety.  The Company 
is currently in the exploration phase and does not operate mines at any of its properties, and as such is not 
subject to disclosure requirements regarding mine safety that were imposed by the Act.
MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES.
ITEM 5.  
STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES.
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED
PART II
Until August 5, 2014, the Company’s common stock was quoted on the on the Toronto Stock Exchange 
under the Symbol “LSL” and on occasion trades by appointment on the Grey Market under the Symbol 
"LBSV".    Prior  to  October  15,  2012,  the  Company’s  shares  traded  on  the  OTC  Bulletin  Board 
(“OTCBB”). 
 
On October 5, 2012, Liberty Silver was named in an Order of Suspension of Trading (the "Order") from 
the US Securities and Exchange Commission.  Pursuant to the Order, trading in the Company's securities 
was  suspended  from  October  5,  2012  through  October  18,  2012.    Furthermore,  effective  October  11, 
2012, the Company had its stock quotation under the symbol "LBSV" removed from the OTC Bulletin 
Board (the "OTCBB") as it became ineligible for quotation on OTCBB due to quoting inactivity under 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  Rule  15c2-11.    The  Company  continues  to  consider  its 
circumstances  and  review  the  requirements  necessary  to  permit  its  stock  to  resume  trading  on  the 
OTCBB, and in due course, will determine the most appropriate course of action.  There is no assurance 
as to when or whether the Company’s stock will resume trading on the OTCBB. 
 
On October 12, 2012, the Ontario Securities Commission issued a cease trade order providing that trading 
in the securities of Liberty Silver Corp. (excepting issuances from treasury) shall cease until 11:59 pm 
EST on October 18, 2012 (the “OSC Order”).  The OSC Order was effective for the same time frame as 
the Order of Suspension of Trading imposed by the SEC.  Trading in the Company’s shares on the TSX 
in Canada resumed on October 22, 2012.
21
On July 2, 2014, the Company announced that the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) had determined to 
delist the Company’s common shares effective the close of business on August 5, 2014 as a result of the 
failure by the Company to meet the continued listing requirements of the TSX.  The Company appealed 
that  decision,  and  on  August  11,  2014,  it  was  announced  that  the  Appeals  Committee  of  the  TSX 
determined that the Company’s shares would not be relisted.
The  quotations  set  forth  below  reflect  inter-dealer  prices,  without  retail  mark-up,  markdown  or 
commission and may not represent actual transactions. 
 
The  high  and  low  closing  prices  of  our  common  stock  on  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  and  the  OTC 
Bulletin Board or the Grey Market for the periods indicated below are as follows:
PERIOD
April 1, 2014 through June 30, 2014  
January 1, 2014 through March 31, 2014 
October 1, 2013 through December 31, 2013  
July 1, 2013 through September 30, 2013  
April 1, 2013 through June 30, 2013  
January 1, 2013 through March 31, 2013  
October 1, 2012 through December 31, 2012  
July 1, 2012 through September 30, 2012
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$
HIGH BID
TSX
$ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $
LOW BID
CAD$ 
0.02 
0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.11 
0.18 
0.39 
0.60
$ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $
CAD$ 
0.10 
0.04 
0.06 
0.12 
0.36 
0.73 
1.58 
1.49
OTCBB/GREY MARKET 
LOW BID
HIGH BID
US$ 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
0.36 
0.70 
1.55 
1.54
$ 
   $ 
  $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
  $ 
   $
US$ 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
0.09 
0.15 
0.15 
0.60
(1)  Common stock commenced trading on the TSX on December 22, 2011.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL
As of September 29, 2014, there were 84,723,945 shares of common stock issued and outstanding held by 
approximately 24 registered stockholders of record of the Company's common stock. 
 
There have been no cash dividends declared or paid on the shares of common stock, and management 
does not anticipate payment of dividends in the foreseeable future.  
 
ITEM 6. 
 
Not Applicable.   
 
ITEM 7.  
CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.  
 
SPECIAL NOTE OF CAUTION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS 
 
CERTAIN STATEMENTS IN THIS REPORT, INCLUDING STATEMENTS IN THE FOLLOWING 
DISCUSSION,  ARE  WHAT  ARE  KNOWN  AS  "FORWARD  LOOKING  STATEMENTS",  WHICH 
ARE  BASICALLY  STATEMENTS  ABOUT  THE  FUTURE.  FOR  THAT  REASON,  THESE 
STATEMENTS  INVOLVE  RISK  AND  UNCERTAINTY  SINCE  NO  ONE  CAN  ACCURATELY 
PREDICT THE FUTURE. WORDS SUCH AS "PLANS," "INTENDS," "WILL," "HOPES," "SEEKS," 
"ANTICIPATES,"  "EXPECTS  "AND  THE  LIKE  OFTEN  IDENTIFY  SUCH  FORWARD  LOOKING 
STATEMENTS, BUT ARE NOT THE ONLY INDICATION THAT A STATEMENT IS A FORWARD 
LOOKING STATEMENT. SUCH FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS INCLUDE STATEMENTS
22
CONCERNING  OUR  PLANS  AND  OBJECTIVES  WITH  RESPECT  TO  THE  PRESENT  AND 
FUTURE OPERATIONS OF THE COMPANY, AND STATEMENTS WHICH EXPRESS OR IMPLY 
THAT  SUCH  PRESENT  AND  FUTURE  OPERATIONS  WILL  OR  MAY  PRODUCE  REVENUES, 
INCOME  OR  PROFITS.  NUMEROUS  FACTORS  AND  FUTURE  EVENTS  COULD  CAUSE  THE 
COMPANY  TO  CHANGE  SUCH  PLANS  AND  OBJECTIVES  OR  FAIL  TO  SUCCESSFULLY 
IMPLEMENT  SUCH  PLANS  OR  ACHIEVE  SUCH  OBJECTIVES,  OR  CAUSE  SUCH  PRESENT 
AND  FUTURE  OPERATIONS  TO  FAIL  TO  PRODUCE  REVENUES,  INCOME  OR  PROFITS. 
THEREFORE, THE READER IS ADVISED THAT THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION SHOULD BE 
CONSIDERED IN LIGHT OF THE DISCUSSION OF RISKS AND OTHER FACTORS CONTAINED 
IN  THIS  REPORT  ON  FORM  10-K  AND  IN  THE  COMPANY'S  OTHER  FILINGS  WITH  THE 
SECURITIES  AND  EXCHANGE  COMMISSION.  NO  STATEMENTS  CONTAINED  IN  THE 
FOLLOWING DISCUSSION SHOULD BE CONSTRUED AS A GUARANTEE OR ASSURANCE OF 
FUTURE PERFORMANCE OR FUTURE RESULTS. 
 
Background and Overview 
 
The Company was incorporated for the purpose of engaging in mineral exploration activities.  On March 
29,  2010,  the  Company  entered  into  an  Exploration  Earn-In  Agreement  relating  to  the  Trinity  Project 
located in Pershing County, Nevada and intends to engage in efforts to develop the Trinity Project.  The 
plan of operation for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2015 is to conduct mineral exploration activities and 
production planning at the Trinity Silver property.  Operations at the Trinity Project, in due course, will 
consist  of  (i)  an  effort  to  expand  the  known  resource  through  drilling,  (ii)  permitting  for  operation,  if 
deemed economically viable, (iii) metallurgical studies aimed at enhancing the recovery of the silver and 
by-product  lead  and  zinc,  and  (iv)  engineering  design  related  to  potential  construction  of  a  new  mine. 
Exploration  of  the  property  will  be  conducted  simultaneously  with  the  potential  mine  development  in 
order to locate additional resources. 
 
Results of Operations 
 
The  following  discussion  and  analysis  provides  information  that  is  believed  to  be  relevant  to  an 
assessment and understanding of the results of operation and financial condition of the Company for the 
fiscal year ended June 30, 2014 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013.  Unless otherwise 
stated, all figures herein are expressed in U.S. dollars, which is the Company’s functional currency.   
 
Comparison of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 
 
Revenue 
           
During the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2013, the Company generated no revenue. 
 
Expenses  
 
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014, the Company reported total operating expenses of $2,732,323 
as  compared  to  $3,302,560  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  2013,  a  decrease  of  $570,237  or 
approximately  17%.    The  decrease  in  operating  expenses  is  primarily  due  to  decreases  in  legal  and 
accounting expense and exploration expense.  The decrease in these expenses was partially offset by the 
increase in operation and administration expense and consulting expense.   
 
Legal and accounting expense decreased by $490,458 to $461,337 during the fiscal year ended June 30, 
2014, as compared to a legal and accounting expense of $951,795 reported during the fiscal year ended 
June 30, 2013, when the Company was in the midst of dealing with the trading halt of its shares.
23
Exploration  expense  decreased  by  $441,312  to  $53,071  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  2014,  as 
compared to an expense of $494,383 reported during the period ended June 30, 2013.  During the fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  2014,  the  Company  was  not  engaged  in  a  field  exploration  program,  however  it 
incurred  relatively  less  expenses  to  compile,  analyze,  interpret  and  model  its  vast  database,  and  to 
maintain its property claims in good standing, as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013 when 
the Company incurred expenses related to a field exploration program.   
 
For  financial  accounting  purposes,  the  Company  reports  all  direct  exploration  expenses  under  the 
exploration expense line item of the statement of operations.  Certain indirect expenses, which are related 
to  the  exploration  activities,  may  be  reported  as  operation  and  administration  expense  or  consulting 
expense on the statement of operations, or in certain cases, these expenses may also be capitalized to the 
balance sheet if they relate to costs incurred to acquire mineral properties.  During the fiscal year ended 
June 30, 2014, the Company incurred a total of $460,432 of direct and indirect expenses, which related to 
its exploration activities, as compared to approximately $3,299,000 during the fiscal year ended June 30, 
2014. 
 
Operation and administration expense increased by $265,484 to $2,117,915 during the fiscal year ended 
June 30, 2014, as compared to an expense of $1,852,431 reported during the fiscal year ended June 30, 
2013.    While  the  majority  of  expense  items,  which  comprise  the  overall  operations  and  administrative 
expenses,  decreased  during  the  current  fiscal  years,  the  net  increase  in  operation  and  administration 
expense was primarily due to the increase of $825,367 in non-cash stock based compensation expense 
from $558,728 during the previous year to $1,384,095 during the current fiscal period.  During the current 
fiscal year, certain officers and directors of the Company cancelled or forfeited their previously issued 
stock  options,  and  as  a  result,  any  unamortized  value  attributed  to  those  previously  issued  and  vested 
stock options, was expensed upon cancellation.  Stock options that had not vested were forfeited, which 
did  not  impact  the  results  of  the  current  period.    Additionally,  during  the  current  fiscal  year,  certain 
officers  and  directors  of  the  Company  were  issued  a  total  of  5,200,000  options  to  purchase  common 
shares, and the value attributed to that portion of the stock options that had vested during the year, was 
expensed as stock based compensation.  The Company also incurred an increase of $51,771 in directors 
and officers insurance expense during the current fiscal period.   
 
Some of the expenses, which comprised the overall operations and administrative expense, that partially 
offset  the  increase  in  the  non-cash  stock  based  compensation  expense  and  director’s  and  officer’s 
insurance expense, are as follows: salary expense decreased by $321,466; travel, promotional and investor 
relations expense decreased by $112,814; corporate development expense decreased by $103,601; office 
expenses decreased by $45,170; and, expenses related to being a public company decreased by $42,021.   
 
Consulting  expense  increased  by  $96,049  to  $100,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  2014,  as 
compared to an expense of $3,951 reported during the period ended June 30, 2013. During the fiscal year 
ended June 30, 2014, the Company engaged the services of a consultant and a consulting firm to assist the 
Company with its business strategy and financing initiatives, and to assist with the drafting of a special 
report, respectively. 
 
Net Loss and Comprehensive Loss  
 
The Company had a net loss and comprehensive loss of $2,758,774 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 
2014, as compared to a net loss and comprehensive loss of $3,279,604 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 
2013, a change of $520,830 or approximately 16%.  The decrease in net loss and comprehensive loss was 
due to a net decrease in operating expenses of $570,237 as outlined above, which was partially offset by 
the net total other expense or loss during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014, as compared to a net total
24
other income or gain for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013.  The net total other expense or loss during 
the current fiscal year was comprised of gain of $19,932 resulting from foreign exchange transactions and 
interest expense of $46,383, which related to the outstanding loan facility.  During the previous year, the 
net total income or gain was comprised of a gain of $23,157 resulting from foreign exchange transactions 
and interest expense of $201.  
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources 
 
The Company does not have sufficient working capital needed to meet its current fiscal obligations.  In 
order  to  continue  to  meet  its  fiscal  obligations  in  the  current  fiscal  year  and  beyond  the  next  twelve 
months, management is considering various financing alternatives including, but not limited to, merger 
and acquisition activity, raising capital through the equity markets and debt financing.  
 
In order to acquire a 70% interest in the Trinity Project, the Company is required to incur $5,000,000 in 
exploration expenditures over a six-year period from March 29, 2010, the date of the Earn-In Agreement, 
to March 29, 2016.  In addition, by the end of March 29, 2017, the Company is required to produce a 
bankable  feasibility  study.    As  of  March  29,  2013,  the  end  of  the  third  year  following  the  date  of  the 
Earn-In Agreement, the Company had incurred approximately $5,652,397 in expenditures related to the 
Trinity  Project,  and  therefore  has  satisfied  the  $5,000,000  exploration  expenditure  commitment.    The 
Company is currently considering financing alternatives, as described above, with the objective to raise 
approximately $2,500,000 to meet its immediate financial obligations and to fund its near-term working 
capital requirements and fieldwork plans.  The Company also has the objective to raise additional capital, 
within the next twelve to eighteen months, to fund additional work to complete the bankable feasibility 
study  and  to  fund  ongoing  working  capital.    The  additional  work  will  consist  of  engineering  and 
metallurgical testing, confirmation drilling, and an update of the National Instrument 43-101 compliant 
resource estimate. 
 
The primary source for capital for the Company is the equity markets.  Management plans to continue its 
canvassing efforts of investors and financial institutions to invest capital in the Company through private 
placement offerings of common shares or units consisting of common shares and warrants.  The terms 
and pricing of any such financing would be determined in the context of the markets and the Company’s 
financial  condition.  The  Company  has  not  entered  into  an  agency  agreement  or  arrangement  with  any 
financial institution or investor group to raise capital at this time.  
 
In such an event where the Company is not successful at raising capital through the issuance of capital 
stock,  the  Company  may  consider  raising  capital  by  the  issuance  of  debt.    However,  unless  the 
appropriate  features,  such  as  convertible  options,  are  attached  to  the  debt  instruments,  this  form  of 
financing is less desirable until such time as the Company may be in a position to reasonably foresee the 
generation of cash flow to service and repay debt.   
 
On November 14, 2013, the Company closed a $1,210,000 loan facility with BG Capital Group Ltd.  The 
loan bears interest at the rate of 11% per annum for the first twelve months.  The Company may extend 
the  one-year  term  of  the  loan  for  an  additional  six  months  at  the  rate  of  15%  per  annum  during  the 
extended term.  The loan is secured by a charge on all of the Company’s assets.  Subject to regulatory 
approval, the Company may cause the lender to convert the outstanding debt to common shares of the 
Company, should the Company complete an arm’s length equity financing of $500,000 or more, at a price 
of  not  less  than  $0.50  per  common  share.  The  Company  intends  to  use  the  funds  from  the  Loan  for 
general  working  capital  purposes,  thereby  affording  the  Company  more  time  to  secure  longer  term 
financing for the Trinity Silver Project.
25
Further, on an ongoing basis, management will review potential merger or acquisition targets to determine 
if  certain  synergies  exist  for  the  Company  and  if  the  potential  target  would  strengthen  the  Company’s 
financial position. Management does not currently have any merger or acquisition target identified, and 
any such discussions are at the very preliminary stages. 
 
In the event that the Company raises some funds, but, due to difficult capital market conditions or other 
factors, is not successful at raising all funds needed to complete the bankable feasibility study and fund 
ongoing working capital, management plans to reduce overhead and maintain the Trinity Project under a 
care  and  maintenance  program,  until  such  time  as  the  capital  markets  improve  for  junior  exploration 
companies.  Management believes that this option is available to it, without jeopardizing its interest in the 
Trinity Project, due to the accelerated pace at which it has incurred exploration expenditures in relation to 
the timeline for the minimum expenditure commitment prescribed in the Earn-In Agreement. 
 
On  November  10,  2011,  the  Company  entered  into  a  Subscription  Agreement  (the  “Subscription 
Agreement”)  with  Look  Back  Investments,  Inc.  (“Investor”),  pursuant  to  which  the  Investor  acquired 
Subscription  Receipts  (“Subscription  Receipts”)  for  U.S.  $0.50  per  Subscription  Receipt  for  gross 
proceeds of U.S. $3,250,000; the gross proceeds of U.S. $3,250,000 (the “Escrow Proceeds”) were held in 
escrow pursuant to the terms of the Subscription Receipt. Each Subscription Receipt entitled the Investor 
to receive one unit (a "Unit") from the Company without payment of any additional consideration upon 
conditional  approval  by  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  for  the  listing  of  the  common  shares  of  the 
Company.  Each  Unit  consists  of  one  share  of  common  stock  of  the  Company  and  one  common  stock 
purchase warrant (a “Warrant”); each Warrant is exercisable at a price of US $0.65 per share at any time 
until 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on December 31, 2013. On December 19, 2011, each Subscription Receipt 
was automatically converted for no additional consideration, into one Unit of the Company as a result of 
the Company’s receipt of notice that its common stock was accepted for trading on the Toronto Stock 
Exchange under the trading symbol, “LSL”, effective as of December 22, 2011. On December 19, 2011, 
the Escrow Proceeds were delivered to the Company from the escrow agent. 
 
Additionally, on December 19, 2011, the Company completed a private placement offering, pursuant to 
which the Company raised a total of US $1,313,750 through the sale of 2,627,500 Units at a purchase 
price  of  US  $0.50  per  Unit;  there  were  no  underwriting  discounts  or  commissions  paid.  Each  Unit 
consisted  of  one  share  of  common  stock  of  the  Company  and  one  common  stock  purchase  warrant  (a 
“Warrant”). Each whole Warrant entitles the holder to acquire one share of common stock at a price of 
US $0.65 for a period of two years following the date of the closing of the financing.  
 
Effective September 28, 2012, the Company issued 100,000 common shares upon the exercise of 100,000 
whole warrants for gross proceeds of CDN$75,000. 
 
Effective October 3, 2012, the Company issued 300,000 common shares upon the exercise of 300,000 
whole warrants for gross proceeds of CDN$225,000. 
 
Effective November 27, 2012, the Company issued 20,000 common shares upon the exercise of 20 whole 
warrants for the gross proceeds of US$13,000. 
 
 
Effective  December  19,  2013,  3,900,000  vested  stock  options  were  cancelled,  and  150,000  non-vested 
stock options were forfeited.  Further, the Company granted 200,000 stock options at an exercise price of 
$0.10 each.   
 
Effective December 21, 2013, 300,000 vested stock options had expired.  
 
On April 8, 2014, the Company granted 5,000,000 stock options at an exercise price of $0.10 each.
26
As at the filing date of this Form 10-K, there were 6,700,000 stock options outstanding, which may be 
exercised at various exercise prices, for gross proceeds of $1,645,000, however the exercise prices of the 
stock options exceed the market price of the Company’s shares. 
 
As at June 30, 2014, there were 200,000 warrants outstanding, which may be exercised for gross proceeds 
of  $150,000, however the  exercise prices of these warrants exceed the market price of the Company’s 
shares. 
 
Current Assets and Total Assets 
 
As of June 30, 2014, the Company’s audited balance sheet reflects that the Company had: i) total current 
assets  of  $459,506,  as  compared  to  total  current  assets  of  $140,890  at  June  30,  2013,  an  increase  of 
$318,616,  or  approximately  226%;  and  ii)  total  assets  of  $3,026,872,  as  compared  to  total  assets  of 
$2,702,011 at June 30, 2013, an increase of $324,861 or approximately 12%.  The net increase in current 
assets was primarily due to a net increase in cash received from financing activities during the current 
fiscal year, as compared to the previous year, and that less cash was used in operations during the current 
fiscal year, as compared to the previous year.  The increase in total assets was primarily due to the same 
reason  for  the  increase  in  current  assets,  as  the  long-term  assets  remain  relatively  unchanged 
year-over-year. 
 
 
Total Current Liabilities and Liabilities 
 
As of June 30, 2014, the Company’s audited balance sheet reflects that the Company had total current 
liabilities and total liabilities of $2,754,909, as compared to total current liabilities and total liabilities of 
$1,275,987  at  June  30,  2013,  an  increase  of  $1,478,922  or  approximately  116%.    The  increase  in 
liabilities was due to: an increase in accounts payable, which was comprised of legal fees in connection 
with  the  Company’s  Cease  Trade  Orders  issued  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  and  the 
Ontario Securities Commission and a Class Action Complaint brought forward against the Company, and 
ongoing  operational  invoices;  and,  an  increase  in  accrued  liabilities,  which  was  comprised  of  ongoing 
operational accruals, including management salaries, which have not been paid.  The Company has issued 
a claim to its insurance underwriters for coverage under the Company’s directors and officer’s insurance 
policy  to  offset  certain  legal  fees  incurred  in  connection  with  the  Cease  Trade  Orders  and  the  Class 
Action Complaint, which if successful, will offset a significant portion of the current accounts payable 
balance.  The insurance underwriters had originally rejected the Company’s claim in connection with the 
Cease  Trade  Orders,  however,  after  Management  disputed  the  underwriters  position,  the  underwriters 
agreed to certain coverages, the extent of which continues to be unclear.  The underwriters have agreed to 
provide coverage in the matter of the Class Action Complaint, and Management expects that the accounts 
payable balances in connection with the Class Action Complaint, will be extinguished in due course.  
 
Cash Flow 
 
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014 cash was primarily used to fund operations.  The Company 
reported a net increase in cash during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014 as compared to June 30, 2013.  
See below for additional discussion and analysis of cash flow.
27
Net cash used in operating activities 
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash from financing activities
Net increase (decrease) cash
For the years ended June 30,  
2014 
2013
$
(1,620,991) 
(348,430)
298,432
(1,670,989)
$ 
(895,043) 
                   (13,191)
1,204,618
296,384
During the year ended June 30, 2014, net cash used in operating activities was $895,043, compared to net 
cash used in operating activities of $1,620,991 during the year ended June 30, 2013.  The decrease in net 
cash used in operating activities of $725,948 is due to a decrease in net loss and comprehensive loss of 
$520,830, and an increase of $1,051,367 in non-cash items reported during the current fiscal year.  The 
decrease  in  cash  used  in  operating  activities,  which  resulted  from  the  decrease  in  net  loss  and 
comprehensive loss and non-cash items reported during the current fiscal year, was partially offset by the 
net  changes  in  working  capital  items,  which  led  to  an  increase  in  cash  of $246,690  during  the  current 
fiscal year versus net changes in working capital items, which led to an increase in cash of $1,092,939 
during the comparative fiscal year. 
   
During the year ended June 30, 2014, net cash used in investing activities was $13,191, which related to 
residual  acquisition  costs  that  were  directly  associated  with  the  mining  interests  acquired  during  the 
previous fiscal year, when the Company had used $348,430 to complete the acquisition of those mining 
interests. 
 
During the year ended June 30, 2014, net cash from financing activities was $1,204,618, compared to net 
cash from financing activities of $298,432 during the fiscal year 2013. During the year ended June 30, 
2014, the Company received gross proceeds of $1,210,000 pursuant to a Loan Agreement entered into on 
November 14, 2013.  The cash received pursuant to this loan, was partially offset by the cash issue costs 
incurred in connection with the non-cash settlement of previous obligations to former employees of and a 
consultant to the Company, by the issuance of common stock.   
 
During the year ended June 30, 2013, the Company issued 100,000 common shares upon the exercise of 
100,000 whole warrants at an exercise price of CDN $0.75 per common share, for gross proceeds of CDN 
$75,000 and 300,000 common shares upon the exercise of 300,000 whole warrants at an exercise price of 
CDN $0.75 per common share, for the gross proceeds of $225,000. The warrants were originally issued 
pursuant  to  a  private  placement  offering  of  200,000  Units  on  July  27,  2011  and  1,000,000  Units  on 
August  4,  2011.  The  Units  were  comprised  of  one  common  share  and  one  half  of  one  common  share 
purchase warrant.  The total CDN $300,000 proceeds were reported as US $305,296.  During the previous 
fiscal year end, the Company had also issued 20,000 common shares upon the exercise of 20,000 warrants 
at  an  exercise  price  of  US  $0.65  per  common  share,  for  gross  proceeds  of  US  $13,000.   The  warrants 
were  originally  issued  pursuant  to  a  private  placement  offering  of  2,627,500  Units  on  December  19, 
2011.  These Units were comprised of one common share and one common share purchase warrant.  The 
gross proceeds of US $318,296 from these share issuances during the previous fiscal year were partially 
offset by cash issue costs of $19,864, which were directly related to the share issuances.
28
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET
Subsequent Events 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Company announced that the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) had determined to 
delist the Company’s common shares effective the close of business on August 5, 2014 as a result of the 
failure by the Company to meet the continued listing requirements of the TSX.  The Company appealed 
that  decision,  and  on  August  11,  2014,  it  was  announced  that  the  Appeals  Committee  of  the  TSX 
determined that the Company’s shares would not be relisted. 
 
On July 14, 2014, the Company received notice from the firm of Morrill & Associates, LLC, 1448 North 
2000 West, Suite 3, Clinton, Utah 84015, (“Morrill”), that as a result of its merger with another public 
accounting firm, which is not registered with the Canadian Public Accountability Board, it had resigned 
as the principal independent accountant to audit the Company’s financial statements for the fiscal year 
ending  June  30,  2014.    Effective  September  2,  2014,  the  Company  appointed  the  firm  of  MNP,  LLP, 
Chartered Professional Accountants, as the Company’s new independent audit firm.  
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements 
 
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements. 
 
ITEM 7A. 
RISK. 
 
Not Applicable. 
 
ITEM 8.  
 
The  financial  statements  of  the  Company  required  by  Article  8  of  Regulation  S-X  are  attached  to  this 
report
29
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms 
 
Balance Sheets 
 
Statements of Operations And Comprehensive Income 
 
Statements of Stockholders Equity 
 
Statements of Cash Flows 
 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
LIBERTY SILVER CORP.
AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE FISCAL YEARS ENDED JUNE 30, 2014 and 2013
Page 
 
  31 
 
  33 
 
  34 
 
  35-37 
 
  38-39 
 
  40-51
30
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board or Directors and Stockholders of Liberty Silver Corp. 
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Liberty Silver Corp. as of June 30, 2014, and the 
related  statements  of  operations,  stockholders'  equity,  and  cash  flows  for  the  year  then  ended.  Liberty 
Silver Corp.’s management is responsible for these financial statements. Our responsibility is to express 
an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit. The financial statements as of June 30, 2013 
and for the cumulative period from February 20, 2007 (date of inception) through to June 30, 2013 were 
audited by other auditors who expressed an opinion without reservation on those statements in their audit 
report  dated  September  26,  2013.  Their  report  included  an  explanatory  paragraph  regarding  going 
concern.  Our opinion, in so far as it relates to the period from February 20, 2007 through to June 30, 2013, 
is based solely on the report of other auditors. 
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable 
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. Liberty Silver Corp. is 
not  required  to  have,  nor  were  we  engaged  to  perform,  an  audit  of  its  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting.  Our  audit  included  consideration  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  a  basis  for 
designing  audit  procedures  that  are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of 
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of Liberty Silver Corp.’s internal control over financial reporting. 
Accordingly,  we  express  no  such  opinion.  An  audit  also  includes  examining,  on  a  test  basis,  evidence 
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles 
used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement 
presentation. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion. 
In  our  opinion,  the  financial  statements  referred  to  above  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the 
financial position of Liberty Silver Corp. as of June 30, 2014, and the results of its operations and its cash 
flows for the year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United 
States of America. 
The  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  the  Company  will 
continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1, the Company has experienced negative cash flows 
from operations since inception and has accumulated a significant deficit which raises substantial doubt 
about its ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans regarding these matters are also 
described in Note 1. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the 
outcome of this uncertainty.
Toronto, Canada 
September 26, 2014
Chartered Professional Accountants 
Licensed Public Accountants
31
Morrill & Associates, LLC
Certified Public Accountants
1448 North 2000 West, Suite 3
Clinton, Utah 84015
801-820-6233 Phone; 801-820-6628 FAX
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders 
Liberty Silver Corp. (An Exploration Stage Company) 
Toronto, Ontario  
 
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  balance  sheet  of  Liberty  Silver  Corp.  (an  exploration  stage 
company) as of June 30, 2013 and the related statements of operations, stockholders’ equity and 
cash flows for the year ended June 30, 2013 and from inception on February 20, 2007 through June 
30,  2013.  These  financial  statements  are  the  responsibility  of  the  Company’s  management.   Our 
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit. 
 
We  conducted  our  audit  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting 
Oversight  Board  (United  States).   Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to 
obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  of  material 
misstatement.  The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its 
internal  control  over  financial  reporting.   Our  audit  included  consideration  of  internal  control  over 
financial  reporting  as  a  basis  for  designing  audit  procedures  that  are  appropriate  in  the 
circumstances,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  an  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  the 
Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.   Accordingly,  we  express  no  such  opinion.  An 
audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in 
the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by 
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.  We believe that our 
audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion. 
 
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the 
financial position of Liberty Silver Corp. (an exploration stage company) as of June 30, 2013 and the 
results  of  its  operations  and  cash  flows  for  the  year  ended  June  30,  2013  and  from  inception  on 
February 20, 2007 through June 30, 2013 in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles 
in the United States of America. 
 
The  accompanying  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  that  the  Company  will 
continue  as  a  going  concern.   The  Company  has  suffered  recurring  losses  and  has  no  significant 
operations  which 
to  continue  as  a  going 
concern.   Management’s  plans  in  regard  to  these  matters  are  described  in  Note  1.  The  financial 
statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. 
 
 
/s/ Morrill & Associates 
 
 
Morrill & Associates 
Clinton, Utah 84015 
September 26, 2013
raise  substantial  doubt  about
its  ability
32
Liberty Silver Corp.  
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Balance Sheets
As at June 30,
2014
2013
ASSETS 
  
Current assets 
!! Cash and cash equivalents 
!! Deposit 
!! Other assets 
!! Prepaid expenses 
Total current assets 
  
Property and equipment 
!! Furniture and office equipment 
!! Accumulated depreciation 
!! Mining interests  
Total property and equipment 
  
 Total assets 
  
LIABILITIES 
  
Current liabilities  
!! Accounts payable 
!! Accrued liabilities 
!! Loan payable 
Total current liabilities   
  
Total liabilities 
  
Commitments and contingencies (note 7) 
  
SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY 
   Preferred shares, $0.001 par value, 10,000,000 preferred shares authorized; 
  
!! Common shares, $0.001 par value, 300,000,000 common shares authorized; 
!!
!! Additional paid-in-capital 
!! Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage 
Total shareholders’ equity  
  
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity   
!!
0 and 0 preferred shares issued and outstanding, respectively
!!
84,723,945 and 83,991,945 common shares issued and outstanding, respectively
$
320,309  
       10,467  
         9,618  
119,112  
     459,506  
  
  
       34,732  
       (18,106) 
2,550,740  
   2,567,366  
  
      3,026,872  
  
  
  
  
 1,123,339  
         421,570  
   1,210,000  
   2,754,909  
  
  2,754,909  
  
                    -  
  
  
  
              -  
  
       84,724  
11,987,079  
(11,799,840) 
 271,963  
  
3,026,872
$
23,925  
             10,710  
             28,472  
             77,783  
           140,890  
  
  
             34,732  
           (11,160) 
       2,537,549  
        2,561,121  
  
        2,702,011  
  
  
  
  
        867,952  
           408,035  
                       -  
       1,275,987  
  
       1,275,987  
  
                       -  
  
  
  
                      -  
  
             83,992  
      10,383,098  
     (9,041,066) 
        1,426,024  
  
       2,702,011
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
!!
!!
33
Liberty Silver Corp.  
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statements of Operations
Impairment of mining interests
For the years ended June 30, 
  
  
  
Revenue 
  
Operating expenses 
   Operation and administration 
   Exploration 
   Legal and accounting 
   Consulting 
  
Total operating expenses 
  
Loss from operations 
  
Other income or gain (expense or loss) 
   Gain on foreign exchange 
  
  
Total other income or gain (expense or loss) 
  
Loss before income tax 
Provision for income taxes 
  
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
Loss per common share – basic and fully diluted 
Weighted average common shares – basic and diluted 
!!
Interest income 
Interest expense
!!
!!
2014
$
-
2,117,915  
       53,071  
      461,337  
       100,000  
                     -  
     2,732,323  
  
 (2,732,323) 
  
  
           19,932  
                      -  
     (46,383) 
       (26,451) 
  
  (2,758,774) 
                     -  
  
(2,758,774) 
             (0.03) 
84,168,513
2013
$
-  
  
  
1,852,431  
     494,383  
     951,795  
            3,951  
                    -  
      3,302,560  
  
  (3,302,560) 
  
  
           23,157  
                      -  
              (201) 
          22,956  
  
  (3,279,604) 
                    -  
  
 (3,279,604) 
              (0.04) 
82,945,754
!!
!!
!!
Cumulative 
during the 
exploration
stage February
20, 2007
(inception) to 
June 30, 2014
$
-
6,721,283  
       2,038,887  
       1,814,480  
       1,202,416  
             11,800  
    11,788,866  
  
  (11,788,866) 
  
  
             34,793  
               1,220  
           (46,987) 
           (10,974) 
  
   (11,799,840) 
                       -  
  
    (11,799,840)
!!
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
34
Liberty Silver Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit) 
For the period February 20, 2007 (inception) through June 30, 2014 
  
  
Common Stock
Shares
Balance, February 20, 2007 (inception) 
  Shares for cash:
Shares issued at $0.001 per share 
     Shares issued at $0.01 per share 
     Shares issued at $0.05 per share 
Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2007
Balance, June 30, 2007
Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2008
Balance, June 30, 2008
Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2009
Balance, June 30, 2009
Shares for cash: 
     Shares issued at $0.75 per share
Share cancellation 
  Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2010 
Balance, June 30, 2010
Valuation of stock options 
Valuation of stock warrants 
Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2011
Balance, June 30, 2011
-
80,000,000 
20,000,000 
8,400,000 
                       -  
108,400,000 
                       -  
108,400,000 
                       -  
108,400,000
1,333,334  
     (40,000,000) 
                       -  
69,733,334 
                       -  
                       -  
                       -  
      69,733,334
Amount
$ 
              -
80,000  
     20,000  
       8,400  
                -  
   108,400  
               -  
 108,400  
                -  
  108,400
1,334  
      (40,000) 
                 -  
    69,734  
                 -  
                -  
               -  
         69,734
Additional
Paid in 
Capital
$
Deficit
Accumulated
During
Exploration Stage
Total
Stockholders'
Equity
$
$
-
-
-
(76,000) 
       (10,000) 
          12,600  
                   -  
       (73,400) 
                   -  
       (73,400) 
                   -  
        (73,400)
998,666  
          40,000  
                    -  
        965,266  
        286,750  
          40,000  
                    -  
     1,292,016
-  
                       -  
                       -  
              (1,128) 
              (1,128) 
            (22,248) 
            (23,376) 
            (31,522) 
            (54,898)
-  
                       -  
          (296,391) 
          (351,289) 
                       -  
                       -  
       (1,464,253) 
       (1,815,542)
4,000  
             10,000  
             21,000  
              (1,128) 
             33,872  
            (22,248) 
             11,624  
            (31,522) 
            (19,898)
1,000,000  
                       -  
          (296,391) 
           683,711  
           286,750  
             40,000  
       (1,464,253) 
          (453,792)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
35
Liberty Silver Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit) 
For the period February 20, 2007 (inception) through June 30, 2014
Common Stock
Deficit
Accumulated
During
Exploration
Stage
Total
Stockholders'
Equity
$
(1,815,542)
$
(453,792)
Balance, June 30, 2011
Shares issued at $0.57 per share (1) 
     Shares issued at $0.57 per share (1) 
     Shares issued at $0.50 per share 
     Shares issued at $0.50 per share
Valuation of stock options 
  Valuation of stock warrants 
  Shares for cash: 
 
 
 
 
  Shares for non-cash: 
 
 
 
 
  Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2012
Shares issued at $0.64 per share (2) 
     Shares issued at $0.50 per share (3) 
     Shares issued at $0.50 per share (4) 
Issue costs
Balance, June 30, 2012
Shares
69,733,334
Additional
Paid in 
Capital
$
1,292,016
Amount
$
69,734
-  
                       -
-  
                 -
639,731  
          82,824
-  
                       -
639,731  
             82,824
200,000  
        1,000,000  
        6,500,000  
        2,107,500
650,000  
           300,000  
           220,000  
                       -  
                       -  
  
      80,710,834
200  
         1,000  
        6,500  
         2,107
116,291  
        571,148  
     3,243,500  
     1,051,642
-  
                       -  
                       -  
                       -
116,491  
           572,148  
        3,250,000  
        1,053,749
650  
           300  
            220  
                 -  
                -  
  
      80,711
415,350  
        149,700  
        109,780  
      (202,763) 
                   -  
  
     7,469,219
-  
                       -  
                       -  
                       -  
       (3,945,920) 
  
       (5,761,462)
416,000  
           150,000  
           110,000  
          (202,763) 
       (3,945,920) 
  
        1,788,468
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
36
Liberty Silver Corp. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit) 
For the period February 20, 2007 (inception) through June 30, 2014
Balance, June 30, 2012
Issue costs
Shares issued at $0.75 per share (5) 
     Shares issued at $0.75 per share (5) 
     Shares issued at $0.65 per share (6)
Valuation of stock options 
 
  Shares for cash: 
 
 
 
  Shares for non-cash: 
 
 
  Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2013
Shares issued at $0.72 per share (7) 
     Shares issued at $0.72 per share (7)
Issue costs
Valuation of stock options 
 
  Shares for non-cash: 
 
 
 
  Net loss for the year ending June 30, 2014
Shares issued at $0.50 per share (4) 
     Shares issued at $0.50 per share (4) 
     Shares issued at $0.10 per share (4)
Balance, June 30, 2013
Balance, June 30, 2014
Shares
80,710,834  
                      -  
                      -
100,000  
         300,000  
           20,000
2,583,333  
         277,778  
                      -  
 83,991,945  
                      -  
                      -
242,000  
         140,000  
         350,000  
                      -  
 84,723,945
Common Stock
Amount
$
80,711  
                      -  
                      -
Additional Paid
in Capital
$
7,469,219  
         558,728  
         (19,864)
Deficit
Accumulated
During
Exploration Stage
$
(5,761,462) 
                      -  
                      -
Total Stockholders'
Equity
$ 
    1,788,468 
         558,728  
         (19,864)
100  
 
                 300  
                   20
2,583  
 
                 278  
                      -  
         83,992  
                      -  
                      -
242  
 
                 140  
                 350  
                      -  
         84,724
76,190  
 
         228,706  
           12,980
1,857,417  
 
         199,722  
                      -  
    10,383,098  
      1,384,095  
            (5,382)
120,758  
 
           69,860  
           34,650  
                      -  
    11,987,079
-  
 
                      -  
                      -
-  
 
                      -  
    (3,279,604) 
  (9,041,066) 
                      -  
                      -
-  
 
                      -  
                      -  
    (2,758,774) 
  (11,799,840)
76,290  
 
         229,006  
           13,000
1,860,000  
 
         200,000  
    (3,279,604) 
1,426,024 
      1,384,095  
            (5,382)
121,000  
 
           70,000  
           35,000  
    (2,758,774) 
    271,963
(1) Shares issued at $0.55 CDN and converted to $0.57 USD 
 
(2) Shares issued to satisfy contractual obligation pursuant to a registration rights agreement 
(3) Shares issued to settle related party notes 
(4) Shares issued for services 
(5) Shares issued upon the exercise of warrants at $0.75 CDN and converted to USD 
(6) Shares issued upon the exercise of warrants 
(7) Shares issued in connection with the acquisition of mining interests
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
37
2014 
 $
(2,758,774) 
  
  
                     -  
  1,384,095  
                      -  
       226,000  
          6,946  
  
  
        (41,329) 
               243  
           18,854  
         255,387  
           13,535  
        (895,043) 
  
  
                       -  
        (13,191) 
         (13,191) 
  
  
                       -  
    1,210,000  
                    -  
           (5,382) 
     1,204,618  
  
         296,384  
            23,925  
  
        320,309
2013 
 $
(3,279,604) 
  
  
                       -  
        558,728  
                     -  
                    -  
            6,946  
  
  
         (21,159) 
                196  
           5,863  
         771,629  
         336,410  
    (1,620,991) 
  
  
                     -  
      (348,430) 
       (348,430) 
  
  
                      -  
                    -  
        318,296  
         (19,864) 
         298,432  
  
   (1,670,989) 
       1,694,914  
  
             23,925
Cumulative 
during the 
exploration
stage February
20, 2007
(inception) to 
June 30, 2014
$
(11,799,840) 
  
  
       122,824  
        2,869,304  
          416,000  
           336,000  
             18,106  
  
  
        (119,112) 
          (10,467) 
            (9,618) 
       1,123,339  
          421,570  
     (6,631,894) 
  
  
          (34,732) 
       (490,740) 
        (525,472)
150,000  
       1,210,000  
       6,345,684  
        (228,009) 
       7,477,675  
  
          320,309  
 -   
  
           320,309
Liberty Silver Corp.  
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statements of Cash Flows
!! Valuation of warrants 
!! Valuation of stock options 
!! Shares issued to settle contractual obligation 
!! Shares issued for services 
!! Depreciation expense
For the years ended June 30, 
  
  
  
Cash flows from operating activities 
   Net loss and comprehensive loss 
   Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating 
   activities: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   Changes in operating assets and liabilities: 
(Increase) decrease in prepaid expenses 
  
(Increase) decrease in deposit 
  
(Increase) decrease in other assets 
  
  
Increase in accounts payable 
  
Increase in accrued expenses 
Net cash used in operating activities 
  
Cash flows from investing activities 
   Cash used for furniture and equipment 
   Cash paid for  mining interests 
Net cash used in investing activities 
  
Cash flows from financing activities 
   Proceeds from related party note 
   Proceeds from loan payable 
   Proceeds from issuance of common stock 
  
Net cash from financing activities 
  
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period 
  
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
Issue costs
38
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
For the years ended June 30,
!
Supplemental Disclosures: 
!
 
Cash paid for:
!
Non-cash financing activities:
Interest 
Income tax 
 
Common stock issued to settle related party note 
Common stock issued to acquire mining interests
2014 
 $
!
4,881 
-
- 
-
2013 
 $
201 
- 
 
 
- 
2,060,000
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
!
!
!
!
Cumulative 
during the 
exploration
stage February
20, 2007
(inception) to 
June 30, 2014
$
5,485 
                  -
150,000 
2,060,000
!
!
!
39
Liberty Silver Corp.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to Audited Financial Statements
For the Fiscal Year End June 30, 2014 and 2013
Note 1 – Nature and Continuance of Operations and Going Concern 
 
Liberty Silver Corp. was incorporated under the laws of the state of Nevada, U.S.A on February 20, 2007 under the 
name  Lincoln  Mining  Corp.    Pursuant  to  a  Certificate  of  Amendment  dated  February  11,  2010,  the  Company 
changed its name to Liberty Silver Corp.  The Company’s registered office is located at 1802 N. Carson Street, Suite 
212,  Carson  City  Nevada  89701,  and  its  head  office  is  located  at  181  Bay  Street,  Suite  2330,  Toronto,  Ontario, 
Canada, M5J 2T3, and its telephone number is 888-749-4916.  As of the date of this Form 10-K, the Company has 
no subsidiaries. 
 
The Company was incorporated for the purpose of engaging in mineral exploration activities.  On March 29, 2010, 
the  Company  entered  into  an  Exploration  Earn-In  Agreement  relating  to  the  Trinity  Project  located  in  Pershing 
County,  Nevada.    The  Company  is  currently  engaged  in  the  exploration  of  the  Trinity  Project,  and  has  not  yet 
commenced development stage activities, however, the Company intends to engage in efforts to develop the Trinity 
Project in the future.  Subject to securing adequate financing, the plan of operation for the fiscal year ending June 
30,  2015  is  to  conduct  additional  mineral  exploration  activities  at  the  Trinity  Silver  property.    Operations  at  the 
Trinity Project will consist of (i) an effort to expand the known mineralized material through drilling, (ii) permitting 
for  operation,  if  deemed  economically  viable,  (iii)  metallurgical  studies  aimed  at  enhancing  the  recovery  of  the 
silver and by-product lead and zinc, (iv) engineering design related to potential construction of a new mine, and (v) 
complete feasibility studies relating to possible re-opening of the historic mine.  Exploration of the property would 
be conducted simultaneously with the mine development in order to locate additional mineralized materials. 
 
These financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.  The Company has incurred losses since 
inception resulting in an accumulated deficit of $11,799,840 and further losses are anticipated in the development of 
its business.  The Company does not have sufficient working capital needed to meet its current fiscal obligations.  In 
order to continue to meet its fiscal obligations in the current fiscal year and beyond the next twelve months, the 
Company must seek additional financing.  This raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a 
going concern.  Its ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the ability of the Company to generate 
profitable  operations  in  the  future  and/or  to  obtain  the  necessary  financing  to  meet  its  obligations  and  repay  its 
liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due.  
  
Management  is  considering  various  financing  alternatives  including,  but  not  limited  to,  merger  and  acquisition 
activity, raising capital through the capital markets and debt financing.  These financial statements do not include 
any  adjustments  relating  to  the  recoverability  and  classification  of  recorded  assets,  or  the  amounts  of  and 
classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event the Company cannot continue in existence. 
 
The ability of the Company to emerge from the exploration stage is dependent upon, among other things, obtaining 
additional  financing  to  continue  operations,  explore  and  develop  the  mineral  properties  and  the  discovery, 
development, and sale of reserves. 
 
These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. 
The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this 
uncertainty.
40
Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies 
 
The following is a summary of significant account policies used in the preparation of these financial statements. 
 
 
 
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America applicable to exploration stage enterprises.  The financial statements are 
expressed in U.S. dollars, the functional currency.  The Company’s fiscal year end is June 30.
a. Basis of presentation
b. Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents may include highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
c. Mineral rights, property and acquisition costs
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its formation on February 20, 2007 and has not yet realized 
any  revenues  from  its  planned  operations.    It  is  primarily  engaged  in  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  mining 
properties.
The Company capitalizes acquisition and option costs of mineral rights as tangible assets.  Upon commencement of 
commercial production, the mineral rights will be amortized using the unit-of-production method over the life of the 
mineral rights.  If the Company does not continue with exploration after the completion of the feasibility study, the 
mineral rights will be expensed at that time. 
 
The  costs  of  acquiring  mining  properties  are  capitalized  upon  acquisition.  Mine  development  costs  incurred  to 
develop and expand the capacity of mines, or to develop mine areas in advance of production are also capitalized 
once proven and probable reserves exist and the property is a commercially mineable property.  Costs incurred to 
maintain current exploration or to maintain assets on a standby basis are charged to operations.  Costs of abandoned 
projects  are  charged  to  operations  upon  abandonment.  The  Company  evaluates  the  carrying  value  of  capitalized 
mining costs and related property and equipment costs, to determine if these costs are in excess of their recoverable 
amount  whenever  events  or  changes  in  circumstances  indicate  that  their  carrying  amounts  may  not  be 
recoverable.  Evaluation of the carrying value of capitalized costs and any related property and equipment costs are 
based  upon  expected  future  cash  flows  and/or  estimated  salvage  value  in  accordance  with  Accounting  Standards 
Codification (ASC) 360-10-35, Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.
d. Property and equipment
Property and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation.  Depreciation is provided principally on the 
straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which are generally 3 to 39 years.  The cost of 
repairs and maintenance is charged to expense as incurred.  Expenditures for property betterments and renewals are 
capitalized.  Upon sale or other disposition of a depreciable asset, cost and accumulated depreciation are removed 
from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in other income (expense). 
 
The Company periodically evaluates whether events and circumstances have occurred that may warrant revision of 
the estimated useful lives of property and equipment or whether the remaining balance of property and equipment 
should be evaluated for possible impairment.  If events and circumstances warrant evaluation, the Company uses an 
estimate of the related undiscounted cash flows over the remaining life of the property and equipment in measuring 
their recoverability.  The Company currently owns furniture and office equipment as its depreciable assets.
e. Impairment of long-lived assets
The  Company  reviews  and  evaluates  long-lived  assets  for  impairment  when  events  or  changes  in  circumstances 
indicate the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable.  The assets are subject to impairment consideration 
under ASC 360-10-35, Measurement of an Impairment Loss, if events or circumstances indicate that their carrying 
amount might not be recoverable.  As of June 30, 2014, exploration progress is on schedule with the Company’s
41
exploration and evaluation plan and no events or circumstances have occurred to indicate that the related carrying 
values of the properties may not be recoverable.  When the Company determines that an impairment analysis should 
be  done,  the  analysis  will  be  performed  using  the  rules  of  FASB  ASC  930-360-35,  Asset  Impairment,  and 
360-10-15-3 through 15-5, Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets. 
  
Various  factors  could  impact  the  Company’s  ability  to  achieve  forecasted  production  schedules.    Additionally, 
commodity  prices,  capital  expenditure  requirements  and  reclamation  costs  could  differ  from  the  assumptions  the 
Company may use in cash flow models used to assess impairment.  The ability to achieve the estimated quantities of 
recoverable  minerals  from  exploration  stage  mineral  interests  involves  further  risks  in  addition  to  those  factors 
applicable to mineral interests where proven and probable reserves have been identified, due to the lower level of 
confidence that the identified mineralized material can ultimately be mined economically. 
 
Material changes to any of these factors or assumptions discussed above could result in future impairment charges to 
operations.
f. Fair Value of Financial instruments
The  Company  adopted  FASB  ASC  820-10-50,  Fair  Value  Measurements.  This  guidance  defines  fair  value, 
establishes  a  three-level  valuation  hierarchy  for  disclosures  of  fair  value  measurement  and  enhances  disclosure 
requirements for fair value measures. The three levels are defined as follows:
·
·
·
Level  1  inputs  to  the  valuation  methodology  are  quoted  prices  (unadjusted)  for  identical 
assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level  2  inputs  to  the  valuation  methodology  include  quoted  prices  for  similar  assets  and 
liabilities  in  active  markets,  and  inputs  that  are  observable  for  the  asset  or  liability,  either 
directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
Level  3  inputs  to  valuation  methodology  are  unobservable  and  significant  to  the  fair 
measurement.
g. Environmental expenditures
The carrying amounts reported in the balance sheet for the cash and cash equivalents, and current liabilities each 
qualify  as  financial  instruments  and  are  a  reasonable  estimate  of  fair  value  because  of  the  short  period  of  time 
between the origination of such instruments and their expected realization and their current market rate of interest.  
 
 
 
The operations of the Company have been, and may in the future, be affected from time to time, in varying degrees, 
by changes in environmental regulations, including those for future reclamation and site restoration costs.  Both the 
likelihood of new regulations and their overall effect upon the Company vary greatly and are not predictable.  The 
Company’s  policy  is  to  meet,  or  if  possible,  surpass  standards  set  by  relevant  legislation,  by  application  of 
technically proven and economically feasible measures. 
 
Environmental  expenditures  that  relate  to  ongoing  environmental  and  reclamation  programs  are  charged  against 
earnings as incurred or capitalized and amortized depending on their future economic benefits.   Estimated future 
reclamation  and  site  restoration  costs,  when  the  ultimate  liability  is  reasonably  determinable,  are  charged  against 
earnings over the estimated remaining life of the related business operation, net of expected recoveries.  No costs 
have been, or may ever be recognized by the Company for environmental expenditures.
h. Income taxes
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) has issued FASB ASC 740-10, which clarifies the accounting 
for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise's financial statements.  This standard requires a company 
to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination based upon the 
technical  merits  of  the  position.   If  the  more-likely-than-not  threshold  is  met,  a  company  must  measure  the  tax 
position to determine the amount to recognize in the financial statements.  As a result of the implementation of this
42
standard,  the  Company  performed  a  review  of  its  material  tax  positions  in  accordance  with  recognition  and 
measurement standards established by FASB ASC 740-10.   
 
Deferred  taxes  are  provided  on  a  liability  method  whereby  deferred  tax  assets  are  recognized  for  deductible 
temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for 
taxable temporary differences.  Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets 
and liabilities and their tax basis.  Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of 
management,  it  is  more  likely  than  not  that  some  portion  or  all  of  the  deferred  tax  assets  will  not  be 
realized.  Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of 
enactment.
i. Basic and diluted net loss per share
The  Company  computes  net  loss  per  share  of  common  stock  in  accordance  with  ASC  260,  Earnings  per  Share 
(“ASC 260”).  Under the provisions of ASC 260, basic net income (loss) per share is computed using the weighted 
average number of common shares outstanding during the period.  Diluted net loss per share is computed using the 
weighted  average  number  of  common  shares  and,  if  dilutive,  potential  common  shares  outstanding  during  the 
period.    Potential  common  shares  consist  of  the  incremental  common  shares  issuable  upon  the  exercise  of  stock 
options and warrants and the conversion of convertible promissory notes and/or loans payable.  As of June 30, 2014, 
6,700,000  stock  options  and  200,000  warrants  were  considered  in  the  calculation  but  not  included  due  to 
anti-dilution.  The dilutive effect of these instruments is reflected in diluted earnings per share by application of the 
treasury stock method.   
 
The Company’s calculation of basic and diluted loss per share is as follows: 
 
 
 
Basic and Fully Diluted Earnings per share:
Income (Loss) (numerator) 
Shares (denominator) 
 
Per Share Amount
(3,279,604) 
82,945,754 
(0.04)
(2,758,774) 
84,168,513 
(0.03)
For the Years Ended
June 30, 2014
June 30, 2013
$ 
 
$
$
j. Stock-Based compensation
In December 2004, FASB issued FASB ASC 718, which establishes standards for the accounting for transactions in 
which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods or services.  It also addresses transactions in which an 
entity  incurs  liabilities  in  exchange  for  goods  or  services  that  are  based  on  the  fair  value  of  the  entity’s  equity 
instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of those equity instruments.  FASB ASC 718 focuses primarily on 
accounting 
in  share-based  payment 
transactions.  FASB ASC 718 requires that the compensation cost relating to share-based payment transactions be 
recognized in the financial statements.  That cost will be measured based on the fair value of the equity or liability 
instruments issued.
in  which  an  entity  obtains  employee  services
transactions
for
k. Use of estimates and assumptions
Many  of  the  amounts  included  in  the  financial  statements  require  management  to  make  judgments  and/or 
estimates.  These judgments and estimates are continuously evaluated and are based on management’s experience 
and knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances.  Actual results may differ from the amounts included in the 
financial statements. 
 
Areas of significant judgment and estimates affecting the amounts recognized in the financial statements include:  
 
Impairment of mining interests  
 
The  Company’s  fair  value  measurement  with  respect  to  the  carrying  amount  of  mining  interests  is  based  on
43
numerous assumptions and may differ significantly from actual fair values.  The fair values are based, in part, on 
certain  factors  that  may  be  partially  or  totally  outside  of  the  Company’s  control.   This  evaluation  involves  a 
comparison of the estimated recoverable amount of mining interests to their carrying values.  The Company’s fair 
value estimates are based on numerous assumptions. 
 
The fair value estimates may differ from actual fair values and these differences may be significant and could have a 
material impact on the Company’s balance sheet and statement of operations.  Assets are reviewed for an indication 
of impairment at each reporting date.  This determination requires significant judgment.  Factors that could trigger 
an impairment review include, but are not limited to, significant negative industry or economic trends, interruptions 
in exploration activities or a significant drop in precious metal prices.
l. Concentrations of credit risk
The Company’s financial instruments that are exposed to concentrations of credit risk primarily consist of its cash.  
The Company places its cash and cash equivalents with financial institutions of high credit worthiness.  At times, its 
cash equivalents with a particular financial institution may exceed any applicable government insurance limits.  The 
Company’s management also routinely assesses the financial strength and credit worthiness of any parties to which 
it extends funds and as such, it believes that any associated credit risk exposures are limited.
m. Risks and uncertainties
n. Foreign currency transactions
The  Company  operates  in  the  mineralized  material  exploration  industry  that  is  subject  to  significant  risks  and 
uncertainties,  including  financial,  operational,  and  other  risks  associated  with  operating  a  mineralized  material 
exploration business, including the potential risk of business failure.   
 
 
 
The Company from time to time will receive invoices from service providers that are presenting their invoices using 
the  Canadian  dollar.   The  Company  will  use  its  US  dollars  to  settle  the  Canadian  dollar  liabilities  and  any 
differences resulting from the exchange transaction are reported as gain or loss on foreign exchange.  The gain or 
loss reported by the Company in the financial statements represents transaction gain or loss.  
 
Note 3 – New Technical Pronouncements 
 
The Company has reviewed accounting pronouncements issued during the past year and has assessed the adoption 
of any that are applicable to the Company.  Management has determined that none had a material impact on the 
financial position, results of operations, or cash flows for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014. 
 
Note 4 - Mineral Property 
 
The Company acquired its interest in the Trinity Project through an Exploration Earn-In Agreement.  On March 29, 
2010, the Company entered into the Earn-In Agreement relating to the Trinity Project with AuEx, Inc., a Nevada 
company  beneficially  owned  by  another  Nevada  company  AuEx  Ventures,  Inc.    AuEx,  Inc.  held  an  exclusive 
interest  in  the  Trinity  Project  by  way  of  a  Minerals  Lease  and  Sublease  with  Newmont  Mining  USA  Limited,  a 
Delaware  corporation  who  owns  or  leases  the  various  unpatented  mining  claims  and  portions  of  private  land 
comprising  the  Trinity  Project.    As  part  of  a  restructuring  transaction  by  AuEx  Ventures,  Inc.,  another  Nevada 
company, Renaissance Exploration Inc. (“Renaissance”) was spun out, and on July 1, 2010 AuEx, Inc. assigned all 
of  its  interest  in  the  Trinity  Project  and  the  Earn-In  Agreement  to  Renaissance,  who  currently  holds  a  100% 
leasehold interest in the Trinity Project.  The Minerals Lease and Sublease grants to Newmont, a right of first offer 
on  any  transfer  of  AuEx,  Inc.’s  interests  in  the  Trinity  Project  to  any  non-affiliate  of  AuEx,  Inc.,  and  also  gives 
Newmont  a  right  to  either  enter  into  a  joint  venture  agreement  covering  the  Trinity  Project  and  any  other  real 
property interests that AuEx, Inc. holds or acquires within the Trinity Project, or receive a royalty on all mineral 
production from such properties.  Currently the rights to the Trinity Project are held 100% by Renaissance, pursuant 
to an assignment of such rights from AuEx, Inc.  The Company entered into the Earn-In Agreement providing the 
Company with a right to earn a 70% undivided interest in rights of Renaissance in the Trinity Project (the “70% 
Interest”).
44
Under  the  Earn-In  Agreement,  the  Company  may  earn-in  the  70%  Interest  in  the  Trinity  Project  during  a  6-year 
period  in  consideration  of  (1)  a  signing  payment  of  $25,000,  which  has  been  made,  (2)  an  expenditure  of  a 
cumulative total of $5,000,000 in exploration and development expenses on the Trinity Project by March 29, 2016, 
including  a  minimum  of  $500,000  which  must  be  expended  within  one  year  from  the  effective  date  of  the 
Agreement, and (3) completion of a bankable feasibility study on the Trinity Project on or before the 7th anniversary 
date of the Agreement.  Item (1) has been completed by the Company, and the Company has satisfied item (2), and 
has  reported  its  compliance  as  of  March  29,  2013,  which  is  the  end  of  the  third  year  from  the  inception  of  the 
Earn-in Agreement. 
 
On October 15, 2012, the Company entered into and closed a Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with 
Primus Resources, L.C. and James A. Freeman (collectively “Seller”) to acquire unpatented mining claims, Nevada 
BLM  Serial  No.  799907,  799908,  799909,  799910,  and  799911  covering  approximately  100  acres  of  property 
located adjacent to the former Trinity Silver mine on the Company’s Trinity Project (the “Hi Ho Properties”).  The 
Hi  Ho  Properties  were  previously  the  only  acreage  not  controlled  by  the  Company  or  its  joint  venture  partner 
Renaissance  Exploration  Inc.  in  the  Trinity  Project.    Under  the  terms  of  the  Purchase  Agreement,  the  Company 
provided  cash  consideration  of  US$250,000  and  issued  2,583,333  restricted  shares  of  common  stock  of  the 
Company to Seller.  In addition the Seller was granted a 2% net smelter royalty on future production from the Hi Ho 
Properties pursuant to the terms of a Deed With Reservation of Royalty Hi Ho Silver Claims.  
 
In  conjunction  with  the  entry  into  the  Purchase  Agreement,  the  Company  entered  into  a  Registration  Rights 
Agreement  (the  “Registration  Rights  Agreement”)  with  Seller,  pursuant  to  which  the  Company  agreed  to  file  a 
registration statement on Form S-1 with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), within 
thirty  (30)  days  of  the  closing,  which  registers  the  common  stock  issued  to  the  Seller  pursuant  to  the  Purchase 
Agreement.  Pursuant  to  the  Registration  Rights  Agreement  the  Company  was  obliged  to  pay  Seller  additional 
consideration as follows:
•  if the registration statement was declared effective by the SEC by March 1, 2013, Liberty Silver would 
issue  an  additional  277,778  Liberty  Silver  common  shares  to  Primus,  thereby  increasing  the  total 
aggregate number of shares issued to 2,861,111 shares; or
•  if the registration statement was not declared effective by the SEC by March 1, 2013, Liberty Silver would 
pay  Primus  US$200,000.    As  well,  if  the  five-day  weighted  average  trading  price  of  Liberty  Silver’s 
common  shares  on  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  as  of  March  1,  2013  (the  “Market  Price”)  exceeded 
US$0.72  per  share,  Liberty  Silver  would  have  issued  an  additional  number  of  Liberty  Silver  common 
shares to Primus equal to (a) 277,778 less (b) US$200,000 divided by the Market Price.
On March 1, 2013, the SEC declared the Company’s registration statement, filed on Form S-1, effective and as such, 
the Company issued an additional 277,778 Liberty Silver common shares to Primus, pursuant to the Registration 
Rights Agreement.   
 
The  Trinity  Project  consists  of  a  total  of  approximately  10,020  acres,  including  5,676  acres  of  fee  land  and  253 
unpatented mining claims. 
 
The  Company  has  completed  some  financing  transactions,  and  continues  to  pursue  additional  financing 
opportunities in order to obtain the capital needed to fulfill its obligations under the terms of the Earn-In Agreement. 
There has been no mining of resources to date. 
 
Note 5 – Loan Payable 
 
On  November  14,  2013,  the  Company  announced  the  closing  of  a  $1,210,000  Loan  facility  (the  “Loan”).    The 
Company  intends  to  use  the  funds  from  the  Loan  for  general  working  capital  purposes,  thereby  affording  the 
Company more time to secure longer term financing for the Trinity Silver Project. 
 
The key terms of the Loan are as follows:
45
•
•
•
•
a  total  amount  of  up  to  $1,210,000  is  being  advanced  to  Liberty,  of  which  $100,000  was  previously 
advanced by way of promissory notes subsequent to the signing of a letter of intent relating to the Loan, 
which promissory notes are superseded by the Loan.  Upon closing of the Loan on November 14, 2013 (the 
“Closing Date”), $202,500 was advanced to the Company, and a further $302,500 was advanced on each of 
December 31, 2013, March 31, 2014, and June 30, 2014;
the outstanding principal amount bears interest at 11% per annum from date of advance and becomes due 
and payable in its entirety one year following the Closing Date (the “Maturity Date”).  The Company has 
the option to extend the Maturity Date by six months, with interest payable at 15% per annum accruing on 
the outstanding principal amount during such extension period;
the Loan is secured by a charge on all of the assets of the Company; and
subject  to  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  approval,  if  Liberty  completes  an  arm’s  length  equity  financing  of 
US$500,000 or more at a price of not less than US$0.50 per common share of Liberty (each, a “Share”), 
Liberty may require BG to convert the outstanding principal and interest amount of the Loan into equity of 
Liberty on the same terms and conditions as the equity financing.
The lender pursuant to the Loan is BG Capital Group Ltd. (“BG”).  Effective as of the Closing Date, BG and certain 
of its related parties owned 8,609,853 common shares of Liberty and 6,500,000 common share purchase warrants, 
with each such warrant entitling BG to acquire one common share of Liberty for US$0.65 until December 31, 2013 
(the  “Warrants”).    As  a  condition  of  the  Loan,  BG  consented  to  the  termination  of  the  Warrants  for  no  further 
consideration.  Accordingly, following the closing of the loan facility transaction, BG owned, directly and indirectly, 
8,609,853  shares  representing  approximately  10.3%  of  the  Company’s  then  83,991,945  issued  and  outstanding 
common shares on the Closing Date.  Other than pursuant to the Loan, the Company does not have any contractual 
or other relationship with BG.  As at June 30, 2014, based on information that is available to the Company, BG and 
its affiliates, together, held of record or beneficially a total of 29,968,953 common shares of the Company.  
 
Note 6 - Capital Stock and Warrants 
 
 
 
The total authorized capital is as follows:
Authorized
300,000,000 common shares with a par value of $0.001 per common share; and 
10,000,000 preferred shares with a par value of $0.001 per preferred share
- 
-
Issued and outstanding
On September 28, 2012, the Company issued 100,000 common shares upon the exercise of 100,000 whole warrants 
at  an  exercise  price  of  CDN  $0.75  per  common  share,  for  gross  proceeds  of  CDN  $75,000.   The  warrants  were 
originally  issued  pursuant  to  a  private  placement  offering  of  200,000  Units  on  July  27,  2011.   The  Units  were 
comprised of one common share and one half of one common share purchase warrant. 
 
On October 3, 2012, the Company issued 300,000 common shares upon the exercise of 300,000 whole warrants at 
an  exercise  price  of  CDN  $0.75  per  common  share,  for  gross  proceeds  of  CDN  $225,000.   The  warrants  were 
originally issued pursuant to a private placement offering of 1,000,000 Units on August 4, 2011.  The Units were 
comprised of one common share and one half of one common share purchase warrant. 
 
On October 15, 2012, in connection with the acquisition of the Hi Ho Properties as described in Note 4 – Mineral 
property, the Company issued 2,583,333 common shares.  The common shares were valued at $0.72 per share for a 
total value of $1,860,000 for the shares. 
 
On November 27, 2012, the Company issued 20,000 common shares upon the exercise of 20,000 whole warrants at 
an exercise price of $0.65 per common share, for gross proceeds of US $13,000. The warrants were originally issued 
pursuant to a private placement offering of 2,627,500 Units on December 19, 2011.  The Units were comprised of 
one common share and one common share purchase warrant.
46
On  March  1,  2013,  in  connection  with  the  acquisition  of  the  Hi  Ho  Properties  as  described  in  Note 4 – Mineral 
property, the Company issued an additional 277,778 common shares pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement. 
 
On  June  30,  2014,  the  Company  reached  an  agreement  with  arm’s-length  creditors  to  settle  indebtedness  in  the 
aggregate amount of $226,000 by issuing 732,000 common shares, including 382,000 common shares at a deemed 
price of $0.50 per share and 350,000 common shares at a deemed price of $0.10 per share. 
  
For the above share issuances, the shares were not registered under the Securities Act of 1933 in reliance upon the 
exemptions from registration contained in Regulation S of the Securities Act of 1933.  No underwriters were used, 
nor were any brokerage commissions paid in connection with the above share issuances. 
 
Warrants 
 
On September 28, 2012, the Company issued 100,000 common shares upon the exercise of 100,000 whole warrants 
at  an  exercise  price  of  CDN  $0.75  per  common  share,  for  gross  proceeds  of  CDN  $75,000.   The  warrants  were 
originally  issued  pursuant  to  a  private  placement  offering  of  200,000  Units  on  July  27,  2011.   The  Units  were 
comprised of one common share and one half of one common share purchase warrant. 
 
On October 3, 2012, the Company issued 300,000 common shares upon the exercise of 300,000 whole warrants at 
an  exercise  price  of  CDN  $0.75  per  common  share,  for  gross  proceeds  of  CDN  $225,000.   The  warrants  were 
originally issued pursuant to a private placement offering of 1,000,000 Units on August 4, 2011.  The Units were 
comprised of one common share and one half of one common share purchase warrant. 
 
On November 27, 2012, the Company issued 20,000 common shares upon the exercise of 20,000 whole warrants at 
an exercise price of $0.65 per common share, for gross proceeds of US $13,000. The warrants were originally issued 
pursuant to a private placement offering of 2,627,500 Units on December 19, 2011.  The Units were comprised of 
one common share and one common share purchase warrant. 
 
On November 13, 2013, and as described in Note 5 – Loan payable, 6,500,000 common share purchase warrants 
were  terminated  as  a  condition  of  the  Loan  with  BG.    The  warrants  were  originally  issued  pursuant  to  a  private 
placement  offering  of  Subscription  Receipts,  which  Subscription  Receipts  were  converted  into  Units,  without 
additional consideration, effective December 19, 2011.  The Units were comprised of one common share and one 
common share purchase warrant.  The warrants were exercisable at a price of $0.65 per common share. 
 
On December 31, 2013, 2,607,500 common share purchase warrants expired.  The warrants were originally issued 
pursuant to a private placement offering of 2,627,500 Units on December 19, 2011.  The Units were comprised of 
one common share and one common share purchase warrant.  The warrants were exercisable at a price of $0.65 per 
common share.  
 
On  April  1,  2014,  300,000  common  share  purchase  warrants  expired.    The  warrants  were  originally  issued  in 
connection with notes payable issued to related parties on April 1, 2011.  The warrants were exercisable at $0.55 per 
common share. 
 
The fair value of warrants was established at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model, with the 
following underlying assumptions:
Risk free interest rate  Dividend yield
Weighted average remaining life
Year 
2014 
2013
1.12%
0.24% - 1.51%
0% 
0%
Volatility 
113.77%
102.90% - 113.77%
Warrants 
10,027,500
- 
47
The following table summarizes the warrant activity during the period being reported on and ending June 30, 2014:
Weighted average exercise price ($)
Description 
Outstanding, July 1, 2012 
     Granted
2.10 years 
1.08 years
0.66
-
420,000
9,607,500
Exercised 
     Expired or terminated 
Outstanding, June 30, 2013 
 
Outstanding, July 1, 2013 
     Granted 
     Exercised 
     Expired or terminated 
Outstanding, June 30, 2014 
 
  The following table summarizes the information on warrants outstanding at June 30, 2014:
9,407,500 
200,000
9,607,500
-
- 
-
0.72
0.65
0.65
-
- 
-
0.65 
0.75
Range of exercise price
Number outstanding
CAD $0.75
200,000!
price
CAD 0.75
Weighted average exercise
Weighted average
remaining life in years
2.1!
As at June 30, 2014, the aggregate weighted average intrinsic value of warrants outstanding was $0, and the 
weighted average grant date fair value of each warrant outstanding was CAD $0.75. 
 
 
Stock Options 
 
On  December  19,  2013,  the  Company  granted  a  total  of  200,000  stock  options  to  purchase  common  shares  to 
directors of the Company, at an exercise price of $0.10 per share and for a term of 5 years.  Mr. James J. Sbrolla and 
Mr. Eric Klein, were each granted 100,000 stock options.  Pursuant to the terms of the stock option agreements, the 
options  vest  as  to  one-third  immediately  upon  grant,  one-third  on  the  first  anniversary  of  the  date  of  grant,  and 
one-third on the second anniversary of the date of grant.  The aggregate fair value of these options as of the date of 
grant was $5,725 determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model. 
 
On  April  8,  2014,  the  Company  granted  to  a  total  of  5,000,000  stock  options  to  purchase  common  shares  to 
directors, officers and an employee of the Company, at an exercise price of $0.10 per share and for a term of 5 years.  
Messrs.  R.  Geoffrey  Browne,  W.  Thomas  Hodgson,  Timothy  N.  Unwin,  and  Manish  Z.  Kshatriya,  were  each 
granted  1,000,000  stock  options.    Messrs.  James  J.  Sbrolla  and  Eric  R.  Klein,  were  each  granted  400,000  stock 
options.    Mr.  William  Tafuri  was  granted  200,000  stock  options.    Pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  stock  option 
agreements, the options vest as to one-third immediately upon grant, one-third on the first anniversary of the date of 
grant, and one-third on the second anniversary of the date of grant.  The aggregate fair value of these options as of 
the date of grant was $143,687 determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model. 
 
Stock based compensation expense, resulting from the issuance of stock options, for the year ended June 30, 2014 
was $1,384,095 (2013 - $558,728).  . 
 
The fair value of stock options was determined on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model, and 
using the following underlying assumptions:
Year 
2014 
2013
Risk free interest rate  Dividend yield
1.68% – 2.09% 
0.79% - 2.09%
0% 
0%
Volatility
127.32% - 201% 
95.11% - 164.27%
Weighted average remaining life
3.28 years 
2.59 years
The following table summarizes the stock option activity during the period being reported on and ending June 30, 
2014: 
 
Description
Weighted average exercise price
Options
Outstanding, July 1, 2012 
     Granted
6,950,000
-!
48
($) 
0.77
-!
- 
-!
6,950,000 
6,650,000
Exercised 
     Expired or terminated 
Outstanding, June 30, 2013 
Exercisable, June 30, 2013 
 
Outstanding, July 1, 2013 
     Granted 
     Exercised 
     Expired or forfeited 
Outstanding, June 30, 2014 
Exercisable, June 30, 2014 
 
The following table summarizes the information on stock options outstanding at June 30, 2014:
5,450,000 
6,700,000 
3,233,330
6,950,000 
5,200,000
-
- 
-
0.77 
0.76
0.77 
0.10!
-
0.77 
0.25 
0.40
Stock options outstanding
Stock options exercisable
June 30, 2015 
June 30, 2016
June 30, 2017 and
thereafter
Total Lease Commitment
$63,063 
$37,666
$0
On  September  12,  2013,  the  Company  and  certain  of  its  current  and  former  officers  and  directors  (the  “Liberty 
Silver  Parties”)  were  named  as  defendants  in  a  proposed  securities  class  action  lawsuit  filed  against  Robert 
Genovese, an officer of BG Capital Group Ltd., certain individuals alleged to have collaborated with Mr. Genovese, 
and an offshore investment firm allegedly controlled by Mr. Genovese (the “Action,” Case No. 9:13-cv-80923-KLR,
49
Exercise prices!
$0.75 
$0.10
Number of
options 
1,500,000 
5,200,000
average exercise
remaining life in
Weighted
price 
$0.75 
$0.10
Weighted 
average
years 
1.81 
4.71
Number of
options 
1,500,000 
1,733,330
Weighted
average exercise
price 
$0.75 
$0.10
As at June 30, 2014, the aggregate intrinsic value of the stock options outstanding and exercisable was $0, and the 
weighted average grant date fair value of stock options granted was $0.11.  
 
Note 7 – Commitments and Contingencies 
 
Effective November 1, 2011, the Company entered into a sub-lease agreement for the lease of premises in Toronto, 
Ontario,  Canada,  for  a  term  of  54  months.    The  Company  has  its  head  office  at  these  premises,  which  is 
approximately  1,400  square  feet.    The  annual  base  rent  commitment  for  the  Toronto  head  office  space  is  CAD 
$48,084. 
 
Effective  February  8,  2012,  the  Company  entered  into  a  lease  agreement  for  the  lease  of  premises  in  Sparks, 
Nevada, USA, for a term of 12 months, and terminating on January 31, 2013.  The lease agreement was amended 
such that the term was extended for a further 24 months, and terminating on January 31, 2015.  The Company has its 
field office at these premises, which is approximately 5,500 square feet.  The annual base rent commitment for the 
Sparks  field  office  space  is  USD  $29,727  for  the  period  from  February  1,  2013  to  January  31,  2014,  and  USD 
$30,624 for the period from February 1, 2014 to January 31, 2015. 
 
As at June 30, 2014, the Company had a commitment, for the above noted leases, of USD $100,729 remaining. 
 
The following table outlines the remaining lease commitment at the end of the next five fiscal years based on the 
leases that are currently entered into by the Company:
Stanaford v. Genovese et al.).  The action contains various claims alleging violations of the United States Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 and rules thereunder relating to anomalous trading activity and fluctuations in the Company’s 
share price from August through October 2012.  The plaintiff purports to bring suit on behalf of all who purchased 
or otherwise acquired the Company’s common shares from April 1, 2008, through and including October 5, 2012.  
An amended complaint was filed on September 27, 2013. 
 
On  January  22,  2014,  the  Court  appointed  Jerald  Todd  Stanaford  and  Philip  Hobel  lead  plaintiffs  and  approved 
Federman & Sherwood as Lead Counsel and Menzer & Hill, PA as Liaison Counsel.  On March 24, 2014, Plaintiffs 
filed a Second Amended Consolidated Class Action Complaint.  On May 8, 2014, the Liberty Silver Parties moved 
to dismiss the Complaint.  The Liberty Silver Parties intend to vigorously defend the Action.  It is not possible at 
this  time  to  predict  whether  the  Company  will  incur  any  liability  as  a  result  of  the  Action,  or  to  estimate  the
damages, or the range of damages, if any, that the Company might incur in connection with the Action.!
Effective December 1, 2012, the Company had deferred payment of salary to certain employees of the Company. 
Pursuant to agreements reached with such employees, the accrued salary obligation of $366,667 may, at the sole 
option of such employees, subject to regulatory approval and in certain instances shareholder approval, be settled 
pursuant to the issuance of common shares or forfeited, within two years from the effective date of the agreements 
with the various employees.  The common shares would be priced at the greater of (i) $0.50 per common share, and 
(ii)  the  volume  weighted  average  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  for  the  five  trading  days  immediately 
preceding the date on which the election is made to receive the common shares.  As at June 30, 2014, $150,000 of 
deferred salary has been settled by the issuance of common shares, priced at $0.50 per share, and $216,667 may still 
be settled by the issuance of common shares, at the option of the employees, or forfeited. 
  
Effective July 1, 2013, ongoing salary obligations have been reduced by $320,000 per annum.  Effective October 1, 
2013, subject to regulatory and shareholder approval, salary obligations of $216,000 (reduced to $120,000 effective 
May 2014) per annum, which would otherwise be settled in cash on a monthly basis, will be settled with 50% in 
cash  and  50%  by  the  issuance  of  common  stock,  on  a  periodic  basis,  and  priced  at  the  greater  of  (i)  $0.50  per 
common share, and (ii) the volume weighted average price of the Company’s common shares for the five trading 
days immediately preceding the date on which the shares are to be issued. 
 
Additionally,  in  the  normal  course  of  operations,  certain  other  contingencies  may  arise  relating  to  legal  actions 
undertaken against the Company. In the opinion of management, whether the impact of such potential legal actions 
would  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the  Company's  results  of  operations,  liquidity,  or  its  financial  position, 
cannot be determined in advance. 
 
Note 8 - Income Taxes 
 
As of June 30, 2014, the Company had no accrued interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions.  The 
income  tax  provision  differs  from  the  amount  of  income  tax  determined  by  applying  the  U.S.  federal  and  state 
income tax rates of 35% (2013 - 34%) to pretax income from continuing operations for the years ended June 30, 
2014 and 2013 due to the following: 
 
Deferred tax assets and the valuation account are as follows:
Deferred tax asset: 
  Net operating loss carry forward 
  Valuation allowance 
  Total
$ 
 
$
For the Years Ended
June 30,
2014
4,039,533  
(4,039,533) 
                  -
$  
 
 $
2013
3,073,962  
(3,073,962) 
                  -
50
The components of income tax expense are as follows:
Current Federal tax 
  Current State tax 
  Change in NOL benefit 
  Change in valuation allowance 
  Total
$ 
 
 
 
$
For the Years Ended
June 30,
2014 
                  -  
                  -  
965,571  
(965,571) 
                  -
$  
 
 
 
 $
2013 
                  -  
                  -  
1,115,065  
(1,115,065) 
                  -
The potential income tax benefit of these losses has been offset by a full valuation allowance. 
 
As of June 30, 2014 and 2013, the Company has an unused net operating loss carry-forward balance of $11,799,840 
and  $9,041,066  that  is  available  to  offset  future  taxable  income.  This  unused  net  operating  loss  carry-forward 
balance begins to expire in 2031. 
 
The  Company  did  not  have  any  tax  positions  for  which  it  is  reasonably  possible  that  the  total  amount  of 
unrecognized tax benefits will significantly increase or decrease within the next 12 months.   
  
The tax years that remain subject to examination by major taxing jurisdictions are those for the years ended June 30, 
2014, 2013, 2012, 2011, 2010 and 2009.
Note 9 – Subsequent events 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Company announced that the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) had determined to delist the 
Company’s  common  shares  effective  the  close  of  business  on  August  5,  2014  as  a  result  of  the  failure  by  the 
Company  to  meet  the  continued  listing  requirements  of  the  TSX.    The  Company  appealed  that  decision,  and  on 
August 11, 2014, it was announced that the Appeals Committee of the TSX determined that the Company’s shares 
would not be relisted. 
 
The Company has evaluated subsequent events for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014 through the date the financial 
statements  were  issued,  and  concluded,  aside  from  the  foregoing,  that  there  were  no  other  events  or  transactions 
occurring during this period that required recognition or disclosure in its financial statements.
51
CHANGES
IN  AND  DISAGREEMENTS  WITH  ACCOUNTANTS  ON
ITEM 9. 
ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 
 
On July 16, 2014, the Company disclosed on Form 8-K filed with the SEC, that the Company’s principal 
independent  accountant  to  audit  the  Company’s  financial  statements  had  resigned.    On  September  3, 
2014,  the  Company  disclosed  on  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  SEC,  that  effective  September  2,  2014,  the 
Company appointed the firm of MNP, LLP, Chartered Professional Accountants, as the Company’s new 
principal independent accountant to audit the Company’s financial statements.  The Company has had no 
disagreements  with  its  accountants,  which  would  be  required  to  be  disclosed  pursuant  to  Item  304  of 
Regulation S-K. 
 
ITEM 9A.    CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES. 
 
Disclosure Controls and Procedures 
 
The Securities and Exchange Commission defines the term “disclosure controls and procedures” to mean 
a  Company's  controls  and  other  procedures  of  an  issuer  that  are  designed  to  ensure  that  information 
required to be disclosed in the reports that it files or submits under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is 
recorded,  processed,  summarized  and  reported,  within  the  time  periods  specified  in  the  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission’s rules and forms.  Disclosure controls and procedures include, without limitation, 
controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by an issuer in the 
reports  that  it  files  or  submits  under  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934  is  accumulated  and 
communicated  to  the  issuer’s  management,  including  its  principal  executive  and  principal  financial 
officers,  or  persons  performing  similar  functions,  as  appropriate  to  allow  timely  decisions  regarding 
required disclosure.  The Company maintains such a system of controls and procedures in an effort to 
ensure  that  all  information  which  it  is  required  to  disclose  in  the  reports  it  files  under  the  Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified 
under  the  SEC's  rules  and  forms  and  that  information  required  to  be  disclosed  is  accumulated  and 
communicated to principal executive and principal financial officers to allow timely decisions regarding 
disclosure.  
 
As  of  the  end  of  the  period  covered  by  this  report,  the  Company  carried  out  an  evaluation,  under  the 
supervision  and  with  the  participation  of  the  chief  executive  officer  and  chief  financial  officer,  of  the 
effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures.  Based on 
this  evaluation,  the  chief  executive  officer  and  chief  financial  officer  concluded  that  the  disclosure 
controls  and  procedures  are  designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  of  achieving  the  objectives  of 
timely  alerting  them  to  material  information  required  to  be  included  in  the  Company’s  periodic  SEC 
reports and of ensuring that such information is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the 
time periods specified.  The Company’s chief executive officer and chief financial officer also concluded 
that  the  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  were  effective  as  of  the  end  of  the  period  covered  by  this 
report to provide reasonable assurance of the achievement of these objectives.   
 
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
    
The management of the Company is responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and related 
financial information appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.  The financial statements and notes 
have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of 
America.  The management of the Company also is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate 
internal control over financial reporting, as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange 
Act.  A company's internal control over financial reporting is defined as a process designed to provide 
reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial
52
statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.    The 
Company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain 
to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and 
dispositions of the assets of the Company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded 
as  necessary  to  permit  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted 
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the issuer are being made only in accordance 
with authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance 
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the Company's 
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 
 
Management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, does not expect that the 
Company's disclosure controls and internal controls will prevent all error and all fraud.  Because of its 
inherent limitations, a system of internal control over financial reporting can provide only reasonable, not 
absolute,  assurance  that  the  objectives  of  the  control  system  are  met  and  may  not  prevent  or  detect 
misstatements.  Further, over time, control may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or 
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 
 
With  the  participation  of  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Financial  Officer,  the  Company’s 
management evaluated the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of 
June  30,  2014  based  upon  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the 
Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission  (COSO).    Based  on  that 
evaluation,  management  has  concluded  that,  as  of  June  30,  2014,  the  Company's  internal  control  over 
financial reporting was effective.
This annual report does not include an attestation report of the Company's registered public accounting 
firm regarding internal control over financial reporting.  Management's report is not subject to attestation 
by the Company's registered public accounting firm.
There  was  no  change  in  the  Company's  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  during  the  last  fiscal 
quarter, that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company's internal 
control over financial reporting.  
 
ITEM 9B.     OTHER INFORMATION. 
 
None.
53
PART III
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE.
Project Manager
Since 
October 2010 
January 2012 
October 2010 
December 2010 
December 2013 
December 2013 
October 2010
President, Chief Executive Officer, Director 
Executive VP, Chief Financial Officer, Secretary 
Chairman, Director
Age  Position with the Company 
61 
41 
71 
61  Director 
54  Director 
46  Director 
73
ITEM 10. 
 
Directors and Executive Officers 
 
The following table sets forth the directors, executive officers, promoters and control persons, their ages, 
and all offices and positions held within the Company as of June 30, 2014.  Directors are elected for a 
period  of  one  year  and  thereafter  serve  until  their  successor  is  duly  elected  by  the  stockholders  and 
qualified.  Officers and other employees serve at the will of the board of directors. 
 
Name 
R. Geoffrey Browne 
Manish Z. Kshatriya 
Timothy N. Unwin 
W. Thomas Hodgson 
Eric R. Klein 
James J. Sbrolla 
William Tafuri 
 
Biographical Information 
 
R. Geoffrey Browne.  Mr. Browne currently serves as the Company’s President, Chief Executive Officer 
and Director.  Mr. Browne has over 30 years of experience in the financial services industry in Canada, 
the U.S. and London, England.  In addition to his work with the Company, since July 1996 Mr. Browne 
has served as the Managing Partner of MWI & Partners, a private equity firm located in Ontario, Canada.  
As the managing partner of MWI & Partners, Mr. Browne is responsible for making investments for the 
company.  Prior to founding MWI & Partners, Inc., from September 1976 to June 1996 Mr. Browne was a 
senior  executive  with  Canadian  Imperial  Bank  of  Commerce  and  CIBC  Wood  Gundy  Inc.    The  last 
position he held at CIBC was Chief of Staff for CIBC World Markets.  Mr. Browne is active on numerous 
other  corporate  and  not-for-profit  Boards,  and  is  one  of  three  independent  members  of  the  Investment 
Review  Committee  of  UBS  Global  Asset  Management  (Canada)  Co.    Mr.  Browne  is  holds  a  B.A.  in 
economics  from  the  University  of  Western  Ontario.    Mr.  Browne’s  over  30  years  of  experience  in  the 
financial services industry in Canada, the U.S. and London, England, including his time spent as Chief of 
Staff for CIBC World Markets led the board to conclude that Mr. Browne should serve as a director of the 
Company. 
 
Manish Z. Kshatriya.  Mr. Kshatriya currently serves as the Company’s Executive Vice President, Chief 
Financial Officer, and Secretary.  He has over 15 years of progressive experience in corporate finance, 
accounting, taxation and auditing obtained in public accounting practice and industry.  Mr. Kshatriya’s 
extensive  capital  markets  experience  includes:  the  formation  and  development  of  mineral  resource 
exploration  companies  from  inception  to  initial  public  offerings;  the  formation  and  offerings  of 
flow-through limited partnerships; mergers and acquisition activity; and proxy contests.  From January 
2006  until  October  2011,  Mr.  Kshatriya  worked  for  Augen  Capital  Corp.,  a  Toronto  based,  Canadian 
listed mining merchant bank where he served as both the Director of Finance, and most recently the Chief 
Financial Officer.  As the Director of Finance and Chief Financial Officer, Mr. Kshatriya was responsible 
for the management and oversight of all financial matters for Augen Capital Corp., its subsidiaries, and its 
flow-through limited Partnerships and mutual fund investment products.  Mr. Kshatriya has also served as 
Chief  Financial  Officer  or  senior  financial  executive  for  various  other  private  and  publicly  listed 
companies in the mineral resource sector.  Mr. Kshatriya earned his Bachelors degree in Administrative
54
Studies,  with  Honours  in  Accounting  and  Finance,  from  York  University  in  Toronto,  CA.    He  is  a 
Chartered  Professional  Accountant  (Chartered  Accountant)  and  a  member  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered 
Professional Accountants of Ontario.  He is also a Certified Public Accountant in the United States and a 
member of the Colorado State Board of Accountancy. 
 
Timothy  N.  Unwin.    Mr.  Unwin  currently  serves  as  a  Director  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the 
Company.  In addition to his work for the Company, Mr. Unwin is also the Chairman of the board of 
Evoke  Neurosciences  Inc.,  a  private  U.S  based  company  specializing  in  neurological  testing  and 
reporting, and from January 2008 to the present, Mr. Unwin has been a partner emeritus at Blake, Cassels 
& Graydon LLP in Toronto.  Additionally, from February 2009 to March 2013, Mr. Unwin served as a 
director and member of the Audit Committee of C.A. Bancorp Inc.  From March 2004 until his retirement 
as  an  active  partner  in  December  2008,  Mr.  Unwin  worked  as  the  managing  partner  of  the  New  York 
Office of Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP.  As the managing partner, Mr. Unwin oversaw the management 
of  the  law  firm  and  worked  as  a  corporate  and  securities  lawyer.    Prior  to  working  as  the  managing 
partner  of  the  New  York  Office  of  Blake,  Cassels  &  Graydon  LLP,  Mr.  Unwin  was  also  the  office 
managing  partner  at  Blake’s  office  in  London,  England.    Mr.  Unwin  is  a  graduate  of  the  director’s 
education  program  at  the  Institute  of  Corporate  Directors  at  the  Rotman  School  of  Management, 
University of Toronto and is an institute certified director (ICD.D).  Mr. Unwin’s experience as managing 
partner at the New York Office of Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP, where he oversaw the management of 
the law firm and worked as a corporate and securities lawyer led the board to conclude that Mr. Unwin 
should serve as a director of the Company.    
 
W. Thomas Hodgson.  Mr. Hodgson currently serves as a Director on the Board of the Company.  In 
addition to his work for the Company, Mr. Hodgson is also Executive Chairman of Lithium Americas 
Corp., a TSX-listed mineral exploration company, and until May 2011, acted as a consultant and advisor 
to the Chairman of Magna International Inc., one of the world’s largest automotive companies, having a 
particular specialization in sourcing venture investment opportunities for the company.  Mr. Hodgson has 
over twenty years’ experience in capital markets research, corporate advisory matters and consulting.  He 
is currently a director of Lithium Americas Corp., has been a board member of MI Developments Inc., 
and was Director, President and Chief Executive Officer of Magna Entertainment Corp. from March 2005 
to March 2006.  From November 2002 to March 2005, Mr. Hodgson was President of Strategic Analysis 
Corporation.  Prior to that, Mr. Hodgson held senior positions with Canadian financial institutions and 
U.K. companies, including Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Canada Permanent Trust Co. Central 
Guaranty Trust, where he served as President and Chief Executive Officer, Marathon Asset Management 
Inc.,  where  he  served  as  President,  and  GlobalNetFinancial.com,  where  he  served  as  Chief  Operating 
Officer and then as President and Chief Executive Officer.  Mr. Hodgson holds an MBA from Queen’s 
University,  Kingston,  Ontario.    Mr.  Hodgson’s  experience  as  a  senior  corporate  executive  with  the 
various companies listed above, in the financial services and corporate finance sectors, led the board to 
conclude that Mr. Hodgson should serve as a director of the Company. 
 
Eric R. Klein.  Mr. Klein currently serves as a Director on the Board of the Company.  In addition to his 
work for the Company, since 1993, in various capacities, Mr. Klein has served at Farber Financial Group, 
Klein  Farber  Corporate  Finance  Inc.,  Klein  Valuation  Services  Inc.,  and  is  currently  the  Managing 
Director and Partner at these firms.  Mr. Klein’s accomplishments at these firms include the execution and 
closing of numerous acquisition, divestiture, financing, business valuation and strategy assignments for 
private and public companies as well as several utilities.  Mr. Klein also currently serves as a director and 
Chairman  of  the  audit  committee  for  INV  Metals  Inc.  and  Northquest  Ltd.,  and  has  been  a  director  at 
these companies since 2008.  Mr. Klein is also currently a director on the Board of Bonanza Blue Corp., 
and has been since 2011. Mr. Klein was previously a director and the Chairman of the audit committee for 
FMX Ventures Inc. between 2008 and 2011.  Mr. Eric R. Klein is a Chartered Professional Accountant 
(Chartered  Accountant)  in  the  Province  of  Ontario,  and  holds  the  designation  of  Chartered  Business
55
Valuator.    Mr.  Klein  obtained  his  Bachelor  of  Commerce  degree  and  a  graduate  diploma  in  public 
accounting from McGill University.  Mr. Klein’s over 20 years of experience with the various companies 
listed above, in the financial services sector, led the board to conclude that Mr. Klein should serve as a 
director of the Company.!
 
James J. Sbrolla.   Mr. Sbrolla currently serves as a Director on the Board of the Company.  In addition 
to his work for the Company, Mr. Sbrolla is a veteran of the financial and environmental industries.  His 
career  has  been  focused  primarily  on  public  and  private  companies  in  the  “clean-tech”  sector.    He 
currently serves as Chairman of Environmental Business Consultant and serves on other boards including 
Actual Media, WE Communications and BlueZone Technologies.  Mr. Sbrolla is also an “Entrepreneur in 
Residence” in the Business Accelerator Program funded by Ontario’s Ministry of Economic Development 
and  Innovation.    He  also  is  a  “qualified  expert”  for  the  Investment  Accelerator  Fund  and  sits  on  the 
Ontario Centers of Excellence funding panel as a clean-tech domain expert.  Mr. Sbrolla has written on a 
variety  of  topics  including  a  multi-national  study  on  finance,  the  environment  and  sustainable 
development.    Mr.  Sbrolla  earned  his  B.A.  in  Administrative  and  Commercial  Studies  from  Western 
University (1990), has a Graduate Accolade in Management from Wilfrid Laurier University (1991) and 
is  a  2011  graduate  of  the  director’s  education  program  at  the  Institute  of  Corporate  Directors  at  the 
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto and is an institute certified director (ICD.D).  Mr. 
Sbrolla’s experience with the various companies listed above, in the financial and environmental sectors, 
led the board to conclude that Mr. Hodgson should serve as a director of the Company.  
 
William J. Tafuri.  Mr. Tafuri currently serves as Project Manager of the Trinity Project.  Mr. Tafuri has 
a Ph.D. in geology and over 40 years of diverse mining and exploration experience in precious and base 
metals.    Mr.  Tafuri  has  worked  for  a  number  of  major  international  mining  companies  and  has  held 
management  positions  in  both  domestic  and  foreign  locations  for  Getty  Mining  Co.,  Santa  Fe  Pacific 
Gold Corp., and Kinross Gold Corp.  He has extensive consulting experience, both domestic and foreign.  
He has extensive exploration and mine development experience in the USA, Central Asia, Russia, and 
Chile.    As  of  March  2010,  Mr.  Tafuri  was  responsible  for  managing  the  operations  of  the  Company.  
From January 2007 to December 2009, Mr. Tafuri was the President of Yellowcake Mining Company, 
which was located in Vancouver, B.C., Canada, and was in the business of mining.  As of January 2007, 
Mr.  Tafuri  was  responsible  for  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  uranium  properties  in  Wyoming  and 
Colorado.  From June 2004 to November 2006 Mr. Tafuri was the Vice President of Centrasia Mining 
Company, which was located in Vancouver, B.C., Canada and was in the business of mining.  As of June 
2004, Mr. Tafuri was responsible for the acquisition and exploration of mining properties in Central Asia.  
Mr. Tafuri received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in geology at the University of Nevada-Reno and his Ph.D. 
in geology at the University of Utah. 
 
Family Relationships 
 
There are no family relationships between any of the current directors or officers of the Company. 
 
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings 
 
On September 12, 2013, the Company and certain of its current and former officers and directors (the 
“Liberty  Silver  Parties”)  were  named  as  defendants  in  a  proposed  securities  class  action  lawsuit  filed 
against  Robert  Genovese,  certain  individuals  alleged  to  have  collaborated  with  Mr.  Genovese,  and  an 
offshore 
(the  “Action,”  Case  No. 
9:13-cv-80923-KLR, Stanaford v. Genovese et al.).  The action contains various claims alleging violations 
of the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and rules thereunder relating to anomalous trading 
activity and fluctuations in the Company’s share price from August through October 2012.  The plaintiff 
purports  to  bring  suit  on  behalf  of  all  who  purchased  or  otherwise  acquired  the  Company’s  common
firm  allegedly  controlled  by  Mr.  Genovese
investment
56
shares from April 1, 2008, through and including October 5, 2012.  An amended complaint was filed on 
September 27, 2013. 
 
On  January  22,  2014,  the  Court  appointed  Jerald  Todd  Stanaford  and  Philip  Hobel  lead  plaintiffs  and 
approved Federman & Sherwood as Lead Counsel and Menzer & Hill, PA as Liaison Counsel.  On March 
24, 2014, Plaintiffs filed a Second Amended Consolidated Class Action Complaint.  On May 8, 2014, the 
Liberty Silver Parties moved to dismiss the Complaint.  The Liberty Silver Parties intend to vigorously 
defend the Action.  It is not possible at this time to predict whether the Company will incur any liability 
as a result of the Action, or to estimate the damages, or the range of damages, if any, that the Company 
might incur in connection with the Action. 
 
Neither the Company nor its property is the subject of any other pending legal proceedings, and no other 
such proceeding is known to be contemplated by any governmental authority.  The Company is not aware 
of any other legal proceedings in which any director, officer or affiliate of the Company, any owner of 
record or beneficially of more than 5% of any class of our voting securities, or any associate of any such 
director, officer, affiliate or security holder of the Company, is a party adverse to the Company or any of 
its subsidiaries or has a material interest adverse to the Company or any of its subsidiaries. 
 
Directorships 
 
None of the Company’s executive officers or directors is a director of any company with a class of equity 
securities registered pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”) 
or subject to the requirements of the Exchange Act or any company registered as an investment company 
under the Investment Company Act of 1940. 
 
Code of Ethics 
 
The Company’s board of directors has adopted a code of ethics that will apply to its principal executive 
officer, principal financial officer and principal accounting officer or controller and to persons performing 
similar functions.  The code of ethics is designed to deter wrongdoing and to promote honest and ethical 
conduct, full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure, compliance with applicable laws, rules 
and regulations, prompt internal reporting of violations of the code and accountability for adherence to the 
code.  The Company will provide a copy of its code of ethics, without charge, to any person upon receipt 
of written request for such, delivered to our corporate headquarters.  All such requests should be sent care 
of Liberty Silver Corp, Attn: Corporate Secretary, 181 Bay Street, Suite 2330, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 
M5J  2T3.    The  Company’s  Code  of  Business  Conduct  and  Ethics  has  also  posted  on  its  website  at, 
www.libertysilvercorp.com.
57
Name and
Non-Equity 
Incentive
Salary
Bonus
Stock 
Awards
Option 
Awards (2)
Plan
Compensation
Non-qualified
Deferred
Compensation
Earnings
All other
Compensation
Total
($)
28,738 
200,004 
200,004
158,737 
130,000 
356,490
--
50,000 
120,000
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION.
ITEM 11.  
 
Summary Compensation Table  
 
The following table sets forth, for the years indicated, all compensation paid, distributed or accrued for 
services,  including  salary  and  bonus  amounts,  rendered  in  all  capacities  by  the  Company’s  principal 
executive officer, chief financial officer and all other executive officers; the information contained below 
represents compensation paid, distributed or accrued to the Company’s officers for their work related to 
the Company.
Principal Position
Year
($)
($)
($)
R. Geoffrey Browne 
CEO 
 
 
Manish Z. Kshatriya 
CFO 
 
 
William Tafuri 
Project Manager (1)
2014 
2013 
2012
2014 
2013 
2012
2014 
2013 
2012
1
200,004 
200,004
130,000 
130,000 
60,357
--
50,000 
120,000
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
--
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
--
($)
28,737
-- 
--
28,737
--
296,133
-- 
-- 
--
(#)
($)
($)
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
--
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
--
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
--
(1) William Tafuri resigned as President and Chief Operating Officer effective November 28, 2012, and undertook 
the role of Project Manager for the Company. 
 
(2) Option awards reflect the aggregate grant date fair value computed using the Black-Scholes model; for a 
discussion please refer to Note 6 in the Notes to the Financial Statements herein.  
 
Grant of Plan Based Awards 
 
During  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  2014,  there  were  no  equity  awards  granted  to  the  Company’s 
executive officers.
58
Outstanding Stock Options Awards At Fiscal Year End 
 
The following table provides a summary of equity awards outstanding at June 30, 2014, for each of the 
named executive officers.
________________________________________________________
Option Awards
_________________________________________
Stock Awards
Equity 
Incentive
Plan
Awards: 
Market or
Payout 
Value of 
Unearned 
Shares, 
Units or 
Other 
Rights 
That
Have Not 
Vested
($)
--
--
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying 
Unexercised 
Options (#) 
Exercisable
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying 
Unexercised 
Options (#) 
Unexercisable
Equity 
Incentive
Plan
Awards: 
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying 
Unexercised 
Unearned 
Options (#)
Number of 
Shares or 
Units of 
Stock 
That
Have Not 
Vested
(#)
Market 
Value of 
Shares or 
Units of 
Stock 
That
Have Not 
Vested
($)
Option 
Exercise
Price 
($)
Option
Expiration
Date
Equity 
Incentive
Plan
Awards: 
Number of 
Unearned 
Shares, 
Units or 
Other 
Rights 
That
Have Not 
Vested
(#)
333,333
666,667
--
0.10
April 8, 2019
--
--
--
Name
R. Geoffrey
Browne
Manish Z. 
Kshatriya
333,333
666,667
--
0.10
April 8, 2019
--
--
--
There  were  no  options  or  other  derivative  securities  exercised  in  fiscal  2014  by  the  named  executive 
officers.  In addition, there were no shares acquired by the named executive officers upon the vesting of 
restricted stock.     
   
Long-Term Incentive Plans 
 
The Company does not have any long-term incentive plans, pension plans, or similar compensatory plans 
for its directors or executive officers. 
 
Change of Control Agreements 
 
Pursuant to the employment agreement between the Company and Manish Z. Kshatriya discussed below, 
as at the end of the 2014 fiscal year, the Company is party to a change of control agreement with Mr. 
Kshatriya.  In the event of Change of Control of the Company, as defined below, Mr. Kshatriya shall have 
the option to terminate his employment agreement within 12 months of the date on which the Change of 
Control occurs and shall be entitled to the payment referred to in the following section on Employment 
Agreements,  in  addition  to  an  amount  representing  all  business  expenses  reasonably  incurred  by  Mr. 
Kshatriya up to the date of his termination. 
 
A “Change of Control” is defined in Mr. Kshatriya’s employment agreement with the Company as any of 
the following events: (i) a transaction or series of transactions following which the individuals and entities 
who were the respective beneficial owners of the voting securities of the Company as of the date of the 
employment agreement cease to collectively hold more than 50% of the outstanding voting shares of the 
Company; (ii) the sale, transfer or other disposition of assets of the Company, having a fair market value 
equal to 50% or more of the fair market value of the assets of the Company, to any person other than an 
affiliate  of  the  Company;  (iii)  the  approval  by  Shareholders  of  a  merger,  reorganisation,  plan  of 
arrangement or similar transaction (any of the foregoing, a “Merger”) as a result of which the individuals 
and entities who were the respective beneficial owners of the voting securities of the Company prior to 
such  Merger  are  not  expected  to  own  immediately  after  such  Merger,  directly  or  indirectly,  more  than
59
50%  of  the  voting  securities  or  securities  convertible  into  or  exchangeable  for  voting  securities  of  the 
entity  resulting  from  the  Merger;  or  (iv)  the  resignation  or  removal  of  a  majority  of  directors  of  the 
Company as a result of a solicitation of proxies that was not approved by a majority of the Board. 
  
Employment Agreements 
 
R.  Geoffrey  Browne  currently  serves  as  the  President,  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Director  of  the 
Company.  Pursuant to an agreement dated October 18, 2010, (the “Agreement”), and until June 30, 2013, 
Mr. Browne was entitled to an annual salary of $200,000, as well as an annual discretionary performance 
bonus for his services rendered as the Chief Executive Officer; the amount of the performance bonus is at 
the discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors.  In conjunction with the entry into the Agreement, the 
Company granted Mr. Browne stock options to acquire up to 3,000,000 shares of restricted common stock 
of the Company at a price of $0.75 per share.  The 3,000,000 restricted stock options were cancelled.  From 
December  1,  2012,  management  of  the  Company  deferred  payment  to  the  NEOs.    Pursuant  to  an 
amendment agreement to Mr. Browne’s employment agreement, unpaid salary of $116,667 earned by Mr. 
Browne  between  December  1,  2012  and  June  30,  2013  may,  at  the  sole  option  of  Mr.  Browne  until 
September 30, 2015, be settled pursuant to the issuance of Common Shares or forfeited.  Effective July 1, 
2013, pursuant to the amendment agreement, Mr. Browne’s salary was amended to an annual rate of $1.00 
payable on the last day of each year.  On April 8, 2014, the Company granted Mr. Browne stock options to 
acquire up to 1,000,000 shares of common stock of the Company at a price of $0.10 per share. The options 
are  subject  to  the  following  vesting  schedule:  (i)  333,334  options  vest  at  grant  date,  April  8,  2014;  (ii) 
333,333 options vest one years after April 8, 2014; and (iii) 333,3333 options vest two years after April 8, 
2014.    
 
Manish  Z.  Kshatriya  currently  serves  as  the  Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Financial  Officer  and 
Secretary  of  the  Company.    Pursuant  to  an  employment  agreement  between  the  Company  and  Mr. 
Kshatriya, dated January 16, 2012, Mr. Kshatriya is entitled to a base annual salary of $130,000.  In the 
event that Mr. Kshatriya’s employment is terminated by the Company other than for (i) cause; (ii) death; 
or (iii) inability to discharge employment duties by reason of illness, disease, mental or physical disability 
or otherwise, Mr. Kshatriya shall be entitled to payment in a lump sum of his base salary earned up to the 
date of termination plus an amount equal to the sum of: (i) the value of any unused vacation leave; (ii) any 
unpaid amounts to which Mr. Kshatriya is entitled to a bonus for the fiscal year immediately preceding 
the fiscal year in which the termination occurs; (iii) an amount equal to the average bonus paid to Mr. 
Kshatriya in the fiscal years of the Company (up to a maximum of three) immediately preceding the fiscal 
year in which the termination occurs, pro-rated for the length of service during the fiscal year in which the 
termination occurs; and (iv) an amount equal to Mr. Kshatriya’s base salary at the time of the termination 
for a period equal to the sum of (A) one year and (B) one month for every full year of service, up to a 
maximum of two years. 
 
Additionally,  in  January  of  2012  Mr.  Kshatriya  was  granted  stock  options  to  purchase  up  to  a  total  of 
450,000  shares  the  Company’s  common  stock  at  an  exercise  price  of  $1.00  per  share.    The  options  are 
subject to the following vesting schedule: (i) 150,000 options vest six months after January 16, 2012; (ii) 
150,000 options vest one and a half years after January 16, 2012; and (iii) 150,000 options vest two and one 
half years after January 16, 2012.  The 450,000 common stock options were cancelled.  On April 8, 2014, 
the Company granted Mr. Kshatriya stock options to acquire up to 1,000,000 shares of common stock of 
the Company at a price of $0.10 per share.  The options are subject to the following vesting schedule: (i) 
333,334 options vest at grant date, April 8, 2014; (ii) 333,333 options vest one years after April 8, 2014; 
and (iii) 333,3333 options vest two years after April 8, 2014. 
 
The  foregoing  description  of  the  employment  agreement  between  the  Company  and  Mr.  Kshatriya  is
60
qualified in its entirety by reference to the employment agreement which is filed as Exhibit 10.21 to this 
Form 10-K and is herein incorporated by reference. 
 
There  have  been  no  other  changes  to  the  base  compensation  of  the  NEOs  following  the  most  recently 
completed financial year.    
 
Equity Compensation Plan Information 
 
On April 19, 2011, subject to shareholder approval, which was obtained at the Company’s annual and 
special  meeting  of  shareholders  held  on  December  21,  2012,  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Liberty  Silver 
Corp. approved the adoption of the Liberty Silver Corp. Incentive Share Plan (the “Plan”) under which 
common  shares  of  the  Company’s  common  stock  have  been  reserved  for  purposes  of  possible  future 
issuance of incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options, and stock grants to employees, directors 
and  certain  key  individuals.    Under  the  Plan,  the  maximum  number  of  common  shares  reserved  for 
issuance shall not exceed 10% of the common shares of the Company outstanding from time to time.  The 
purpose of the Plan shall be to advance the interests of the Company by encouraging equity participation 
in  the  Company  through  the  acquisition  of  common  shares  of  the  Company.    In  order  to  maintain 
flexibility in the award of stock benefits, the Plan constitutes a single plan, but is composed of two parts.  
The  first  part  is  the  Share  Option  Plan  which  provides  grants  of  both  incentive  stock  options  under 
Section 422A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and nonqualified stock options.  The 
second part is the Share Bonus Plan which provides grants of shares of Company common stock. The 
following is intended to be a summary of some of the material terms of the Plan, and is subject to, and 
qualified in its entirety, by the full text of the Plan.
The Plan 
    
The Plan is a rolling plan, under which the maximum number of Shares reserved for issuance under the 
Share Option Plan, together with the Share Bonus Plan, shall not exceed 10% of the Shares outstanding 
(on  a  non-diluted  basis)  at  any  given  time.   The  purpose  of  the  Plan  is  to  advance  the  interests  of  the 
Corporation  by  (i)  providing  certain  employees,  senior  officers,  directors,  or  consultants  of  the 
Corporation  (collectively,  the  “Optionees”)  with  additional  performance  incentives;  (ii)  encouraging 
Share ownership by the Optionees; (iii) increasing the proprietary interest of the Optionees in the success 
of the Corporation; (iv) encouraging the Optionees to remain with the Corporation; and (v) attracting new 
employees, officers, directors and consultants to the Corporation.
Share Option Plan 
 
The following information is intended to be a brief description and summary of the material features of 
the Share Option Plan:
(a)
The aggregate maximum number of Shares available for issuance from treasury under the 
Share Option Plan, together with the Share Bonus Plan, at any given time is 10% of the 
outstanding  Shares  as  at  the  date  of  grant  of  an  option  under  the  Plan,  subject  to 
adjustment  or  increase  of  such  number  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Plan.  Any  Shares 
subject to an option which has been granted under the Share Option Plan and which has 
been surrendered, terminated, or expired without being exercised, in whole or in part, will 
again be available under the Plan.
(b)
The exercise price of an option shall be determined by the Board at the time each option 
is granted, provided that such price shall not be less than the closing price of the Shares 
on the principal stock exchange(s) upon which the Shares are listed and posted for trading
61
on the trading day immediately preceding the day of the grant of the option.
(c)
(d)
(e)
Options  granted  to  persons  conducting  Investor  Relations  Activities  (as  defined  in  the 
Plan) for the Corporation must vest in stages over twelve months with no more than ¼ of 
the options vesting in any three-month period.
In the event an Optionee ceases to be eligible for the grant of options under the Share 
Option Plan, options previously granted to such person will cease to be exercisable within 
a period of 12 months following the date such person ceases to be eligible under the Plan.
In the event that a take-over bid or issuer bid is made for all or any of the issued and 
outstanding Shares, then the Board may, by resolution, permit all options outstanding to 
become immediately exercisable in order to permit Shares issuable under such options to 
be tendered to such bid.
Share Bonus Plan 
 
The following information is intended to be a brief description and summary of the material features of 
the Share Bonus Plan:
(a)
Participants  in  the  Share  Bonus  Plan  shall  be  directors,  officers,  employees,  or 
consultants of the Corporation who, by the nature of their positions are, in the opinion of 
the Board and upon the recommendation of the President of the Corporation, in a position 
to contribute to the success of the Corporation.
(b)
The  determination  regarding  the  amount  of  bonus  Shares  issued  pursuant  to  the  Share 
Bonus Plan will take into consideration the Optionee’s present and potential contribution 
to the success of the Corporation and shall be determined from time to time by the Board. 
However, in no event shall the number of bonus Shares pursuant to the Share Bonus Plan, 
together with the Share Option Plan, exceed 10% of the issued and outstanding Shares in 
the aggregate.
General Features of the Plan  
 
In addition to the above summaries of the Share Option Plan and the Share Bonus Plan, the following is 
intended to be a brief description and summary of some of the general features of the Plan:
(a)
The aggregate number of Shares reserved pursuant to the Plan for issuance to insiders of 
the Corporation within any twelve-month period, under all security based compensation 
arrangements of the Corporation, shall not exceed 10% of the total number of Shares then 
outstanding.
(b)
The  aggregate  number  of  Share  reserved  for  issuance  pursuant  to  the  Plan  to  any  one 
person  in  any  twelve  month  period  shall  not  exceed  5%  of  the  total  number  of  Shares 
outstanding  from  time  to  time,  unless  disinterested  shareholder  approval  is  obtained 
pursuant to the policies of the Corporation’s principal stock exchange(s) upon which the 
Shares  are  listed  and  posted  for  trading  or  any  stock  exchange  or  regulatory  authority 
having  jurisdiction  over  the  securities  of  the  Corporation.  No  more  than  2%  of  the 
outstanding Shares may be granted to any one Consultant (as defined in the Plan) in any 
twelve-month period, or to persons conducting Investor Relations Activities (as defined 
in the Plan) in any twelve-month period.
62
Director Compensation 
 
The general policy of the Board is that compensation for independent directors should be equity-based 
compensation.  Additionally, the Company reimburses directors for reasonable expenses incurred during 
the course of their performance.  There are no long-term incentive or medical reimbursement plans.  The 
Company  does  not  pay  directors,  who  are  part  of  management,  for  Board  service  in  addition  to  their 
regular employee compensation.  The Board, through its compensation committee, determines the amount 
of  director  compensation.    The  following  table  provides  a  summary  of  compensation  paid  to  directors 
during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014.
Fees 
Earned 
or Paid
in Cash
($)
--
--
--
--
Stock 
Awards
!!
($) 
!
--
---
---
--
Option 
Awards 
($) (1)
!
!!
--
28,737
28,737
14,357
!
!!
Non-Equity 
Incentive Plan 
Compensation
($) 
!!
--
---
---
--
Nonqualified
All Other
Deferred
Compensation
Compensation
Earnings
!!
!!
--
---
---
--
($) 
!
--
--
---
--
Director
R. Geoffrey Browne (2)
Timothy N. Unwin
W. Thomas Hodgson
Eric R. Klein
Total ($)
--
28,737
28,737
14,357
14,357
--
James J. Sbrolla 
 
(1)  Option awards reflect the aggregate grant date fair value computed using the Black-Scholes model; for a
14,357
---
---
--
---
discussion please refer to Note 6 in the Notes to the Financial Statements herein.
(2)  Refer to the summary compensation table in Item 11 executive compensation.
63
Number of 
securities 
remaining 
available for
future issuances
under equity 
compensation 
plans, excluding
securities 
reflected in 
column (a)
(c)
1,772,394
-
1,772,394
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND
ITEM 12.  
MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 
 
Equity Compensation Plan 
 
The following table gives information about the Company’s Equity Compensation Plan as of June 30, 
2014:
Weighted
average exercise
price of
outstanding
options, 
warrants
(b) 
$0.25
-
$0.25
Plan category 
 
Equity compensation plans approved 
by security holders 
 
Equity compensation plans not 
approved by security holders 
 
Total
Number of
securities to be 
issued upon 
exercise of 
outstanding
options, warrants
(a)
6,700,000
-
6,700,000
64
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners 
 
The following table sets forth as of June 30, 2014, the name and the number of shares of the Company’s 
common  stock,  par  value  $0.001  per  share,  held  of  record  or  beneficially  by  each  person  who  held  of 
record, or was known by the Company to own beneficially, more than 5% of the issued and outstanding 
shares of the Company’s common stock, and the name and shareholdings of each director and significant 
employee, and of all executive officers and directors and significant employees as a group.  The beneficial 
ownership amount includes the underlying shares of unexercised warrants and options, as described in the 
footnotes to the table.
Title and Class
Name and Address  
of Beneficial Owner
Amount and Nature  
of Beneficial Ownership
Percent of class
Common
Common
Common
Common
Common
Common
Common
Common 
 
 
 
 
 
Common
R. Geoffrey Browne (1) 
181 Bay Street, Suite 2330 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3
Manish Z. Kshatriya (1) 
181 Bay Street, Suite 2330 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3
William Tafuri (1) 
808 Packer St. 
Reno, Nevada 89431
Timothy N. Unwin (1) 
181 Bay Street, Suite 2330 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3 
Eric R. Klein (1) 
181 Bay Street, Suite 2330 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3 
James J. Sbrolla (1) 
181 Bay Street, Suite 2330 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3 
W. Thomas Hodgson (1) 
181 Bay Street, Suite 2330 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3 
 
BG Capital Group, Ltd.  
Lauriston House 
Lower Collymore Rock Dr. 
P.O. Box 1132 
Bridgetown, Barbados 11000 
 
Outlook Investments, Inc. 
Edificio 5, Suite 1A 
Calle Eusebio A. Morales 
El Cangrejo, Panama City, Panama
65
2,883,334 (2)
333,334 (3)
2,976,667 (4)
1,383,334 (5)
166,667 (6)
166,667 (7)
1,483,334 (8)
21,583,301 (9) 
 
 
 
 
 
7,735,652 (10)
3.39%
0.39%
3.48%
1.63%
0.20%
0.20%
1.74%
25.47% 
 
 
 
 
 
9.13%
Common
Common
Robert Genovese 
#5 Mir Mar Villas 
Nassau, Bahamas 
 
All Directors, Executive Officers, or 
Significant Employee as a Group (6 in 
number)
29,968,953 (11)
35.37%
9,393,336
10.77%
(1) Director, Officer or Significant Employee of Company 
 
(2) Included in this number, are (i) 2,550,000 shares owned directly by Mr. Browne, and (ii) 333,334option shares.  Mr. Browne 
may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the option shares because he holds the right to acquire these shares within 60 days 
through the exercise of the options. 
 
(3) Included in this number are 333,334 option shares because Mr. Kshatriya may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the 
option shares because he holds the right to acquire these shares within 60 days through the exercise of the options. 
 
(4) Included in this number, are (i) 2,110,000 shares owned directly by Mr. Tafuri, and (ii) 866,667 option shares.  Mr. Tafuri 
may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the option shares because he holds the right to acquire these shares within 60 days 
through the exercise of the options. 
 
 (5) Included in this number, are (i) 1,050,000 shares owned directly by Mr. Unwin, and (ii) 333,334 option shares.  Mr. Unwin 
may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of these shares because he holds the right to acquire the option shares within 60 days 
through the exercise of the options. 
 
(6) Included in this number are 166,667 option shares because Mr. Klein may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the option 
shares because he holds the right to acquire these shares within 60 days through the exercise of the options. 
 
(7) Included in this number are 166,667 option shares because Mr. Sbrolla may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the 
option shares because he holds the right to acquire these shares within 60 days through the exercise of the options. 
 
(8)  Included  in  this  number,  are  (i)  500,000  shares  owned  directly;  (ii)  650,000  owned  indirectly  by  Mr.  Hodgson,  through 
Greenbrook Capital Partners Inc., and (iii) 333,334 option shares.  Mr. Hodgson may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the 
option shares because he holds the right to acquire these shares within 60 days through the exercise of the options. Greenbrook 
Capital  Partners  Inc.  is  a  private  Ontario,  Canada  company  based  in  Toronto,  Ontario.    W.  Thomas  Hodgson,  officer  of 
Greenbrook Capital Partners Inc., makes decisions as to the voting and disposition of securities owned by Greenbrook Capital 
Partners Inc.   
 
 (9) BG Capital Group Ltd. is a private Panamanian company based in Panama.  Robert Genovese, officer of BG Capital Group 
Ltd., makes decisions as to the voting and disposition of the securities.  
 
(10)  Outlook  Investments  Inc.  is  a  private  Panamanian  company  based  in  Panama.    Robert  Genovese,  officer  of  BG  Capital 
Group Ltd., makes decisions as to the voting and disposition of the securities.  
 
(11) This number includes 21,583,301 shares owned by BG Capital Group Ltd., 7,735,652 shares owned by Outlook Investments, 
Inc.,  and,  650,000  shares  owned  by  Look  Back  Investments  Inc.    Mr.  Genovese  makes  investment  decisions  for  Look  Back 
Investments,  Inc.,  Outlook  Investments,  Inc.,  and  BG  Capital  Group,  Ltd.,  and  may  be  deemed  to  be  the  beneficial  owner  of 
shares registered in the name of these entities.   
 
ITEM 13.  CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR 
INDEPENDENCE 
 
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions 
!
On November 14, 2013, the Company announced the closing of a $1,210,000 Loan facility (the “Loan”).  
The  Company  intends  to  use  the  funds  from  the  Loan  for  general  working  capital  purposes,  thereby 
affording the Company more time to secure longer term financing for the Trinity Silver Project. 
 
The key terms of the Loan are as follows:
66
•
•
•
•
a  total  amount  of  up  to  $1,210,000  is  being  advanced  to  Liberty,  of  which  $100,000  was 
previously advanced by way of promissory notes subsequent to the signing of a letter of intent 
relating to the Loan, which promissory notes are superseded by the Loan.  Upon closing of the 
Loan on November 14, 2013 (the “Closing Date”), $202,500 was advanced to the Company, and 
a further $302,500 was advanced on each of December 31, 2013, March 31, 2014, and June 30, 
2014;
the  outstanding  principal  amount  bears  interest  at  11%  per  annum  from  date  of  advance  and 
becomes  due  and  payable  in  its  entirety  one  year  following  the  Closing  Date  (the  “Maturity 
Date”).  The Company has the option to extend the Maturity Date by six months, with interest 
payable at 15% per annum accruing on the outstanding principal amount during such extension 
period;
the Loan is secured by a charge on all of the assets of the Company; and
subject  to  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  approval,  if  Liberty  completes  an  arm’s  length  equity 
financing  of  US$500,000  or  more  at  a  price  of  not  less  than  US$0.50  per  common  share  of 
Liberty  (each,  a  “Share”),  Liberty  may  require  BG  to  convert  the  outstanding  principal  and 
interest amount of the Loan into equity of Liberty on the same terms and conditions as the equity 
financing.
The lender pursuant to the Loan is BG Capital Group Ltd. (“BG”).  Effective the Closing Date, BG and 
certain of its related parties owned 8,609,853 common shares of Liberty and 6,500,000 common share 
purchase  warrants,  with  each  such  warrant  entitling  BG  to  acquire  one  common  share  of  Liberty  for 
US$0.65  until  December  31,  2013  (the  “Warrants”).  As  a  condition  of  the  Loan,  BG  consented  to  the 
termination of the Warrants for no further consideration.  Accordingly, following the closing of the loan 
facility  transaction,  BG  owned,  directly  and  indirectly,  8,609,853  shares  representing  approximately 
10.3% of the Company’s 83,991,945 issued and outstanding common shares on the Closing Date.  Other 
than pursuant to the Loan, the Company does not have any contractual or other relationship with BG.  As 
at June 30, 2014, based on information that is available to the Company, BG and its affiliates, together, 
held of record or beneficially a total of 29,968,953 common shares of the Company. 
 
Aside from the foregoing, there were no material transactions, or series of similar transactions, during the 
Company’s  last  fiscal  year,  or  any  currently  proposed  transactions,  or  series  of  similar  transactions,  to 
which  the  Company  was  or  is  to  be  a  party,  in  which  the  amount  involved  exceeded  the  lesser  of 
$120,000 or one percent of the average of the small business issuer’s total assets at year-end for the last 
three completed fiscal years and in which any director, executive officer or any security holder who is 
known to us to own of record or beneficially more than five percent of any class of our common stock, or 
any member of the immediate family of any of the foregoing persons, had an interest. 
 
Director Independence
The Company’s common stock is currently traded on the Grey Market, and as such, is not subject to the 
rules of any national securities exchange which requires that a majority of a listed company’s directors 
and specified committees of its board of directors meet independence standards prescribed by such rules. 
For the purpose of preparing the disclosures in this document with respect to director independence, the 
Company has used the definition of “independent director” within the meaning of National Instrument 
52-110 – Audit Committees adopted by the Canadian Securities Administration and as set forth in the 
Marketplace Rules of the NASDAQ, which defines an “independent director” generally as being a person, 
other than an executive officer or employee of the company or any other individual having a relationship
67
which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  company’s  board  of  directors,  would  interfere  with  the  exercise  of 
independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
Consistent  with  these  standards,  the  Company’s  board  of  directors  has  determined  that  Timothy  N. 
Unwin,  W.  Thomas  Hodgson,  Eric  R.  Klein,  and  James  J.  Sbrolla  are  “independent”  directors  of  the 
Company. 
 
ITEM 14.  
 
Audit Fees 
 
(1) 
On  July  14,  2014,  the  Company  received  notice  from  the  firm  of  Morrill  &  Associates,  LLC, 
1448  North  2000  West,  Suite  3,  Clinton,  Utah  84015,  (“Morrill”),  that  as  a  result  of  its  merger  with 
another public accounting firm, which is not registered with the Canadian Public Accountability Board, it 
had resigned as the principal independent accountant to audit the Company’s financial statements for the 
fiscal year ending June 30, 2014.  Effective September 2, 2014, the Company appointed the firm of MNP, 
LLP, Chartered Professional Accountants, as the Company’s new independent audit firm. 
 
Morrill & Associates served as the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm for the year 
ended June 30, 2013.  Principal accounting fees for professional services rendered for the Company by 
Morrill & Associates for the year ended June 30, 2014 were $8,590 and for the year ended June 30, 2013 
were $27,385, and are summarized and included in the following table. 
 
MNP, LLP, Chartered Professional Accountants, 701 Evans Avenue, Toronto, ON M9C 1A3, served as 
the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm for the year ended June 30, 2014, and is 
expected to serve in that capacity for the ensuing year.  Principal accounting fees for professional services 
rendered  for  the  Company  by  MNP,  LLP  for  the  year  ended  June  30,  2014  were  $20,000  and  are 
summarized and included in the following table:
Audit 
 Audit related 
 Tax 
 All other 
 Total
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$
2014
$ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $ 
   $
28,590 
0 
0 
0 
28,590
2013
27,385 
0 
0  
0  
27,385
Audit Related Fees  
 
 
(2)  
Neither Morrill & Associates or MNP, LLP billed the Company any amounts for assurance and 
related services that were related to its audit or review of the Company’s financial statements during the 
fiscal years ended 2014 and 2013. 
 
Tax Fees 
 
(3) 
planning were $0.00 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013. 
 
All Other Fees
The aggregate fees billed by Morrill & Associates and MNP, LLP for tax compliance, advice and
68
(4)   Neither Morrill & Associates or MNP, LLP billed the Company for any products and services 
other than the foregoing during the fiscal years ended 2014 and 2013. 
 
Audit Committee’s Pre-approval Policies and Procedures 
 
(5)  
At the Company’s regularly scheduled and special meetings, the audit committee considers and 
pre-approves any audit and non-audit services to be performed by the Company’s independent registered 
public  accounting  firm.    The  audit  committee  has  the  authority  to  grant  pre-approvals  of  non-audit 
services.
PART IV
EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES.
ITEM 15.  
 
(a)(1)(2) Financial Statements and Financial Statement Schedule. 
 
The financial statements and financial statement schedules identified in Item 8 are filed as part of this 
annual report. 
 
(a)(3) Exhibits. 
 
The exhibits required by this item are set forth on the Exhibit Index below.
3.1  Articles  of  Incorporation  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  S-1  filed  with  the  Securities  and
3.2
Exchange Commission on April 1, 2008). 
 
Bylaws  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  S-1  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission on April 1, 2008).
3.3  Articles  of  Amendment  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  Securities  and
3.3  Amended Bylaws (included as exhibit to Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange
Exchange Commission on February 12, 2010).
Commission on October 25, 2010).
3.4  Amended  and  Restated  Bylaws  of  Liberty  Silver  Corp.,  December  14,  2011  (included  as 
exhibit to Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 14, 
2011).
3.5  Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of Liberty Silver Corp, (included as exhibit
to Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 28, 2012)
3.6  Amended and Restated Bylaws of Liberty Silver Corp., dated December 21, 2012. (included 
as exhibit to Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 
28, 2012)
10.1  Mineral  Property  Purchase  Agreement  corporation  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  S-1  filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 1, 2008).
69
10.2
Exploration Earn-In Agreement dated March 29, 2010, by and between Liberty Silver Corp, 
a Nevada corporation, and AuEx Ventures, Inc., a Nevada corporation (included as exhibit 
to Form S-1/A filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 19, 2013).
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
Employment  Agreement  and  accompanying  Stock  Option  Agreement,  dated  October  18, 
2010, by and between Liberty Silver Corp. and Geoff Browne (included as exhibit to Form 
8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on October 19, 2010).
Stock Option Agreement dated October 26, 2010 by and between Liberty Silver Corp. and 
Paul  Haggis  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission on October 27, 2010).
Stock Option Agreement dated October 26, 2010 by and between Liberty Silver Corp. and 
Timothy  Unwin  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission on October 27, 2010).
Stock Option Agreement dated October 26, 2010 by and between Liberty Silver Corp. and 
John  Barrington  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission on October 27, 2010).
Stock Option Agreement dated October 26, 2010 by and between Liberty Silver Corp. and 
George  Kent  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission on October 27, 2010).
Stock Option Agreement dated December 6, 2010 by and between Liberty Silver Corp. and 
W.  Thomas  Hodgson  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission on December 6, 2010).
10.9
Liberty Silver Corp. Incentive Share Plan (included as exhibit to Form 8-K filed with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission on May 3, 2011).
10.10  Liberty  Silver  Corp.  Incentive  Stock  Option  Agreement  dated  April  19,  2011  between 
Liberty  Silver  Corp.  and  William  Tafuri  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K  filed  with  the 
Securities and Exchange Commission on May 5, 2011).
10.11  Liberty Silver Corp. Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement dated April 19, 2011 between 
Liberty Silver Corp. and John Barrington (included as exhibit to Form 8-K filed with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission on May 5, 2011).
10.12  Subscription Agreement dated November 10, 2011 (included as exhibit to Form 8-K filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 10, 2011).
10.13  Subscription Receipt and Escrow Agreement dated November 10, 2011 (included as exhibit
to Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 10, 2011).
10.14  Registration Rights Agreement dated November 10, 2011 (included as exhibit to Form 8-K
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 10, 2011).
10.15  Purchase  Agreement  Hi  Ho  Silver  Mining  Claims  dated  October  15,  2012  (included  as 
exhibit to Form S-1/A filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 24, 
2013).
70
10.16  Registration  Rights  Agreement  dated  October  15,  2012  (included  as  exhibit  to  Form  8-K
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on October 16, 2012).
10.17  Memorandum  of  Exploration  Earn-In  Agreement,  effective  March  29,  2010(included  as 
exhibit to Form S-1/A filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 24, 
2013)
10.18  Letter  Agreement  re  Assignment  of  Exploration  Earn-In  Agreement,  effective  July  1, 
2010(included as exhibit to Form S-1/A filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
on January 24, 2013)
10.19  Loan Agreement dated November 14, 2013, by and between BG Capital Group Ltd. and
Liberty Silver Corp., and Promissory Note dated November 14, 2013, as Scheduled A 
thereto (included as exhibit to Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
on November 15, 2013)
10.20  Security Agreement dated November 14, 2013, by and between BG Capital Group Ltd. and 
Liberty Silver Corp. (included as exhibit to Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission on November 15, 2013)
10.21  Employment Agreement dated January 16, 2012, by and between Liberty Silver Corp. and
Manish Z. Kshatriya.* 
 
Consent of Morrill and Associates, LLC, Certified Public Accountants
23.1
31.1
31.2
32.1
32.2
101
101
101
101
101
101
Certifications pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934, as amended, as adopted pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.* 
 
Certifications pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934, as amended, as adopted pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.* 
 
Certifications pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.* 
 
Certifications pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.* 
 
SCH XBRL Schema Document * 
 
INS XBRL Instance Document *
CAL XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document*
LAB XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document *
PRE XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document *
DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document*
* Filed Herewith
71
SIGNATURES 
 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant 
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. 
 
 
By: /s/ Manish Z. Kshatriya
Manish  Z.  Kshatriya,  Chief  Financial  Officer,  Principal  Financial  Officer,  Principal 
Accounting Officer
Officer, Director 
  
 /s/ Manish Z. Kshatriya
/s/ R. Geoffrey Browne
By: 
Name:  R. Geoffrey Browne 
Title:  Chief Executive Officer, Principal Executive
Date:  September 29, 2014 
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below 
by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated. 
  
Date: September 29, 2014 
  
  
  
 
 Date:  September 29, 2014 
 
 
 
Date: September 29, 2014 
  
  
  
Date: September 29, 2014 
  
  
 
Date: September 29, 2014 
  
  
 
Date: September 29, 2014
By: 
Name:  Manish Z. Kshatriya 
Title:  Chief Financial Officer, Principal Financial 
 
By: 
Name:   W. Thomas Hodgson 
Title:   Director 
  
By: 
Name:   Timothy N. Unwin 
Title:   Director
Officer, Principal Accounting Officer 
 
/s/ W. Thomas Hodgson
/s/ James J. Sbrolla
By: 
Name:   James J. Sbrolla 
Title:   Director
/s/ Eric R. Klein
By: 
Name:   Eric R. Klein 
Title:   Director
/s/ Timothy N. Unwin
72