
Filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(5) 
Registration No. 333-191481
424B5 1 d219397d424b5.htm 424B5 424B5
Table of Contents
Preliminary prospectus supplement
(To Prospectus dated October 28, 2013)
Hi-Crush Partners LP
6,500,000 Common units
Representing limited partner interests
We are offering 6,500,000 common units (“common units”) representing limited partner interests in us.
Our common units trade on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the symbol “HCLP.” On August 9, 2016, the
last reported trading price of our common units on the NYSE was $13.45 per common unit.
Investing in our common units involve risks. You should carefully consider each of the factors described under
“Risk Factors” on page S-3 of this prospectus supplement and on page 7 of the accompanying base prospectus
before you make an investment in our common units.
The underwriters have agreed to purchase common units at a price of $11.768 per common unit, which will result in
approximately $76.5 million of proceeds to us. The underwriters propose to offer the common units from time to time for
sale in one or more transactions on the NYSE, in the over-the-counter market, through negotiated transactions or
otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to prevailing market prices or at negotiated
prices. See “Underwriting.”
We have granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 975,000 common units from us on the
same terms and conditions as set forth above.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of the securities or determined if this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base
prospectus is truthful or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The common units will be ready for delivery on or about August 16, 2016.
Credit Suisse
J.P. Morgan
Morgan Stanley
UBS Investment Bank
Cowen and Company
Comerica Securities
IBERIA Capital Partners L.L.C.
Prospectus Supplement dated August 10, 2016
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
INDUSTRY AND MARKET DATA
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
USE OF PROCEEDS
CAPITALIZATION
MATERIAL TAX CONSEQUENCES
UNDERWRITING
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
PROSPECTUS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
HI-CRUSH PARTNERS LP
RISK FACTORS
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
DESCRIPTION OF THE COMMON UNITS
HOW WE MAKE DISTRIBUTIONS TO OUR PARTNERS
DESCRIPTION OF PARTNERSHIP SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
OUR PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT
MATERIAL TAX CONSEQUENCES
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
SELLING UNITHOLDER
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
Table of Contents
S-i
S-ii  
 
S-ii  
 
S-iii  
 
S-iii  
 
S-v  
 
S-1  
 
S-3  
 
S-4  
 
S-5  
 
S-6  
 
 
S-9  
  S-14  
  S-14
1  
2  
2  
4  
6  
7  
8  
9  
10  
12  
25  
26  
34  
48  
61  
63  
65  
65
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
This document is in two parts. The first part is this prospectus supplement, which describes the specific terms of this
offering of common units. The second part is the accompanying base prospectus, which gives more general information,
some of which may not apply to this offering of common units. Generally, when we refer only to the “prospectus,” we are
referring to both parts combined. If the information about the common unit offering varies between this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus, you should rely on the information in this prospectus supplement.
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus. Neither we nor our underwriters have authorized anyone to provide you with additional
or different information. We are not making an offer of the common units in any state where the offer is not permitted. You
should not assume that the information contained in this prospectus supplement or the accompanying base prospectus or
the information we have previously filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) that is incorporated
by reference herein is accurate as of any date other than its respective date.
Additional information, including our financial statements and the notes thereto, is incorporated in this prospectus
supplement by reference to our reports filed with the SEC. Please read “Where You Can Find More Information” of this
prospectus supplement. You are urged to read this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus,
together with the additional information described under the heading “Where You Can Find More Information,” carefully
before investing in our common units.
Any statement made in this prospectus or in a document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by reference into this
prospectus will be deemed to be modified or superseded for purposes of this prospectus to the extent that a statement
contained in this prospectus or in any other subsequently filed document that is also incorporated by reference into this
prospectus modifies or supersedes that statement. Any statement so modified or superseded will not be deemed, except
as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this prospectus. Please read “Incorporation by Reference.”
The following information should help you understand some of the conventions used in this prospectus supplement.
•   Throughout this prospectus supplement, when we use the terms “we,” “us,” “the partnership,” “our partnership” or
“Hi-Crush Partners LP,” we are referring either to Hi-Crush Partners LP, the issuer itself, or to Hi-Crush Partners
LP and its subsidiaries collectively, as the context requires.
•   Hi-Crush GP LLC, our general partner (“Hi-Crush GP” or “our general partner”), is responsible for the management
of our partnership, and its operations are governed by a board of directors.
•   Unless the context indicates otherwise, all references to “Hi-Crush Proppants LLC” and “our sponsor” refer to Hi-
Crush Proppants LLC (the parent company of Hi-Crush GP LLC) and its subsidiaries and affiliates other than Hi-
Crush Partners LP and Hi-Crush GP LLC and their respective subsidiaries.
INDUSTRY AND MARKET DATA
A portion of the market data and certain other statistical information used throughout this prospectus and the information
incorporated by reference herein is based on independent industry publications, government publications or other
published independent sources. Some data is also based on our good faith estimates and our management’s
understanding of industry conditions. While we are not aware of any misstatements regarding our market, industry or
similar data presented herein, such data involve risks and uncertainties and are subject to change based on various
factors, including those discussed under the headings “Information Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk
Factors.”
Table of Contents
S-ii
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed a registration statement with the SEC under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, that registers the offer
and sale of the common units covered by this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus. The
registration statement, including the exhibits attached to the registration statement, contains additional relevant
information about us.
We are required to file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with the SEC. You may read and copy
any documents filed by us with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C.
20549. You may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-
0330. Our filings with the SEC are also available to the public from commercial document retrieval services and at the
SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Our common units are listed and traded on the NYSE under the symbol “HCLP.” Our reports and other information filed
with the SEC can also be inspected and copied at the NYSE, 20 Broad Street, New York, New York 10005.
We also make available free of charge on our website at www.hicrushpartners.com all of the documents that we file with
the SEC as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with the SEC. Information contained
on our website, other than the documents listed below, is not incorporated by reference into, or otherwise a part of, this
prospectus supplement or the accompanying base prospectus.
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
We “incorporate by reference” information into this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus,
which means that we disclose important information to you by referring you to another document filed separately with the
SEC. The information incorporated by reference is deemed to be part of this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus, except for any information superseded by information contained expressly in this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus, and the information that we file later with the SEC will
automatically supersede this information. You should not assume that (i) the information contained in this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus is current as of any date other than the dates shown in these
documents or (ii) any information we have incorporated by reference in these documents is current as of any date other
than the date of the document incorporated by reference.
We incorporate by reference the documents listed below and any documents subsequently filed with the SEC by Hi-
Crush Partners LP pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(excluding any information furnished and not filed with the SEC pursuant to Item 2.02 or 7.01 on any Current Report on
Form 8-K, or corresponding information furnished under Item 9.01 or included as an exhibit) until all of the securities
offered by this prospectus supplement are sold or until the termination of this offering:
•   our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015;
•   our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarters ended March 31, 2016 and June 30, 2016;
•   our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on May 3, 2016, May 19, 2016, June 17, 2016 and August 10, 2016; and
•   the description of our common units contained in our Registration Statement on Form 8-A (File No. 001-35630)
filed with the SEC on August 13, 2012 and any subsequent amendments or reports filed for the purpose of
updating such description.
S-iii
Table of Contents
You may request a copy of any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus and any exhibit specifically incorporated by reference in those documents, at no cost, by
writing or telephoning us at the following address or telephone number:
Hi-Crush Partners LP
Attention: Investor Relations
Three Riverway, Suite 1350
Houston, Texas 77056
(713) 980-6200
S-iv
Table of Contents
INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Some of the information in this prospectus supplement, including information incorporated by reference, may contain
forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements give our current expectations, contain projections of results of
operations or of financial condition, or forecasts of future events. Words such as “may,” “assume,” “could,” “forecast,”
“position,” “predict,” “strategy,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “project,” “budget,” “potential,” or
“continue,” and similar expressions are used to identify forward-looking statements. They can be affected by assumptions
used or by known or unknown risks or uncertainties. Consequently, no forward-looking statements can be guaranteed.
When considering these forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the risk factors and other cautionary
statements in this prospectus supplement. Actual results may vary materially. You are cautioned not to place undue
reliance on any forward-looking statements. You should also understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all
such risk factors and as such should not consider the risk factors in this prospectus or the following to be a complete list of
all potential risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results
contemplated by such forward-looking statements include those described under the “Risk Factors” section of this
prospectus supplement and those set forth in any documents incorporated by reference into this prospectus supplement,
and the following factors, among others:
•   the amount of frac sand we are able to excavate and process, which could be adversely affected by, among other
things, operating difficulties and unusual or unfavorable geologic conditions;
•   the volume of frac sand we are able to buy and sell;
•   the price at which we are able to buy and sell frac sand;
•   changes in the price and availability of natural gas or electricity;
•   changes in prevailing economic conditions, including the extent of changes in natural gas, crude oil and other
commodity prices;
•   unanticipated ground, grade or water conditions;
•   inclement or hazardous weather conditions, including flooding, and the physical impacts of climate change;
•   environmental hazards;
•   difficulties in obtaining or renewing environmental permits;
•   industrial accidents;
•   changes in laws and regulations (or the interpretation thereof) related to the mining and hydraulic fracturing
industries, silica dust exposure or the environment;
•   the outcome of litigation, claims or assessments, including unasserted claims;
•   inability to acquire or maintain necessary permits, licenses or other approvals, including mining or water rights;
•   facility shutdowns in response to environmental regulatory actions;
•   inability to obtain necessary production equipment or replacement parts;
•   reduction in the amount of water available for processing;
•   technical difficulties or failures;
•   inability to attract and retain key personnel;
•   labor disputes and disputes with our excavation contractor;
•   late delivery of supplies;
S-v
Table of Contents
•   difficulty collecting receivables;
•   inability of our customers to take delivery;
•   changes in the price and availability of transportation;
•   fires, explosions or other accidents;
•   cave-ins, pit wall failures or rock falls;
•   our ability to borrow funds and access capital markets;
•   changes in the political environment of the drilling basins in which we and our customers operate; and
•   changes in railroad infrastructure, price, capacity and availability, including the potential for rail line washouts.
All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing cautionary statements. You should
assess any forward-looking statements made within this prospectus supplement within the context of such risks and
uncertainties.
Table of Contents
S-vi
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base
prospectus. It does not contain all of the information that you should consider before making an investment decision. For
a more complete understanding of this offering of common units, you should read this entire prospectus supplement, the
accompanying base prospectus and the documents incorporated herein by reference. Please read “Where You Can Find
More Information” on page S-iii of this prospectus supplement. Please read “Risk Factors” beginning on page S-3 of this
prospectus supplement, Part I—Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2015 for information regarding risks you should consider before investing in our common units.
Hi-Crush Partners LP
Hi-Crush Partners LP is a publicly-traded Delaware limited partnership formed on May 8, 2012 to acquire selected sand
reserves and related processing and transportation facilities of Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, our sponsor. Our non-economic
general partner interest is held by our general partner, Hi-Crush GP LLC, which is owned by our sponsor. As of August 9,
2016, our sponsor owned all of our incentive distribution rights and 13,640,351 common units, representing a 27.8%
ownership interest in the limited partner units of Hi-Crush Partners LP.
We are a pure play, low-cost, domestic producer and supplier of premium monocrystalline sand, a specialized mineral
that is used as a proppant to enhance the recovery rates of hydrocarbons from oil and natural gas wells. Our reserves
consist of “Northern White” sand, a resource existing predominately in Wisconsin and limited portions of the upper
Midwest region of the United States, which is highly valued as a preferred proppant because it exceeds all American
Petroleum Institute (“API”) specifications. We own, operate and develop sand reserves and related excavation and
processing facilities. We operate through an extensive logistics network of rail-served destination terminals strategically
located throughout Colorado, Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York and Texas.
Recent developments
Blair Dropdown
On August 9, 2016, we entered into a Contribution Agreement (the “Contribution Agreement”) with our sponsor pursuant
to which our sponsor will contribute to us all of the outstanding membership interests in Hi-Crush Blair LLC (“Blair”), in
exchange for $75.0 million in cash, 7,053,292 common units and up to $10.0 million of contingent earnout consideration
(the “Purchase Price”) (such transactions, collectively, the “Blair Dropdown”). Following the transaction, we will own all of
the outstanding membership interests in Blair. Blair has 1,285 acres of Northern White reserves, with a plant processing
capacity of approximately 2.86 million tons of 20/100 frac sand per year. We expect to close the Blair Dropdown in
September 2016. The consummation of this offering is not contingent upon the closing of the Blair Dropdown.
Principal executive offices
Our principal executive office is located at Three Riverway, Suite 1350, Houston, Texas 77056. Our telephone number is
(713) 980-6200. We maintain a website at www.hicrushpartners.com. We make our periodic reports and other information
filed with or furnished to the SEC available, free of charge, through our website, as soon as reasonably practicable after
those reports and other information are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. The information on our website is
not part of this prospectus, and you should rely only on information contained or incorporated by reference in this
prospectus when making a decision as to whether or not to invest in the common units.
Table of Contents
Common Units Offered by Us
S-1
THE OFFERING
6,500,000 common units (or 7,475,000 common units if the underwriters
exercise in full their option to purchase additional common units).
Common Units to be Outstanding after this
Offering
55,639,227 common units (or 56,614,227 common units if the underwriters
exercise in full their option to purchase additional common units).
Use of Proceeds
Cash distributions
NYSE Symbol
Risk Factors
Limited Voting Rights
We intend to use the net proceeds from the sale of common units covered
by this prospectus supplement, after deducting the underwriters’ discount
and commission and our offering expenses, to fund a portion of the
purchase price of the Blair Dropdown, with the balance to be funded
through the issuance of 7,053,292 common units to Proppants. The
consummation of this offering is not contingent on the closing of the Blair
Dropdown. Please read “Use of Proceeds” in this prospectus supplement.
On October 26, 2015, we announced the board of directors decision to
temporarily suspend the distribution payment to common unitholders.
“HCLP.”
An investment in the common units involve risks. You should consider
carefully the information under the heading “Risk Factors” on page S-3 of
this prospectus supplement, on page 7 of the accompanying base
prospectus and all other information contained or incorporated by reference
herein before deciding to invest in our common units.
Our general partner manages and operates us. Unlike the holders of
common stock in a corporation, you will have only limited voting rights on
matters affecting our business. You will have no right to elect our general
partner or its directors on an annual or other continuing basis. Our general
partner may not be removed except by a vote of the holders of at least 66
2/3% of the outstanding units, including any units owned by our general
partner and its affiliates, including our sponsor, voting together as a single
class. Please read “Our Partnership Agreement—Voting Rights” included
in the accompanying base prospectus.
Material Tax Consequences
For a discussion of other material federal income tax consequences that may be relevant to prospective unitholders who
are individual citizens or residents of the United States, please read “Material Tax Considerations” in this prospectus
supplement and in the accompanying base prospectus.
Table of Contents
S-2
RISK FACTORS
Limited partnerships are inherently different from corporations. Before you invest in our securities, you should carefully
consider the risk factors and all of the other information included in, or incorporated by reference into, this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus, including those in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2015 and our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q for the quarters ended March 31, 2016 and June 30,
2016 in evaluating an investment in our common units.
If any of the risks discussed in the incorporated documents were actually to occur, our business, financial condition or
results of operations could be adversely affected. In that case, the trading price of our common units could decline and
you could lose all or part of your investment.
The Blair Dropdown may not be consummated.
Risks Relating to the Blair Dropdown
The Blair Dropdown is expected to close by September 2016 and is subject to closing conditions and regulatory
approvals, including a condition that provides that we will not be obligated to consummate the Blair Dropdown if we do
not obtain funds sufficient to consummate the transaction. If these conditions and regulatory approvals are not satisfied or
waived, the Blair Dropdown will not be consummated. If the closing of the Blair Dropdown is substantially delayed or
does not occur at all, or if the terms of the Blair Dropdown are required to be modified substantially due to regulatory
concerns, we may not realize the anticipated benefits of the Blair Dropdown fully or at all. The consummation of this
offering is not contingent on the closing of the Blair Dropdown. See “Use of Proceeds.”
Tax Risks Relating to Qualifying Income
We have historically satisfied, and believe we currently satisfy, the “qualifying income exception” to be treated as
a partnership. Although we monitor our level of non-qualifying income closely and attempt to manage our
operations to ensure compliance with the qualifying income exception, given the continued weak demand and
low prices for frac sand, we may not be able to continue to meet the qualifying income level necessary to
maintain our status as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
As a publicly traded partnership, we may be treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes unless 90% or more
of our gross income in each year consists of certain identified types of “qualifying income.” In addition to qualifying
income, like many other publicly traded partnerships, we also generate ancillary income that may not be considered
qualifying income. We have historically satisfied, and believe we currently satisfy, the “qualifying income exception” to be
treated as a partnership. Although we monitor our level of gross income that may not be considered qualifying income
closely and attempt to manage our operations to ensure compliance with the qualifying income exception, given the
continued weak demand and low prices for frac sand, the sale of which generates qualifying income, we may not be able
to continue to meet the qualifying income level necessary to maintain our status as a publicly traded partnership. To the
extent we become aware that we may not generate or have not generated sufficient qualifying income with respect to a
period, we can and would take action to preserve our treatment as a partnership for federal income tax purposes,
including seeking relief from the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”). Section 7704(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended (the “Code”), provides for the possibility of relief upon, among other things, determination by the IRS that
such failure to meet the qualifying income requirement was inadvertent. However, we are unaware of examples of such
relief being sought by a publicly traded partnership.
Table of Contents
S-3
USE OF PROCEEDS
We estimate that we will receive net proceeds from this offering of approximately $76.2 million, or $87.7 million if the
underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional common units in full (after deducting underwriters’ discounts and
commissions and estimated offering expenses). We intend to use the net proceeds of this offering to fund a portion of the
purchase price of the Blair Dropdown, with the balance to be funded through the issuance of 7,053,292 common units to
Proppants. The consummation of this offering is not contingent on the closing of the Blair Dropdown. In the event the Blair
Dropdown is not consummated, we expect to use the proceeds from this offering for general partnership purposes. For
more information on the Blair Dropdown, see “Prospectus Supplement Summary—Recent Developments.”
Table of Contents
S-4
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our cash and cash equivalents and capitalization as of June 30, 2016:
•   on an actual basis;
•   a pro forma basis to give effect to the issuance and sale of our common units in this offering; and
•   a pro forma as adjusted basis to give effect to the Blair Dropdown.
This table should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, “Use of Proceeds,” the
historical audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2015 and our unaudited and condensed consolidated financial statements and the
accompanying notes in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarters ended March 31, 2016 and June 30, 2016,
which are incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
Cash
Long-term debt, including current maturities:
Revolving credit facility
Term loan(2)
Other notes payable
Total long-term debt
Partners’ equity
Total capitalization
Actual
(unaudited)
$
$
$
 
$
39.7    
    
  
—      
190.2    
5.0    
    
195.2    
180.3    
    
375.5
As of June 30, 2016
Pro Forma
(unaudited) 
 
(In thousands)
115.9(1)  
$
—    
190.2  
5.0  
 
195.2  
256.5  
 
451.7
$
$
 
$
Pro Forma
As Adjusted
(unaudited)(3) 
 
40.9
$
$
$
 
$
—    
190.2  
5.0  
 
195.2  
293.0  
 
488.2
(1)
(2)
Includes gross proceeds of $80.3 million from the sale of common units and expenses, underwriting discounts and
fees of $4.1 million.
Includes unamortized original issue discount and unamortized debt issuance costs.
(3) Gives effect to the issuance and sale of our common units in this offering and the Blair Dropdown, which would be
accounted for as a combination of entities under common control.
Table of Contents
S-5
MATERIAL TAX CONSEQUENCES
The tax consequences to you of an investment in our common units will depend in part on your own tax circumstances.
For a discussion of the principal federal income tax considerations associated with our operations and the purchase,
ownership and disposition of our common units, please read “Material Tax Considerations” beginning on page 48 in the
accompanying base prospectus and “Item 1A. Risk Factors—Tax Risks to Common Unitholders” in our most recent
Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the tax risks related to purchasing and owning our common units. The
following discussion is limited as described under the caption “Material Tax Considerations” in the accompanying base
prospectus. You are urged to consult with your own tax advisor about the federal, state, local and foreign tax
consequences particular to your circumstances.
Tax opinion of Vinson & Elkins L.L.P.
Except for the statements set forth herein and subject to the representations, assumptions, qualifications and limitations
stated herein and in the accompanying prospectus, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. adopts and affirms as its opinion all
statements as to the matter of law and legal conclusions contained in the section captioned “Material Tax Considerations”
in the accompanying prospectus.
Partnership Status
Section 7704 of the Code generally provides that publicly traded partnerships will be treated as corporations for federal
income tax purposes. However, if 90% or more of a partnership’s gross income for every taxable year it is publicly-traded
consists of “qualifying income,” the partnership may continue to be treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes (the “Qualifying Income Exception”). Qualifying income includes (i) income and gains derived from the
exploration, development, mining or production, processing, refining, transportation, and marketing of any mineral or
natural resource, including sand, (ii) interest (other than from a financial business), (iii) dividends, (iv) gains from the sale
of real property and (v) gains from the sale or other disposition of capital assets held for the production of qualifying
income. We estimate that less than 8% of our current gross income is not qualifying income; however, this estimate could
change from time to time.
Based upon factual representations made by us and our general partner regarding the composition of our gross income
and the other representations set forth below, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. is of the opinion that we will be treated as a
partnership for federal income tax purposes. In rendering its opinion, Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has relied on factual
representations made by us and our general partner. The representations made by us and our general partner upon
which Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has relied include, without limitation:
(a) Neither we nor any of our partnership or limited liability company subsidiaries has elected to be treated as a
corporation for federal income tax purposes; and
(b) For each taxable year since and including the year of our initial public offering, at least 90% of our gross income has
been and will be income of a character that Vinson & Elkins L.L.P. has opined is “qualifying income” within the meaning
of Section 7704(d) of the Code.
We believe that these representations are true and will be true in the future.
Legislation Affecting the Tax Treatment of Publicly Traded Partnerships.
Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership
The present U.S. federal income tax treatment of publicly traded partnerships, including us, or an investment in our
common units may be modified by administrative or legislative action or judicial interpretation at any time. For example,
from time to time, members of Congress and the President propose and consider substantive changes to the existing U.S.
federal income tax laws that affect publicly traded partnerships, including the elimination of the “qualifying income
exception” upon which we rely for our treatment as a partnership for tax purposes.
Table of Contents
S-6
In addition, the Internal Revenue Service has issued proposed regulations regarding qualifying income under Section
7704(d)(1)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code (the “Proposed Regulations”). We do not believe the Proposed Regulations
affect our ability to qualify as a publicly traded partnership. However, there are no assurances that final regulations will
not include changes that interpret Section 7704(d)(1)(E) in a manner that is contrary to the Proposed Regulations, which
could modify the amount of our gross income that we are able to treat as qualifying income for the purposes of the
qualifying income requirement and modify or revoke existing private letter rulings, including ours.
Any modification to the U.S. federal income tax laws may be applied retroactively and could make it more difficult or
impossible for us to meet the exception for certain publicly traded partnerships to be treated as partnerships for U.S.
federal income tax purposes. We are unable to predict whether any of these changes or other proposals will ultimately be
enacted. Any such changes could negatively impact the value of an investment in our common units.
Alternative Minimum Tax.
If a unitholder is subject to federal alternative minimum tax, such tax will apply to such unitholder’s distributive share of
any items of our income, gain, loss or deduction. The current alternative minimum tax rate for non corporate taxpayers is
26% on the first $186,300 of alternative minimum taxable income in excess of the exemption amount and 28% on any
additional alternative minimum taxable income. Prospective unitholders are urged to consult their tax advisors as to the
impact of an investment in the units on their liability for the alternative minimum tax.
Nominee Reporting.
Persons who hold an interest in us as a nominee for another person are required to furnish to us: (1) the name, address
and taxpayer identification number of the beneficial owner and the nominee; (2) a statement regarding whether the
beneficial owner is: (a) a non-U.S. person; (b) a non-U.S. government, an international organization or any wholly owned
agency or instrumentality of either of the foregoing; or (c) a tax-exempt entity; (3) the amount and description of units held,
acquired or transferred for the beneficial owner; and (4) specific information including the dates of acquisitions and
transfers, means of acquisitions and transfers, and acquisition cost for purchases, as well as the amount of net proceeds
from sales. Brokers and financial institutions are required to furnish additional information, including whether they are
U.S. persons and specific information on units they acquire, hold or transfer for their own account. A penalty of $250 per
failure, up to a maximum of $3 million per calendar year, is imposed by the Code for failure to report that information to us.
The nominee is required to supply the beneficial owner of the units with the information furnished to us.
Additional Withholding Requirements.
Under Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code (such Sections commonly referred to as “FATCA”), the relevant
withholding agent may be required to withhold 30% of any interest, dividends and other fixed or determinable annual or
periodical gains, profits and income from sources within the United States, or gross proceeds from the sale of any
property of a type which can produce interest or dividends from sources within the United States occurring after
December 31, 2018, in each case paid to (i) a “foreign financial institution” (as specifically defined in the Code) which
does not provide sufficient documentation, typically on IRS Form W-8BEN-E, evidencing either an exemption from
FATCA or its compliance (or deemed compliance) with FATCA (which alternatively may be in the form of compliance
with an intergovernmental agreement with the United States) in a manner which avoids withholding or (ii) a “non-financial
foreign entity” (as specifically defined in the Code) which does not provide sufficient documentation, typically on IRS
Form W-8BEN-E, evidencing either an exemption from FATCA or adequate information regarding certain substantial U.S.
beneficial owners of such entity (if any). In addition, other countries have implemented regimes similar to that of FATCA.
Non-U.S. and U.S. Holders are encouraged to consult their own tax advisors regarding the possible implications of
FATCA on their investment in our common units.
Table of Contents
S-7
New Partnership Audit Rules.
Recently enacted legislation applicable to partnership tax years beginning after 2017 alters the procedures for auditing
partnerships and for assessing and collecting taxes due (including any applicable penalties and interest) as a result of a
partnership-level federal income tax audit. Under the new rules, unless we are eligible (and do) elect to issue revised
Schedules K-1 to our unitholders with respect to an audited and adjusted return, the IRS may assess and collect taxes
(including any applicable penalties and interest) directly from us in the year in which the audit is completed. If we are
required to make payments of taxes, penalties and interest resulting from audit adjustments, our cash available for
distribution to our unitholders might be substantially reduced. Pursuant to this new legislation, we will designate a person
(our general partner) to act as the partnership representative who shall have the sole authority to act on behalf of the
partnership with respect to dealings with the IRS under these new audit procedures.
Table of Contents
S-8
UNDERWRITING
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC is acting as the lead underwriter in connection with this offering. Under the terms and
subject to the conditions in an underwriting agreement dated the date of this prospectus supplement, each of the
underwriters named below has severally agreed to purchase, and we have agreed to sell to it, the respective number of
common units shown opposite its name below:
Underwriters
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC
Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
UBS Securities LLC
Cowen and Company, LLC
Comerica Securities, Inc.
IBERIA Capital Partners L.L.C.
Total
Number of
Common Units 
4,225,000  
 
650,000  
 
 
650,000  
650,000  
 
195,000  
 
65,000  
 
 
65,000  
  
 
6,500,000
The underwriting agreement provides that the underwriters’ obligation to purchase the common units included in this
offering depends on the satisfaction of the conditions contained in the underwriting agreement including:
•   the obligation to purchase all of the common units offered hereby (other than those common units covered by its
option to purchase additional common units as described below), if any of the common units are purchased;
•   the representations and warranties made by us and our general partner to the underwriters are true;
•   there is no material change in our business or the financial markets; and
•   we and our general partner deliver customary closing documents to the underwriters.
We have granted the underwriters an option, exercisable for 30 days after the date of the underwriting agreement, to
purchase, from time to time, in whole or in part, up to an aggregate of 975,000 additional common units at the public
offering price less underwriting discounts and commissions. To the extent that this option is exercised, the underwriters
will be severally obligated, subject to certain conditions, to purchase these additional common units.
The underwriters propose to offer the common units offered hereby from time to time for sale in one or more transactions
on the NYSE, in the over-the-counter market, through negotiated transactions or otherwise at market prices prevailing at
the time of sale, at prices related to prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices, subject to receipt of acceptance by
them and subject to their right to reject any order in whole or in part. The underwriters may effect such transactions by
selling the common units to or through dealers and such dealers may receive compensation in the form of discounts,
concessions or commissions from the underwriters and/or purchasers of common units for whom they may act as agents
or to whom they may sell as principal. The difference between the price at which the underwriters purchase common units
and the price at which the underwriters resell such common units may be deemed underwriting compensation.
We estimate that the expenses of this offering incurred by us will be approximately $0.3 million (excluding underwriting
discounts and commissions).
Our common units are listed on the NYSE under the trading symbol “HCLP.”
Table of Contents
S-9
We, our general partner and certain of its affiliates, including our sponsor and the directors and executive officers of our
general partner, have agreed that, without the prior written consent of Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, we and it will
not, except with respect to the issuance of common units in connection with the Blair Dropdown, directly or indirectly,
during the period ending 60 days after the date of this prospectus supplement:
•   offer, pledge, sell, contract to sell, sell any option or contract to purchase, purchase any option or contract to sell,
grant any option, right or warrant to purchase, lend or otherwise transfer or dispose of, directly or indirectly, any
common units or any securities convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for common units;
•   enter into any swap or other arrangement that transfers to another, in whole or in part, any of the economic
consequences of ownership of the common units; or
•   file any registration statement with the SEC relating to the offering of common units or any securities convertible
into or exercisable or exchangeable for common units;
•   whether any such transaction described in the first two bullet points above is to be settled by delivery of common
units or such other securities, in cash or otherwise. In addition, we and each such person agrees that, without the
prior written consent of Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, each such person will not, during the period ending
60 days after the date of this prospectus supplement, make any demand for, or exercise any right with respect to,
the registration of any common units or any security convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for common
units.
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, in its sole discretion, may release the common units and other securities subject to
the lock-up agreements described above in whole or in part at any time with or without notice. When determining whether
or not to release common units and other securities from lock-up agreements, Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC will
consider, among other factors, the holder’s reasons for requesting the release, the number of common units and other
securities for which the release is being requested and market conditions at the time.
We and our general partner have agreed to indemnify the underwriters against certain liabilities, including liabilities under
the Securities Act and to contribute to payments that the underwriters may be required to make for these liabilities.
The underwriters have informed us that they do not intend to confirm sales to discretionary accounts that exceed 5% of
the total number of common units offered by them.
The underwriters and their affiliates are full service financial institutions engaged in various activities, which may include
securities trading, commercial and investment banking, financial advisory, investment management, investment research,
principal investment hedging, financing and brokerage activities. The underwriters and their respective affiliates have
from time to time performed, and may in the future perform, various financial advisory, commercial banking and
investment banking services for us and for our affiliates, including Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, in the ordinary course of
business for which they have received and would receive customary compensation. In the ordinary course of their various
business activities, the underwriters and their respective affiliates may make or hold a broad array of investments and
actively trade debt and equity securities (or related derivative securities) and financial instruments (including bank loans)
for their own account and for the accounts of their customers, and such investments and securities activities may involve
securities and/or instruments of the issuer and its affiliates, including Hi-Crush Proppants LLC. Affiliates of certain
underwriters are lenders under Hi-Crush Proppants LLC’s existing credit facility and Hi-Crush Proppants LLC may use a
portion of its proceeds from the Blair Dropdown to pay off some or all of that debt. The underwriters and their respective
affiliates may also make investment recommendations and/or publish or express independent research views in respect
of such securities or instruments and may at any time hold, or recommend to clients that they acquire, long and/or short
positions in such securities and instruments.
Table of Contents
S-10
In connection with the offering the underwriters may engage in over-allotment transactions in accordance with Regulation
M under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act.
•   Over-allotment involves sales by an underwriter of shares in excess of the number of shares that underwriter is
obligated to purchase, which creates a syndicate short position. The short position may be either a covered short
position or a naked short position. In a covered short position, the number of shares over-allotted by an underwriter
is not greater than the number of shares that it may purchase in the over-allotment option. In a naked short
position, the number of shares involved is greater than the number of shares in the over-allotment option. An
underwriter may close out any covered short position by either exercising its over-allotment option and/or
purchasing shares in the open market.
These over-allotment transactions may have the effect of raising or maintaining the market price of our common units or
preventing or retarding a decline in the market price of the common units. As a result the price of our common units may
be higher than the price that might otherwise exist in the open market. These transactions may be effected on the NYSE
or otherwise and, if commenced, may be discontinued at any time.
A prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus in electronic format may be made available on the web sites
maintained by the underwriters, or selling group members, if any, participating in this offering and the underwriters may
distribute prospectuses electronically. The underwriters may agree to allocate a number of common units to selling group
members for sale to their online brokerage account holders. Internet distributions will be allocated by the underwriters that
will make internet distributions on the same basis as other allocations.
EEA restriction
Selling Restrictions
In relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus Directive
(each, a “Relevant Member State”) an offer to the public of any shares which are the subject of the offering contemplated
by this prospectus (the “Shares”) may not be made in that Relevant Member State except that an offer to the public in that
Relevant Member State of any Shares may be made at any time under the following exemptions under the Prospectus
Directive, if they have been implemented in that Relevant Member State:
(a)
to legal entities which are qualified investors as defined under the Prospectus Directive;
(b) by the underwriters to fewer than 100, or, if the Relevant Member State has implemented the relevant provisions
of the 2010 PD Amending Directive, 150, natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in
the Prospectus Directive), as permitted under the Prospectus Directive; or
(c)
in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive,
provided that no such offer of Shares shall result in a requirement for the Company or any underwriter to publish a
prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article 16 of the
Prospectus Directive.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer to the public” in relation to any Shares in any Relevant
Member State means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient information on the terms of the offer
and any Shares to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to purchase any Shares, as the same may be varied in
that Member State by any measure implementing the Prospectus Directive in that Member State, the expression
“Prospectus Directive” means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto, including the 2010 PD Amending
Directive, to the extent implemented in the Relevant Member State), and includes any relevant implementing measure in
each Relevant Member State and the expression “2010 PD Amending Directive” means Directive 2010/73/EU.
Table of Contents
United Kingdom
S-11
Each of the underwriters has represented and agreed that:
(a)
it has only communicated or caused to be communicated and will only communicate or cause to be
communicated an invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the meaning of Section 21 of
the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (the “FSMA”)) received by it in connection with the issue or sale of
the shares in circumstances in which Section 21(1) of the FSMA does not apply to the Company; and
(b)
it has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to anything done by it in
relation to the shares in, from or otherwise involving the United Kingdom.
Notice to Prospective Investors in the United Kingdom
This prospectus supplement and the accompanying prospectus are only being distributed to, and are only directed at,
persons in the United Kingdom that are qualified investors within the meaning of Article 2(1)(e) of the Prospectus
Directive that are also (i) investment professionals falling within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and Markets Act
2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005 (the “Order”) or (ii) high net worth entities, and other persons to whom it may
lawfully be communicated, falling within Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the Order (each such person being referred to as a
“relevant person”). This prospectus supplement and its contents are confidential and should not be distributed, published
or reproduced (in whole or in part) or disclosed by recipients to any other persons in the United Kingdom. Any person in
the United Kingdom that is not a relevant person should not act or rely on this document or any of its contents.
Notice to Canadian Residents
Resale Restrictions
The distribution of common units in Canada is being made only in the provinces of Ontario, Quebec, Alberta and British
Columbia on a private placement basis exempt from the requirement that we prepare and file a prospectus with the
securities regulatory authorities in each province where trades of these securities are made. Any resale of our common
units in Canada must be made under applicable securities laws which may vary depending on the relevant jurisdiction,
and which may require resales to be made under available statutory exemptions or under a discretionary exemption
granted by the applicable Canadian securities regulatory authority. Purchasers are advised to seek legal advice prior to
any resale of the securities.
Representations of Canadian Purchasers
By purchasing our common units in Canada and accepting delivery of a purchase confirmation, a purchaser is
representing to us and the dealer from whom the purchase confirmation is received that:
•   the purchaser is entitled under applicable provincial securities laws to purchase the shares of common units
without the benefit of a prospectus qualified under those securities laws as it is an “accredited investor” as defined
under National Instrument 45-106—Prospectus Exemptions,
•   the purchaser is a “permitted client” as defined in National Instrument 31-103—Registration Requirements,
Exemptions and Ongoing Registrant Obligations,
•   where required by law, the purchaser is purchasing as principal and not as agent, and
•   the purchaser has reviewed the text above under Resale Restrictions.
S-12
Table of Contents
Conflicts of Interest
Canadian purchasers are hereby notified that the underwriters named herein are relying on the exemption set out in
section 3A.3 or 3A.4, if applicable, of National Instrument 33-105—Underwriting Conflicts from having to provide certain
conflict of interest disclosure in this document.
Statutory Rights of Action
Securities legislation in certain provinces or territories of Canada may provide a purchaser with remedies for rescission or
damages if the offering memorandum (including any amendment thereto) such as this document contains a
misrepresentation, provided that the remedies for rescission or damages are exercised by the purchaser within the time
limit prescribed by the securities legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory. The purchaser of these securities in
Canada should refer to any applicable provisions of the securities legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory for
particulars of these rights or consult with a legal advisor.
Enforcement of Legal Rights
All of our directors and officers as well as the experts named herein may be located outside of Canada and, as a result, it
may not be possible for Canadian purchasers to effect service of process within Canada upon us or those persons. All or
a substantial portion of our assets and the assets of those persons may be located outside of Canada and, as a result, it
may not be possible to satisfy a judgment against us or those persons in Canada or to enforce a judgment obtained in
Canadian courts against us or those persons outside of Canada.
Taxation and Eligibility for Investment
Canadian purchasers of our common units should consult their own legal and tax advisors with respect to the tax
consequences of an investment in our common units in their particular circumstances and about the eligibility of our
common units for investment by the purchaser under relevant Canadian legislation.
S-13
Table of Contents
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the common units will be passed upon for us by Vinson & Elkins L.L.P., Houston, Texas. Certain legal
matters in connection with the common units offered hereby will be passed upon for the underwriters by Norton Rose
Fulbright US LLP, Houston, Texas.
EXPERTS
The financial statements and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting (which is included in Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting) of Hi-Crush Partners
LP incorporated in this Prospectus by reference to the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015 have been so incorporated in reliance on the report of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered
public accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
The audited historical financial statements of Hi-Crush Blair LLC included in Exhibit 99.1 of Hi-Crush Partners LP’s
Current Report on Form 8-K dated August 10, 2016 have been so incorporated in reliance on the report of
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as
experts in auditing and accounting.
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS
S-14
Hi-Crush Partners LP
Hi-Crush Finance Corp.
$1,000,000,000
Common Units
Partnership Securities
Debt Securities
Guarantees
and
702,851 Common Units Offered by the Selling Unitholder
We may offer, from time to time, in one or more series, the following securities under this prospectus:
•
common units representing limited partner interests in Hi-Crush Partners LP;
•
partnership securities; and
•
debt securities, which may be senior debt securities or subordinated debt securities.
The debt securities may be issued solely by Hi-Crush Partners LP or Hi-Crush Finance Corp. may act as co-issuer of the
debt securities, and the subsidiaries of Hi-Crush Partners LP (other than Hi-Crush Finance Corp., whose sole purpose is
to act as co-issuer of any debt securities) may guarantee the debt securities. We will provide information in the prospectus
supplement for the trading market, if any, for any partnership securities and debt securities we may offer.
In addition, the selling unitholder, Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, may from time to time, in one or more offerings, offer and sell
up to 702,851 common units representing limited partner interests in us. All of these 702,851 common units have been
previously issued and are currently outstanding. We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of common units owned
by Hi-Crush Proppants LLC. For a more detailed discussion of the selling unitholder, please read “Selling Unitholder.”
We or the selling unitholder may offer and sell these securities to or through one or more underwriters, dealers and
agents, or directly to purchasers, on a continuous or delayed basis. This prospectus describes the general terms of these
securities and the general manner in which we will offer the securities. The specific terms of any securities we offer will
be included in a supplement to this prospectus. The prospectus supplement will also describe the specific manner in
which we will offer the securities.
Our common units trade on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “HCLP.”
You should carefully read this prospectus and any prospectus supplement before you invest. You should also read the
documents we refer to in the “Where You Can Find More Information” section of this prospectus for information on us and
our financial statements.
Investing in our securities involves risks. Limited partnerships are inherently different from corporations. You
should carefully consider each of the risk factors described under “Risk Factors” beginning on page 7 of this
prospectus and in the applicable prospectus supplement and in the documents incorporated herein before you
make an investment in our securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is truthful or complete. Any representation to
the contrary is a criminal offense.
Table of Contents
The date of this prospectus is October 28, 2013.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
HI-CRUSH PARTNERS LP
RISK FACTORS
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
DESCRIPTION OF THE COMMON UNITS
HOW WE MAKE DISTRIBUTIONS TO OUR PARTNERS
DESCRIPTION OF PARTNERSHIP SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
1
  2
  2
  4
  6
  7
  8
  9
  10
  12
  25
26
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
OUR PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT
MATERIAL TAX CONSIDERATIONS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
SELLING UNITHOLDER
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
26
 
  34
  48
  61
  63
  65
  65
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus and any
prospectus supplement. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with additional or different information. If
anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information, you should not rely on it. This prospectus and
any prospectus supplement are not an offer to sell, nor a solicitation of an offer to buy, these securities in any
jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted. You should not assume that the information contained in this
prospectus is accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of this prospectus, or that the
information contained in any document incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other than the date
of the document incorporated by reference, regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus or any sale of a
security.
Table of Contents
i
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement on Form S-3 that we and Hi-Crush Finance Corp. have filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), utilizing a “shelf” registration process. Under this shelf registration
process, we may, from time to time in one or more offerings, offer and sell up to $1,000,000,000 of the securities
described in this prospectus in one or more offerings. In addition, up to 702,851 common units, which are owned by Hi-
Crush Proppants LLC, may be offered and sold by Hi-Crush Proppants LLC from time to time, in one or more offerings.
Each time we offer securities, we will provide you with this prospectus and a prospectus supplement that will describe,
among other things, the specific amounts and prices of the securities being offered and the terms of the offering. Because
the selling unitholder, Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, is deemed to be an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act
of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), each time the common units owned by Hi-Crush Proppants LLC are sold
pursuant to this prospectus, Hi-Crush Proppants LLC is required to provide you with this prospectus and the related
prospectus supplement containing specific information about Hi-Crush Proppants LLC and the terms of the common units
being offered in the manner required by the Securities Act.
The prospectus supplement may include additional risk factors or other special considerations applicable to those
securities and may also add, update or change information in this prospectus. If there is any inconsistency between the
information in this prospectus and any prospectus supplement, you should rely on the information in that prospectus
supplement.
Additional information, including our financial statements and the notes thereto, is incorporated in this prospectus by
reference to our reports filed with the SEC. Please read “Where You Can Find More Information.” You are urged to read
this prospectus and any accompanying prospectus supplements relating to the securities offered to you, together with the
additional information described under the heading “Where You Can Find More Information,” carefully before investing in
our common units, partnership securities or debt securities.
The following information should help you understand some of the conventions used in this prospectus.
•
•
Throughout this prospectus, when we use the terms “we,” “us,” “our partnership” or “Hi-Crush Partners LP,” we
are referring either to Hi-Crush Partners LP, the registrant itself, or to Hi-Crush Partners LP and its subsidiaries
collectively, as the context requires.
Hi-Crush GP LLC, our general partner (“Hi-Crush GP” or “our general partner”), is responsible for the
management of our partnership, and its operations are governed by a board of directors.
•
Unless the context indicates otherwise all references to “Hi-Crush Proppants LLC,” the “selling unitholder” and
“our sponsor” refer to Hi-Crush Proppants LLC (the parent company of Hi-Crush GP LLC) and its subsidiaries
and affiliates other than Hi-Crush Partners LP and Hi-Crush GP LLC and their respective subsidiaries.
1
Table of Contents
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed a registration statement with the SEC under the Securities Act that registers the offer and sale of the
securities covered by this prospectus. The registration statement, including the attached exhibits, contains additional
relevant information about us.
We are required to file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with the SEC. You may read and copy
any documents filed by us with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C.
20549. You may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-
0330. Our filings with the SEC are also available to the public from commercial document retrieval services and at the
SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Our common units are listed and traded on the New York Stock Exchange. Our reports and other information filed with the
SEC can also be inspected and copied at the New York Stock Exchange, 20 Broad Street, New York, New York 10005.
We also make available free of charge on our website at www.hicrushpartners.com all of the documents that we file with
the SEC as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with the SEC. Information contained
on our website, other than the documents listed below, is not incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
We “incorporate by reference” information into this prospectus, which means that we disclose important information to you
by referring you to another document filed separately with the SEC. The information incorporated by reference is deemed
to be part of this prospectus, except for any information superseded by information contained expressly in this prospectus,
and the information that we file later with the SEC will automatically supersede this information. You should not assume
that the information in this prospectus is current as of any date other than the date on the front page of this prospectus.
We incorporate by reference the documents listed below and any documents subsequently filed with the SEC by Hi-
Crush Partners LP pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the
“Exchange Act”) (excluding any information furnished and not filed with the SEC pursuant to Item 2.02 or 7.01 on any
Current Report on Form 8-K, or corresponding information furnished under Item 9.01 or included as an exhibit) until all
offerings under this shelf registration statement are completed, including all such documents we may file with the SEC
after the date on which the registration statement that includes this prospectus was initially filed with the SEC and before
the effectiveness of such registration statement:
•
•
•
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012 filed on March 14, 2013;
our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2013 and June 30, 2013, filed on
May 14, 2013 and August 14, 2013, respectively;
our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on February 5, 2013, May 15, 2013, May 16, 2013, June 13, 2013, August
14, 2013 (8-K/A with respect to the D & I Silica, LLC. acquisition), August 15, 2013, October 1, 2013 and
October 10, 2013; and
•
the description of our common units contained in our Registration Statement on Form 8-A (File No. 001-35630)
filed with the SEC on August 13, 2012 and any subsequent amendments or reports filed for the purpose of
updating such description.
2
Table of Contents
You may request a copy of any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus and any exhibit specifically
incorporated by reference in those documents, at no cost, by writing or telephoning us at the following address or
telephone number:
Hi-Crush Partners LP
Attention: Investor Relations
Three Riverway, Suite 1550
Houston TX 77056
(713) 960-4777
3
Table of Contents
INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Some of the information in this prospectus, including information incorporated by reference, may contain forward-looking
statements. Forward-looking statements give our current expectations, and contain projections of results of operations or
of financial condition, or forecasts of future events. Words such as “may,” “assume,” “forecast,” “position,” “predict,”
“strategy,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “could,” “believe,” “project,” “budget,” “potential,” or “continue,”
and similar expressions are used to identify forward-looking statements. They can be affected by assumptions used or by
known or unknown risks or uncertainties. Consequently, no forward-looking statements can be guaranteed. When
considering these forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the risk factors and other cautionary statements in
this prospectus. Actual results may vary materially. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking
statements. You should also understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such risk factors and as such should
not consider the risk factors in this prospectus or the following list to be a complete statement of all potential risks and
uncertainties. Factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results contemplated by such
forward-looking statements include those described under the “Risk Factors” section of this prospectus, those set forth in
any documents incorporated by reference into this prospectus, and the following factors, among others:
•
the amount of frac sand we are able to excavate and process, which could be adversely affected by, among
other things, operating difficulties and unusual or unfavorable geologic conditions;
•
the volume of frac sand we are able to sell;
•
the price at which we are able to sell frac sand;
•
the outcome of litigation, claims or assessments, including unasserted claims;
•
changes in the price and availability of natural gas, diesel fuel or electricity;
•
changes in prevailing economic conditions;
•
unanticipated ground, grade or water conditions;
•
inclement or hazardous weather conditions, including flooding, and the physical impacts of climate change;
•
environmental hazards;
•
difficulties in obtaining or renewing environmental permits;
•
industrial accidents;
•
changes in laws and regulations (or the interpretation thereof) related to the mining and hydraulic fracturing
industries, silica dust exposure or the environment;
•
inability to acquire or maintain necessary permits or mining or water rights;
•
facility shutdowns in response to environmental regulatory actions;
•
inability to obtain necessary production equipment or replacement parts;
•
reduction in the amount of water available for processing;
•
technical difficulties or failures;
•
labor disputes and disputes with our excavation contractor;
•
late delivery of supplies;
•
difficulty collecting receivables;
4
Table of Contents
•
inability of our customers to take delivery;
•
changes in the price and availability of transportation;
•
fires, explosions or other accidents;
•
cave-ins, pit wall failures or rock falls;
•
our ability to borrow funds and access capital markets;
•
the potential for rail line washouts;
•
changes in the political environment of the drilling basins in which we operate; and
•
changes in the railroad infrastructure and capacity.
All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing cautionary statements. You should
assess any forward-looking statements made within this prospectus within the context of such risks and uncertainties.
Table of Contents
5
HI-CRUSH PARTNERS LP
Hi-Crush Partners LP is a publicly-traded Delaware limited partnership formed on May 8, 2012 to acquire selected sand
reserves and related processing and transportation facilities of Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, our sponsor. Our non-economic
general partner interest is held by our general partner, Hi-Crush GP LLC, which is indirectly owned by our sponsor. As of
June 30, 2013, our sponsor owned all of our incentive distribution rights and owned 702,851 common units, 13,640,351
subordinated units and 3,750,000 Class B Units, representing a 49.7% ownership interest in the limited partner units and
100% ownership interest in the Class B Units of Hi-Crush Partners LP. In addition, our sponsor is the owner of our
general partner. All of our common units held by our sponsor have been registered for sale pursuant to the registration
statement on Form S-3 of which this prospectus forms a part.
We are a pure play, low-cost, domestic producer and supplier of premium monocrystalline sand, a specialized mineral
that is used as a “proppant” to enhance the recovery rates of hydrocarbons from oil and natural gas wells. Our reserves
consist of “Northern White” sand, a resource existing predominately in Wisconsin and limited portions of the upper
Midwest region of the United States, which is highly valued as a preferred proppant because it exceeds all American
Petroleum Institute (“API”) specifications. We own, operate and develop sand reserves and related excavation and
processing facilities and will seek to acquire or develop additional facilities. Our 651-acre Wyeville facility with integrated
rail infrastructure, located near Wyeville, Wisconsin, enables us to process and cost-effectively deliver a potential
1,600,000 tons of frac sand per year. We also own a preferred interest in our sponsor’s 1,187 acre-facility with integrated
rail infrastructure, located in Eau Claire County, Wisconsin, which enables our sponsor to process and cost effectively
deliver a further 1,600,000 tons of frac sand per year. Substantially all of our frac sand production is sold to leading
investment grade-rated pressure pumping service providers under long-term, take-or-pay contracts that require our
customers to pay a specified price for a specified volume of frac sand each month.
On June 10, 2013, we acquired an independent frac sand supplier, D & I Silica, LLC. (“D&I”), transforming us into an
integrated Northern White frac sand producer, transporter, marketer and distributor. Founded in 2006, D&I is the largest
independent frac sand supplier to the oil and gas industry drilling in the Marcellus and Utica shales. D&I operates through
an extensive logistics network of rail-served origin and destination terminals located in the Midwest near supply sources
and strategically throughout Pennsylvania, Ohio and New York.
Our principal executive office is located at Three Riverway, Suite 1550, Houston, Texas 77056. Our telephone number is
(713) 960-4777. Our common units trade on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “HCLP.”
For additional information as to our business, properties and financial condition, please refer to the documents cited in
“Where You Can Find More Information.”
Table of Contents
6
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our securities involves a high degree of risk. Additionally, limited partner interests are inherently different
from the capital stock of a corporation, although many of the business risks to which we are subject are similar to those
that would be faced by a corporation engaged in similar businesses. You should carefully consider the risk factors and all
of the other information included in, or incorporated by reference into, this prospectus, including those described under
“Item 1A. Risk Factors” of our most recent annual report on Form 10-K and subsequent quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, in
evaluating an investment in our securities. Our business could also be affected by additional risks not currently known to
us or that we currently deem to be immaterial. If any of these risks were to occur, our business, financial condition or
results of operations could be materially adversely affected. In that case, the trading price of our common units or debt
securities could decline and you could lose all or part of your investment. When we offer and sell any securities pursuant
to a prospectus supplement, we may include additional risk factors relevant to those securities in the prospectus
supplement.
Table of Contents
7
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless otherwise indicated to the contrary in an accompanying prospectus supplement, we will use the net proceeds
from the sale of the securities covered by this prospectus for general partnership purposes, which may include debt
repayment, future acquisitions, capital expenditures and additions to working capital.
Any specific allocation of the net proceeds of an offering of securities to a specific purpose will be determined at the time
of the offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement.
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of common units owned by Hi-Crush Proppants LLC.
Table of Contents
8
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
The table below sets forth our, and our predecessor’s, ratio of earnings to fixed charges for the periods indicated on a
consolidated historical basis. For purposes of determining the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, earnings are defined as
net income plus fixed charges. Fixed charges consist of interest on all indebtedness, amortization of deferred financing
costs and interest associated with operating leases.
The ratio of earnings to fixed charges through August 15, 2012 include the consolidated results of operations of our
sponsor, which we refer to below as predecessor. On August 16, 2012, our sponsor contributed its ownership of Hi-Crush
Chambers LLC, Hi-Crush Railroad LLC, Hi-Crush Wyeville LLC, Hi-Crush Operating LLC and cash to our partnership in
return for limited partner units. In connection with this transaction, we also completed an initial public offering through the
sale of common units by our sponsor. The ratio of earnings to fixed charges for periods subsequent to August 15, 2012
consists of the consolidated results of operations of our partnership, which we refer to below as successor. Our
predecessor was formed on October 28, 2010.
Fiscal
Year
Period From Inception
Through December 31,
2010
Predecessor
—(1)
Ended December
31,
2011
Predecessor
4.5
Period From
January 1
Through
August 15,
2012
Predecessor
6.0
Period From August
16
Through December
31,
2012
Successor
71.4
Six
Months
Ended
June 30,
2013
Successor
27.1
(1) The predecessor did not incur any fixed charges during the period.
Table of Contents
9
DESCRIPTION OF THE COMMON UNITS
The Units
Our common units, subordinated units and Class B Units are separate classes of units representing limited partner
interests in us. The holders of common units and subordinated units are entitled to participate in partnership distributions
and exercise the rights or privileges available to limited partners under our partnership agreement. For a description of
the relative rights and preferences of holders of common units and subordinated units in and to partnership distributions,
please read this section and “How We Make Distributions To Our Partners.” Our Class B Units are generally not eligible
to participate in partnership distributions until such Class B Units are converted into common units. For a description of
the circumstances that would cause our Class B Units to convert, please read “How We Make Distributions to Our
Partners—Conversion of Class B Units.” For a description of other rights and privileges of limited partners under our
partnership agreement, including voting rights, please read “Our Partnership Agreement.”
Duties
Transfer Agent and Registrar
American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC serves as the registrar and transfer agent for the common units. We will
pay all fees charged by the transfer agent for transfers of common units except the following, which must be paid by
unitholders:
•
•
•
surety bond premiums to replace lost or stolen certificates, taxes and other governmental charges;
special charges for services requested by a holder of a common unit; and
other similar fees or charges.
There is no charge to our common unitholders for disbursements of our cash distributions. We will indemnify each of the
transfer agent, its agents and their respective stockholders, directors, officers and employees against all claims and
losses that may arise out of acts performed or omitted for its activities in that capacity, except for any liability due to any
gross negligence or intentional misconduct of the indemnified person or entity.
Resignation or Removal
The transfer agent may resign, by notice to us, or be removed by us. The resignation or removal of the transfer agent will
become effective upon our appointment of a successor transfer agent and registrar and its acceptance of the appointment.
If no successor is appointed or has not accepted its appointment within 30 days of the resignation or removal, our general
partner may act as the transfer agent and registrar until a successor is appointed.
Transfer of Common Units
Upon the transfer of a common unit in accordance with our partnership agreement, the transferee of the common unit will
be admitted as a limited partner with respect to the common units transferred when such transfer and admission are
reflected in our books and records. Each transferee:
•
•
•
represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to become bound by our partnership
agreement;
automatically becomes bound by the terms and conditions of our partnership agreement; and
gives the consents, waivers and approvals contained in our partnership agreement.
10
Table of Contents
Our general partner will cause any transfers to be recorded on our books and records no less frequently than quarterly.
We may, at our discretion, treat the nominee holder of a common unit as the absolute owner. In that case, the beneficial
holder’s rights are limited solely to those that it has against the nominee holder as a result of any agreement between the
beneficial owner and the nominee holder.
Common units are securities and any transfers are subject to the laws governing the transfer of securities. In addition to
other rights acquired upon transfer, the transferor gives the transferee the right to become a substituted limited partner in
our partnership for the transferred common units.
Until a common unit has been transferred on our books, we and the transfer agent may treat the record holder of the
common unit as the absolute owner for all purposes, except as otherwise required by law or stock exchange regulations.
Table of Contents
11
HOW WE MAKE DISTRIBUTIONS TO OUR PARTNERS
Set forth below is a summary of the significant provisions of our partnership agreement that relate to cash distributions.
Intent to Distribute the Minimum Quarterly Distribution
General
Within 60 days after the end of each quarter, we intend to distribute to the holders of common and subordinated units on a
quarterly basis at least the minimum quarterly distribution of $0.4750 per unit, or $1.90 on an annualized basis, to the
extent we have sufficient cash after establishment of cash reserves and payment of fees and expenses, including
payments to our general partner and its affiliates.
Even if our cash distribution policy is not modified or revoked, the amount of distributions paid under our policy and the
decision to make any distribution is determined by our general partner. Our partnership agreement does not contain a
requirement for us to pay distributions to our unitholders, and there is no guarantee that we will pay the minimum quarterly
distribution, or any distribution, on the units in any quarter. However, it does contain provisions intended to motivate our
general partner to make steady, increasing and sustainable distributions over time.
General Partner Interest
Our general partner owns a non-economic general partner interest in us, which does not entitle it to receive cash
distributions. However, our general partner may in the future own common units or other equity securities in us and will be
entitled to receive distributions on any such interests.
Incentive Distribution Rights
Our sponsor currently holds incentive distribution rights that entitle it to receive increasing percentages, up to a maximum
of 50.0%, of the cash we distribute from operating surplus (as defined below) in excess of $0.54625 per unit per quarter.
The maximum distribution of 50.0% does not include any distributions that our sponsor may receive on any limited partner
units that it owns.
General
Operating Surplus and Capital Surplus
Any distributions we make will be characterized as made from “operating surplus” or “capital surplus.” Distributions from
operating surplus are made differently than cash distributions that we would make from capital surplus. Operating surplus
distributions will be made to our unitholders and, if we make quarterly distributions above the first target distribution level
described below, to the holder of our incentive distribution rights. We do not anticipate that we will make any distributions
from capital surplus. In such an event, however, any capital surplus distribution would be made pro rata to all unitholders,
but the holder of the incentive distribution rights would generally not participate in any capital surplus distributions with
respect to those rights.
Operating Surplus
We define operating surplus as:
•
•
•
$26.0 million (as described below); plus
all of our cash receipts, excluding cash from interim capital transactions (as defined below); plus
working capital borrowings made after the end of a period but on or before the date of determination of operating
surplus for the period; plus
12
Table of Contents
•
cash distributions paid in respect of equity issued (including incremental distributions on incentive distribution
rights) to finance all or a portion of expansion capital expenditures or expenditures for a replacement capital
asset in respect of the period from such financing until the earlier to occur of the date the capital asset
commences commercial service and the date that it is abandoned or disposed of; plus
•
•
•
•
cash distributions paid in respect of equity issued (including incremental distributions on incentive distribution
rights) to pay the construction period interest on debt incurred, or to pay construction period distributions on
equity issued, to finance the expansion capital expenditures or expenditures for a replacement capital asset
referred to above, in each case, in respect of the period from such financing until the earlier to occur of the date
the capital asset is placed in service and the date that it is abandoned or disposed of; less
all of our operating expenditures (as defined below); less
the amount of cash reserves established by our general partner to provide funds for future operating
expenditures; less
all working capital borrowings not repaid within twelve months after having been incurred, or repaid within such
twelve-month period with the proceeds of additional working capital borrowings; less
•
any loss realized on disposition of an investment capital expenditure.
As described above, operating surplus does not reflect actual cash on hand that is available for distribution to our
unitholders and is not limited to cash generated by our operations. For example, it includes a basket of $26.0 million that
will enable us, if we choose, to distribute as operating surplus cash we receive in the future from non-operating sources
such as asset sales, issuances of securities and long-term borrowings that would otherwise be distributed as capital
surplus. In addition, the effect of including, as described above, certain cash distributions on equity interests in operating
surplus will be to increase operating surplus by the amount of any such cash distributions. As a result, we may also
distribute as operating surplus up to the amount of any such cash that we receive from non-operating sources.
The proceeds of working capital borrowings increase operating surplus and repayments of working capital borrowings
are generally operating expenditures, as described below, and thus reduce operating surplus when made. However, if a
working capital borrowing is not repaid during the twelve-month period following the borrowing, it will be deemed repaid
at the end of such period, thus decreasing operating surplus at such time. When such working capital borrowing is in fact
repaid, it will be excluded from operating expenditures because operating surplus will have been previously reduced by
the deemed repayment.
We define operating expenditures in our partnership agreement, which generally means all of our cash expenditures,
including, but not limited to, taxes, reimbursement of expenses to our general partner or its affiliates, payments made
under interest rate hedge agreements or commodity hedge agreements (provided that (1) with respect to amounts paid in
connection with the initial purchase of an interest rate hedge contract or a commodity hedge contract, such amounts will
be amortized over the life of the applicable interest rate hedge contract or commodity hedge contract and (2) payments
made in connection with the termination of any interest rate hedge contract or commodity hedge contract prior to the
expiration of its stipulated settlement or termination date will be included in operating expenditures in equal quarterly
installments over the remaining scheduled life of such interest rate hedge contract or commodity hedge contract), officer
compensation, repayment of working capital borrowings, debt service payments and estimated maintenance and
replacement capital expenditures (as discussed in further detail below), provided that operating expenditures will not
include:
•
•
repayment of working capital borrowings deducted from operating surplus pursuant to the penultimate bullet
point of the definition of operating surplus above when such repayment actually occurs;
payments (including prepayments and prepayment penalties and the purchase price of indebtedness that is
repurchased or cancelled) of principal of and premium on indebtedness, other than working capital borrowings;
Table of Contents
13
•
•
•
•
•
•
expansion capital expenditures;
actual maintenance and replacement capital expenditures (as discussed in further detail below);
investment capital expenditures;
payment of transaction expenses relating to interim capital transactions;
distributions to our partners (including distributions in respect of our incentive distribution rights); or
repurchases of equity interests except to fund obligations under employee benefit plans.
Capital Surplus
Capital surplus is defined in our partnership agreement as any cash and cash equivalents distributed in excess of our
operating surplus. Accordingly, capital surplus would generally be generated only by the following (which we refer to as
“interim capital transactions”):
•
•
•
borrowings other than working capital borrowings;
sales of our equity and debt securities; and
sales or other dispositions of assets for cash, other than inventory, accounts receivable and other assets sold in
the ordinary course of business or as part of normal retirement or replacement of assets.
Characterization of Cash Distributions
Our partnership agreement requires that we treat all cash distributed as coming from operating surplus until the sum of all
cash distributed since the closing of our initial public offering equals the operating surplus from the closing of our initial
public offering through the end of the quarter immediately preceding that distribution. Our partnership agreement requires
that we treat any amount distributed in excess of operating surplus, regardless of its source, as distributions of capital
surplus. As described above, operating surplus includes up to $26.0 million, which does not reflect actual cash on hand
that is available for distribution to our unitholders. Rather, it is a provision that enables us, if we choose, to distribute as
operating surplus up to this amount that would otherwise be distributed as capital surplus. We do not anticipate that we
will make any distributions from capital surplus.
Capital Expenditures
Estimated maintenance and replacement capital expenditures reduce operating surplus, but expansion capital
expenditures, actual maintenance and replacement capital expenditures and investment capital expenditures do not.
Maintenance and replacement capital expenditures are those capital expenditures required to maintain our long-term
operating capacity. Examples of maintenance and replacement capital expenditures include expenditures associated
with the replacement of equipment and sand reserves, to the extent such expenditures are made to maintain our long-
term operating capacity. Maintenance and replacement capital expenditures also include interest (and related fees) on
debt incurred and distributions on equity issued (including incremental distributions on incentive distribution rights) to
finance all or any portion of the construction or development of a replacement asset that is paid in respect of the period
that begins when we enter into a binding obligation to commence constructing or developing a replacement asset and
ending on the earlier to occur of the date that any such replacement asset commences commercial service and the date
that such asset is abandoned or disposed. Capital expenditures made solely for investment purposes are not considered
maintenance and replacement capital expenditures.
Because our maintenance and replacement capital expenditures can be irregular, the amount of our actual maintenance
and replacement capital expenditures may differ substantially from period to period, which could cause similar
fluctuations in the amounts of operating surplus and adjusted operating surplus if we subtracted actual maintenance and
replacement capital expenditures from operating surplus.
Table of Contents
14
Our partnership agreement requires that an estimate of the average quarterly maintenance and replacement capital
expenditures necessary to maintain our operating capacity over the long-term be subtracted from operating surplus each
quarter as opposed to the actual amounts spent. The amount of estimated maintenance and replacement capital
expenditures deducted from operating surplus for those periods is subject to review and change by our general partner at
least once a year, provided that any change is approved by our conflicts committee. The estimate is made at least
annually and whenever an event occurs that is likely to result in a material adjustment to the amount of our maintenance
and replacement capital expenditures, such as a major acquisition or the introduction of new governmental regulations
that will impact our business. Our partnership agreement does not set a limit on the amount of maintenance and
replacement capital expenditures that our general partner may estimate. For purposes of calculating operating surplus,
any adjustment to this estimate will be prospective only.
The use of estimated maintenance and replacement capital expenditures in calculating operating surplus has the
following effects:
•
•
•
the amount of actual maintenance and replacement capital expenditures in any quarter will not directly reduce
operating surplus but will instead be factored into the estimate of the average quarterly maintenance and
replacement capital expenditures. This may result in the subordinated units converting into common units when
the use of actual maintenance and replacement capital expenditures would result in lower operating surplus
during the subordination period and potentially result in the tests for conversion of the subordinated units not
being satisfied;
it may increase our ability to distribute as operating surplus cash we receive from non-operating sources; and
it may be more difficult for us to raise our distribution above the minimum quarterly distribution and pay incentive
distributions on the incentive distribution rights held by our sponsor.
Expansion capital expenditures are those capital expenditures that we expect will increase our operating capacity over
the long term. Examples of expansion capital expenditures include the acquisition of new reserves or equipment,
development of a new surface mine or the expansion of an existing surface mine, to the extent such capital expenditures
are expected to expand our long-term operating capacity. Expansion capital expenditures will also include interest (and
related fees) on debt incurred and distributions on equity issued (including incremental distributions on incentive
distribution rights) to finance all or any portion of the construction of such capital improvement in respect of the period that
commences when we enter into a binding obligation to commence construction of a capital improvement and ending on
the earlier to occur of the date any such capital improvement commences commercial service and the date that it is
disposed of or abandoned. Capital expenditures made solely for investment purposes are not considered expansion
capital expenditures.
Investment capital expenditures are those capital expenditures that are neither maintenance and replacement capital
expenditures nor expansion capital expenditures. Investment capital expenditures largely consist of capital expenditures
made for investment purposes. Examples of investment capital expenditures include traditional capital expenditures for
investment purposes, such as purchases of securities, as well as other capital expenditures that might be made in lieu of
such traditional investment capital expenditures, such as the acquisition of a capital asset for investment purposes or
development of assets that are in excess of the maintenance of our existing operating capacity, but which are not
expected to expand, for more than the short term, our operating capacity.
As described below, neither investment capital expenditures nor expansion capital expenditures are included in
operating expenditures, and thus will not reduce operating surplus. Because expansion capital expenditures include
interest payments (and related fees) on debt incurred to finance all or a portion of the construction, replacement or
improvement of a capital asset in respect of a period that begins when we enter into a binding obligation to commence
construction of a capital improvement and ending on the earlier to occur of the date any
Table of Contents
15
such capital asset commences commercial service and the date that it is abandoned or disposed of, such interest
payments also do not reduce operating surplus. Losses on disposition of an investment capital expenditure will reduce
operating surplus when realized and cash receipts from an investment capital expenditure will be treated as a cash
receipt for purposes of calculating operating surplus only to the extent the cash receipt is a return on principal.
Capital expenditures that are made in part for maintenance and replacement capital purposes, investment capital
purposes and/or expansion capital purposes will be allocated as maintenance and replacement capital expenditures,
investment capital expenditures or expansion capital expenditures by our general partner.
General
Subordination Period
Our partnership agreement provides that, during the subordination period (which we describe below), the common units
will have the right to receive distributions from operating surplus each quarter in an amount equal to $0.4750 per common
unit, which amount is defined in our partnership agreement as the minimum quarterly distribution, plus any arrearages in
the payment of the minimum quarterly distribution on the common units from prior quarters, before any distributions from
operating surplus may be made on the subordinated units. These units are deemed “subordinated” because for a period
of time, referred to as the subordination period, the subordinated units will not be entitled to receive any distributions from
operating surplus until the common units have received the minimum quarterly distribution plus any arrearages in the
payment of the minimum quarterly distribution from prior quarters. Furthermore, no arrearages will be paid on the
subordinated units. The practical effect of the subordinated units is to increase the likelihood that during the subordination
period there will be sufficient cash from operating surplus to pay the minimum quarterly distribution on the common units.
Determination of Subordination Period
Our sponsor owns all of our subordinated units. Except as described below, the subordination period will expire on the
first business day after the distribution to unitholders in respect of any quarter, beginning with the quarter ending June 30,
2015, if each of the following has occurred:
•
•
distributions from operating surplus on each of the outstanding common and subordinated units equaled or
exceeded the minimum quarterly distribution for each of the three consecutive, non-overlapping four-quarter
periods immediately preceding that date;
the “adjusted operating surplus” (as defined below) generated during each of the three consecutive, non-
overlapping four-quarter periods immediately preceding that date equaled or exceeded the sum of the minimum
quarterly distribution on all of the outstanding common and subordinated units during those periods on a fully
diluted weighted average basis; and
•
there are no arrearages in payment of the minimum quarterly distribution on the common units.
Early Termination of Subordination Period
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the subordination period will automatically terminate, and all of the subordinated units will
convert into common units on a one-for-one basis, on the first business day after the distribution to unitholders in respect
of any quarter if each of the following has occurred:
•
•
distributions from operating surplus exceeded $2.85 (150.0% of the annualized minimum quarterly distribution)
on all outstanding common units and subordinated units, plus the related distributions on the incentive
distribution rights for a four-quarter period immediately preceding that date;
the “adjusted operating surplus” (as defined below) generated during the four-quarter period immediately
preceding that date equaled or exceeded the sum of $2.85 (150.0% of the annualized
Table of Contents
16
minimum quarterly distribution) on all of the outstanding common and subordinated units during that period on a
fully diluted weighted average basis, plus the related distribution on the incentive distribution rights; and
•
there are no arrearages in payment of the minimum quarterly distributions on the common units.
Expiration Upon Removal of the General Partner
In addition, if the unitholders remove our general partner other than for cause:
•
•
the subordinated units held by any person will immediately and automatically convert into common units on a
one-for-one basis, provided (1) neither such person nor any of its affiliates voted any of its units in favor of the
removal and (2) such person is not an affiliate of the successor general partner; and
if all of the subordinated units convert pursuant to the foregoing, all cumulative common unit arrearages on the
common units will be extinguished and the subordination period will end.
Expiration of the Subordination Period
When the subordination period ends, each outstanding subordinated unit will convert into one common unit and will then
participate pro rata with the other common units in distributions.
Adjusted Operating Surplus
Adjusted operating surplus is intended to reflect the cash generated from operations during a particular period and
therefore excludes net increases in working capital borrowings and net drawdowns of reserves of cash generated in prior
periods. Adjusted operating surplus consists of:
•
operating surplus generated with respect to that period (excluding any amounts attributable to the items
described in the first bullet point under “—Operating Surplus and Capital Surplus—Operating Surplus” above);
less
•
•
•
•
•
any net increase in working capital borrowings with respect to that period; less
any net decrease in cash reserves for operating expenditures with respect to that period not relating to an
operating expenditure made with respect to that period; plus
any net decrease in working capital borrowings with respect to that period; plus
any net increase in cash reserves for operating expenditures with respect to that period required by any debt
instrument for the repayment of principal, interest or premium; plus
any net decrease made in subsequent periods in cash reserves for operating expenditures initially established
with respect to such period to the extent such decrease results in a reduction of adjusted operating surplus in
subsequent periods pursuant to the third bullet point above.
Distributions From Operating Surplus During the Subordination Period
If we make a distribution from operating surplus for any quarter during the subordination period, our partnership
agreement requires that we make the distribution in the following manner:
•
•
first, to the common unitholders, pro rata, until we distribute for each common unit an amount equal to the
minimum quarterly distribution for that quarter and any arrearages in payment of the minimum quarterly
distribution on the common units for any prior quarters;
second, to the subordinated unitholders, pro rata, until we distribute for each subordinated unit an amount equal
to the minimum quarterly distribution for that quarter; and
•
thereafter, in the manner described in “—Incentive Distribution Rights” below.
17
Table of Contents
Distributions From Operating Surplus After the Subordination Period
If we make distributions of cash from operating surplus for any quarter after the subordination period, our partnership
agreement requires that we make the distribution in the following manner:
•
first, to all common unitholders, pro rata, until we distribute for each common unit an amount equal to the
minimum quarterly distribution for that quarter; and
•
thereafter, in the manner described in “—Incentive Distribution Rights” below.
General Partner Interest
Our general partner owns a non-economic general partner interest in us, which does not entitle it to receive cash
distributions. However, our general partner may in the future own common units or other equity securities in us and will be
entitled to receive distributions on any such interests.
Incentive Distribution Rights
Incentive distribution rights represent the right to receive increasing percentages (15.0%, 25.0% and 50.0%) of quarterly
distributions from operating surplus after the minimum quarterly distribution and the target distribution levels have been
achieved. Our sponsor currently holds the incentive distribution rights, but may transfer these rights at any time.
If for any quarter:
•
•
we have distributed cash from operating surplus to the common and subordinated unitholders in an amount
equal to the minimum quarterly distribution; and
we have distributed cash from operating surplus on outstanding common units in an amount necessary to
eliminate any cumulative arrearages in payment of the minimum quarterly distribution;
then we will make additional distributions from operating surplus for that quarter among the common and subordinated
unitholders and the sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution rights) in the following manner:
•
•
•
•
first, to all unitholders holding common units and subordinated units, pro rata, until each common and
subordinated unitholder receives a total of $0.54625 per unit for that quarter (the “first target distribution”);
second, 85.0% to all common unitholders and subordinated unitholders, pro rata, and 15.0% to the holders of
our incentive distribution rights, until each common and subordinated unitholder receives a total of $0.59375 per
unit for that quarter (the “second target distribution”);
third, 75.0% to all common unitholders and subordinated unitholders, pro rata, and 25.0% to the holders of our
incentive distribution rights, until each common and subordinated unitholder receives a total of $0.71250 per
unit for that quarter (the “third target distribution”); and
thereafter, 50.0% to all common unitholders and subordinated unitholders, pro rata, and 50.0% to the holders of
our incentive distribution rights.
18
Table of Contents
Percentage Allocations of Distributions From Operating Surplus
The following table illustrates the percentage allocations of distributions from operating surplus between the common and
subordinated unitholders and our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution rights) based on the specified target
distribution levels. The amounts set forth under the column heading “Marginal Percentage Interest in Distributions” are the
percentage interests of our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution rights) and the common and subordinated
unitholders in any distributions from operating surplus we distribute up to and including the corresponding amount in the
column “Total Quarterly Distribution Per Common Unit and Subordinated Unit.” The percentage interests shown for our
common and subordinated unitholders and our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution rights) for the minimum
quarterly distribution are also applicable to quarterly distribution amounts that are less than the minimum quarterly
distribution. The percentage interests set forth below assume our sponsor has not transferred its incentive distribution
rights and there are no arrearages on common units.
Total Quarterly Distribution
Per Common Unit and
Marginal Percentage Interest in Distributions
Sponsor (as Holder of
Unitholders
(Common and Subordinated)
Our Incentive
Distribution Rights)
Subordinated Unit
Minimum Quarterly
Distribution
    
  
First Target Distribution
     above $0.4750 up to $0.54625   
Second Target Distribution    above $0.54625 up to $0.59375  
    above $0.59375 up to $0.71250  
Third Target Distribution
Thereafter
above $0.71250
up to $0.4750
100.0%   
100.0%   
85.0%   
75.0%   
50.0%
0% 
0% 
15.0% 
25.0% 
50.0%
Our Sponsor’s Right to Reset Incentive Distribution Levels
Our sponsor, as the initial holder of our incentive distribution rights, has the right under our partnership agreement to elect
to relinquish the right to receive incentive distribution payments based on the initial target distribution levels and to reset,
at higher levels, the target distribution levels upon which the incentive distribution payments to our sponsor would be set.
If our sponsor transfers all or a portion of our incentive distribution rights in the future, then the holder or holders of a
majority of our incentive distribution rights will be entitled to exercise this right. The following discussion assumes that our
sponsor holds all of the incentive distribution rights at the time that a reset election is made. The right to reset the target
distribution levels upon which the incentive distributions are based may be exercised, without approval of our unitholders
or the conflicts committee of our general partner, at any time when there are no subordinated units outstanding and we
have made cash distributions to the holders of the incentive distribution rights at the highest level of incentive distribution
for the prior four consecutive fiscal quarters. The reset target distribution levels will be higher than the target distribution
levels prior to the reset such that there will be no incentive distributions paid under the reset target distribution levels until
cash distributions per unit following the reset event increase as described below. We anticipate that our sponsor would
exercise this reset right in order to facilitate acquisitions or internal growth projects that would otherwise not be sufficiently
accretive to cash distributions per common unit, taking into account the existing levels of incentive distribution payments
being made to our sponsor.
In connection with the resetting of the target distribution levels and the corresponding relinquishment by our sponsor of
incentive distribution payments based on the target cash distributions prior to the reset, our sponsor will be entitled to
receive a number of newly issued common units based on a predetermined formula described below that takes into
account the “cash parity” value of the cash distributions related to the incentive distribution rights received by our sponsor
for the quarter prior to the reset event as compared to the cash distribution per common unit in such quarter.
The number of common units that our sponsor would be entitled to receive from us in connection with a resetting of the
minimum quarterly distribution amount and the target distribution levels then in effect would be equal to the quotient
determined by dividing (x) the amount of cash distributions received by our sponsor in
Table of Contents
19
respect of its incentive distribution rights for the fiscal quarter ended immediately prior to the date of such reset election by
(y) the amount of cash distributed per common unit with respect to such quarter. Our sponsor would be entitled to receive
distributions in respect of these common units pro rata in subsequent periods.
Following a reset election, a baseline minimum quarterly distribution amount will be calculated as an amount equal to the
cash distribution amount per unit for the fiscal quarter immediately preceding the reset election (which amount we refer to
as the “reset minimum quarterly distribution”) and the target distribution levels will be reset to be correspondingly higher
such that we would make distributions from operating surplus for each quarter thereafter as follows:
•
first, to all common unitholders, pro rata, until each unitholder receives an amount per unit equal to 115.0% of
the reset minimum quarterly distribution for that quarter;
•
•
second, 85.0% to all common unitholders, pro rata, and 15.0% to our sponsor, until each unitholder receives an
amount per unit equal to 125.0% of the reset minimum quarterly distribution for the quarter;
third, 75.0% to all common unitholders, pro rata, and 25.0% to our sponsor, until each unitholder receives an
amount per unit equal to 150.0% of the reset minimum quarterly distribution for the quarter; and
•
thereafter, 50.0% to all common unitholders, pro rata, and 50.0% to our sponsor.
Because a reset election can only occur after the subordination period expires, the reset minimum quarterly distribution
will have no significance except as a baseline for the target distribution levels.
The following table illustrates the percentage allocation of distributions from operating surplus between the common and
subordinated unitholders and our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution rights) at various distribution levels
(1) pursuant to the distribution provisions of our partnership agreement currently in effect, as well as (2) following a
hypothetical reset of the target distribution levels based on the assumption that the quarterly distribution amount per
common unit during the fiscal quarter immediately preceding the reset election was $0.80.
Minimum
Quarterly
Distribution
First Target
Distribution
Second Target
Distribution
Third Target
Distribution
Thereafter
Quarterly
Distribution Per Unit
Prior to Reset
Unitholders
(common and
subordinated)
Sponsor
(as Holder
of Our
Incentive
Distribution
Quarterly Distribution
Per Unit
Rights)
Following Hypothetical Reset
up to $0.4750
above $0.4750
up to $0.54625
above $0.54625
up to $0.59375
above $0.59375
up to $0.71250
above $0.71250
100.0%
100.0%
85.0%
75.0%  
50.0%
0.0%
0.0%
15.0%
25.0%  
50.0%
up to $0.8000(1)
above $0.8000
up to $0.9200(2)
above $0.9200
up to $1.0000(3)
above $1.0000
up to $1.2000(4)
above $1.2000
(1) This amount is equal to the hypothetical reset minimum quarterly distribution.
(2) This amount is 115.0% of the hypothetical reset minimum quarterly distribution.
(3) This amount is 125.0% of the hypothetical reset minimum quarterly distribution.
(4) This amount is 150.0% of the hypothetical reset minimum quarterly distribution.
Table of Contents
20
Our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution rights) will be entitled to cause the target distribution levels to be
reset on more than one occasion, provided that it may not make a reset election except at a time when it has received
incentive distributions for the prior four consecutive fiscal quarters based on the highest level of incentive distributions
that it is entitled to receive under our partnership agreement.
How Distributions From Capital Surplus Will Be Made
Distributions From Capital Surplus
Our partnership agreement requires that we make distributions from capital surplus, if any, in the following manner:
•
•
first, to all unitholders, pro rata, until the minimum quarterly distribution is reduced to zero, as described below;
second, to the common unitholders, pro rata, until we distribute for each common unit an amount from capital
surplus equal to any unpaid arrearages in payment of the minimum quarterly distribution on the common units;
and
•
thereafter, we will make all distributions from capital surplus as if they were from operating surplus.
Effect of a Distribution From Capital Surplus
Our partnership agreement treats a distribution of capital surplus as the repayment of the initial unit price, which is a
return of capital. Each time a distribution of capital surplus is made, the minimum quarterly distribution and the target
distribution levels and the Class B Unit conversion threshold described below will be reduced in the same proportion as
the corresponding reduction in relation to the fair market value of the common units prior to the announcement of the
distribution. Because distributions of capital surplus will reduce the minimum quarterly distribution, target distribution
levels and the Class B Unit conversion threshold after any of these distributions are made, it may be easier for our
sponsor to receive incentive distributions and for the subordinated units and Class B Units to convert into common units.
However, any distribution of capital surplus before the minimum quarterly distribution is reduced to zero cannot be
applied to the payment of the minimum quarterly distribution or any arrearages.
Once we reduce the minimum quarterly distribution and target distribution levels to zero, all future distributions will be
made such that 50.0% is paid to all unitholders, pro rata, and 50.0% is paid to the holder or holders of incentive
distribution rights, pro rata.
Adjustment to the Minimum Quarterly Distribution and Target Distribution Levels
In addition to adjusting the minimum quarterly distribution and target distribution levels to reflect a distribution of capital
surplus, if we combine our common units into fewer common units or subdivide our common units into a greater number
of common units, our partnership agreement specifies that the following items will be proportionately adjusted:
•
•
•
•
•
the minimum quarterly distribution;
the target distribution levels;
the Class B Unit conversion threshold described below;
the initial unit price, as described below under “—Distributions of Cash Upon Liquidation”;
the per unit amount of any outstanding arrearages in payment of the minimum quarterly distribution on the
common units; and
•
the number of subordinated units and Class B Units.
21
Table of Contents
For example, if a two-for-one split of the common units should occur, the minimum quarterly distribution, the target
distribution levels and the initial unit price would each be reduced to 50.0% of its initial level. If we combine our common
units into a lesser number of units or subdivide our common units into a greater number of units, we will combine or
subdivide our subordinated units using the same ratio applied to the common units. Our partnership agreement provides
that we do not make any adjustment by reason of the issuance of additional units for cash or property.
In addition, if as a result of a change in law or interpretation thereof, we or any of our subsidiaries is treated as an
association taxable as a corporation or is otherwise subject to additional taxation as an entity for U.S. federal, state, local
or non-U.S. income or withholding tax purposes, our general partner may, in its sole discretion, reduce the minimum
quarterly distribution, the target distribution levels and the Class B conversion thresholds for each quarter by multiplying
each distribution level by a fraction, the numerator of which is cash for that quarter (after deducting our general partner’s
estimate of our additional aggregate liability for the quarter for such income and withholdings taxes payable by reason of
such change in law or interpretation) and the denominator of which is the sum of (1) cash for that quarter, plus (2) our
general partner’s estimate of our additional aggregate liability for the quarter for such income and withholding taxes
payable by reason of such change in law or interpretation thereof. To the extent that the actual tax liability differs from the
estimated tax liability for any quarter, the difference will be accounted for in distributions with respect to subsequent
quarters.
Distributions of Cash Upon Liquidation
General
If we dissolve in accordance with the partnership agreement, we will sell or otherwise dispose of our assets in a process
called liquidation. We will first apply the proceeds of liquidation to the payment of our creditors. We will distribute any
remaining proceeds to the unitholders and the holders of the incentive distribution rights, in accordance with their capital
account balances, as adjusted to reflect any gain or loss upon the sale or other disposition of our assets in liquidation.
The allocations of gain and loss upon liquidation are intended, to the extent possible, to entitle the holders of units to a
repayment of the initial value contributed by unitholders for their units, which we refer to as the “initial unit price” for each
unit. The allocations of gain and loss upon liquidation are also intended, to the extent possible, to entitle the holders of
common units to a preference over the holders of subordinated units upon our liquidation, to the extent required to permit
common unitholders to receive their initial unit price plus the minimum quarterly distribution for the quarter during which
liquidation occurs plus any unpaid arrearages in payment of the minimum quarterly distribution on the common units.
However, there may not be sufficient gain upon our liquidation to enable the common unitholders to fully recover all of
these amounts, even though there may be cash available for distribution to the holders of subordinated units. Any further
net gain recognized upon liquidation will be allocated in a manner that takes into account the incentive distribution rights
of our sponsor.
Manner of Adjustments for Gain
The manner of the adjustment for gain is set forth in the partnership agreement. If our liquidation occurs before the end of
the subordination period, we will generally allocate any gain to the partners in the following manner:
•
•
first, to our general partner to the extent of certain prior losses specially allocated to our general partner;
second, to the common unitholders and holders of Class B Units, pro rata, until the aggregate of the allocated
gain to the Class B Units is equal to the aggregate losses described below under “-Manner of Adjustments for
Losses” allocated to the holders of Class B Units;
Table of Contents
22
•
•
•
•
•
•
third, to the common unitholders and holders of Class B Units, pro rata, until the capital account for each
common unit is equal to the sum of: (1) the initial unit price; (2) the amount of the minimum quarterly distribution
for the quarter during which our liquidation occurs; and (3) any unpaid arrearages in payment of the minimum
quarterly distribution; provided, however, that a Class B Unit is not treated as a unit for purposes of this
allocation prior to the first day of the quarter with respect to which the common unit, into which such Class B Unit
converts, participates in distributions;
fourth, to the subordinated unitholders, pro rata, until the capital account for each subordinated unit is equal to
the sum of: (1) the initial unit price; and (2) the amount of the minimum quarterly distribution for the quarter
during which our liquidation occurs;
fifth, to all unitholders, pro rata, until we allocate under this paragraph an amount per unit equal to: (1) the sum of
the excess of the first target distribution per unit over the minimum quarterly distribution per unit for each quarter
of our existence; less (2) the cumulative amount per unit of any distributions from operating surplus in excess of
the minimum quarterly distribution per unit that we distributed to the unitholders, pro rata, for each quarter of our
existence; provided, however, that a Class B Unit is not treated as a unit for purposes of this allocation prior to
the first day of the quarter with respect to which the common unit, into which such Class B Unit converts,
participates in distributions;
sixth, 85.0% to all unitholders, pro rata, and 15.0% to our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution
rights), until we allocate under this paragraph an amount per unit equal to: (1) the sum of the excess of the
second target distribution per unit over the first target distribution per unit for each quarter of our existence; less
(2) the cumulative amount per unit of any distributions from operating surplus in excess of the first target
distribution per unit that we distributed 85.0% to the unitholders, pro rata, and 15.0% to our general partner for
each quarter of our existence; provided, however, that a Class B Unit is not treated as a unit for purposes of this
allocation prior to the first day of the quarter with respect to which the common unit, into which such Class B Unit
converts, participates in distributions;
seventh, 75.0% to all unitholders, pro rata, and 25.0% to our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution
rights), until we allocate under this paragraph an amount per unit equal to: (1) the sum of the excess of the third
target distribution per unit over the second target distribution per unit for each quarter of our existence; less
(2) the cumulative amount per unit of any distributions from operating surplus in excess of the second target
distribution per unit that we distributed 75.0% to the unitholders, pro rata, and 25.0% to our sponsor (as the
holder of our incentive distribution rights) for each quarter of our existence; provided, however, that a Class B
Unit is not treated as a unit for purposes of this allocation prior to the first day of the quarter with respect to which
the common unit, into which such Class B Unit converts, participates in distributions; and
thereafter, 50.0% to all unitholders, pro rata, and 50.0% to our sponsor (as the holder of our incentive distribution
rights); provided, however, that a Class B Unit is not treated as a unit for purposes of this allocation prior to the
first day of the quarter with respect to which the common unit, into which such Class B Unit converts participates
in distributions;.
The percentage interests set forth above for our sponsor assume our sponsor has not transferred the incentive distribution
rights.
If the liquidation occurs after the end of the subordination period, the distinction between common units and subordinated
units will disappear, so that clause (3) of the third bullet point above and all of the fourth bullet point above will no longer
be applicable.
We may make special allocations of gain among the partners in a manner to create economic uniformity among the
common units into which the subordinated units convert and the common units held by public unitholders.
23
Table of Contents
Manner of Adjustments for Losses
If our liquidation occurs before the end of the subordination period, we will generally allocate any loss to our general
partner and the unitholders in the following manner:
•
•
first, to holders of subordinated units in proportion to the positive balances in their capital accounts until the
capital accounts of the subordinated unitholders have been reduced to zero;
second, to the holders of common units and Class B Units in proportion to the positive balances in their capital
accounts, until the capital accounts of the common unitholders and holders of Class B Units have been reduced
to zero; and
•
thereafter, 100.0% to our general partner.
If the liquidation occurs after the end of the subordination period, the distinction between common units and subordinated
units will disappear, so that all of the first bullet point above will no longer be applicable.
We may make special allocations of loss among the partners in a manner to create economic uniformity among the
common units into which the subordinated units convert and the common units held by public unitholders.
Adjustments to Capital Accounts
Our partnership agreement requires that we make adjustments to capital accounts upon the issuance of additional units.
In this regard, our partnership agreement specifies that we allocate any unrealized and, for federal income tax purposes,
unrecognized gain resulting from the adjustments to the unitholders and sponsor (as the holder of our incentive
distribution rights) in the same manner as we allocate gain upon liquidation. In the event that we make positive
adjustments to the capital accounts upon the issuance of additional units, our partnership agreement requires that we
generally allocate any later negative adjustments to the capital accounts resulting from the issuance of additional units or
upon our liquidation in a manner which results, to the extent possible, in the partners’ capital account balances equaling
the amount which they would have been if no earlier positive adjustments to the capital accounts had been made. By
contrast to the allocations of gain, and except as provided above, we generally will allocate any unrealized and
unrecognized loss resulting from the adjustments to capital accounts upon the issuance of additional units to the
unitholders and our general partner based on their respective percentage ownership of us. In this manner, prior to the end
of the subordination period, we generally will allocate any such loss equally with respect to our common and
subordinated units. In the event we make negative adjustments to the capital accounts as a result of such loss, future
positive adjustments resulting from the issuance of additional units will be allocated in a manner designed to reverse the
prior negative adjustments, and special allocations will be made upon liquidation in a manner that results, to the extent
possible, in our unitholders’ capital account balances equaling the amounts they would have been if no earlier
adjustments for loss had been made.
Conversion of Class B Units
The Class B Units will not be eligible to participate in quarterly distributions until converted into common units. The Class
B Units are eligible for conversion into common units once our partnership has, for two consecutive quarters, (a) earned
$2.31 per unit, including per common unit, subordinated unit and Class B Unit on an annualized basis and (b) paid $2.10
per unit in annualized distributions on each common and subordinated unit, and any other outstanding units that are
senior or equal in right of distribution to the subordinated units, for a period of two consecutive quarters, and our general
partner has determined, with the concurrence of our conflicts committee, that our partnership is expected to maintain such
performance for at least two succeeding quarters.
24
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF PARTNERSHIP SECURITIES
We may issue additional partnership securities and options, rights, warrants and appreciation rights relating to the
partnership securities for any partnership purpose at any time and from time to time to such persons for such
consideration and on such terms and conditions as shall be established by our general partner in its sole discretion, all
without the approval of any limited partners.
With respect to any series of partnership securities, a prospectus supplement and an amendment to our partnership
agreement relating to that series of partnership securities will set forth the number of securities, particular designation,
relative rights and preferences and the limitations of any series of partnership securities in respect of which this
prospectus is delivered. The particular terms of any such series will include the following:
•
•
•
•
•
the maximum number of securities to constitute the series and the designation and ranking thereof;
the annual distribution rate, if any, on securities of the series, whether such rate is fixed or variable or both, the
dates from which distributions will begin to accrue or accumulate, whether distributions will be cumulative and
whether such distributions will be paid in cash, securities or otherwise;
whether the securities of the series will be redeemable and, if so, the price and the terms and conditions on
which the securities of the series may be redeemed, including the time during which securities of the series may
be redeemed and any accumulated distributions thereof that the holders of the securities of the series will be
entitled to receive upon the redemption thereof;
the liquidation preference, if any, applicable to securities of the series;
the terms and conditions, if any, on which the securities of the series will be convertible into, or exchangeable
for, securities of any other class or classes of partnership securities, including the price or prices or the rate or
rates of conversion or exchange and the method, if any, of adjusting the same; and
•
the voting rights, if any, of the securities of the series.
The prospectus supplement will contain, if applicable, a description of the material tax considerations relating to the
purchase and ownership of the series of partnership securities offered by the prospectus supplement. The transfer agent,
registrar and distributions disbursement agent for the partnership securities will be designated in the applicable
prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
The debt securities will be:
25
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
General
•
•
•
our direct general obligations;
either senior debt securities or subordinated debt securities; and
issued under separate indentures among us, any subsidiary guarantors and a trustee.
Hi-Crush Partners LP may issue debt securities in one or more series, and Hi-Crush Finance Corp. may be a co-issuer of
one or more series of debt securities. Hi-Crush Finance Corp. was incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware
in September 2013, is wholly owned by Hi-Crush Partners LP and has no material assets or any liabilities other than as a
co-issuer of debt securities. Its activities are limited to co-issuing debt securities and engaging in other activities
incidental thereto. When used in this section “Description of Debt Securities,” the terms “we,” “us,” “our” and “issuers” refer
jointly to Hi-Crush Partners LP and Hi-Crush Finance Corp., and the terms “Hi-Crush Partners LP” and “Hi-Crush
Finance” refer strictly to Hi-Crush Partners LP and Hi-Crush Finance Corp., respectively.
If we offer senior debt securities, we will issue them under a senior indenture. If we issue subordinated debt securities, we
will issue them under a subordinated indenture. A form of each indenture is filed as an exhibit to the registration statement
of which this prospectus is a part. We have not restated either indenture in its entirety in this description. You should read
the relevant indenture because it, and not this description, controls your rights as holders of the debt securities.
Capitalized terms used in the summary have the meanings specified in the indentures.
Specific Terms of Each Series of Debt Securities in the Prospectus Supplement
A prospectus supplement and a supplemental indenture or authorizing resolutions relating to any series of debt securities
being offered will include specific terms relating to the offering. These terms will include some or all of the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
whether Hi-Crush Finance will be a co-issuer of the debt securities;
the guarantors of the debt securities, if any;
whether the debt securities are senior or subordinated debt securities;
the title of the debt securities;
the total principal amount of the debt securities;
the assets, if any, that are pledged as security for the payment of the debt securities;
whether we will issue the debt securities in individual certificates to each holder in registered form, or in the form
of temporary or permanent global securities held by a depository on behalf of holders;
the prices at which we will issue the debt securities;
the portion of the principal amount that will be payable if the maturity of the debt securities is accelerated;
the currency or currency unit in which the debt securities will be payable, if not U.S. dollars;
the dates on which the principal of the debt securities will be payable;
the interest rate that the debt securities will bear and the interest payment dates for the debt securities;
any conversion or exchange provisions;
any optional redemption provisions;
any sinking fund or other provisions that would obligate us to repurchase or otherwise redeem the debt
securities;
•
•
•
•
•
•
26
Table of Contents
•
•
any changes to or additional events of default or covenants; and
any other terms of the debt securities.
We may offer and sell debt securities, including original issue discount debt securities, at a substantial discount below
their principal amount. The prospectus supplement will describe special U.S. federal income tax and any other
considerations applicable to those securities. In addition, the prospectus supplement may describe certain special U.S.
federal income tax or other considerations applicable to any debt securities that are denominated in a currency other than
U.S. dollars.
Guarantees
Each of the current subsidiaries of Hi-Crush Partners LP (other than Hi-Crush Finance Corp., whose sole purpose is to
act as a co-issuer of any debt securities), each a 100 percent directly or indirectly owned subsidiary of Hi-Crush Partners
LP, (the “guarantors”) will issue guarantees of the debt securities, if any of them issue guarantees, and such guarantees
will be full and unconditional and will constitute the joint and several obligations of such guarantors. The guarantors are
our sole subsidiaries, other than Hi-Crush Finance Corp., which is our 100 percent owned subsidiary. Hi-Crush Partners
LP has no assets or operations independent of its subsidiaries, and there are no significant restrictions upon the ability of
Hi-Crush Partners LP or any of its subsidiaries to obtain funds from its respective subsidiaries by dividend or loan. None
of the assets of our subsidiaries represent restricted net assets pursuant to Rule 4-08(e)(3) of Regulation S-X under the
Securities Act.
The guarantees will be general obligations of the guarantors. Guarantees of subordinated debt securities will be
subordinated to the Senior Indebtedness of the guarantors on the same basis as the subordinated debt securities are
subordinated to the Senior Indebtedness of Hi-Crush Partners LP. The definition of “Senior Indebtedness” will be set forth
in the related prospectus supplement.
Consolidation, Merger or Asset Sale
Each indenture will, in general, allow us to consolidate or merge with or into another domestic entity. It will also allow
each issuer to sell, lease, transfer or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of its assets to another domestic entity. If
this happens, the remaining or acquiring entity must assume all of the issuer’s responsibilities and liabilities under the
indenture, including the payment of all amounts due on the debt securities and performance of the issuer’s covenants in
the indenture.
However, each indenture will impose certain requirements with respect to any consolidation or merger with or into an
entity, or any sale, lease, transfer or other disposition of all or substantially all of an issuer’s assets, including:
•
•
•
the remaining or acquiring entity must be organized under the laws of the United States, any state or the District
of Columbia; provided that Hi-Crush Finance may not merge into or consolidate with another entity other than a
corporation satisfying such requirement for so long as Hi-Crush Partners LP is not a corporation;
the remaining or acquiring entity must assume the issuer’s obligations under the indenture; and
immediately after giving effect to the transaction, no Default or Event of Default (as defined under “—Events of
Default and Remedies” below) may exist.
The remaining or acquiring entity will be substituted for the issuer in the indenture with the same effect as if it had been an
original party to the indenture, and the issuer will be relieved from any further obligations under the indenture, except in
the case of a lease of all or substantially all of the issuer’s assets.
Table of Contents
27
No Protection in the Event of a Change of Control
Unless otherwise set forth in the prospectus supplement, the debt securities will not contain any provisions that protect
the holders of the debt securities in the event of a change of control of us or in the event of a highly leveraged transaction,
whether or not such transaction results in a change of control of us.
Modification of Indentures
We may supplement or amend an indenture if the holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of all series issued under the indenture affected by the supplement or amendment consent to
it. Further, the holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any
series may waive past defaults under the indenture and compliance by us with our covenants with respect to the debt
securities of that series only. Those holders may not, however, waive any default in any payment on any debt security of
that series or compliance with a provision that cannot be supplemented or amended without the consent of each holder
affected. Without the consent of the holders of each outstanding debt security affected, no modification of the indenture or
waiver may:
•
•
•
•
reduce the principal of or extend the fixed maturity of any debt security;
reduce or waive any premium payable upon redemption or change any redemption date with respect to the
redemption of the debt securities (except as may be permitted in the case of a particular series of debt
securities);
reduce the rate of or extend the time for payment of interest on any debt security;
waive a past Default or an Event of Default in the payment of principal of or premium, if any, or interest on the
•
•
•
•
•
debt securities or in respect of an indenture provision that cannot be modified without the consent of each
affected holder;
except as otherwise permitted under the indenture, release any security that may have been granted with
respect to the debt securities;
make any debt security payable in currency other than that stated in the debt securities;
in the case of any subordinated debt security, make any change in the subordination provisions that adversely
affects the rights of any holder under those provisions;
except as otherwise permitted in the indenture, release any guarantor from its obligations under its guarantee or
the indenture or change any guarantee in any manner adverse to the holders; or
make any change in the preceding amendment, supplement and waiver provisions (except to increase any
percentage set forth therein).
We may supplement or amend an indenture without the consent of any holders of the debt securities in certain
circumstances, including:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
to establish the form of terms of any series of debt securities;
to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
to provide for uncertificated notes in addition to or in place of certificated notes;
to provide for the assumption of an issuer’s obligations to holders of debt securities in the case of a merger or
consolidation or disposition of all or substantially all of such issuer’s assets;
in the case of any subordinated debt security, to make any change in the subordination provisions that limits or
terminates the benefits applicable to any holder of Senior Indebtedness of Hi-Crush Partners LP;
to add or release guarantors pursuant to the terms of the indenture;
to make any change that does not adversely affect the rights under the indenture of any holder of debt securities;
Table of Contents
28
•
•
•
•
to comply with requirements of the SEC in order to effect or maintain the qualification of the indenture under the
Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended (the “Trust Indenture Act”);
to evidence or provide for the acceptance of appointment under the indenture of a successor trustee;
to add any additional covenants or Events of Default with respect to all or any series of debt securities; or
to secure the debt securities and/or the guarantees.
Events of Default and Remedies
“Event of Default,” when used in an indenture, will mean any of the following with respect to the debt securities of any
series:
•
•
•
•
•
•
failure to pay when due the principal of or any premium on any debt security of that series;
failure to pay, within 60 days of the due date, interest on any debt security of that series;
failure to pay when due any sinking fund payment with respect to any debt securities of that series;
failure to perform any other covenant in the indenture that continues for 90 days after written notice is received
by the issuers or guarantors, as applicable;
certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization of an issuer or guarantor;
if such series is entitled to the benefits of a guarantee, such guarantee ceases to be in full force (except as
otherwise provided in the indenture) or is declared void in a judicial proceeding; or
•
any other Event of Default provided under the terms of the debt securities of that series.
An Event of Default for a particular series of debt securities will not necessarily constitute an Event of Default for any other
series of debt securities issued under an indenture. The trustee may withhold notice to the holders of debt securities of
any default (except in the payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest) if it considers such withholding of notice to be
in the interests of the holders.
If an Event of Default for any series of debt securities occurs and continues, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in
aggregate principal amount of the debt securities of the series may declare the entire principal of, and accrued interest on,
all the debt securities of that series to be due and payable immediately. If this happens, subject to certain conditions, the
holders of a majority in the aggregate principal amount of the debt securities of that series can rescind the declaration.
Other than its duties in case of a default, a trustee is not obligated to exercise any of its rights or powers under either
indenture at the request, order or direction of any holders, unless the holders offer the trustee reasonable security or
indemnity. If they provide this reasonable security or indemnification, the holders of a majority in aggregate principal
amount of any series of debt securities may direct the time, method and place of conducting any proceeding or any
remedy available to the trustee, or exercising any power conferred upon the trustee, for that series of debt securities.
No Limit on Amount of Debt Securities
Neither indenture will limit the amount of debt securities that we may issue, unless we indicate otherwise in a prospectus
supplement. Each indenture will allow us to issue debt securities of any series up to the aggregate principal amount that
we authorize.
We will issue debt securities of a series only in registered form, without coupons, unless otherwise indicated in the
prospectus supplement.
Registration of Notes
Table of Contents
29
Minimum Denominations
Unless the prospectus supplement states otherwise, the debt securities will be issued only in principal amounts of $1,000
each or integral multiples of $1,000.
No Personal Liability
None of the past, present or future partners, incorporators, managers, members, directors, officers, employees,
unitholders or stockholders, as such, of either issuer, the general partner of Hi-Crush Partners LP or any guarantor will
have any liability for the obligations of the issuers or any guarantors under either indenture, the debt securities or any
guarantee or for any claim based on such obligations or their creation. Each holder of debt securities by accepting a debt
security waives and releases all such liability. The waiver and release are part of the consideration for the issuance of the
debt securities. The waiver may not be effective under federal securities laws, however, and it is the view of the SEC that
such a waiver is against public policy.
Payment and Transfer
The trustee will initially act as paying agent and registrar under each indenture. The issuers may change the paying
agent or registrar without prior notice to the holders of debt securities, and the issuers may act as paying agent or
registrar.
If a holder of debt securities has given timely wire transfer instructions to the issuers, the issuers will make all payments
on the debt securities in accordance with those instructions. All other payments on the debt securities will be made at the
office of the paying agent, unless the issuers elect to make interest payments by check mailed to the holders at their
addresses set forth in the debt security register.
The trustee and any paying agent will repay to us upon request any funds held by them for payments on the debt
securities that remain unclaimed for two years after the date upon which that payment has become due. After payment to
us, holders entitled to the money must look to us for payment as general creditors.
Exchange, Registration and Transfer
Debt securities of any series will be exchangeable for other debt securities of the same series, the same total principal
amount and the same terms but in different authorized denominations in accordance with the indenture. Holders may
present debt securities for exchange or registration of transfer at the office of the registrar. The registrar will effect the
transfer or exchange when it is satisfied with the documents of title and identity of the person making the request. We will
not charge a service charge for any registration of transfer or exchange of the debt securities. We may, however, require
the payment of any tax or other governmental charge payable for that registration or exchange.
We will not be required to:
•
issue, register the transfer of, or exchange debt securities of a series called or being called for redemption or
during a period of 15 days prior to the mailing of notice of redemption of debt securities of that series; or
•
register the transfer of or exchange any debt security called for redemption or repurchase, except the
unredeemed portion of any debt security we are redeeming or repurchasing in part.
Provisions Relating only to the Senior Debt Securities
The senior debt securities will rank equally in right of payment with all of our other senior and unsubordinated debt. The
senior debt securities will be effectively subordinated, however, to all of our secured debt to the extent of the value of the
collateral for that debt. We will disclose the amount of our secured debt in the prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
30
Provisions Relating only to the Subordinated Debt Securities
Subordinated Debt Securities Subordinated to Senior Indebtedness
The subordinated debt securities will rank junior in right of payment to all of our Senior Indebtedness. The definition of
“Senior Indebtedness” will be set forth in the related prospectus supplement. If the subordinated debt securities are
guaranteed by the subsidiaries of Hi-Crush Partners LP (other than Hi-Crush Finance Corp., whose sole purpose is to act
as co-issuer of any debt securities), then the guarantees will be subordinated on like terms.
Payment Blockages
The subordinated indenture will provide that no payment of principal, interest and any premium on the subordinated debt
securities may be made in the event:
•
•
•
we or our property (or any guarantor or its property) is involved in any liquidation, bankruptcy or similar
proceeding;
we fail to pay the principal, interest, any premium or any other amounts on any of our Senior Indebtedness
within any applicable grace period or the maturity of such Senior Indebtedness is accelerated following any
other default, subject to certain limited exceptions set forth in the subordinated indenture; or
any other default on any of our Senior Indebtedness occurs that permits immediate acceleration of its maturity,
in which case a payment blockage on the subordinated debt securities will be imposed for a maximum of 179
days at any one time.
No Limitation on Amount of Senior Debt
The subordinated indenture will not limit the amount of Senior Indebtedness that we or any guarantor may incur, unless
otherwise indicated in the prospectus supplement.
Book Entry, Delivery and Form
The debt securities of a particular series may be issued in whole or in part in the form of one or more global certificates
that will be deposited with the trustee as custodian for The Depository Trust Company, New York, New York (“DTC”).
This means that we will not issue certificates to each holder, except in the limited circumstances described below.
Instead, one or more global debt securities will be issued to DTC, who will keep a computerized record of its participants
(for example, your broker) whose clients have purchased the debt securities. The participant will then keep a record of its
clients who purchased the debt securities. Unless it is exchanged in whole or in part for a certificated debt security, a
global debt security may not be transferred, except that DTC, its nominees and their successors may transfer a global
debt security as a whole to one another.
Beneficial interests in global debt securities will be shown on, and transfers of global debt securities will be made only
through, records maintained by DTC and its participants.
DTC has provided us the following information: DTC, the world’s largest securities depository, is a limited-purpose trust
company organized under the New York Banking Law, a “banking organization” within meaning of the New York Banking
Law, a member of the Federal Reserve System, a “clearing corporation” within the meaning of the New York Uniform
Commercial Code and a “clearing agency” registered pursuant to the provisions of Section 17A of the Exchange Act.
DTC holds and provides asset servicing for several million issues of U.S. and non-U.S. equity issues, corporate and
municipal debt issues, and money market instruments that DTC’s participants (“Direct Participants”) deposit with DTC.
DTC also facilitates the post-trade settlement among Direct Participants of sales and other securities transactions in
deposited securities, through electronic computerized book-entry transfers and pledges between Direct Participants’
accounts. This eliminates the need for physical movement of securities certificates. Direct Participants include both U.S.
and non-U.S. securities
Table of Contents
31
brokers and dealers, banks, trust companies, clearing corporations and certain other organizations. DTC is a wholly
owned subsidiary of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (“DTCC”). DTCC is the holding company for DTC,
National Securities Clearing Corporation and Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, all of which are registered clearing
agencies. DTCC is owned by the users of its regulated subsidiaries. Access to the DTC system is also available to others
such as both U.S. and non-U.S. securities brokers and dealers, banks, trust companies and clearing corporations that
clear through or maintain a custodial relationship with a Direct Participant, either directly or indirectly (“Indirect
Participants”). The DTC rules applicable to its participants are on file with the SEC.
We will wire all payments on the global debt securities to DTC. We, any guarantor and the trustee will treat DTC’s
nominee as the owner of the global debt securities for all purposes. Accordingly, we, any guarantor, the trustee and any
paying agent will have no direct responsibility or liability to pay amounts due on the global debt securities to owners of
beneficial interests in the global debt securities.
It is DTC’s current practice, upon receipt of any payment on the global debt securities, to credit Direct Participants’
accounts on the payment date according to their respective holdings of beneficial interests in the global debt securities as
shown on DTC’s records. In addition, it is DTC’s current practice to assign any consenting or voting rights to Direct
Participants whose accounts are credited with debt securities on a record date, by using an omnibus proxy. Payments by
participants to owners of beneficial interests in the global debt securities, and voting by participants, will be governed by
the customary practices between the participants and owners of beneficial interests, as is the case with debt securities
held for the account of customers registered in “street name.” However, payments will be the responsibility of the
participants and not of DTC, the trustee, any guarantor or us.
Debt securities represented by a global debt security will be exchangeable for certificated debt securities with the same
terms in authorized denominations only if:
•
•
DTC notifies us that it is unwilling or unable to continue as depositary or if DTC ceases to be a clearing agency
registered under applicable law and in either event a successor depositary is not appointed by us within 90
days; or
an Event of Default occurs and DTC notifies the trustee of its decision to exchange the global debt security for
certificated debt securities.
Satisfaction and Discharge; Defeasance
Each indenture will be discharged and will cease to be of further effect as to all outstanding debt securities of any series
issued thereunder, when:
(a) either:
(1) all outstanding debt securities of that series that have been authenticated (except lost, stolen or destroyed debt
securities that have been replaced or paid and debt securities for whose payment money has theretofore been deposited
in trust and thereafter repaid to us) have been delivered to the trustee for cancellation; or
(2) all outstanding debt securities of that series that have not been delivered to the trustee for cancellation have become
due and payable by reason of the giving of a notice of redemption or otherwise or will become due and payable at their
stated maturity within one year or are to be called for redemption within one year under arrangements satisfactory to the
trustee and in any case we have irrevocably deposited with the trustee as trust funds cash or U.S. government
obligations, or combinations thereof, in such amounts as will be sufficient, without consideration of any reinvestment of
interest, to pay and discharge the entire indebtedness of such debt securities not delivered to the trustee for cancellation,
for principal, premium, if any, and accrued interest to the stated maturity or redemption date;
(b) we have paid or caused to be paid all other sums payable by us under the indenture; and
Table of Contents
32
(c) we have delivered an officers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel to the trustee stating that all conditions precedent
to satisfaction and discharge have been satisfied.
The debt securities of a particular series will be subject to legal or covenant defeasance to the extent, and upon the terms
and conditions, set forth in the prospectus supplement.
Each indenture and all of the debt securities will be governed by the laws of the State of New York.
Governing Law
The Trustee
We will enter into the indentures with a trustee that is qualified to act under the Trust Indenture Act and with any other
trustees chosen by us and appointed in a supplemental indenture for a particular series of debt securities.
Resignation or Removal of Trustee
If the trustee has or acquires a conflicting interest within the meaning of the Trust Indenture Act, the trustee must either
eliminate its conflicting interest or resign, to the extent and in the manner provided by, and subject to the provisions of, the
Trust Indenture Act and the applicable indenture. Any resignation will require the appointment of a successor trustee
under the applicable indenture in accordance with the terms and conditions of such indenture.
The trustee may resign or be removed by us with respect to one or more series of debt securities and a successor trustee
may be appointed to act with respect to any such series. The holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the
debt securities of any series may remove the trustee with respect to the debt securities of such series.
Limitations on Trustee if It Is Our Creditor
Each indenture will contain certain limitations on the right of the trustee, in the event that it becomes a creditor of an issuer
or a guarantor, to obtain payment of claims in certain cases, or to realize on certain property received in respect of any
such claim as security or otherwise.
Certificates and Opinions to Be Furnished to Trustee
Each indenture will provide that, in addition to other certificates or opinions that may be specifically required by other
provisions of an indenture, every application by us for action by the trustee must be accompanied by a certificate of
certain of our officers and an opinion of counsel (who may be our counsel) stating that, in the opinion of the signers, all
conditions precedent to such action have been complied with by us.
Table of Contents
33
OUR PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT
The following is a summary of the material provisions of our partnership agreement. We will provide prospective investors
with a copy of our partnership agreement upon request at no charge.
We summarize the following provisions of our partnership agreement elsewhere in this prospectus:
•
•
•
with regard to distributions of cash available for distribution, please read “How We Make Distributions To Our
Partners”;
with regard to the rights of holders of common units, please read “Description of the Common Units”; and
with regard to allocations of taxable income and taxable loss, please read “Material Tax Considerations.”
Organization and Duration
Hi-Crush Partners LP was organized in May 2012 and will have a perpetual existence unless terminated pursuant to the
terms of our partnership agreement.
Purpose
Our purpose, as set forth in our partnership agreement, is limited to any business activity that is approved by our general
partner and that lawfully may be conducted by a limited partnership organized under Delaware law; provided that our
general partner shall not cause us to take any action that the general partner determines would be reasonably likely to
cause us to be treated as an association taxable as a corporation or otherwise taxable as an entity for federal income tax
purposes.
Although our general partner has the ability to cause us and our subsidiaries to engage in activities other than the
business of excavating, processing and selling frac sand, our general partner may decline to do so free of any fiduciary
duty or obligation whatsoever to us or the limited partners, including any duty to act in good faith or in the best interests of
us or the limited partners. Our general partner is generally authorized to perform all acts it determines to be necessary or
appropriate to carry out our purposes and to conduct our business.
Cash Distributions
Our partnership agreement specifies the manner in which we will make cash distributions to holders of our common units
and other partnership securities as well as to our sponsor in respect of its incentive distribution rights. For a description of
these cash distribution provisions, please read “How We Make Distributions To Our Partners.”
Unitholders are not obligated to make additional capital contributions, except as described below under “—Limited
Liability.”
Capital Contributions
Voting Rights
The following is a summary of the unitholder vote required for approval of the matters specified below. Matters that require
the approval of a “unit majority” require:
•
during the subordination period, the approval of a majority of the common units, excluding those common units
held by our general partner and its affiliates, and a majority of the subordinated units, voting as separate
classes; and
•
after the subordination period, the approval of a majority of the common units, voting as a single class.
34
Table of Contents
In voting their units, affiliates of our general partner have no fiduciary duty or obligation whatsoever to us or the limited
partners, including any duty to act in good faith or in the best interests of us or the limited partners.
The incentive distribution rights may be entitled to vote in certain circumstances.
Issuance of additional units
Amendment of the partnership agreement
Merger of our partnership or the sale of all or
substantially all of our assets
Dissolution of our partnership
Continuation of our business upon
dissolution
Withdrawal of our general partner
Removal of our general partner
Transfer of our general partner interest
Transfer of incentive distribution rights
Transfer of ownership interests in our
general partner
No approval right.
Certain amendments may be made by our general partner without the
approval of the unitholders. Other amendments generally require the
approval of a unit majority. Please read “—Amendment of the Partnership
Agreement.”
Unit majority in certain circumstances. Please read “—Merger,
Consolidation, Conversion, Sale or Other Disposition of Assets.”
Unit majority. Please read “—Dissolution.”
Unit majority. Please read “—Dissolution.”
Under most circumstances, the approval of a majority of the common
units, excluding common units held by our general partner and its
affiliates, is required for the withdrawal of our general partner prior to
June 30, 2022 in a manner that would cause a dissolution of our
partnership. Please read “—Withdrawal or Removal of Our General
Partner.”
Not less than 66 2/3% of the outstanding units, voting as a single class,
including units held by our general partner and its affiliates. Please read
“—Withdrawal or Removal of Our General Partner.”
No approval right. Please read “—Transfer of General Partner Interest.”
No approval right. Please read “—Transfer of Subordinated Units;
Incentive Distribution Rights; and Class B Units.”
No approval right. Please read “—Transfer of Ownership Interests in the
General Partner.”
Class B Units are not entitled to vote on any matters relating to our partnership, except that the affirmative vote of the
holders of a majority of the outstanding Class B Units, voting separately as a class, is needed to amend the partnership
agreement in any manner that
•
•
changes the rights, preferences or privileges or duties and obligations of the Class B Units in any material
respect;
increases or decreases the authorized number of Class B Units (including the issuance of additional Class B
Units); or
•
otherwise adversely affects the Class B Units in any material respect.
If any person or group other than our general partner and its affiliates acquires beneficial ownership of 20% or more of
any class of units, that person or group loses voting rights on all of its units. This loss of voting rights does not apply to
any person or group that acquires the units from our general partner or its affiliates and any transferees of that person or
group approved by our general partner or to any person or group who acquires the units with the specific prior approval of
our general partner.
Table of Contents
35
Applicable Law; Forum, Venue and Jurisdiction
Our partnership agreement is governed by Delaware law. Our partnership agreement requires that any claims, suits,
actions or proceedings:
•
•
•
•
arising out of or relating in any way to the partnership agreement (including any claims, suits or actions to
interpret, apply or enforce the provisions of the partnership agreement or the duties, obligations or liabilities
among limited partners or of limited partners to us, or the rights or powers of, or restrictions on, the limited
partners or us);
brought in a derivative manner on our behalf;
asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any director, officer or other employee of us or our
general partner, or owed by our general partner, to us or the limited partners;
asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision of the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act, as amended
(the “Delaware Act”); or
•
asserting a claim governed by the internal affairs doctrine
shall be exclusively brought in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware (or, if such court does not have subject
matter jurisdiction thereof, any other court located in the State of Delaware with subject matter jurisdiction), regardless of
whether such claims, suits, actions or proceedings sound in contract, tort, fraud or otherwise, are based on common law,
statutory, equitable, legal or other grounds, or are derivative or direct claims. By purchasing a common unit, a limited
partner is irrevocably consenting to these limitations and provisions regarding claims, suits, actions or proceedings and
submitting to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware (or such other Delaware courts)
in connection with any such claims, suits, actions or proceedings.
Limited Liability
Assuming that a limited partner does not participate in the control of our business within the meaning of the Delaware Act
and that he otherwise acts in conformity with the provisions of the partnership agreement, his liability under the Delaware
Act will be limited, subject to possible exceptions, to the amount of capital he is obligated to contribute to us for his
common units plus his share of any undistributed profits and assets. However, if it were determined that the right, or
exercise of the right, by the limited partners as a group:
•
•
•
to remove or replace our general partner;
to approve some amendments to our partnership agreement; or
to take other action under our partnership agreement;
constituted “participation in the control” of our business for the purposes of the Delaware Act, then the limited partners
could be held personally liable for our obligations under the laws of Delaware, to the same extent as our general partner.
This liability would extend to persons who transact business with us under the reasonable belief that the limited partner is
a general partner. Neither our partnership agreement nor the Delaware Act specifically provides for legal recourse
against our general partner if a limited partner were to lose limited liability through any fault of our general partner. While
this does not mean that a limited partner could not seek legal recourse, we know of no precedent for this type of a claim in
Delaware case law.
Under the Delaware Act, a limited partnership may not make a distribution to a partner if, after the distribution, all liabilities
of the limited partnership, other than liabilities to partners on account of their partnership interests and liabilities for which
the recourse of creditors is limited to specific property of the partnership, would exceed the fair value of the assets of the
limited partnership. For the purpose of determining
Table of Contents
36
the fair value of the assets of a limited partnership, the Delaware Act provides that the fair value of property subject to
liability for which recourse of creditors is limited shall be included in the assets of the limited partnership only to the extent
that the fair value of that property exceeds the nonrecourse liability. The Delaware Act provides that a limited partner who
receives a distribution and knew at the time of the distribution that the distribution was in violation of the Delaware Act
shall be liable to the limited partnership for the amount of the distribution for three years.
Maintenance of our limited liability as owner of our operating subsidiaries may require compliance with legal
requirements in the jurisdictions in which the operating subsidiaries conduct business, including qualifying our
subsidiaries to do business there.
Limitations on the liability of members or limited partners for the obligations of a limited liability company or limited
partnership have not been clearly established in many jurisdictions. If, by virtue of our ownership interest in our
subsidiaries or otherwise, it were determined that we were conducting business in any jurisdiction without compliance
with the applicable limited partnership or limited liability company statute, or that the right or exercise of the right by the
limited partners as a group to remove or replace our general partner, to approve some amendments to our partnership
agreement, or to take other action under our partnership agreement constituted “participation in the control” of our
business for purposes of the statutes of any relevant jurisdiction, then the limited partners could be held personally liable
for our obligations under the law of that jurisdiction to the same extent as our general partner under the circumstances.
We will operate in a manner that our general partner considers reasonable and necessary or appropriate to preserve the
limited liability of the limited partners.
Issuance of Additional Interests
Our partnership agreement authorizes us to issue an unlimited number of additional partnership interests for the
consideration and on the terms and conditions determined by our general partner without the approval of the unitholders.
It is possible that we will fund acquisitions through the issuance of additional common units, subordinated units or other
partnership interests. Holders of any additional common units we issue will be entitled to share equally with the then-
existing common unitholders in our distributions of cash available for distribution. In addition, the issuance of additional
common units or other partnership interests may dilute the value of the interests of the then-existing common unitholders
in our net assets.
In accordance with Delaware law and the provisions of our partnership agreement, we may also issue additional
partnership interests that, as determined by our general partner, may have rights to distributions or special voting rights to
which the common units are not entitled. In addition, our partnership agreement does not prohibit our subsidiaries from
issuing equity interests, which may effectively rank senior to the common units.
Our general partner will have the right, which it may from time to time assign in whole or in part to any of its affiliates, to
purchase common units, subordinated units or other partnership interests whenever, and on the same terms that, we
issue partnership interests to persons other than our general partner and its affiliates, to the extent necessary to maintain
the percentage interest of our general partner and its affiliates, including such interest represented by common and
subordinated units, that existed immediately prior to each issuance. The common unitholders do not have preemptive
rights under our partnership agreement to acquire additional common units or other partnership interests.
General
Amendment of the Partnership Agreement
Amendments to our partnership agreement may be proposed only by our general partner. However, our general partner
will have no duty or obligation to propose any amendment and may decline to do so free of any fiduciary duty or
obligation whatsoever to us or the limited partners, including any duty to act in good faith or in
Table of Contents
37
the best interests of us or the limited partners. In order to adopt a proposed amendment, other than the amendments
discussed below, our general partner is required to seek written approval of the holders of the number of units required to
approve the amendment or to call a meeting of the limited partners to consider and vote upon the proposed amendment.
Except as described below, an amendment must be approved by a unit majority.
Prohibited Amendments
No amendment may be made that would:
•
•
enlarge the obligations of any limited partner without his consent, unless approved by at least a majority of the
type or class of limited partner interests so affected; or
enlarge the obligations of, restrict in any way any action by or rights of, or reduce in any way the amounts
distributable, reimbursable or otherwise payable by us to our general partner or any of its affiliates without the
consent of our general partner, which consent may be given or withheld in its sole discretion.
The provision of our partnership agreement preventing the amendments having the effects described in the clauses
above can be amended upon the approval of the holders of at least 90.0% of the outstanding units (including the Class B
Units), voting as a single class (including units owned by our general partner and its affiliates).
No Unitholder Approval
Our general partner may generally make amendments to our partnership agreement without the approval of any limited
partner to reflect:
•
•
•
•
a change in our name, the location of our principal place of business, our registered agent or our registered
office;
the admission, substitution, withdrawal or removal of partners in accordance with our partnership agreement;
a change that our general partner determines to be necessary or appropriate to qualify or continue our
qualification as a limited partnership or other entity in which the limited partners have limited liability under the
laws of any state or to ensure that neither we nor any of our subsidiaries will be treated as an association
taxable as a corporation or otherwise taxed as an entity for federal income tax purposes (to the extent not
already so treated or taxed);
an amendment that is necessary, in the opinion of our counsel, to prevent us or our general partner or its
directors, officers, agents or trustees from in any manner being subjected to the provisions of the Investment
Company Act of 1940, the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 or “plan asset” regulations adopted under the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or ERISA, whether or not substantially similar to plan asset
regulations currently applied or proposed;
an amendment that our general partner determines to be necessary or appropriate in connection with the
creation, authorization or issuance of additional partnership interests or the right to acquire partnership interests;
any amendment expressly permitted in our partnership agreement to be made by our general partner acting
alone;
an amendment effected, necessitated or contemplated by a merger agreement that has been approved under
the terms of our partnership agreement;
any amendment that our general partner determines to be necessary or appropriate for the formation by us of, or
our investment in, any corporation, partnership or other entity, as otherwise permitted by our partnership
agreement;
•
•
•
•
Table of Contents
38
•
•
a change in our fiscal year or taxable year and related changes;
conversions into, mergers with or conveyances to another limited liability entity that is newly formed and has no
assets, liabilities or operations at the time of the conversion, merger or conveyance other than those it receives
by way of the conversion, merger or conveyance; or
•
any other amendments substantially similar to any of the matters described in the clauses above.
In addition, our general partner may make amendments to our partnership agreement, without the approval of any limited
partner, if our general partner determines that those amendments:
•
•
•
do not adversely affect the limited partners, considered as a whole, or any particular class of limited partners, in
any material respect;
are necessary or appropriate to satisfy any requirements, conditions or guidelines contained in any opinion,
directive, order, ruling or regulation of any federal or state agency or judicial authority or contained in any federal
or state statute;
are necessary or appropriate to facilitate the trading of limited partner interests or to comply with any rule,
regulation, guideline or requirement of any securities exchange on which the limited partner interests are or will
be listed for trading;
•
•
•
are necessary or appropriate for any action taken by our general partner relating to splits or combinations of
units under the provisions of our partnership agreement;
are necessary or appropriate in connection with the creation, authorization or issuance of any class or series of
partnership securities; or
are required to effect the intent expressed in this prospectus or the intent of the provisions of our partnership
agreement or are otherwise contemplated by our partnership agreement.
Opinion of Counsel and Unitholder Approval
Any amendment that our general partner determines adversely affects in any material respect one or more particular
classes of limited partners will require the approval of at least a majority of the class or classes so affected, but no vote
will be required by any class or classes of limited partners that our general partner determines are not adversely affected
in any material respect. Any amendment that would have a material adverse effect on the rights or preferences of any type
or class of outstanding units in relation to other classes of units will require the approval of at least a majority of the type or
class of units so affected. Any amendment that would reduce or increase the voting percentage required to take any
action other than to remove the general partner or call a meeting of unitholders is required to be approved by the
affirmative vote of limited partners whose aggregate outstanding units constitute not less than the voting requirement
sought to be reduced or increased. Any amendment that would increase the percentage of units required to remove the
general partner or call a meeting of unitholders must be approved by the affirmative vote of limited partners whose
aggregate outstanding units constitute not less than the percentage sought to be increased. For amendments of the type
not requiring unitholder approval, our general partner will not be required to obtain an opinion of counsel that an
amendment will neither result in a loss of limited liability to the limited partners nor result in our being treated as a taxable
entity for federal income tax purposes in connection with any of the amendments. No other amendments to our
partnership agreement will become effective without the approval of holders of at least 90% of the outstanding units
(including the Class B Units), voting as a single class, unless we first obtain an opinion of counsel to the effect that the
amendment will not affect the limited liability under applicable law of any of our limited partners.
Merger, Consolidation, Conversion, Sale or Other Disposition of Assets
A merger, consolidation or conversion of us requires the prior consent of our general partner. However, our general
partner will have no duty or obligation to consent to any merger, consolidation or conversion and may decline to do so
free of any fiduciary duty or obligation whatsoever to us or the limited partners, including any duty to act in good faith or in
the best interest of us or the limited partners.
Table of Contents
39
In addition, our partnership agreement generally prohibits our general partner, without the prior approval of the holders of
a unit majority, from causing us to sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets in a single
transaction or a series of related transactions, including by way of merger, consolidation or other combination. Our
general partner may, however, mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or grant a security interest in all or substantially all of our
assets without such approval. Our general partner may also sell all or substantially all of our assets under a foreclosure or
other realization upon those encumbrances without such approval. Finally, our general partner may consummate any
merger without the prior approval of our unitholders if we are the surviving entity in the transaction, our general partner
has received an opinion of counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters, the transaction would not result in a material
amendment to the partnership agreement (other than an amendment that the general partner could adopt without the
consent of other partners), each of our units will be an identical unit of our partnership following the transaction and the
partnership securities to be issued do not exceed 20% of our outstanding partnership interests (other than incentive
distribution rights) immediately prior to the transaction. If the conditions specified in our partnership agreement are
satisfied, our general partner may convert us or any of our subsidiaries into a new limited liability entity or merge us or any
of our subsidiaries into, or convey all of our assets to, a newly formed entity, if the sole purpose of that conversion, merger
or conveyance is to effect a mere change in our legal form into another limited liability entity, we have received an opinion
of counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters and the governing instruments of the new entity provide the limited
partners and our general partner with the same rights and obligations as contained in our partnership agreement. Our
unitholders are not entitled to dissenters’ rights of appraisal under our partnership agreement or applicable Delaware law
in the event of a conversion, merger or consolidation, a sale of substantially all of our assets or any other similar
transaction or event.
We will continue as a limited partnership until dissolved under our partnership agreement. We will dissolve upon:
Dissolution
•
•
•
•
the election of our general partner to dissolve us, if approved by the holders of units representing a unit majority;
there being no limited partners, unless we are continued without dissolution in accordance with applicable
Delaware law;
the entry of a decree of judicial dissolution of our partnership; or
the withdrawal or removal of our general partner or any other event that results in its ceasing to be our general
partner other than by reason of a transfer of its general partner interest in accordance with our partnership
agreement or its withdrawal or removal following the approval and admission of a successor.
Upon a dissolution under the last clause above, the holders of a unit majority may also elect, within specific time
limitations, to continue our business on the same terms and conditions described in our partnership agreement by
appointing as a successor general partner an entity approved by the holders of units representing a unit majority, subject
to our receipt of an opinion of counsel to the effect that:
•
•
the action would not result in the loss of limited liability under Delaware law of any limited partner; and
neither our partnership nor any of our subsidiaries would be treated as an association taxable as a corporation
or otherwise be taxable as an entity for federal income tax purposes upon the exercise of that right to continue
(to the extent not already so treated or taxed).
Liquidation and Distribution of Proceeds
Upon our dissolution, unless our business is continued, the liquidator authorized to wind up our affairs will, acting with all
of the powers of our general partner that are necessary or appropriate, liquidate our assets and apply the proceeds of the
liquidation as described in “How We Make Distributions To Our Partners—Distributions of Cash Upon Liquidation.” The
liquidator may defer liquidation or distribution of our assets for a reasonable period of time or distribute assets to partners
in kind if it determines that a sale would be impractical or would cause undue loss to our partners.
Table of Contents
40
Withdrawal or Removal of Our General Partner
Except as described below, our general partner has agreed not to withdraw voluntarily as our general partner prior to
June 30, 2022 without obtaining the approval of the holders of at least a majority of the outstanding common units,
excluding common units held by our general partner and its affiliates, and furnishing an opinion of counsel regarding
limited liability and tax matters. On or after June 30, 2022, our general partner may withdraw as general partner without
first obtaining approval of any unitholder by giving 90 days’ written notice, and that withdrawal will not constitute a
violation of our partnership agreement. Notwithstanding the information above, our general partner may withdraw without
unitholder approval upon 90 days’ notice to the limited partners if at least 50% of the outstanding common units are held
or controlled by one person and its affiliates, other than our general partner and its affiliates. In addition, our partnership
agreement permits our general partner, in some instances, to sell or otherwise transfer all of its general partner interest in
us without the approval of the unitholders. Please read “—Transfer of General Partner Interest.”
Upon withdrawal of our general partner under any circumstances, other than as a result of a transfer by our general
partner of all or a part of its general partner interest in us, the holders of a unit majority may select a successor to that
withdrawing general partner. If a successor is not elected, or is elected but an opinion of counsel regarding limited liability
and tax matters cannot be obtained, we will be dissolved, wound up and liquidated, unless within a specified period after
that withdrawal, the holders of a unit majority agree in writing to continue our business and to appoint a successor
general partner. Please read “—Dissolution.”
Our general partner may not be removed unless that removal is approved by the vote of the holders of not less than
66 2/3% of the outstanding units (including the Class B Units), voting together as a single class, including units held by
our general partner and its affiliates, and we receive an opinion of counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters. Any
removal of our general partner is also subject to the approval of a successor general partner by the vote of the holders of
a majority of the outstanding common units, voting as a class, and the outstanding subordinated units, voting as a class.
The ownership of more than 33 1/3 % of the outstanding units by our general partner and its affiliates gives them the ability
to prevent our general partner’s removal.
Our partnership agreement also provides that if our general partner is removed as our general partner under
circumstances where cause does not exist:
•
•
all subordinated units held by any person who did not, and whose affiliates did not, vote any units in favor of the
removal of the general partner, will immediately and automatically convert into common units on a one-for-one
basis, provided such person is not an affiliate of the successor general partner; and
if all of the subordinated units convert pursuant to the foregoing, all cumulative common unit arrearages on the
common units will be extinguished and the subordination period will end.
In the event of the removal of our general partner under circumstances where cause exists or withdrawal of our general
partner where that withdrawal violates our partnership agreement, a successor general partner will have the option to
purchase the general partner interest and incentive distribution rights of the departing general partner and its affiliates for
a cash payment equal to the fair market value of those interests. Under all other circumstances where our general partner
withdraws or is removed by the limited partners, the departing general partner will have the option to require the
successor general partner to purchase the general partner interest and the incentive distribution rights of the departing
general partner and its affiliates for fair market value. In each case, this fair market value will be determined by agreement
between the departing general partner and the successor general partner. If no agreement is reached, an independent
investment banking firm or other independent expert selected by the departing general partner and the successor general
partner will determine the fair market value. Or, if the departing general partner and the successor general partner cannot
agree upon an expert, then an expert chosen by agreement of the experts selected by each of them will determine the fair
market value.
Table of Contents
41
If the option described above is not exercised by either the departing general partner or the successor general partner, the
departing general partner’s general partner interest and all its and its affiliates’ incentive distribution rights will
automatically convert into common units equal to the fair market value of those interests as determined by an investment
banking firm or other independent expert selected in the manner described in the preceding paragraph.
In addition, we will be required to reimburse the departing general partner for all amounts due the departing general
partner, including, without limitation, all employee-related liabilities, including severance liabilities, incurred as a result of
the termination of any employees employed for our benefit by the departing general partner or its affiliates.
Transfer of General Partner Interest
At any time, our general partner may transfer all or any of its general partner interest to another person without the
approval of any other partner. As a condition of this transfer, the transferee must, among other things, assume the rights
and duties of our general partner, agree to be bound by the provisions of our partnership agreement and furnish an
opinion of counsel regarding limited liability and tax matters.
Transfer of Ownership Interests in the General Partner
At any time, the owners of our general partner may sell or transfer all or part of its ownership interests in our general
partner to an affiliate or third party without the approval of our unitholders.
Transfer of Subordinated Units; Incentive Distribution Rights and Class B Units
By transfer of subordinated units, incentive distribution rights or Class B Units in accordance with our partnership
agreement, each transferee will be admitted as a limited partner with respect to the subordinated units, incentive
distribution rights or Class B Units transferred when such transfer and admission is reflected in our books and records.
Each transferee:
•
•
•
represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to become bound by our partnership
agreement;
automatically becomes bound by the terms and conditions of our partnership agreement; and
gives the consents, waivers and approvals contained in our partnership agreement.
Our general partner will cause any transfers to be recorded on our books and records no less frequently than quarterly.
We may, at our discretion, treat the nominee holder of subordinated units, incentive distribution rights or Class B Units as
the absolute owner. In that case, the beneficial holder’s rights are limited solely to those that it has against the nominee
holder as a result of any agreement between the beneficial owner and the nominee holder.
Subordinated units, incentive distribution rights and Class B Units are securities and any transfers are subject to the laws
governing transfer of securities. In addition to other rights acquired upon transfer, the transferor gives the transferee the
right to become a limited partner for the transferred subordinated units, incentive distribution rights or Class B Units.
Until a subordinated unit, incentive distribution right or Class B Unit has been transferred on our books, we and the
transfer agent may treat the record holder of the unit or right as the absolute owner for all purposes, except as otherwise
required by law or stock exchange regulations.
Table of Contents
42
Change of Management Provisions
Our partnership agreement contains specific provisions that are intended to discourage a person or group from attempting
to remove Hi-Crush GP LLC as our general partner or from otherwise changing our management. Please read “—
Withdrawal or Removal of Our General Partner” for a discussion of certain consequences of the removal of our general
partner. If any person or group, other than our general partner and its affiliates, acquires beneficial ownership of 20% or
more of any class of units, that person or group loses voting rights on all of its units. This loss of voting rights does not
apply in certain circumstances. Please read “—Meetings; Voting.”
Limited Call Right
If at any time our general partner and its affiliates own more than 80% of the then-issued and outstanding limited partner
interests of any class, our general partner will have the right, which it may assign in whole or in part to any of its affiliates
or beneficial owners or to us, to acquire all, but not less than all, of the limited partner interests of the class held by
unaffiliated persons, as of a record date to be selected by our general partner, on at least 10, but not more than 60, days’
notice. The purchase price in the event of this purchase is the greater of:
•
•
the highest price paid by our general partner or any of its affiliates for any limited partner interests of the class
purchased within the 90 days preceding the date on which our general partner first mails notice of its election to
purchase those limited partner interests; and
the average of the daily closing prices of the partnership securities of such class over the 20 trading days
preceding the date that is three days before the date the notice is mailed.
As a result of our general partner’s right to purchase outstanding limited partner interests, a holder of limited partner
interests may have his limited partner interests purchased at an undesirable time or at a price that may be lower than
market prices at various times prior to such purchase or lower than a unitholder may anticipate the market price to be in
the future. The tax consequences to a unitholder of the exercise of this call right are the same as a sale by that unitholder
of his common units in the market. Please read “Material Tax Considerations—Disposition of Units.”
Non-Taxpaying Holders; Redemption
To avoid any adverse effect on the maximum applicable rates chargeable to customers by us or any of our future
subsidiaries, or in order to reverse an adverse determination that has occurred regarding such maximum rate, our
partnership agreement provides our general partner the power to amend the agreement. If our general partner, with the
advice of counsel, determines that our not being treated as an association taxable as a corporation or otherwise taxable
as an entity for federal income tax purposes, coupled with the tax status (or lack of proof thereof) of one or more of our
limited partners, has, or is reasonably likely to have, a material adverse effect on the maximum applicable rates
chargeable to customers by our subsidiaries, then our general partner may adopt such amendments to our partnership
agreement as it determines necessary or advisable to:
•
•
obtain proof of the federal income tax status of our limited partners (and their owners, to the extent relevant); and
permit us to redeem the units held by any person whose tax status has or is reasonably likely to have a material
adverse effect on the maximum applicable rates or who fails to comply with the procedures instituted by our
general partner to obtain proof of the federal income tax status. The redemption price in the case of such a
redemption will be the average of the daily closing prices per unit for the 20 consecutive trading days
immediately prior to the date set for redemption.
43
Table of Contents
Non-Citizen Assignees; Redemption
If our general partner, with the advice of counsel, determines we are subject to federal, state or local laws or regulations
that, in the reasonable determination of our general partner, create a substantial risk of cancellation or forfeiture of any
property that we have an interest in because of the nationality, citizenship or other related status of any limited partner,
then our general partner may adopt such amendments to our partnership agreement as it determines necessary or
advisable to:
•
obtain proof of the nationality, citizenship or other related status of our limited partners (and their owners, to the
extent relevant); and
•
permit us to redeem the units held by any person whose nationality, citizenship or other related status creates
substantial risk of cancellation or forfeiture of any property or who fails to comply with the procedures instituted
by the general partner to obtain proof of the nationality, citizenship or other related status. The redemption price
in the case of such a redemption will be the average of the daily closing prices per unit for the 20 consecutive
trading days immediately prior to the date set for redemption.
Meetings; Voting
Except as described below regarding a person or group owning 20% or more of any class of units then outstanding,
record holders of units on the record date will be entitled to notice of, and to vote at, meetings of our limited partners and
to act upon matters for which approvals may be solicited.
Our general partner does not anticipate that any meeting of our unitholders will be called in the foreseeable future. Any
action that is required or permitted to be taken by the unitholders may be taken either at a meeting of the unitholders or
without a meeting if consents in writing describing the action so taken are signed by holders of the number of units
necessary to authorize or take that action at a meeting. Meetings of the unitholders may be called by our general partner
or by unitholders owning at least 20% of the outstanding units of the class for which a meeting is proposed. Unitholders
may vote either in person or by proxy at meetings. The holders of a majority of the outstanding units of the class or
classes for which a meeting has been called, represented in person or by proxy, will constitute a quorum, unless any
action by the unitholders requires approval by holders of a greater percentage of the units, in which case the quorum will
be the greater percentage.
Each record holder of a unit has a vote according to his percentage interest in us, although additional limited partner
interests having special voting rights could be issued. Please read “—Issuance of Additional Interests.” However, if at any
time any person or group, other than our general partner and its affiliates, or a direct or subsequently approved transferee
of our general partner or its affiliates and purchasers specifically approved by our general partner, acquires, in the
aggregate, beneficial ownership of 20% or more of any class of units then outstanding, that person or group will lose
voting rights on all of its units and the units may not be voted on any matter and will not be considered to be outstanding
when sending notices of a meeting of unitholders, calculating required votes, determining the presence of a quorum or for
other similar purposes. Common units held in nominee or street name account will be voted by the broker or other
nominee in accordance with the instruction of the beneficial owner unless the arrangement between the beneficial owner
and his nominee provides otherwise. Except as our partnership agreement otherwise provides, subordinated units will
vote together with common units, as a single class.
Any notice, demand, request, report or proxy material required or permitted to be given or made to record common
unitholders under our partnership agreement will be delivered to the record holder by us or by the transfer agent.
Table of Contents
44
Voting Rights of Incentive Distribution Rights
If a majority of the incentive distribution rights are held by our general partner and its affiliates, the holders of the incentive
distribution rights will have no right to vote in respect of such rights on any matter, unless otherwise required by law, and
the holders of the incentive distribution rights shall be deemed to have approved any matter approved by our general
partner.
If less than a majority of the incentive distribution rights are held by our general partner and its affiliates, the incentive
distribution rights will be entitled to vote on all matters submitted to a vote of unitholders, other than amendments and
other matters that our general partner determines do not adversely affect the holders of the incentive distribution rights in
any material respect. On any matter in which the holders of incentive distribution rights are entitled to vote, such holders
will vote together with the subordinated units, prior to the end of the subordination period, or together with the common
units, thereafter, in either case as a single class, and such incentive distribution rights shall be treated in all respects as
subordinated units or common units, as applicable, when sending notices of a meeting of our limited partners to vote on
any matter (unless otherwise required by law), calculating required votes, determining the presence of a quorum or for
other similar purposes under our partnership agreement. The relative voting power of the holders of the incentive
distribution rights and the subordinated units or common units, depending on which class the holders of incentive
distribution rights are voting with, will be set in the same proportion as cumulative cash distributions, if any, in respect of
the incentive distribution rights for the four consecutive quarters prior to the record date for the vote bears to the
cumulative cash distributions in respect of such class of units for such four quarters.
Status as Limited Partner
By transfer of common units in accordance with our partnership agreement, each transferee of common units shall be
admitted as a limited partner with respect to the common units transferred when such transfer and admission are reflected
in our books and records. Except as described under “—Limited Liability,” the common units will be fully paid, and
unitholders will not be required to make additional contributions.
Under our partnership agreement, in most circumstances, we will indemnify the following persons, to the fullest extent
permitted by law, from and against all losses, claims, damages or similar events:
Indemnification
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
our general partner;
any departing general partner;
any person who is or was an affiliate of our general partner or any departing general partner;
any person who is or was a manager, managing member, general partner, director, officer, fiduciary or trustee of
our partnership, our subsidiaries, our general partner, any departing general partner or any of their affiliates;
any person who is or was serving as a manager, managing member, general partners, director, officer,
employee, agent, fiduciary or trustee of another person owing a fiduciary duty to us or our subsidiaries;
any person who controls our general partner or any departing general partner; and
any person designated by our general partner.
Any indemnification under these provisions will only be out of our assets. Unless our general partner otherwise agrees, it
will not be personally liable for, or have any obligation to contribute or lend funds or assets to us to enable us to
effectuate, indemnification. We may purchase insurance against liabilities asserted against and expenses incurred by
persons for our activities, regardless of whether we would have the power to indemnify the person against liabilities under
our partnership agreement.
Table of Contents
45
Reimbursement of Expenses
Our partnership agreement requires us to reimburse our general partner for all direct and indirect expenses it incurs or
payments it makes on our behalf and all other expenses allocable to us or otherwise incurred by our general partner in
connection with operating our business. Our partnership agreement does not set a limit on the amount of expenses for
which our general partner and its affiliates may be reimbursed. These expenses include salary, bonus, incentive
compensation and other amounts paid to persons who perform services for us or on our behalf and expenses allocated to
our general partner by its affiliates. Our general partner is entitled to determine the expenses that are allocable to us. Our
general partner does not receive a management fee.
Books and Reports
Our general partner is required to keep appropriate books of our business at our principal offices. These books will be
maintained for both tax and financial reporting purposes on an accrual basis. For tax and fiscal reporting purposes, our
fiscal year is the calendar year.
We will furnish or make available to record holders of our common units, within 105 days after the close of each fiscal
year, an annual report containing audited consolidated financial statements and a report on those consolidated financial
statements by our independent public accountants. Except for our fourth quarter, we will also furnish or make available
summary financial information within 50 days after the close of each quarter. We will be deemed to have made any such
report available if we file such report with the SEC on EDGAR or make the report available on a publicly available
website which we maintain.
We will furnish each record holder with information reasonably required for federal and state tax reporting purposes within
90 days after the close of each calendar year. This information is expected to be furnished in summary form so that some
complex calculations normally required of partners can be avoided. Our ability to furnish this summary information to our
unitholders will depend on their cooperation in supplying us with specific information. Every unitholder will receive
information to assist him in determining his federal and state tax liability and in filing his federal and state income tax
returns, regardless of whether he supplies us with the necessary information.
Right to Inspect Our Books and Records
Our partnership agreement provides that a limited partner can, for a purpose reasonably related to his interest as a limited
partner, upon reasonable written demand stating the purpose of such demand and at his own expense, have furnished to
him:
•
•
•
a current list of the name and last known address of each record holder;
copies of our partnership agreement, our certificate of limited partnership, and all amendments thereto, together
with copies of the executed copies of all powers of attorney pursuant to which our partnership agreement, our
certificate of limited partnership and all amendments thereto have been executed;
information regarding the status of our business and financial condition (provided that obligation shall be
satisfied to the extent the limited partner is furnished our most recent annual report and any subsequent
quarterly or periodic reports required to be filed (or which would be required to be filed) with the SEC pursuant
to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act); and
•
any other information regarding our affairs that our general partner determines is just and reasonable.
Under our partnership agreement, however, each of our limited partners and other persons who acquire interests in our
partnership interests, do not have rights to receive information from us or any of the persons we indemnify as described
above under “—Indemnification” for the purpose of determining whether to pursue litigation or assist in pending litigation
against us or those indemnified persons relating to our affairs, except pursuant to the applicable rules of discovery
relating to the litigation commenced by the person seeking information.
Table of Contents
46
Our general partner may, and intends to, keep confidential from the limited partners trade secrets or other information the
disclosure of which our general partner believes in good faith is not in our best interests or that we are required by law or
by agreements with third parties to keep confidential.
Registration Rights
Under our partnership agreement, we have agreed to register for resale under the Securities Act and applicable state
securities laws any common units, subordinated units or other limited partner interests proposed to be sold by our general
partner or any of its affiliates or their assignees if an exemption from the registration requirements is not otherwise
available. These registration rights continue for two years following any withdrawal or removal of our general partner. We
are obligated to pay all expenses incidental to the registration, excluding underwriting discounts.
Table of Contents
47
MATERIAL TAX CONSIDERATIONS
This section summarizes the material federal income tax consequences that may be relevant to prospective unitholders
and is based upon current provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), existing and
proposed Treasury regulations thereunder (the “Treasury Regulations”), and current administrative rulings and court
decisions, all of which are subject to change. Changes in these authorities may cause the federal income tax
consequences to a prospective unitholder to vary substantially from those described below. Unless the context otherwise
requires, references in this section to “we” or “us” are references to Hi-Crush Partners LP and its subsidiaries.
Legal conclusions contained in this section, unless otherwise noted, are the opinion of Fulbright & Jaworski LLP and are
based on the accuracy of representations made by us to them for this purpose and are subject to the assumptions,
qualifications and limitations set forth herein. However, this section does not address all federal income tax matters that
affect us or our unitholders. Furthermore, this section focuses on unitholders who are individual citizens or residents of
the United States (for federal income tax purposes), who have the U.S. dollar as their functional currency and who hold
units as capital assets (generally, property that is held for investment). This section has limited applicability to
corporations, partnerships, (including entities treated as partnerships for federal income tax purposes), estates, trusts,
non-resident aliens or other unitholders subject to specialized tax treatment, such as tax-exempt institutions, non-U.S.
persons, individual retirement accounts (“IRAs”), employee benefit plans, real estate investment trusts or mutual funds.
Accordingly, we encourage each unitholder to consult the unitholder’s own tax advisor in analyzing the federal,
state, local and non-U.S. tax consequences particular to that unitholder resulting from ownership or disposition
of units.
We are relying on opinions and advice of Fulbright & Jaworski LLP with respect to the matters described herein. An
opinion of counsel represents only that counsel’s best legal judgment and does not bind the IRS or a court. Accordingly,
the opinions and statements made herein may not be sustained by a court if contested by the IRS. Any such contest of the
matters described herein may materially and adversely impact the market for units and the prices at which units trade. In
addition, our costs of any contest with the IRS will be borne indirectly by our unitholders and our general partner because
the costs will reduce our cash available for distribution. Furthermore, the tax consequences of an investment in us, may
be significantly modified by future legislative or administrative changes or court decisions, which may be retroactively
applied.
For the reasons described below, Fulbright & Jaworski LLP has not rendered an opinion with respect to the following
federal income tax issues: (1) the treatment of a unitholder whose units are the subject of a securities loan (e.g., a loan to
a short seller to cover a short sale of units) (please read “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Treatment of
Securities Loans”); (2) whether our convention for allocating taxable income and losses is permitted by existing Treasury
Regulations (please read “—Disposition of Units—Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees”); and (3) whether
our method for taking into account Section 743 adjustments is sustainable in certain cases (please read “—Tax
Consequences of Unit Ownership—Section 754 Election” and “—Uniformity of Units”).
Partnership Status
Taxation of the Partnership
We expect to be treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and, therefore, generally will not be liable for
federal income taxes. Instead, as described below, each of our unitholders will take into account its respective share of
our items of income, gain, loss and deduction in computing its federal income tax liability as if the unitholder had earned
such income directly, even if we make no cash distributions to the unitholder. Distributions we make to a unitholder
generally will not give rise to income or gain taxable to such unitholder, unless the amount of cash distributed exceeds
the unitholder’s adjusted tax basis in its units.
Section 7704 of the Code generally provides that publicly-traded partnerships will be treated as corporations for federal
income tax purposes. However, if 90% or more of a partnership’s gross income for every taxable year it is publicly-traded
consists of “qualifying income,” the partnership may continue to be treated as a partnership
Table of Contents
48
for federal income tax purposes (the “Qualifying Income Exception”). Qualifying income includes (i) income and gains
derived from the exploration, development, mining or production, processing, refining, transportation, and marketing of
any mineral or natural resource, including sand, (ii) interest (other than from a financial business), (iii) dividends, (iv) gains
from the sale of real property and (v) gains from the sale or other disposition of capital assets held for the production of
qualifying income. We estimate that less than 2% of our current gross income is not qualifying income; however, this
estimate could change from time to time.
Based upon factual representations made by us and our general partner regarding the composition of our gross income
and the other representations set forth below, Fulbright & Jaworski LLP is of the opinion that we will be treated as a
partnership for federal income tax purposes. In rendering its opinion, Fulbright & Jaworski LLP has relied on factual
representations made by us and our general partner. The representations made by us and our general partner upon
which Fulbright & Jaworski LLP has relied include, without limitation:
(a) Neither we nor any of our partnership or limited liability company subsidiaries has elected to be treated as a
corporation for federal income tax purposes; and
(b) For each taxable year since and including the year of our initial public offering, more than 90% of our gross income
has been and will be income of a character that Fulbright & Jaworski LLP has opined is “qualifying income” within the
meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code.
We believe that these representations are true and will be true in the future.
If we fail to meet the Qualifying Income Exception, other than a failure that is determined by the IRS to be inadvertent and
that is cured within a reasonable time after discovery (in which case the IRS may also require us to make adjustments
with respect to our unitholders or pay other amounts), we will be treated as transferring all of our assets, subject to
liabilities, to a newly formed corporation, on the first day of the year in which we fail to meet the Qualifying Income
Exception, in return for stock in that corporation and then as distributing that stock to our unitholders in liquidation. This
deemed contribution and liquidation should not result in the recognition of taxable income by our unitholders or us so
long as our liabilities, at that time, do not exceed the aggregate tax bases of our assets. Thereafter, we would be treated
as an association taxable as a corporation for federal income tax purposes.
If for any reason we are taxable as a corporation in any taxable year, our items of income, gain, loss and deduction would
be taken into account by us in determining the amount of our federal income tax liabilities, rather than being passed
through to our unitholders. Our taxation as a corporation would materially reduce the cash available for distribution to our
unitholders and thus would likely substantially reduce the value of our units. Any distribution made to a unitholder at a
time we are treated as a corporation would be (i) a taxable dividend to the extent of our current or accumulated earnings
and profits, then (ii) a nontaxable return of capital to the extent of the unitholder’s tax basis in its units, and thereafter
(iii) taxable capital gain.
The remainder of this discussion assumes that we will be treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
Limited Partner Status
Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership
Unitholders who are admitted as limited partners of the partnership, as well as unitholders whose units are held in street
name or by a nominee and who have the right to direct the nominee in the exercise of all substantive rights attendant to
the ownership of units, will be treated as partners of the partnership for federal income tax purposes. For a discussion
related to the risks of losing partner status as a result of securities loans, please read “—Tax Consequences of Unit
Ownership—Treatment of Securities Loans.” No portion of our income, gains, deductions or losses is reportable by a
unitholder who is not our partner for federal income tax
Table of Contents
49
purposes, and any cash distributions received by such a unitholder would therefore appear to be fully taxable as ordinary
income. Unitholders who are not treated as partners in us as described above are urged to consult their own tax advisors
with respect to the tax consequences applicable to them under the circumstances.
The discussion below assumes that a holder of our units is treated as one of our partners for federal income tax purposes.
Flow-Through of Taxable Income
Subject to the discussion below under “—Entity-Level Collections of Unitholder Taxes” with respect to payments we may
be required to make on behalf of our unitholders, we will not pay any federal income tax. Rather, each unitholder will be
required to report on its federal income tax return each year its share of our income, gains, losses and deductions for our
taxable year or years ending with or within its taxable year. Consequently, we may allocate income to a unitholder even if
that unitholder has not received a cash distribution.
Basis of Units
A unitholder’s tax basis in its units initially will be the amount paid for those units plus the unitholder’s share of our
nonrecourse liabilities. That basis generally will be (i) increased by the unitholder’s share of our income and any
increases in such unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities, and (ii) decreased, but not below zero, by the amount
of all distributions to the unitholder, the unitholder’s share of our losses, and any decreases in its share of our
nonrecourse liabilities.
Treatment of Distributions
Distributions made by us to a unitholder generally will not be taxable to the unitholder, unless such distributions exceed
the unitholder’s tax basis in its units immediately prior to the distribution, in which case the unitholder generally will
recognize gain taxable in the manner described below under “—Disposition of Units.”
Any reduction in a unitholder’s share of our liabilities for which no partner, including the general partner, bears the
economic risk of loss (hereafter referred to as the “nonrecourse liabilities”), will be treated as a distribution by us of cash to
that unitholder. A decrease in a unitholder’s percentage interest in us because of our issuance of additional units may
decrease the unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities and result in a corresponding deemed distribution of cash.
For purposes of the foregoing, a unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities generally will be based upon that
unitholder’s share of the unrealized appreciation (or depreciation) in our assets, to the extent thereof, with any excess
liabilities allocated based on the unitholder’s share of our profits. Please read “—Disposition of Units.”
A non-pro rata distribution of money or property (including a deemed distribution as a result of the reallocation of our
liabilities described above) may cause a unitholder to recognize ordinary income, if the distribution reduces the
unitholder’s share of our “unrealized receivables,” including depreciation and depletion recapture and substantially
appreciated “inventory items,” both as defined in Section 751 of the Code (“Section 751 Assets”). To the extent of such
reduction, the unitholder would be deemed to receive its proportionate share of the Section 751 Assets and exchange
such assets with us for a non-pro rata portion of the actual distribution made to the unitholder. This deemed exchange
generally will result in the unitholder’s recognition of ordinary income in an amount equal to the excess of (1) the non-pro
rata portion of that distribution over (2) the unitholder’s tax basis (generally zero) in the share of Section 751 Assets
deemed relinquished in the exchange.
Limitations on Deductibility of Losses
A unitholder may not be entitled to deduct the full amount of loss we allocate to it because such deduction will be limited
to the lesser of (i) the unitholder’s tax basis in its units, and (ii) in the case of a unitholder that is an individual, estate, trust
or certain types of closely-held corporations, the amount for which the unitholder is
Table of Contents
50
considered to be “at risk” with respect to our activities. In general, a unitholder will be at risk to the extent of its tax basis in
its units, excluding any portion of that basis attributable to his share of our nonrecourse liabilities, reduced by (1) any
portion of that basis representing amounts otherwise protected against loss because of a guarantee, stop loss agreement
or similar arrangement and (2) any amount of money the unitholder borrows to acquire or hold its units, if the lender of
those borrowed funds owns an interest in us, is related to another unitholder or can look only to the units for repayment. A
unitholder subject to the at risk limitation must recapture losses deducted in previous years to the extent that distributions
(including distributions deemed to result from a reduction in a unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities) cause the
unitholder’s at risk amount to be less than zero at the end of any taxable year.
Losses disallowed to a unitholder or recaptured as a result of the basis or at risk limitations will carry forward and will be
allowable as a deduction in a later year to the extent that the unitholder’s tax basis or at risk amount, whichever is the
limiting factor, is subsequently increased. Upon a taxable disposition of units, any gain recognized by a unitholder can be
offset by losses that were previously suspended by the at risk limitation but not losses suspended by the basis limitation.
Any loss previously suspended by the at risk limitation in excess of that gain can no longer be used.
In addition to the basis and at risk limitations, a passive activity loss limitation generally limits the deductibility of losses
incurred by individuals, estates, trusts, some closely-held corporations and personal service corporations from “passive
activities” (generally, trade or business activities in which the taxpayer does not materially participate) only to the extent of
the taxpayer’s income from those passive activities. The passive loss limitations are applied separately with respect to
each publicly-traded partnership. Consequently, any passive losses we generate will be available to offset only passive
income generated by us. Passive losses that exceed a unitholder’s share of passive income we generate may be
deducted in full when the unitholder disposes of all of its units in a fully taxable transaction with an unrelated party. The
passive loss rules generally are applied after other applicable limitations on deductions, including the at risk and basis
limitations.
Limitations on Interest Deductions
The deductibility of a non-corporate taxpayer’s “investment interest expense” generally is limited to the amount of that
taxpayer’s “net investment income.” Investment interest expense includes:
•
•
•
interest on indebtedness allocable to property held for investment;
interest expense allocated against portfolio income; and
the portion of interest expense incurred to purchase or carry an interest in a passive activity to the extent
allocable against portfolio income.
The computation of a unitholder’s investment interest expense will take into account interest on any margin account
borrowing or other loan incurred to purchase or carry a unit. Net investment income includes gross income from property
held for investment and amounts treated as portfolio income under the passive loss rules, less deductible expenses other
than interest directly connected with the production of investment income. Net investment income generally does not
include qualified dividend income or gains attributable to the disposition of property held for investment. A unitholder’s
share of a publicly-traded partnership’s portfolio income and, according to the IRS, net passive income, will be treated as
investment income for purposes of the investment interest expense limitation.
Entity-Level Collections of Unitholder Taxes
If we are required or elect under applicable law to pay any federal, state, local or non-U.S. tax on behalf of any current or
former unitholder or our general partner, we are authorized to treat the payment as a distribution of cash to the relevant
unitholder or general partner. Where the tax is payable on behalf of all unitholders or we
Table of Contents
51
cannot determine the specific unitholder on whose behalf the tax is payable, we are authorized to treat the payment as a
distribution to all current unitholders. Payments by us as described above could give rise to an overpayment of tax on
behalf of a unitholder, in which event the unitholder may be entitled to claim a refund of the overpayment amount.
Unitholders are urged to consult their tax advisors to determine the consequences to them of any tax payment we make
on their behalf.
Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction
In general, if we have a net profit, our items of income, gain, loss and deduction will generally be allocated to our
unitholders in accordance with their percentage interests in us, subject to certain allocations to the general partner. If we
have a net loss, our items of income, gain, loss and deduction will be allocated first among our unitholders in accordance
with their percentage interests in us to the extent of their positive capital accounts and thereafter to our general partner. At
any time that distributions are made with respect to common units and not with respect to subordinated units, or that
incentive distributions are made to our sponsor, gross income will be allocated to the recipients to the extent of such
distributions.
Specified items of our income, gain, loss and deduction will be allocated under Section 704(c) of the Code to account for
any difference between the tax basis and fair market value of our assets at the time such assets are contributed to us and
at the time of any subsequent offering of our units (a “Book-Tax Disparity”). In addition, items of recapture income will be
specially allocated to the extent possible to the unitholder who was allocated the deduction giving rise to that recapture
income in order to minimize the recognition of ordinary income by other unitholders.
Treatment of Securities Loans
A unitholder whose units are loaned (for example, a loan to “short seller” to cover a short sale of units) may be treated as
having disposed of those units. If so, such unitholder would no longer be treated for federal income tax purposes as a
partner with respect to those units during the period of the loan and may recognize gain or loss from the disposition. As a
result, during this period (i) any of our income, gain, loss or deduction allocated to those units would not be reportable by
the lending unitholder, and (ii) any cash distributions received by the unitholder as to those units may be treated as
ordinary taxable income.
Due to a lack of controlling authority, Fulbright & Jaworski LLP has not rendered an opinion regarding the tax treatment of
a unitholder that enters into a securities loan with respect to its units. Unitholders desiring to assure their status as
partners and avoid the risk of income recognition from a loan of their units are urged to modify any applicable brokerage
account agreements to prohibit their brokers from borrowing and lending their units. The IRS has announced that it is
studying issues relating to the tax treatment of short sales of partnership interests. Please read “—Disposition of Units—
Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
Tax Rates
Under current law, the highest marginal federal income tax rates for individuals applicable to ordinary income and long-
term capital gains (generally, gains from the sale or exchange of certain investment assets held for more than one year)
are 39.6% and 20%, respectively. These rates are subject to change by new legislation at any time.
In addition, a 3.8% Medicare tax on certain net investment income earned by individuals, estates, and trusts may apply.
For these purposes, net investment income generally includes a unitholder’s allocable share of our income and gain
realized by a unitholder from a sale of units. In the case of an individual, the tax will be imposed on the lesser of (i) the
unitholder’s net investment income from all investments, or (ii) the amount by which the unitholder’s modified adjusted
gross income exceeds $250,000 (if the unitholder is married and filing jointly or a
52
Table of Contents
surviving spouse), $125,000 (if married filing separately) or $200,000 (if the unitholder is unmarried). In the case of an
estate or trust, the tax will be imposed on the lesser of (i) undistributed net investment income, or (ii) the excess adjusted
gross income over the dollar amount at which the highest income tax bracket applicable to an estate or trust begins.
Alternative Minimum Tax
If a unitholder is subject to federal alternative minimum tax, such tax will apply to such unitholder’s distributive share of
any items of our income, gain, loss or deduction. The current alternative minimum tax rate for non-corporate taxpayers is
26% on the first $179,500 of alternative minimum taxable income in excess of the exemption amount and 28% on any
additional alternative minimum taxable income. Prospective unitholders are urged to consult their tax advisors as to the
impact of an investment in the units on their liability for the alternative minimum tax.
Section 754 Election
We have made the election permitted by Section 754 of the Code that permits us to adjust the tax bases in our assets as
to specific purchasers of our units under Section 743(b) of the Code. The Section 743(b) adjustment separately applies to
each purchaser of units based upon the values and bases of our assets at the time of the relevant purchase, and the
adjustment will reflect the purchase price paid. The Section 743(b) adjustment does not apply to a person who purchases
units directly from us.
The IRS may challenge the positions we adopt with respect to depreciating or amortizing the Section 743(b) adjustment
we take to preserve the uniformity of units due to lack of controlling authority. Because a unitholder’s tax basis for its units
is reduced by its share of our items of deduction or loss, any position we take that understates deductions will overstate a
unitholder’s basis in its units, and may cause the unitholder to understate gain or overstate loss on any sale of such units.
Please read “—Disposition of Units—Recognition of Gain or Loss.” If a challenge to such treatment were sustained, the
gain from the sale of units may be increased without the benefit of additional deductions.
The calculations involved in the Section 754 election are complex and will be made on the basis of assumptions as to the
value of our assets and other matters. The IRS could seek to reallocate some or all of any Section 743(b) adjustment we
allocated to our assets subject to depreciation or depletion to goodwill or nondepreciable assets. Goodwill, as an
intangible asset, is generally nonamortizable or amortizable over a longer period of time or under a less accelerated
method than certain of our tangible assets. We cannot assure any unitholder that the determinations we make will not be
successfully challenged by the IRS or that the resulting deductions will not be reduced or disallowed altogether. Should
the IRS require a different tax basis adjustment to be made, and should, in our opinion, the expense of compliance
exceed the benefit of the election, we may seek permission from the IRS to revoke our Section 754 election. If permission
is granted, a subsequent purchaser of units may be allocated more income than it would have been allocated had the
election not been revoked.
Accounting Method and Taxable Year
Tax Treatment of Operations
We will use the year ending December 31 as our taxable year and the accrual method of accounting for federal income
tax purposes. Each unitholder will be required to include in income its share of our income, gain, loss and deduction for
each taxable year ending within or with its taxable year. In addition, a unitholder who has a taxable year ending on a date
other than December 31 and who disposes of all of its units following the close of our taxable year but before the close of
its taxable year must include its share of our income, gain, loss and deduction in income for its taxable year, with the
result that it will be required to include in income for its taxable year its share of more than one year of our income, gain,
loss and deduction. Please read “—Disposition of Units—Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees.”
53
Table of Contents
Tax Basis, Depreciation and Amortization
The tax basis of our assets will be used for purposes of computing depreciation and cost recovery deductions and,
ultimately, gain or loss on the disposition of these assets. The federal income tax burden associated with the difference
between the fair market value of our assets and their tax basis immediately prior to an offering generally will be borne by
our partners holding interests in us prior to the offering. Please read “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—
Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction.”
If we dispose of depreciable property by sale, foreclosure or otherwise, all or a portion of any gain, determined by
reference to the amount of depreciation and depletion deductions previously taken, may be subject to the recapture rules
and taxed as ordinary income rather than capital gain. Similarly, a unitholder who has taken cost recovery or depreciation
deductions with respect to property we own will likely be required to recapture some or all of those deductions as ordinary
income upon a sale of its interest in us. Please read “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Allocation of Income,
Gain, Loss and Deduction” and “—Disposition of Units—Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
The costs we incur in offering and selling our units (called “syndication expenses”) must be capitalized and cannot be
deducted currently, ratably or upon our termination. While there are uncertainties regarding the classification of costs as
organization expenses, which may be amortized by us, and as syndication expenses, which may not be amortized by us,
the underwriting discounts and commissions we incur will be treated as syndication expenses.
Valuation and Tax Basis of Our Properties
The federal income tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of units will depend in part on our estimates of
the relative fair market values and the tax bases of our assets. Although we may from time to time consult with
professional appraisers regarding valuation matters, we will make many of the relative fair market value estimates
ourselves. These estimates and determinations of tax basis are subject to challenge and will not be binding on the IRS or
the courts. If the estimates of fair market value or basis are later found to be incorrect, the character and amount of items of
income, gain, loss or deduction previously reported by unitholders could change, and unitholders could be required to
adjust their tax liability for prior years and incur interest and penalties with respect to those adjustments.
Sand Depletion
In general, we are entitled to depletion deductions with respect to silica (sand) mined from the underlying mineral
property. We generally are entitled to the greater of cost depletion limited to the basis of the property or percentage
depletion. The percentage depletion rate for sand is 5%.
Depletion deductions we claim generally will reduce the tax basis of the underlying mineral property. Percentage
depletion deductions can, however, exceed the total tax basis of the mineral property. Upon the disposition of the mineral
property, a portion of the gain, if any, equal to the lesser of the deductions for depletion which reduce the adjusted tax
basis of the mineral property plus deductible development and mining exploration expenses, or the amount of gain
recognized on the disposition, will be treated as ordinary income to us.
Sales of Sand Reserves
If any silica reserves are sold or otherwise disposed of in a taxable transaction, we will recognize gain or loss measured
by the difference between the amount realized (including the amount of any indebtedness assumed by the purchaser
upon such disposition or to which such property is subject) and the adjusted tax basis of the property sold. Generally, the
character of any gain or loss recognized upon that disposition will depend upon whether our silica reserves sold are held
by us:
•
for sale to customers in the ordinary course of business (i.e., we are a “dealer” with respect to that property);
Table of Contents
54
•
•
for use in a trade or business within the meaning of Section 1231 of the Code; or
as a capital asset within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code.
In determining dealer status with respect to silica reserves and other types of real estate, courts have identified a number
of factors for distinguishing between a particular property held for sale in the ordinary course of business and one held for
investment. Any determination must be based on all facts and circumstances surrounding the particular property for sale
in question.
We intend to hold our silica reserves for use in a trade or business and to achieve long-term capital appreciation.
Although our general partner may consider strategic sales of silica reserves consistent with achieving long-term capital
appreciation, our general partner does not anticipate frequent sales of silica reserves. Thus, we do not believe we will be
viewed as a dealer. Nonetheless, our purposes for holding our properties may change and our future activities could
cause us to be a “dealer” in silica reserves.
If we are not a dealer with respect to our silica reserves and we have held the disposed reserves for more than a one-year
period primarily for use in our trade or business, subject to the recapture rules discussed below, the character of any gain
or loss realized from a disposition of the property will be determined under Section 1231 of the Code. If we have not held
the property for more than one year at the time of the sale, gain or loss from the sale will be taxable as ordinary income.
A unitholder’s distributive share of any Section 1231 gain or loss generated by us will be aggregated with any other gains
or losses realized by that unitholder from the disposition of property used in a trade or business, as defined in
Section 1231(b) of the Code. If a net gain results, all such gains and losses will be long-term capital gains and losses. If a
net loss results, all such gains and losses will be ordinary income and losses. Net Section 1231 gains will be treated as
ordinary income to the extent of prior Section 1231 losses of the taxpayer or predecessor taxpayer for the five most recent
prior taxable years to the extent such losses have not previously been offset against Section 1231 gains. Losses are
deemed recaptured in the chronological order in which they arose.
If we are not a dealer with respect to our silica reserves and that property is not used in a trade or business, the property
will be a “capital asset” within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code. Subject to the recapture rules discussed below,
gain or loss recognized from the disposition of that property will be taxable as long term capital gain or loss if we have
held such reserves for more than one year and short term gain or loss if we have not satisfied that holding period.
Upon a disposition of silica reserves, a portion of the gain, if any, equal to the lesser of (i) the depletion deductions that
reduced the tax basis of the disposed mineral property, plus deductible mining and exploration and development
expenses, or (ii) the amount of gain recognized on the disposition, will be treated as ordinary income to us (the “recapture
rules”).
Recognition of Gain or Loss
Disposition of Units
A unitholder will be required to recognize gain or loss on a sale of units equal to the difference between the unitholder’s
amount realized and the unitholder’s tax basis in the units sold. A unitholder’s amount realized generally will equal the
sum of the cash or the fair market value of other property it receives plus its share of our nonrecourse liabilities with
respect to such units. Because the amount realized includes a unitholder’s share of our nonrecourse liabilities, the gain
recognized on the sale of units could result in a tax liability in excess of any cash received from the sale.
Except as noted below, gain or loss recognized by a unitholder on the sale or exchange of a unit held for more than one
year generally will be taxable as long-term capital gain or loss. However, gain or loss recognized
Table of Contents
55
on the disposition of units will be separately computed and taxed as ordinary income or loss under Section 751 of the
Code to the extent attributable to assets giving rise to depreciation or depletion recapture or other “unrealized
receivables” or to “inventory items.” Ordinary income attributable to such assets may exceed net taxable gain realized on
the sale of a unit and may be recognized even if there is a net taxable loss realized on the sale of a unit. Thus, a
unitholder may recognize both ordinary income and capital gain or loss upon a sale of units. Net capital loss may offset
capital gains and, in the case of individuals, up to $3,000 of ordinary income per year.
The IRS has ruled that a partner who acquires interests in a partnership in separate transactions must combine those
interests and maintain a single adjusted tax basis for all those interests. Upon a sale or other disposition of less than all of
those interests, a portion of that tax basis must be allocated to the interests sold using an “equitable apportionment”
method, which generally means that the tax basis allocated to the interest sold equals an amount that bears the same
relation to the partner’s tax basis in its entire interest in the partnership as the value of the interest sold bears to the value
of the partner’s entire interest in the partnership.
Treasury Regulations under Section 1223 of the Code allow a selling unitholder who can identify units transferred with an
ascertainable holding period to elect to use the actual holding period of the units transferred. Thus, according to the ruling
discussed above, a unitholder will be unable to select high or low basis units to sell as would be the case with corporate
stock, but, according to the Treasury Regulations, it may designate specific units sold for purposes of determining the
holding period of units transferred. A unitholder electing to use the actual holding period of units transferred must
consistently use that identification method for all subsequent sales or exchanges of our units. A unitholder considering
the purchase of additional units or a sale of units purchased in separate transactions is urged to consult its tax advisor as
to the possible consequences of this ruling and application of the Treasury Regulations.
Specific provisions of the Code affect the taxation of some financial products and securities, including partnership
interests, by treating a taxpayer as having sold an “appreciated” financial position, including a partnership interest with
respect to which gain would be recognized if it were sold, assigned or terminated at its fair market value, in the event the
taxpayer or a related person enters into:
•
•
•
a short sale;
an offsetting notional principal contract; or
a futures or forward contract with respect to the partnership interest or substantially identical property.
Moreover, if a taxpayer has previously entered into a short sale, an offsetting notional principal contract or a futures or
forward contract with respect to the partnership interest, the taxpayer will be treated as having sold that position if the
taxpayer or a related person then acquires the partnership interest or substantially identical property. The Secretary of the
Treasury is authorized to issue regulations that treat a taxpayer that enters into transactions or positions that have
substantially the same effect as the preceding transactions as having constructively sold the financial position.
Allocations Between Transferors and Transferee
In general, our taxable income or loss will be determined annually, will be prorated on a monthly basis and will be
subsequently apportioned among the unitholders in proportion to the number of units owned by each of them as of the
opening of the applicable exchange on the first business day of the month (the “Allocation Date”). However, gain or loss
realized on a sale or other disposition of our assets or, in the discretion of the general partner, any other extraordinary
item of income, gain, loss or deduction will be allocated among the unitholders on the Allocation Date in the month in
which such income, gain, loss or deduction is recognized. As a result, a unitholder transferring units may be allocated
income, gain, loss and deduction realized after the date of transfer.
Although simplifying conventions are contemplated by the Code and most publicly-traded partnerships use similar
simplifying conventions, the use of this method may not be permitted under existing Treasury
Table of Contents
56
Regulations. Recently, however, the Department of the Treasury and the IRS issued proposed Treasury Regulations that
provide a safe harbor pursuant to which a publicly-traded partnership may use a similar monthly simplifying convention to
allocate tax items among transferor and transferee unitholders, although such tax items must be prorated on a daily basis.
Nonetheless, the proposed regulations do not specifically authorize the use of the proration method we have adopted.
Accordingly, Fulbright & Jaworski LLP is unable to opine on the validity of this method of allocating income and
deductions between transferee and transferor unitholders. If this method is not allowed under the final Treasury
Regulations, or only applies to transfers of less than all of the unitholder’s interest, our taxable income or losses could be
reallocated among our unitholders. We are authorized to revise our method of allocation between transferee and
transferor unitholders, as well as among unitholders whose interests vary during a taxable year, to conform to a method
permitted under future Treasury Regulations.
A unitholder who disposes of units prior to the record date set for a cash distribution for that quarter will be allocated items
of our income, gain, loss and deduction attributable to the month of disposition but will not be entitled to receive a cash
distribution for that period.
Notification Requirements
A unitholder who sells or purchases any of its units is generally required to notify us in writing of that transaction within 30
days after the transaction (or, if earlier, January 15 of the year following the transaction). Upon receiving such
notifications, we are required to notify the IRS of that transaction and to furnish specified information to the transferor and
transferee. Failure to notify us of a transfer of units may, in some cases, lead to the imposition of penalties. However,
these reporting requirements do not apply to a sale by an individual who is a citizen of the United States and who effects
the sale through a broker who will satisfy such requirements.
Constructive Termination
We will be considered to have “constructively” terminated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes upon the sale
or exchange of 50% or more of the total interests in our capital and profits within a twelve-month period. For such
purposes, multiple sales of the same unit are counted only once. A constructive termination results in the closing of our
taxable year for all unitholders. In the case of a unitholder reporting on a taxable year other than the calendar year, the
closing of our taxable year may result in more than twelve months of our taxable income or loss being includable in such
unitholder’s taxable income for the year of termination.
A constructive termination occurring on a date other than December 31 generally would require that we file two tax
returns for one fiscal year and the cost of the preparation of these returns will be borne by all unitholders. However, the
IRS is considering relief procedures that may allow a constructively terminated partnership to provide a single Schedule
K-1 for the calendar year in which a termination occurs. Following a constructive termination, we would be required to
make new tax elections, including a new election under Section 754 of the Code, and the termination would result in a
deferral of our deductions for depreciation. A termination could also result in penalties if we were unable to determine that
the termination had occurred. Moreover, a termination may either accelerate the application of, or subject us to, any tax
legislation enacted before the termination that would not otherwise have been applied to us as a continuing as opposed
to a terminating partnership.
Uniformity of Units
Because we cannot match transferors and transferees of units and other reasons, we must maintain uniformity of the
economic and tax characteristics of the units to a transferee of these units. In the absence of uniformity, we may be unable
to completely comply with a number of federal income tax requirements. Any non-uniformity may have a negative impact
on the value of the units. Please read “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership—Section 754 Election.”
Our partnership agreement permits our general partner to take positions in filing our tax returns that preserve the
uniformity of our units. These positions may include reducing the depreciation, amortization or loss
Table of Contents
57
deductions to which a unitholder would otherwise be entitled or reporting a slower amortization of Section 743(b)
adjustments for some unitholders than that to which they would otherwise be entitled. Fulbright & Jaworski LLP is unable
to opine as to validity of such filing positions.
A unitholder’s basis in units is reduced by its share of our deductions (whether or not such deductions were claimed on
an individual income tax return) so that any position that we take that understates deductions will overstate the
unitholder’s basis in its units, and may cause the unitholder to understate gain or overstate loss on any sale of such units.
Please read “—Disposition of Units—Recognition of Gain or Loss” above and “—Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership
—Section 754 Election” above. The IRS may challenge one or more of any positions we take to preserve the uniformity of
units. If such a challenge were sustained, the uniformity of units might be affected, and, under some circumstances, the
gain from the sale of units might be increased without the benefit of additional deductions.
Tax-Exempt Organizations and Other Investors
Ownership of units by employee benefit plans, other tax-exempt organizations, non-resident aliens, non-U.S. corporations
and other non-U.S. persons raises issues unique to those investors and, as described below, may have substantially
adverse tax consequences to them. Prospective unitholders that are tax-exempt entities or non-U.S. persons should
consult their tax advisors before investing in our units. Employee benefit plans and most other tax-exempt organizations,
including IRAs and other retirement plans, are subject to federal income tax on unrelated business taxable income.
Virtually all of our income will be unrelated business taxable income and will be taxable to a tax-exempt unitholder.
Non-resident aliens and foreign corporations, trusts or estates that own units will be considered to be engaged in
business in the United States because of their ownership of our units. Consequently, they will be required to file federal
tax returns to report their share of our income, gain, loss or deduction and pay federal income tax at regular rates on their
share of our net income or gain. Moreover, under rules applicable to publicly-traded partnerships, distributions to non-
U.S. unitholders are subject to withholding at the highest applicable effective tax rate, and we may treat the amount
withheld as a distribution of cash to the affected unitholder. Each non-U.S. unitholder must obtain a taxpayer identification
number from the IRS and submit that number to our transfer agent on a Form W-8BEN or applicable substitute form in
order to obtain credit for these withholding taxes. A change in applicable law may require us to change these procedures.
In addition, because a foreign corporation that owns units will be treated as engaged in a United States trade or business,
that corporation may be subject to the U.S. branch profits tax at a rate of 30%, in addition to regular federal income tax, on
its share of our income and gain, as adjusted for changes in the foreign corporation’s “U.S. net equity,” which is effectively
connected with the conduct of a United States trade or business. That tax may be reduced or eliminated by an income tax
treaty between the United States and the country in which the foreign corporate unitholder is a “qualified resident.” In
addition, this type of unitholder is subject to special information reporting requirements under Section 6038C of the Code.
Under the Foreign Investment in Real Property Tax Act, a non U.S. unitholder generally will be subject to federal income
tax upon the sale or disposition of a unit if (i) it owned (directly or constructively applying certain attribution rules) more
than 5% of our units at any time during the five-year period ending on the date of such disposition and (ii) 50% or more of
the fair market value of all of our assets consisted of U.S. real property interests at any time during the shorter of the
period during which such unitholder held the units or the 5-year period ending on the date of disposition. More than 50%
of our assets may consist of U.S. real property interests. In addition, a non-U.S. unitholder who sells or otherwise
disposes of a unit will be subject to federal income tax on gain realized from the sale or disposition of that unit to the
extent the gain is effectively connected with a U.S. trade or business of the non-U.S. unitholder. Under a ruling published
by the IRS, interpreting the scope of “effectively connected income,” part or all of a non-U.S. unitholder’s gain may be
treated as effectively connected with that unitholder’s indirect U.S. trade or business constituted by its investment in us.
Therefore,
Table of Contents
58
non-U.S. unitholders may be subject to federal income tax on gain from the sale or disposition of their units. Prospective
non-U.S. unitholders are urged to consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential U.S. federal income tax treatment
of the disposition of their units.
Information Returns and Audit Procedures
Administrative Matters
We intend to furnish to each unitholder, within 90 days after the close of each taxable year, specific tax information,
including a Schedule K-1, which describes its share of our income, gain, loss and deduction for our preceding taxable
year. In preparing this information, which will not be reviewed by counsel, we will take various accounting and reporting
positions, some of which have been mentioned earlier, to determine each unitholder’s share of income, gain, loss and
deduction. We cannot assure our unitholders that those positions will yield a result that conforms to all of the
requirements of the Code, Treasury Regulations or administrative interpretations of the IRS.
The IRS may audit our federal income tax information returns. Neither we nor Fulbright & Jaworski LLP can assure
prospective unitholders that the IRS will not successfully challenge the positions we adopt, and such a challenge could
adversely affect the value of the units. Adjustments resulting from an IRS audit may require each unitholder to adjust a
prior year’s tax liability and may result in an audit of the unitholder’s own return. Any audit of a unitholder’s return could
result in adjustments unrelated to our returns.
Publicly traded partnerships generally are treated as entities separate from their owners for purposes of federal income
tax audits, judicial review of administrative adjustments by the IRS and tax settlement proceedings. The tax treatment of
partnership items of income, gain, loss and deduction are determined in a partnership proceeding rather than in separate
proceedings of the partners. The Code requires that one partner be designated as the “Tax Matters Partner” for these
purposes, and our partnership agreement designates our general partner.
The Tax Matters Partner can extend the statute of limitations for assessment of tax deficiencies against unitholders for
items in our returns. The Tax Matters Partner may bind a unitholder with less than a 1% profits interest in us to a
settlement with the IRS unless that unitholder elects, by filing a statement with the IRS, not to give that authority to the Tax
Matters Partner. The Tax Matters Partner may seek judicial review, by which all the unitholders are bound, of a final
partnership administrative adjustment and, if the Tax Matters Partner fails to seek judicial review, judicial review may be
sought by any unitholder having at least a 1% interest in profits or by any group of unitholders having in the aggregate at
least a 5% interest in profits. However, only one action for judicial review may go forward, and each unitholder with an
interest in the outcome may participate in that action.
A unitholder must file a statement with the IRS identifying the treatment of any item on its federal income tax return that is
not consistent with the treatment of the item on our return. Intentional or negligent disregard of this consistency
requirement may subject a unitholder to substantial penalties.
Nominee Reporting
Persons who hold an interest in us as a nominee for another person are required to furnish to us:
(1) the name, address and taxpayer identification number of the beneficial owner and the nominee;
(2) a statement regarding whether the beneficial owner is:
(a) a non-U.S. person;
(b) a non-U.S. government, an international organization or any wholly owned agency or instrumentality of either of the
foregoing; or
(c) a tax-exempt entity;
Table of Contents
59
(3) the amount and description of units held, acquired or transferred for the beneficial owner; and
(4) specific information including the dates of acquisitions and transfers, means of acquisitions and transfers, and
acquisition cost for purchases, as well as the amount of net proceeds from sales.
Brokers and financial institutions are required to furnish additional information, including whether they are U.S. persons
and specific information on units they acquire, hold or transfer for their own account. A penalty of $100 per failure, up to a
maximum of $1.5 million per calendar year, is imposed by the Code for failure to report that information to us. The
nominee is required to supply the beneficial owner of the units with the information furnished to us.
Accuracy-Related Penalties
An additional tax equal to 20% of the amount of any portion of an underpayment of tax that is attributable to one or more
specified causes, including negligence or disregard of rules or regulations, substantial understatements of income tax
and substantial valuation misstatements, is imposed by the Code. No penalty will be imposed, however, for any portion of
an underpayment if it is shown that there was a reasonable cause for the underpayment of that portion and that the
taxpayer acted in good faith regarding the underpayment of that portion.
State, Local and Other Tax Considerations
In addition to federal income taxes, unitholders may be subject to other taxes, including state and local income taxes,
unincorporated business taxes, and estate, inheritance or intangibles taxes that may be imposed by the various
jurisdictions in which we conduct business or own property now or in the future or in which the unitholder is a resident.
We currently conduct business or own property in New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas and Wisconsin. Most of these
states impose a personal income tax and an income tax on corporations and other entities. We may also own property or
do business in other states in the future that impose income or similar taxes on nonresident individuals. Although an
analysis of those various taxes is not presented here, each prospective unitholder should consider their potential impact
on its investment in us.
It is the responsibility of each unitholder to investigate the legal and tax consequences, under the laws of pertinent states
and localities, of its investment in us. Fulbright & Jaworski LLP has not rendered an opinion on the state, local, or non-
U.S. tax consequences of an investment in us. We strongly recommend that each prospective unitholder consult, and
depend on, its own tax counsel or other advisor with regard to those matters. It is the responsibility of each unitholder to
file all tax returns that may be required of it.
Table of Contents
60
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We or the selling unitholder may sell securities described in this prospectus and any accompanying prospectus
supplement through underwriters, through broker-dealers, through agents or directly to one or more investors.
We will prepare a prospectus supplement for each offering that will disclose the terms of the offering, including the name
or names of any underwriters, dealers or agents, the purchase price of the securities and the proceeds to us from the sale,
any underwriting discounts and other items constituting compensation to underwriters, dealers or agents.
Because the selling unitholder, Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, is deemed to be an “underwriter” within the meaning of the
Securities Act, each time the common units owned by Hi-Crush Proppants LLC are sold pursuant to this prospectus, Hi-
Crush Proppants LLC is required to provide you with this prospectus and the related prospectus supplement containing
specific information about Hi-Crush Proppants LLC and the terms of the common units being offered in the manner
required by the Securities Act.
We will fix a price or prices of our securities at:
•
•
•
market prices prevailing at the time of any sale under the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a
part;
prices related to market prices; or
negotiated prices.
We may change the price of the securities offered from time to time.
The selling unitholder may act independently of us in making decisions with respect to the timing, manner and size of
each of its sales. The selling unitholder may make sales of the common units on the NYSE or otherwise at prices and
under terms prevailing at the time of the sale, or at prices related to the then-current market price, at fixed prices, or in
privately negotiated transactions.
If we or the selling unitholder use underwriters or dealers in the sale, they will acquire the securities for their own account,
and they may resell these securities from time to time in one or more transactions, including negotiated transactions, at a
fixed public offering price or at varying prices determined at the time of sale. The securities may be offered to the public
either through underwriting syndicates represented by one or more managing underwriters or directly by one or more of
such firms. Unless otherwise disclosed in the prospectus supplement, the obligations of the underwriters to purchase
securities will be subject to certain conditions precedent, and the underwriters will be obligated to purchase all of the
securities offered by the prospectus supplement if any of the securities are purchased. Any public offering price and any
discounts or concessions allowed or re-allowed or paid to dealers may be changed from time to time.
We may sell the securities through agents designated by us from time to time. We will name any agent involved in the
offering and sale of the securities for which this prospectus is delivered, and disclose any commissions payable by us to
the agent or the method by which the commissions can be determined, in the prospectus supplement. Unless otherwise
indicated in the prospectus supplement, any agent will be acting on a best efforts basis for the period of its appointment.
Offers to purchase securities may be solicited directly by us and the sale thereof may be made by us directly to
institutional investors or others, who may be deemed to be underwriters within the meaning of the Securities Act, with
respect to any resale thereof. The terms of any such sales will be described in the prospectus supplement relating
thereto. We may use electronic media, including the internet, to sell offered securities directly.
Table of Contents
61
We or the selling unitholder may offer our common units into an existing trading market on the terms described in the
prospectus supplement relating thereto. Underwriters, dealers and agents who participate in any at-the-market offerings
will be described in the prospectus supplement relating thereto.
We or the selling unitholder may agree to indemnify underwriters, dealers and agents who participate in the distribution of
securities against certain liabilities to which they may become subject in connection with the sale of the securities,
including liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
Certain of the underwriters and their affiliates may be customers of, may engage in transactions with and may perform
services for us or our affiliates in the ordinary course of business.
A prospectus and accompanying prospectus supplement in electronic form may be made available on the websites
maintained by the underwriters. The underwriters may agree to allocate a number of securities for sale to their online
brokerage account holders. Such allocations of securities for internet distributions will be made on the same basis as
other allocations. In addition, securities may be sold by the underwriters to securities dealers who resell securities to
online brokerage account holders.
The aggregate maximum compensation the underwriters will receive in connection with the sale of any securities under
this prospectus and the registration statement of which it forms a part will not exceed 10% of the gross proceeds from the
sale.
Because the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA, views our common units as interests in a direct
participation program, any offering of common units under the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part
will be made in compliance with FINRA Rule 2310.
To the extent required, this prospectus may be amended or supplemented from time to time to describe a specific plan of
distribution. The place and time of delivery for the securities in respect of which this prospectus is delivered will be set
forth in the accompanying prospectus supplement.
In connection with offerings of securities under the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part and in
compliance with applicable law, underwriters, brokers or dealers may engage in transactions that stabilize or maintain the
market price of the securities at levels above those that might otherwise prevail in the open market. Specifically,
underwriters, brokers or dealers may over-allot in connection with offerings, creating a short position in the securities for
their own accounts. For the purpose of covering a syndicate short position or stabilizing the price of the securities, the
underwriters, brokers or dealers may place bids for the securities or effect purchases of the securities in the open market.
Finally, the underwriters may impose a penalty whereby selling concessions allowed to syndicate members or other
brokers or dealers for distribution of the securities in offerings may be reclaimed by the syndicate if the syndicate
repurchases previously distributed securities in transactions to cover short positions, in stabilization transactions or
otherwise. These activities may stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the market price of the securities, which may be
higher than the price that might otherwise prevail in the open market, and, if commenced, may be discontinued at any
time.
Table of Contents
62
SELLING UNITHOLDER
This prospectus covers the offering for resale of up to 702,851 common units by the selling unitholder and our sponsor,
Hi-Crush Proppants LLC. We were formed on May 8, 2012 to acquire selected sand reserves and related processing and
transportation facilities of our sponsor. In connection with our formation, we issued (a) a non-economic general partner
interest to Hi-Crush GP LLC, our general partner, which is owned by our sponsor, and (b) a 100.0% limited partner
interest to our sponsor.
Through August 15, 2012, our sponsor owned 100% of the sand reserves and related excavation and processing
facilities located in Wyeville, Wisconsin. On August 16, 2012, our sponsor contributed its ownership of Hi-Crush
Chambers LLC, Hi-Crush Railroad LLC, Hi-Crush Wyeville LLC, Hi-Crush Operating LLC and $4.6 million of cash to us.
In addition, our sponsor agreed to (1) convert all $23.9 million of consolidated net intercompany receivables due from us
into capital and (2) assume via capital contribution $10.0 million of outstanding accounts payable maintained by Hi-Crush
Operating LLC as of the transaction date. In return, we issued 13,640,351 common units and 13,640,351 subordinated
units to our sponsor and our incentive distribution rights. In connection with this transaction, we also completed an initial
public offering through the sale of 12,937,500 of our common units by our sponsor. On January 31, 2013, we entered into
an agreement with our sponsor to acquire a preferred interest in Hi-Crush Augusta LLC, the entity that owns our
sponsor’s Augusta facility, which is located in Eau Claire County, Wisconsin, for $37.5 million in cash and 3,750,000
newly issued convertible Class B units in our partnership.
As of June 30, 2013, our sponsor owned 702,851 common units, 13,640,351 subordinated units and 3,750,000 Class B
Units, representing a 49.7% ownership interest in the limited partner units and 100% ownership interest in the Class B
Units of our partnership. This prospectus covers the sale of up to all of the common units currently owned by our sponsor,
which may be sold from time to time, in one or more offerings. Assuming the sale of all common units held by our sponsor
offered by this prospectus, our sponsor would have a 47.3% ownership interest in the limited partnership units and 100%
ownership interest in the Class B Units of our partnership.
The selling unitholder, Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, is deemed to be an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities
Act with respect to any common units offered by it pursuant to this prospectus, and as a result, any such offering is
deemed to be an offering of securities, indirectly, on our behalf.
The following table sets forth information about the maximum number of common units that may be offered from time to
time by Hi-Crush Proppants LLC. The selling unitholder identified below may currently hold or acquire at any time
common units in addition to those registered hereby. In addition, the selling unitholder identified below may sell all or a
portion of the common units registered hereby or sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of some or all of their common units in
private placement transactions exempt from or not subject to the registration requirements of the Securities Act.
Accordingly, we cannot give an estimate as to the amount of common units that will be held by the selling unitholder upon
termination of this offering. Information concerning the selling unitholder may change from time to time and, if necessary,
we will supplement this prospectus accordingly.
Selling Unitholder
Hi-Crush Proppants LLC(2)
Common
Units
Owned(1)    
  702,851
Common Units
That May be
Offered Hereby(1) 
 
702,851
(1) Does not include 13,640,351 subordinated units and 3,750,000 Class B Units.
(2) Avista Capital Partners II, LP, Avista Capital Partners (Offshore) II-A, LP and Avista Capital Partners (Offshore) II, LP
indirectly own 58% of the membership interests of Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, through two investment vehicles, ACP
HIP Splitter, LP and ACP HIP Splitter (Offshore), LP. Each of Avista Capital
63
Table of Contents
Partners II, LP, Avista Capital Partners (Offshore) II-A, LP and Avista Capital Partners (Offshore) II, LP is controlled
by its general partner, Avista Capital Partners II GP, LLC (“Avista GP”). Voting and investment determinations are
made by an investment committee of Avista GP, comprised of the following members: Thompson Dean, Steven
Webster, David Burgstahler, Newton Aguiar, Robert Cabes, David Durkin and OhSang Kwon. As a result, and by
virtue of the relationships described above, each of Thompson Dean, Steven Webster, David Burgstahler, Newton
Aguiar, Robert Cabes, David Durkin and OhSang Kwon may be deemed to exercise voting and dispositive power
with respect to securities held by ACP HIP Splitter, LP and ACP HIP Splitter (Offshore), LP. The address for Avista
Capital Partners is 65 East 55th Street, 18th Floor, New York, NY 10022. The address for Hi-Crush Proppants LLC
is Three Riverway, Suite 1550, Houston, Texas 77056.
Table of Contents
64
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the securities offered in this prospectus will be passed upon for us and the selling unitholder by Fulbright &
Jaworski LLP, Houston, Texas with respect to New York law and Delaware law and by Stevens & Lee P.C., with respect
to Pennsylvania law. Fulbright & Jaworski LLP will also render an opinion on the material federal income tax
considerations regarding the securities. If certain legal matters in connection with an offering of the securities made by
this prospectus and a related prospectus supplement are passed on by counsel for the underwriters of such offering, that
counsel will be named in the applicable prospectus supplement related to that offering.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Hi-Crush Partners LP (the “Partnership”) as of and for the year ended December
31, 2012 and for the period from August 16, 2012 through December 31, 2012 incorporated in this Prospectus by
reference to the Partnership’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2012 have been so
incorporated in reliance on the report of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm,
given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
The consolidated financial statements of Hi-Crush Proppants LLC (the “Predecessor”) as of December 31, 2011 and
December 31, 2010 and for the period from January 1, 2012 to August 15, 2012 and for the year ended December 31,
2011 and for the period from October 28, 2010 (inception) to December 31, 2010 incorporated in this Prospectus by
reference to the Partnership’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2012 have been so
incorporated in reliance on the report of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm,
given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
The financial statements related to D & I Silica, LLC. incorporated in this prospectus by reference to the Hi-Crush
Partners LP’s Current Report on Form 8-K/A filed on August 14, 2013 have been audited by EEPB, PC, an independent
registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report, which is incorporated herein by reference. Such financial
statements have been so incorporated in reliance upon the report of such firm given upon their authority as experts in
accounting and auditing.
The information incorporated in this prospectus by reference to the Hi-Crush Partners LP’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
concerning estimates of our proven mineral reserves was derived from the report of John T. Boyd Company, independent
mining engineers and geologists. All of such information has been included herein in reliance upon the authority of such
firm as an expert in such matters.
The information incorporated in this prospectus by reference to the Hi-Crush Partners LP’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
concerning the crush strength of our frac sand and attributed to Stim-Lab, Inc. or PropTester, Inc. was derived from the
results of third party testing performed by, and summarized in reports of, each of these companies and has been included
herein on the authority of each of these companies as experts with respect to the matters covered by such reports and in
giving such reports.
65
Table of Contents
Hi-Crush Partners LP
6,500,000 Common units
Representing limited partner interests
Prospectus supplement
Credit Suisse
J.P. Morgan
Morgan Stanley
UBS Investment Bank
Cowen and Company
Comerica Securities
IBERIA Capital Partners L.L.C.
August 10, 2016