
424B5 1 v445884_424b5.htm 424B5
Prospectus Supplement
to Prospectus dated August 15, 2014
Filed Pursuant to Rule 424(b)(5)
Registration No. 333-196527
VISTA GOLD CORP.
10,750,000 Units
10,750,000 Common Shares underlying the Units
5,375,000 Warrants to Purchase Common Shares
5,375,000 Common Shares underlying the Warrants
322,500 Underwriters’ Warrants to Purchase Common Shares
322,500 Common Shares underlying the Underwriters’ Warrants
We are offering 10,750,000 units (“Units”). Each Unit consists of one of our common shares
(each an “Offered Share” and collectively, the “Offered Shares”) and one-half of one
transferable common share purchase warrant. Each whole common share purchase warrant (a
“Warrant”) will entitle the holder to purchase one of our common shares (each a “Warrant Share”
and collectively, the “Warrant Shares”) at a price of $1.92 per Warrant Share at any time until
4:30 p.m. (Toronto Time) on the date that is 36 months following the closing of this offering. See
“Description of the Securities Distributed”. This prospectus supplement registers the Units, the
Offered Shares, the Warrants, the issuance of the Warrant Shares upon exercise of the Warrants,
the Underwriters’ Warrants (as defined below) and the issuance of the the Underwriter Warrant
Shares (as defined below) upon exercise of the Underwriters’ Warrants. The Units are being
offered pursuant to an underwriting agreement dated August 2, 2016 (the “Underwriting
Agreement”), as more fully described under the section entitled “Plan of Distribution” on page S-
31 of this prospectus supplement, among us and Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
(“CFCC”) and Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, (together with CFCC,
the “Co-Lead Underwriters”) acting as joint book-running managers and as representatives for
Sprott Private Wealth LP, Roth Capital Partners, LLC and Jett Capital Advisors, LLC, acting as
co-managers (collectively with the Co-Lead Underwriters, the “Underwriters”).
Our common shares are listed on the NYSE MKT LLC (the “NYSE MKT”) and the Toronto Stock
Exchange (the “TSX”), in each case under the symbol “VGZ”. The closing price of our common
shares on August 2, 2016 on the NYSE MKT was $1.55 and on the TSX was Cdn$2.04. We
have applied to the TSX and NYSE MKT for the listing of the Offered Shares, the Warrant Shares
and the Underwriter Warrant Shares. Listing of the Offered Shares, the Warrant Shares and the
Underwriter Warrant Shares will be subject to us fulfilling all the listing requirements of each of
the TSX and NYSE MKT, respectively. We do not intend to apply to the TSX or the NYSE MKT
for the listing of the Warrants or the Underwriters’ Warrants.
There is no market through which the Warrants may be sold and purchasers may not be
able to resell the Warrants purchased under this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus. This may affect the pricing of the Warrants in the
secondary market, the transparency and availability of trading prices, the liquidity of the
securities and the extent of issuer regulation. See “Risk Factors” beginning on page S-9
of this prospectus supplement.
Investing in the Units involves risks that are described in the “Risk Factors” section
beginning on page S-9 of this prospectus supplement and on page 5 of the accompanying
base prospectus dated August 15, 2014 and in the documents incorporated by reference
herein and therein.
Per Unit  Total
$1.40   $15,050,000 
Public offering price
 
    
 
 $0.084   $903,000
 
Underwriting commission
 
 
    
Proceeds, before expenses, to us $1.316   $14,147,000
We have granted to the Underwriters an option (the “Over-Allotment Option”), exercisable in
whole or in part, to purchase up to an additional 1,612,500 Units (the “Additional Units”), each
such Additional Unit to be comprised of a common share (collectively, the “Additional Unit
Shares”) and one-half of one Warrant (collectively, the “Additional Warrants”), at a price equal
to the public offering price per Unit, less the underwriting commission, at any time one business
day prior to the closing date of this offering, to cover over-allotments, if any, and for market
stabilization purposes. This prospectus supplement also registers the grant of the Over-Allotment
Option, the distribution of the Additional Units to be issued upon exercise of the Over-Allotment
Option (and the Offered Shares and Warrants that make up the Additional Units) and the
distribution of the Warrant Shares issuable upon exercise of the Additional Warrants underlying
the Additional Units issuable upon the exercise of the Over-Allotment Option. See “Plan of
Distribution” on page S-31 of this prospectus supplement. In addition, we have agreed to issue
up to 322,500 Warrants (the “Underwriters’ Warrants”), to the Underwriters (370,875
Underwriters’ Warrants assuming exercise of the Over-Allotment Option in full), each exercisable
on the same terms as the Warrants.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references to the “offering” in this prospectus
supplement shall include the Over-Allotment Option and all references to “Units” shall include the
Additional Units, references to “Offered Shares” shall include “Additional Unit Shares” and
references to “Warrants” shall include “Additional Warrants”, as applicable.
Neither the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) nor any state
securities commission has approved or disapproved of these securities or determined if
this prospectus supplement or the accompanying base prospectus is truthful or complete.
Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The closing of this offering is expected to occur on or about August 8, 2016. Except with respect
to U.S. purchasers of the Units, it is anticipated that the Offered Shares and Warrants forming part
of the Units will be issued in “book-entry only” form and represented by a global certificate or
certificates, or be represented by uncertificated securities, registered in the name of CDS
Clearing and Depository Services Inc. (“CDS”) or its nominee or, with respect to the Offered
Shares only, The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”), as directed by the Underwriters, and will
be deposited with CDS or DTC, as the case may be. U.S. Purchasers of the Units will be issued
certificates representing the Warrants comprising portion of their purchased Units.
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada
Corporation
Rodman & Renshaw a unit of HC Wainwright & Co.,
LLC
The date of this prospectus supplement is August 2, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION AND EXCHANGE RATE DATA
MT TODD PROJECT
S-1
S-2
S-6
S-9
S-
12
S-
12
S-
USE OF PROCEEDS
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
DIVIDEND POLICY
DESCRIPTION OF THE SECURITIES DISTRIBUTED
MARKET FOR COMMON SHARES
PRIOR SALES
MATERIAL UNITED STATES FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
MATERIAL CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
CANADIAN PURCHASERS’ STATUTORY RIGHTS AND OTHER RIGHTS OF
RESCISSION
WHERE TO FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
13
S-
13
S-
14
S-
14
S-
16
S-
17
S-
18
S-
27
S-
31
S-
34
S-
35
S-
35
S-
35
S-
36
PROSPECTUS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
THE COMPANY
BUSINESS OF THE COMPANY
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
RISK FACTORS
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
CAUTIONARY NOTE FOR U S  INVESTORS REGARDING RESERVE AND RESOURCE
ESTIMATES
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION AND EXCHANGE RATE DATA
USE OF PROCEEDS
MARKET FOR COMMON SHARES AND WARRANTS
CHANGES TO CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
CERTAIN INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES
1
2
2
2
5
10
13
13
14
15
15
16
18
18
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
EXPERTS
LEGAL MATTERS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
S-i
18
20
23
24
26
26
27
27
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
This document is in two parts. The first part is this prospectus supplement, which describes the
specific terms of this offering of Units and also adds to and updates information contained in the
accompanying base prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference into this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus. The second part is the
accompanying base prospectus, which gives more general information about securities we may
offer from time to time, some of which may not be applicable to this offering. To the extent there is
a conflict between information contained in this prospectus supplement and information
contained in the accompanying base prospectus or any document incorporated by reference
herein or therein or the information in each free writing prospectus, if any, the information in this
prospectus supplement shall control and you should rely on the information contained in this
prospectus supplement. However, if any statement in one of these documents is inconsistent with
a statement in another document having a later date—for example, a document incorporated by
reference into this prospectus supplement or the accompanying base prospectus—the statement
in the document having the later date modifies or supersedes the earlier statement.
This prospectus supplement relates to a registration statement on Form S-3 that we filed with the
SEC utilizing a shelf registration process. Under this shelf registration process, we may, from
time to time, offer and sell any of the securities or any combination of the securities described in
the accompanying base prospectus in one or more offerings. You should read this prospectus
supplement, the accompanying base prospectus, the documents incorporated by reference
herein and therein and each free writing prospectus, if any. We have also filed this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus with the securities regulatory authorities in
each of the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario,
Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador and in the
Yukon Territory, the Northwest Territories and Nunavut (which Canadian-filed prospectus
supplement and accompanying base prospectus we refer to as the “Canadian Prospectus”).
The securities qualified under the Canadian Prospectus may be offered and sold in each of the
Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador and in the
Yukon Territory, the Northwest Territories and Nunavut, subject to any applicable securities laws.
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus and each free writing
prospectus, if any, related to this offering. We have not, and the Underwriters have not,
authorized any other person to provide you with additional or different information. If anyone
provides you with additional or different information, you should not rely on it. You should
assume that the information appearing in this prospectus supplement, the accompanying base
prospectus, any free writing prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference into this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus and each free writing
prospectus, if any, is accurate only as of the respective dates of such documents regardless of
the time of delivery of such documents or of any sale of securities hereunder. Our business,
financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since those dates. It is
important for you to read and consider all information contained in this prospectus supplement
and the accompanying base prospectus, including the documents incorporated by reference
herein and therein, in making your investment decision. You should also read and consider the
information in the documents to which we have referred you under the captions “Where To Find
Additional Information” and “Documents Incorporated by Reference” in this prospectus
supplement and under the sections entitled, “Where You Can Find More Information” and
“Documents Incorporated by Reference” in the accompanying base prospectus, and any
additional information you may need to make your investment decision.
We and the Underwriters are offering to sell, and are seeking offers to buy, the Units only in
jurisdictions where such offers and sales are permitted. The distribution of this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus and the offering of the Units in certain
jurisdictions or to certain persons within such jurisdictions may be restricted by law. Persons
outside the United States who come into possession of this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus must inform themselves about and observe any restrictions
relating to the offering of the Units and the distribution of this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus outside the United States. This prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus do not constitute, and may not be used in connection with, an
offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, any securities offered by this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus by any person in any jurisdiction in which it
is unlawful for such person to make such an offer or solicitation.
Unless stated otherwise or the context otherwise requires, references in this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus to “the Company,” “Vista,” “we,” “us” or “our”
includes Vista Gold Corp. and each of our subsidiaries through which we conduct our business.
S-1
The industry and market data and other statistical information contained in the documents we
incorporate by reference are based on management’s own estimates, independent publications,
government publications, reports by market research firms or other published independent
sources, and, in each case, are believed by management to be reasonable estimates. Although
we believe these sources are reliable, we have not independently verified the information.
Prospective investors should be aware that the acquisition of the Offered Shares, the Warrants
and the Warrant Shares described herein may have tax consequences in the United States and
Canada. Such consequences for investors who are resident in, or citizens of, the United States
and Canada may not be described fully herein. Investors should read the tax discussion in this
prospectus supplement under the captions “Material United States Federal Income Tax
Considerations” and “Material Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations,” and should
consult their own tax advisor with respect to their own particular circumstances.
The enforcement by investors of civil liabilities under U.S. federal securities laws may be affected
adversely by the fact that the Company is incorporated or organized under the laws of British
Columbia, Canada, that some or all of our officers and directors may be residents of a country
other than the United States, that some or all of the Underwriters or experts named in the
registration statement, this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus may
be residents of a country other than the United States, and that all or a substantial portion of the
assets of the Company and said persons may be located outside the United States.
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus, any free writing prospectus
and the documents incorporated by reference herein and therein contain “forward-looking
statements” within the meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
1995 and “forward-looking information” under Canadian securities laws, that are intended to be
covered by the safe harbor created by such legislation. All statements, other than statements of
historical facts, included in this prospectus supplement, the accompanying base prospectus and
the documents incorporated by reference herein and therein and filed with the SEC and with
securities commissions and other similar authorities in Canada that address activities, events or
developments that the Company expects or anticipates will or may occur in the future are
forward-looking statements and forward-looking information, including, but not limited to, such
things as those listed below:
·the timing and closing of the offering;
   
the satisfaction of the conditions of closing of the offering, including the receipt, in a timely
 ·
manner, of regulatory and other required approvals;
   
 ·the use of proceeds of the offering;
   
the Company’s ability to sustain its fixed costs at $1,400,000 to $1,600,000 per quarter for the
 ·
foreseeable future;
   
 ·the ability to fund the Company’s currently planned programs into 2018;
   
 ·the potential monetization of our non-core assets, including our mill equipment which is for sale;
   
 ·our plan to not introduce immediate changes to the business or forecasted spending;
   
our expectation that future R&D grants from the Government of Australia, if any, will be
 ·
significantly smaller than those received in 2015 and 2016;
   
our belief that we have positioned the Company to judiciously pursue near-term value creating
 ·
opportunities;
   
the nature and magnitude of future discretionary programs, if any, and the availability of funding
 ·
for such programs;
   
our ability to quickly advance our Mt Todd gold project in Northern Territory, Australia (“Mt
 ·
Todd”) to development when economic conditions permit;
   
 ·our cautious optimism that that the bear market in the sector may be ending;
   
 ·estimates of future operating and financial performance;
S-2
potential funding requirements and sources of capital, including near-term sources of additional
 ·
cash;
   
our expectation that the Company will continue to incur losses and will not pay dividends for the
 ·
foreseeable future;
   
 ·our intention to continue cost management efforts;
   
 ·our expectation that market conditions will not improve for the foreseeable future;
·our planned deferral of significant development programs until market conditions improve;
   
 ·our potential ability to generate proceeds from operations or the disposition of our assets;
   
 ·the timing, performance and results of feasibility studies; 
   
 ·our potential entry into agreements to find, lease, purchase, option or sell mineral interests;
   
 ·plans to focus our efforts on Mt Todd;
   
 ·plans for the evaluation and advancement of Mt Todd;
   
our expectation that technical and exploration programs at Mt Todd will increase the value of Mt
 ·
Todd
   
 ·our ability to complete the Mt Todd feasibility study within six months of commencement;
   
 ·the feasibility of Mt Todd;
   
 ·our expectation of Mt Todd’s impact, including environmental and economic impacts;
   
plans and estimates concerning potential project exploration and development, including the
 ·
use of high pressure grinding roll crushers and access to a water supply, as well as the ability to
obtain required permits; 
   
our belief that we are in compliance in all material respects with applicable mining, health,
 ·
safety and environmental statutes and regulations in all of the jurisdictions in which we operate;
   
 ·our belief that we maintain reasonable amounts of insurance;
   
 ·estimates of mineral reserves and mineral resources;
   
 ·our intention to seek partners to advance the Guadalupe de los Reyes project;
   
 ·potential changes in regulations or taxation initiatives;
   
 ·our descriptions of our potential mining operations and the anticipated timing; and
   
 ·our expectation that we will continue to be a passive foreign investment company (“PFIC”).
Forward-looking statements and forward-looking information have been based upon the
Company’s current business and operating plans, as approved by the Company’s board of
directors; the business’ cash and other funding requirements and timing and sources thereof;
results of pre-feasibility and feasibility studies, mineral resource and reserve estimates,
preliminary economic assessments and exploration activities; advancements of the Company’s
required permitting processes; current market conditions and project development plans. The
words “estimate”, “plan”, “anticipate”, “contemplate”, “scheduled”, “expect”, “intend”, “believe”,
“will”, “may”, “would” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements
and forward-looking information. These forward-looking statements and forward-looking
information involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors
which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from
actual results, performance or achievements. The factors which may cause these differences
include risks such as:
our ability to raise additional capital or raise funds from the sale of non-core assets on favorable
 ·
terms, if at all;
   
pre-feasibility and feasibility study results and preliminary assessment results and the accuracy
 ·
of estimates and assumptions on which they are based;
S-3
resource and reserve estimate results, the accuracy of such estimates and the accuracy of
 ·
sampling and subsequent assays and geologic interpretations on which they are based; 
   
 ·technical and operational feasibility and the economic viability of deposits; 
   
our ability to obtain, renew or maintain the necessary authorizations and permits for Mt Todd,
 ·
including for its development plans and operating activities; 
   
 ·the timing and results of a feasibility study on Mt Todd;
   
 ·delays in commencement of construction at Mt Todd;
   
 ·our ability to secure the necessary permits for Mt Todd;
   
 ·increased costs that affect our operations or our financial condition;
   
 ·our reliance on third parties to fulfill their obligations under agreements with us;  
   
 ·whether projects not managed by us will comply with our standards or meet our objectives;
   
 ·a shortage of skilled labor, equipment and supplies;
   
whether our acquisition, exploration and development activities, as well as the realization of the
 ·
market value of our assets, will be commercially successful and whether any transactions we
enter into will maximize the realization of the market value of our assets;
·trading price of our securities and our ability to raise funds in new share offerings due to future
sales of common shares in the public or private market;
   
 ·the lack of cash dividend payments by us;
   
the success of future joint ventures, partnerships and other arrangements relating to our
 ·
properties;
   
industry consolidation which could result in the acquisition of a control position in the Company
 ·
for less than fair value;
   
 ·the market price of the securities held by us;
   
 ·our ability to timely monetize our interest in Midas Gold Corp.;
   
 ·perception of potential environmental impact of Mt Todd;
   
 ·reclamation liabilities, including reclamation requirements at Mt Todd;
   
 ·our history of losses from operations;
   
 ·future water supply at Mt Todd;
   
 ·litigation or other legal claims;
   
 ·environmental lawsuits;
   
 ·lack of adequate insurance to cover potential liabilities;
   
 ·our ability to attract, retain and hire key personnel;
   
 ·fluctuations in the price of gold;
   
 ·volatility in our stock price;
   
 ·inherent hazards of mining exploration, development and operating activities;
   
the accuracy of calculations of mineral reserves, mineral resources and mineralized material
 ·
fluctuations therein based on metal prices, and inherent vulnerability of the ore and
recoverability of metal in the mining process;
S-4
·changes in environmental regulations to which our exploration and development operations
are subject;
   
 ·changes in climate change regulations could result in increased operating costs;
   
 ·intense competition in the mining industry;
   
 ·potential challenges to the title to our mineral properties;
   
 ·political and economic instability in Mexico;
   
 ·tax initiatives on domestic and international levels;
   
 ·fluctuation in foreign currency values; and
   
 ·our likely status as a PFIC for U.S. federal tax purposes.
For a more detailed discussion of such risks and other important factors that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those in such forward-looking statements and forward-looking
information, please see “Risk Factors” beginning of page S-9 of this prospectus supplement and
on page 5 of the accompanying base prospectus and, to the extent applicable, the “Risk Factors”
section in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q as filed with
the SEC and Canadian securities regulatory authorities. Although we have attempted to identify
important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those described in
forward-looking statements and forward-looking information, there may be other factors that
cause results not to be as anticipated, estimated or intended. There can be no assurances that
the statements or information will prove to be accurate as actual results and future events could
differ materially from those anticipated in the statements and information. Except as required by
law, we assume no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements and forward-
looking information, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Investors
should review our subsequent reports filed with the SEC and Canadian securities authorities on
Forms 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K and any amendments thereto. We qualify all forward-looking
statements and forward-looking information by these cautionary statements.
S-5
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT SUMMARY
The following is a summary of the principal features of this offering and is not intended to be
complete. It should be read together with the more detailed information and financial data and
statements contained elsewhere in this prospectus supplement, the accompanying base
prospectus, any free writing prospectus filed by us and the documents incorporated by reference
herein and therein, including the information under “Risk Factors’’ beginning on page S-9 of this
prospectus supplement and page 5 of the accompanying base prospectus. Unless otherwise
indicated, the information in this prospectus supplement assumes that the Underwriters will not
exercise their Over-Allotment Option to purchase additional Units.
Business of the Company
We are focused on the evaluation, acquisition, exploration and advancement of gold exploration
and potential development projects which may lead to gold production or value adding strategic
transactions such as earn-in right agreements, option agreements, leases to third parties, joint
venture arrangements with other mining companies, or outright sales of assets for cash and/or
other consideration.  We look for opportunities to improve the value of our gold projects through
exploration drilling and/or technical studies focused on optimizing previous engineering work.
Our principal asset is our flagship Mt Todd gold project in Northern Territory, Australia where we
continue to work to identify opportunities to improve project economics with the goal of moving
the project closer to development. Completion of a feasibility study or the development of the
project is not justified at this time due to the current low gold price. With the completion of the
environmental impact statement in 2014 and the previous completion of a significant amount of
the project engineering and design, much of which is contained in the previously released
preliminary feasibility study, management believes that the permitting risk is substantially
reduced and the potential development timeline at Mt Todd is well defined. We believe that we
are well positioned to move forward quickly with the completion of the Mt Todd feasibility study,
subject to sustained improvement in gold prices.
We do not currently generate cash flows from mining operations. Since 2013, we have financed
our business without significant share dilution and we have significantly reduced our costs to
ensure that the Company remained liquid during the down-turn in the gold market.
Corporate Information
Vista Gold Corp. was originally incorporated on November 28, 1983 under the name “Granges
Exploration Ltd.” It amalgamated with Pecos Resources Ltd. during June 1985 and continued as
Granges Exploration Ltd.  In June 1989, Granges Exploration Ltd. changed its name to Granges
Inc.  Granges Inc. amalgamated with Hycroft Resources & Development Corporation during May
1995 and continued as Granges Inc. Effective November 1996, Da Capo Resources Ltd. and
Granges Inc. amalgamated under the name “Vista Gold Corp.” and, effective December 1997,
Vista continued from British Columbia to the Yukon Territory, Canada under the Business
Corporations Act (Yukon Territory).  On June 11, 2013, Vista Gold continued from the Yukon
Territory, Canada to British Columbia, Canada under the Business Corporations Act (British
Columbia). The current addresses, telephone and facsimile numbers of our offices are:
Registered and Records Office
Executive Office
Suite 5 - 7961 Shaffer Parkway1200 Waterfront Centre – 200 Burrard Street
Littleton, Colorado, USA 80127Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V7X 1T2
Telephone: (720) 981-1185
Facsimile: (720) 981-1186
Telephone: (604) 687-5744
Facsimile: (604) 687-1415
S-6
The Offering
The following is a brief summary of certain terms of this offering and is not intended to be
complete. It does not contain all of the information that will be important to a holder of the Offered
Shares and Warrants. For a more complete description of our Units, see the section entitled
“Description of the Securities Distributed” in this prospectus supplement.
Issuer:
Offering:
Vista Gold Corp.
 
Units
Each Unit consists of one Offered Share and one-half of one Warrant. Each
whole Warrant will entitle the holder to purchase a Warrant Share at a price of
$1.92 per Warrant Share at any time following the closing of the offering until
4:30 p.m. (Toronto Time) on the date that is 36 months after the closing of this
offering. The Warrants shall be issued pursuant to a warrant indenture to be
entered into between us and Computershare Trust Company of Canada, as
warrant agent.
Amount:
 
Price to the
Public:
$15,050,000
$1.40 per Unit
Over-Allotment
Option:
We have granted to the Underwriters an Over-Allotment Option, exercisable in
whole or in part at any time one business day prior to the closing date of this
offering, to purchase at the public offering price up to 1,612,500 Additional Units
(15% of the Units issued under the offering) to cover over-allotments, if any.
Underwriters
Commission:
Prior to the offering: 82,904,132 common shares
Common
Shares
Outstanding(1):
 
 
After the offering:  93,654,132 common shares (2)(3)
 
 
 
We have agreed to pay the Underwriters a commission equal to $0.084 for each
Unit sold pursuant to this offering (other than certain Units that are subject to an
agreed upon president’s list for which the fee will be $0.042 per Unit). See the
section entitled “Plan of Distribution” in this prospectus supplement. In addition,
we have agreed to issue up to 322,500  Underwriters’ Warrants to the
Underwriters (370,875 Underwriters’ Warrants assuming exercise of the Over-
Allotment Option in full) (other than with respect to an agreed upon president’s
list for which the number of Underwriters’ Warrants will be 1.5% of the number of
Units sold). Each Underwriters’ Warrant entitles its holder to purchase one
common share (each, a “Underwriter Warrant Share”) on the same terms as the
Warrants.
 
The net proceeds from the sale of the Units in this offering are estimated to be
approximately $13.6 million ($15.7 million if the Over-Allotment Option is
exercised in full), based on a public offering price of $1.40 per Unit and after
deducting the underwriting commission and estimated offering expenses. We
intend to use the net proceeds from this offering to pursue completion of the
permitting and to perform selected technical studies that we believe will further
de-risk the Mt Todd gold project, enhance the economics of Mt Todd and prepare
it for development if and when economic conditions warrant, and for working
capital requirements and/or for other general corporate purposes. See the
section entitled “Use of Proceeds” on page S-31 in this prospectus supplement.
 
Investing in the Units involves risks that are described in the “Risk
Factors” section beginning on page S-9 of this prospectus supplement
and the “Risk Factors” section on page 5 of the accompanying base
prospectus and, to the extent applicable, the “Risk Factors” sections of our
Annual Reports on Form 10-K and our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q as
filed with the SEC and Canadian securities authorities.
Use of
Proceeds:
Risk Factors:
S-7
Tax
Considerations:
Purchasing our Units may have tax consequences in the United States and
Canada. This prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus
may not describe these consequences fully. Investors should read the tax
discussion in this prospectus supplement and consult with their tax advisor.
See the sections entitled “Material United States Federal Income Tax
Considerations” and “Material Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations”
in this prospectus supplement.
 
Our common shares are listed for trading on the NYSE MKT and the TSX, in
each case under the symbol “VGZ.”
Listing Symbol:
There is no market through which the Warrants may be sold and purchasers
may not be able to resell the Warrants purchased under this prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus.
Notes:
(1)
These figures do not include options outstanding to purchase up to 1,590,000 common shares
at a weighted average exercise price of $1.07 per share (1,343,750 of which are exercisable
as of the date hereof), 4,547,876 common shares underlying unvested restricted stock units
with a weighted average grant date fair value of $0.44 per share.
To the extent any such options or warrants are exercised, new options are issued under our
equity incentive plans, or we otherwise issue additional common shares or securities exercisable
for or convertible into common shares, there will be future dilution to new investors. As of the date
of this prospectus supplement, there are 2,152,537 common shares available for issuance under
our equity incentive plans.
(2)
Does not include up to 5,375,000 Warrant Shares issuable upon exercise of Warrants issued
pursuant to this offering.  Assuming the exercise of all the Warrants, the aggregate
common shares outstanding would be 99,029,132. Also does not assume the exercise of the
Over-Allotment Option. Assuming the exercise of the Over-Allotment Option in full for
Additional Units, the aggregate common shares outstanding would be 95,266,632 and
assuming the exercise of all the Warrants and Additional Warrants underlying the Additional
Units, would be 101,447,882.
Does not include up to 322,500 Underwriter Warrant Shares issuable upon exercise of the
Underwriters’ Warrants, issued pursuant to this offering or up to 48,375 Underwriter Warrant
Shares issuable upon exercise of the Underwriters’ Warrants in connection with the exercise
(3)of the Over-Allotment Option, if any. Assuming the exercise of the Over-Allotment Option in full
for Additional Units and full exercise of all Warrants and the Underwriters’ Warrants, the
aggregate common shares outstanding would be 101,818,757.
S-8
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our Units involves a high degree of risk. Prospective investors should carefully
consider the following risks, as well as the other information contained in this prospectus
supplement, the accompanying base prospectus, any free writing prospectus and the documents
incorporated by reference herein and therein before investing in our Units. If any of the following
risks actually occurs, our business could be harmed. The risks and uncertainties described
below are not the only ones faced by the Company. Additional risks and uncertainties, including
those of which we are currently unaware or that are currently deemed immaterial, may also
adversely affect our business, financial condition, cash flows, prospects and the price of our
common shares.
The following is a short description of the risks and uncertainties which are more fully described
under the section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 4 in the accompanying base
prospectus:
We cannot be assured that our Mt Todd gold project is feasible or that a feasibility study will
·
accurately forecast operating results.
Our Mt Todd gold project requires substantial capital investment and we may be unable to raise
·
sufficient capital on favorable terms or at all.
If we decide to construct the mine at our Mt Todd gold project, we will be assuming certain
·
reclamation obligations resulting in a material financial obligation.
We may not be able to get the required permits to begin construction at our Mt Todd gold project
·
in a timely manner or at all.
·There may be other delays in the construction of our Mt Todd gold project.
·We cannot be assured that we will have an adequate water supply at our Mt Todd gold project.
We could incur substantial costs or disruptions to our business if we cannot obtain, renew or
·
maintain the necessary authorizations and permits.
·We rely on third parties to fulfil their obligations under agreements.
·Our exploration and development operations are subject to evolving environmental regulations.
· We could be subject to environmental lawsuits.
·There may be challenges to our title to mineral properties.
·Our interests in Mexico and Indonesia are subject to risks from political and economic instability.
·We may be unable to raise additional capital on favorable terms, if at all.
A substantial or extended decline in gold prices would have a material adverse effect on the
·
value of our assets, on our ability to raise capital and could result in lower than estimated
economic returns.
We have a history of losses, and we do not expect to generate earnings from operations or pay
·
dividends in the near term.
We cannot be certain that any of our exploration and development activities or any acquisition
·
activities will be commercially successful.
· We face intense competition in the mining industry.
The occurrence of events for which we are not insured may affect our cash flow and overall
·
profitability.
· Currency fluctuations may adversely affect our costs.
· Our R&D Grants may be subject to review.
The Company is likely a “passive foreign investment company,” which will likely have adverse
·
U.S. federal income tax consequences for U.S. shareholders.
· There is lack of a public market for the Warrants.
S-9
·Cost inflation could negatively affect the long-term viability of our industry.
Calculations of mineral reserves and mineral resources are estimates only and subject to
·
uncertainty.
·Feasibility and other studies are estimates only and subject to uncertainty.
Regulations and pending legislation involving climate change could result in increased
·
operating costs.
Development of mineral projects requires geologic, metallurgic, engineering, title, environmental,
economic, financial and other assessments and assumptions that maybe materially incorrect
and/or may not occur as expected.
The exploration and development of mineral properties is based in large part on geologic,
metallurgic, engineering, title, environmental, economic and financial assessments made by us
and our personnel as well as independent consultants and advisors we may hire. These
assessments include a series of assumptions regarding such factors as the ore bodies, grades,
recoverability, regulatory and environmental restrictions, future prices of currencies, commodities,
operating costs, future capital expenditures and royalties and other government levies which will
be imposed over the producing life of the mineral reserves and mineral resources. Many of these
factors are subject to change and are beyond our control. All such assessments involve a
measure of geologic, metallurgic, engineering, environmental, regulatory, political, economic and
financial uncertainty that could result in lower production and lower mineral reserves and mineral
resources or higher operating or capital expenditures than anticipated or unanticipated difficulty
in obtaining required permits or complying with regulatory or environmental requirements.
Additional Risks Related to the Offering
Liquidity of the Warrants.
There is no market through which the Warrants may be sold, and we do not intend to apply to list
the Warrants on the TSX or NYSE MKT. It is not possible to predict the price at which the
Warrants will trade in the secondary market or whether such market will be liquid or illiquid. To
the extent Warrants are exercised, the number of Warrants outstanding will decrease, resulting in
diminished liquidity for such remaining outstanding Warrants. A decrease in the liquidity of the
Warrants may cause, in turn, an increase in the volatility associated with the price of the
Warrants. To the extent that the Warrants become illiquid, an investor may have to exercise such
Warrants to realise value.
Positive return not guaranteed.
A positive return on an investment in the Units is not guaranteed. There is no guarantee that an
investment in the Units will earn any positive return in the short term or long term. An investment
in the Units involves a high degree of risk and should be undertaken only by investors whose
financial resources are sufficient to enable them to assume such risks and who have no need for
immediate liquidity in their investment. An investment in the Units is appropriate only for investors
who have the capacity to absorb a loss of some or all of their investment.
Investors will have no rights as a shareholder with respect to their Warrants until they
exercise their Warrants and acquire our common shares.
Until you acquire common shares upon exercise of your Warrants, you will have no rights with
respect to the Common Shares underlying such Warrants. Upon exercise of your Warrants, you
will be entitled to exercise the rights of a shareholder only as to matters for which the record date
occurs after the exercise date.
The net proceeds of this offering may be reallocated by management
We currently intend to allocate the net proceeds to be received from this Offering as described
under the heading “Use of Proceeds.” However, management will have broad discretion in the
actual application of the net proceeds, and may elect to allocate net proceeds differently from that
described under the heading “Use of Proceeds” if it believes it would be in the Company’s best
interest to do so. The Company’s shareholders, including holders of the Offered Shares, may not
agree with the manner in which management chooses to allocate and spend the net proceeds.
The failure by management to apply these funds effectively could have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s business.
S-10
The results of the United Kingdom’s referendum on withdrawal from the European Union
may have a negative effect on global economic conditions, financial markets and our
business.
In June 2016, a majority of voters in the United Kingdom elected to withdraw from the European
Union in a national referendum. The referendum was advisory, and the terms of any withdrawal
are subject to a negotiation period that could last at least two years after the government of the
United Kingdom formally initiates a withdrawal process. Nevertheless, the referendum has
created significant uncertainty about the future relationship between the United Kingdom and the
European Union, including with respect to the laws and regulations that will apply as the United
Kingdom determines which European Union laws to replace or replicate in the event of a
withdrawal. The referendum has also given rise to calls for the governments of other European
Union member states to consider withdrawal. These developments, or the perception that any of
them could occur, have had and may continue to have a material adverse effect on global
economic conditions and the stability of global financial markets, and may significantly reduce
global market liquidity and restrict the ability of key market participants to operate in certain
financial markets. Any of these factors could depress economic activity and restrict our access to
capital, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and
results of operations and reduce the price of our securities.
Potential Dilution
Our constating documents allow us to issue an unlimited number of common shares for such
consideration and on such terms and conditions as shall be established by the board of directors,
in many cases, without the approval of shareholders. We may issue common shares in offerings
from treasury (including through the sale of securities convertible into or exchangeable for
common shares) and on the exercise of stock options or other securities exercisable for common
shares. We cannot predict the size of future issuances of common shares or the effect that future
issuances and sales of common shares will have on the market price of the common shares.
Issuances of a substantial number of additional common shares, or the perception that such
issuances could occur, may adversely affect prevailing market prices for the common shares.
With any additional issuance of common shares, investors will suffer dilution to their voting power
and we may experience dilution.
The Company is likely a “passive foreign investment company,” which may have adverse
U.S. federal income tax consequences for U.S. shareholders.
U.S. shareholders of the Offered Shares, the Warrants and the Warrant Shares should be aware
that the Company believes it was classified as a PFIC during the taxable year ended
December 31, 2015, and based on current business plans and financial projections,
management believes there is a significant likelihood that the Company will be a PFIC during the
current taxable year. If the Company is a PFIC for any year during a U.S. shareholder's holding
period, then such U.S. shareholder generally will be required to treat any gain realized upon a
disposition of Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares, or any “excess distribution”
received on their Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares, as ordinary income, and to pay
an interest charge on a portion of such gain or distribution, unless the shareholder makes a
timely and effective “qualified electing fund” election (“QEF Election”) or a “mark-to-market”
election. A U.S. shareholder who makes a QEF Election generally must report on a current basis
its share of the net capital gain and ordinary earnings for any year in which the Company is PFIC,
whether or not the Company distributes any amounts to its shareholders. However,
U.S. shareholders should be aware that there can be no assurance that the Company will satisfy
the record keeping requirements that apply to a QEF Election, or that the Company will supply
U.S. shareholders with information that such U.S. shareholders require to report under the QEF
Election rules, in event that the Company is a PFIC and a U.S. shareholder wishes to make a
QEF Election. Thus, U.S. shareholders may not be able to make a QEF Election. A
U.S. shareholder who makes a mark-to-market election generally must include as ordinary
income each year the excess of the fair market value of the Common Shares over the taxpayer's
basis therein. In addition, special PFIC rules may apply to Warrants and Warrant Shares
acquired upon exercise of such Warrants, and certain of the elections described above may not
be available with respect to Warrants and Warrant Shares. This paragraph is qualified in its
entirety by the discussion below under the heading “Material United States Federal Income Tax
Considerations.” Each U.S. shareholder should consult his, her or its own tax advisor regarding
the U.S. federal, U.S. state and local, and foreign tax consequences of the PFIC rules and the
acquisition, ownership, and disposition of the Offered Shares, the Warrants and the Warrant
Shares.
S-11
PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION AND EXCHANGE RATE DATA
The Company presents its consolidated financial statements in United States dollars. All
references in this prospectus supplement to “dollars” and “$” are to United States dollars and all
references to “Cdn$” are to Canadian dollars, unless otherwise noted. Except as otherwise
indicated, all financial statements and financial data contained in, or incorporated by reference
into, this prospectus supplement, the accompanying base prospectus and any free writing
prospectus filed by us have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted
accounting principles.
The following table sets forth, for each period indicated, the exchange rates of the Canadian
dollar to the U.S. dollar for the end of each period indicated and the high, low and average
exchange rates for each of such periods (such rates, which are expressed in Canadian dollars
are based on the noon buying rates for U.S. dollars reported by the Bank of Canada).
Year Ended December 31
 
 2016(1)
 
 
  Cdn$1.4589   Cdn$1.3990   Cdn$1.1643   Cdn$1.0697 
High
  Cdn$1.2544   Cdn$1.1728   Cdn$1.0614   Cdn$0.9839 
Low
Average
  Cdn$1.3266   Cdn$1.2787   Cdn$1.1045   Cdn$1.0299 
End of Period  Cdn$1.3089   Cdn$1.3840   Cdn$1.1601   Cdn$1.0636
2015
2014
2013
(1)Through August 2, 2016
On August 2, 2016, the noon buying rate reported by the Bank of Canada was $1.00 =
Cdn$1.3089.
MT TODD PROJECT
Mt Todd Gold Project, Northern Territory, Australia
The following provides certain additional information for the Mt Todd gold project. Further
information on the Mt Todd gold project is set out in the technical report entitled “NI 43-101
Technical Report – Mt. Todd Gold Project 500,000 tpd Preliminary Feasibility Study Northern
Territory, Australia” with an effective date of May 29, 2013 and an issue date of June 28, 2013
and an amended and restated date of July 7, 2014.
Water Treatment and Discharge Program
Under our approved Waste Discharge License (WDL) from the Northwest Territory Government,
treatment and discharge of metalliferous water initiated during the 2012-2013 wet season has
continued for each wet season including the 2015-2016 wet season. These water treatment and
discharge programs have resulted in an approximately 25% reduction of metalliferous water
inventory at site since inception.
Mining Operations as Currently Proposed
The Batman deposit will be mined using conventional open pit mining methods. The mining
operations will consist of drilling, blasting, loading, and hauling using conventional mining
equipment, including large excavators and mine trucks. The final designed open pit has been
developed using commercially available Geovia’s Whittle software which incorporates all of the
physical (pit slope and rock mechanics data) and economic parameters (direct operating costs,
recoveries, refining charges, royalties, and other contracts, if applicable) necessary to develop an
economically feasible open pit.
Non-drill Related Exploration
In addition to the exploration completed by drilling, a number of other exploration tools have been
utilized in the development of the Batman deposit resource model. An aero-magnetic
geophysical survey was completed that was used to better understand the relationship of the
mineral deposit to the surrounding granitic intrusions. Surface rock chip and soil geochemical
samples were used to assist in the definition of the aerial extent of the Batman deposit. Structural
analysis was completed in the form of a lineament study to better understand the fracturing and
faulting present.
All of these data, along with the drill hole data, are incorporated into the Batman geologic model
which was used to estimate the gold resources.
S-12
USE OF PROCEEDS
The net proceeds from the sale of the Units in this offering are estimated to be approximately
$13.6 million, based on a public offering price of $1.40 per Unit and after deducting the
underwriting commission and estimated offering expenses of $1.4 million ($15.7 million if the
Over-Allotment Option is exercised in full). We intend to allocate the net proceeds from the
offering, including the net proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants and the Underwriters’
Warrants, if any, and the exercise of the Over-Allotment Option, if any, to pursue completion of the
permitting and to perform selected technical studies that we believe will further de-risk our Mt
Todd gold project, enhance the economics of Mt Todd and fully prepare it for development if and
when economic conditions warrant; and for working capital requirements and/or for other general
corporate purposes which include costs of corporate development initiatives, ongoing regulatory,
legal and accounting expenses, and management and administrative expenses.
Until such time as the net proceeds of the offering are used as described above, we intend to
invest the net proceeds primarily in short-term U.S. and/or Australian government treasury bills
and/or notes, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insured certificates of deposit or other
substantially similar secure deposits. Interest earned will be retained by us and used in the same
manner as net proceeds from the sale of the Units.
As we advance our business plan, we may, from time to time, issue additional common shares or
other securities through other offerings of securities.
Depending on opportunities, economic conditions and the results of the activities described
above we may use a portion of the use of proceeds allocated above to invest in property
acquisitions or complete other corporate activities.
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
Since July 10, 2014, there have been no changes to our share capital, on a consolidated basis,
except 628,915 common shares were issued upon the vesting of restricted stock units.
The following table sets forth our cash and cash equivalents and consolidated capitalization as
at December 31, 2015 and June 30, 2016 on an actual basis and as adjusted to give effect to the
distribution of the Units offered hereunder after deducting the Underwriters’ commission and the
estimated expenses of the offering payable by us (assuming no exercise of the Over-Allotment
Option) and the application of the net proceeds from this offering as described under the section
entitled “Use of Proceeds.”
The table should be read in conjunction with our audited annual consolidated financial
statements for the year ended December 31, 2015, our unaudited consolidated financial
statements as at and for the three months ended June 30, 2016, including the notes thereto, and
the management’s discussion and analysis thereof, incorporated in each case by reference in
this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus.
As at
As at June 30, 2016 after giving
effect to the issuance of the
  
 
December 31,
Units(2) (3) (4)
2015(1)
 (in USD thousands, except for share amounts)
As at
  
June 30,
2016(2)
438,900
$1,354
439,208
$14,946
(82,883,562
common
shares)
 $(411,800
(82,904,132
common
shares)
) $(410,877
452,800
(93,654,132 common shares)
) $(410,877
$27,065
$28,360
$41,952
Cash, cash equivalents  $902
Outstanding share
capital (unlimited
authorized)
Accumulated deficit
Total shareholder’s
equity
Notes:
)
(1)
These figures do not include options outstanding to purchase up to 2,257,500 common shares
at a weighted average exercise price of $1.60 per share (2,011,250 of which were exercisable
as of December 31, 2015), 4,085,446 common shares underlying unvested restricted stock
units with a weighted average grant date fair value of $0.44 per share.
S-13
(2)
These figures do not include options outstanding to purchase up to 1,590,000 common shares
at a weighted average exercise price of $1.07 per share (1,343,750 of which were exercisable
as of June 30, 2016), 4,547,876 common shares underlying unvested restricted stock units
with a weighted average grant date fair value of $0.44 per share.
(3)
Prior to the exercise of the Over-Allotment Option. If the Over-Allotment Option is exercised in
full, cash and cash equivalents, outstanding share capital, accumulated deficit during the
exploration stage and total shareholder’s equity would be $17,068, $454,922, $410,877 and
$44,074, respectively. Also does not assume the exercise of the Warrants and any Additional
Warrants underlying the Over-Allotment Option. If the Warrants and Additional Warrants
(assuming the Over-Allotment Option is exercised in full) are exercised in full, cash and cash
equivalents, outstanding share capital, accumulated deficit during the exploration stage and
total shareholder’s equity would be $29,648, $467,502, $410,877 and $56,654, respectively.
(4)
These figures do not include up to 322,500 Underwriters’ Warrants to be issued to the
Underwriters (370,875 Underwriters’ Warrants assuming exercise of the Over-Allotment
Option in full), each exercisable to purchase one Underwriter Warrant Share at a price of $1.92
for a period of 36 months from the closing of the Offering.
DIVIDEND POLICY
We have never declared or paid any dividends on our common shares. Our current intention is to
retain our earnings, if any, to finance the growth and development of our business and we do not
expect to pay dividends or to make any other distributions in the near future. Our board of
directors will review this policy from time to time having regard to our financing requirements,
financial condition and other factors considered to be relevant.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SECURITIES DISTRIBUTED
Description of Units
The offering consists of 10,750,000 Units of the Company, each Unit consisting of one common
share and one-half of one Warrant to purchase a Warrant Share. The Units will be issued at the
public offering price of $1.40 per Unit.
Offered Shares and Warrant Shares
The Offered Shares and the Warrant Shares will have all of the characteristics, rights and
restrictions of our common shares. We are authorized to issue an unlimited number of common
shares, without par value, of which 82,904,132 are issued and outstanding as at the date of this
prospectus supplement. Holders of common shares are entitled to one vote per common share at
all meetings of shareholders, to receive dividends as and when declared by our directors and to
receive a pro rata share of our assets available for distribution to the shareholders in the event of
the liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Company. There are no pre-emptive, conversion
or redemption rights attached to the common shares.
Warrants
The Warrants will be created and issued pursuant to, and governed by, the terms of the warrant
indenture (the “Warrant Indenture”) between us and Computershare Trust Company of Canada
(the “Warrant Agent”), to be entered into and dated as of the closing date of this offering. The
following summary of certain provisions of the Warrant Indenture does not purport to be complete
and is subject in its entirety to the detailed provisions of the Warrant Indenture. Reference is
made to the Warrant Indenture for the full text of the attributes of the Warrants, which we will file
on SEDAR under our profile at www.sedar.com and with the SEC on a Form 8-K following the
closing of this offering. We have appointed the principal transfer offices of the Warrant Agent in
Vancouver, British Columbia as the location at which Warrants may be surrendered for exercise
or transfer.
The Offered Shares and the Warrants comprising the Units will separate immediately upon the
closing of this offering. Each whole Warrant will entitle the holder to purchase one Warrant Share
at a price of $1.92. The exercise price and the number of Warrant Shares issuable upon exercise
are both subject to adjustment in certain circumstances as more fully described below. The
Warrants will be exercisable at any time prior to 4:30 p.m. (Toronto Time) on that date which is 36
months after the closing of this offering, after which time the Warrants will expire and become null
and void. The exercise price for the Warrants is payable in United States dollars. The Warrant
Indenture will provide that, subject to compliance with applicable securities legislation and
approval of applicable regulatory authorities, we will be entitled to purchase in the market, by
private contract or otherwise, all or any of the Warrants then outstanding, and any Warrants so
purchased will be cancelled.
S-14
The Warrant Indenture will provide for adjustment in the number of Warrant Shares issuable
upon the exercise of the Warrants and/or the exercise price per Warrant Share upon the
occurrence of certain events, including: (i) the issuance of our common shares or securities
exchangeable for or convertible into our common shares to all or substantially all of the holders of
our common shares as a stock dividend or other distribution (other than a distribution of our
common shares upon the exercise of Warrants); (ii) the subdivision, redivision or change of our
common shares into a greater number of shares; (iii) the reduction, combination or consolidation
of our common shares into a lesser number of shares; (iv) the issuance to all or substantially all
of the holders of our common shares of rights, options or warrants under which such holders are
entitled, during a period expiring not more than 45 days after the record date for such issuance, to
subscribe for or purchase our common shares, or securities exchangeable for or convertible into
our common shares; and (v) the issuance or distribution to all or substantially all of the holders of
the common shares or shares of any class other than our common shares, rights, options or
warrants to acquire our common shares or securities exchangeable or convertible into our
common shares, of evidences of indebtedness, or any property or other assets.
We provide certain buy-in rights to a holder if we fail to deliver the Warrant Shares by three
trading days after the later of delivery to the Company of the notice of exercise or the aggregate
exercise price (or notice of a cashless exercise). The buy-in rights apply if after the trading day
after the date on which the holder satisfies all of the requirements for exercise, the holder
purchases (in an open market transaction or otherwise) Common Shares to deliver in satisfaction
of a sale by the holder of the Warrant Shares that the holder anticipated receiving from the
Company upon exercise of the Warrant. In this event, we will:
(i)
pay in cash to the holder the amount equal to the excess (if any) of the buy-in price over the
product of (A) such number of Warrant Shares, times (B) the price at which the sell order giving
rise to holder’s purchase obligation was executed; and
(ii)
at the election of holder, either (A) reinstate the portion of the Warrant as to such number of
Warrant Shares, or (B) deliver to the holder a certificate or certificates representing such
number of Warrant Shares.
The Warrant Indenture will also provide for adjustment in the class and/or number of securities
issuable upon the exercise of the Warrants and/or exercise price in the event of the following
additional events: (1) reclassifications of our common shares or a capital reorganization of the
Company (other than as described in clauses (i) to (iii) above; (2) consolidations, amalgamations,
arrangements or mergers of the Company with or into another entity; or (3) the transfer of the
undertaking or assets of the Company as an entirety or substantially as an entirety to another
corporation or other entity.
No adjustment in the exercise price or the number of Warrant Shares purchasable upon the
exercise of the Warrants will be required to be made unless the cumulative effect of such
adjustment or adjustments would change the exercise price by at least 1% or the number of
Warrant Shares purchasable upon exercise by at least one one-hundredth of a Warrant Share.
Furthermore, no adjustment will be made in the right to acquire our common shares attached to
the Warrants if an issue of our common shares is being made in connection with a share
incentive plan for the benefit of directors, officers, employees, consultants or our other service
providers, or the satisfaction of existing instruments issued as of the date of the Warrant
Indenture.
We will also covenant in the Warrant Indenture that, during the period in which the Warrants are
exercisable, we will give notice to holders of Warrants of certain stated events, including events
that would result in an adjustment to the exercise price for the Warrants or the number of Warrant
Shares issuable upon exercise of the Warrants, at least 14 days prior to the record date or
effective date, as the case may be, of such event.
No fractional Warrant Shares will be issued or otherwise provided pursuant to the Warrant
Indenture. The Warrants may only be exercised in a sufficient number to acquire whole numbers
of our common shares and no cash or other consideration will be paid in lieu of fractional shares.
Holders of Warrants will not have any voting or pre-emptive rights, redemption or any other rights
which holders of our common shares have.
The Warrant Indenture also provides that we will use our reasonable best efforts to maintain the
registration statement or another registration statement relating to the Warrant Shares effective
until the earlier of the expiration date of the Warrants and the date on which no Warrants remain
outstanding (provided, however, that nothing shall prevent our amalgamation, arrangement,
merger or sale, including any take-over bid, and any associated delisting or deregistration or
ceasing to be a reporting issuer, provided that, so long as the Warrants are still outstanding and
represent a right to acquire securities of the acquiring company, the acquiring company shall
assume our obligations under the Warrant Indenture). If no such registration statement is
effective, no person holding Warrants will be permitted to exercise Warrants, unless an
exemption from the registration requirements of the United States Securities Act of 1933, as
amended (the “U.S. Securities Act”) and applicable state securities laws is available. During
any such period, any person holding Warrants may give notice of his/her desire to exercise the
Warrants, at which time we will permit the cashless exercise of the Warrants and issue such
number of Warrant Shares calculated pursuant to the provisions of the Warrant Indenture,
provided that such Warrant Shares shall not be subject to any transfer restrictions in the United
States or Canada. If no such registration statement is effective, we will notify the Warrant Agent in
accordance with the provisions of the Warrant Indenture.
S-15
From time to time we, along with the Warrant Agent, without the consent of the holders of
Warrants, may amend or supplement the Warrant Indenture for certain purposes, including curing
defects or inconsistencies or making any change that does not adversely affect the rights of any
holder of Warrants. Any amendment, modification, arrangement or supplement to the Warrant
Indenture that adversely affects the interests of the holders of the Warrants may only be made by
“extraordinary resolution”, which is defined in the Warrant Indenture as a resolution either: (1)
passed at a meeting of the holders of Warrants at which there are holders of Warrants present in
person or represented by proxy holding at least 20% of the aggregate number of common shares
that could be acquired and passed by the affirmative vote of holders of Warrants representing not
less than 66⅔% of the aggregate number of our common shares that could be acquired at the
meeting and voted on the poll upon such resolution; or (2) adopted by an instrument in writing
signed by the holders of Warrants representing not less than 66⅔% of the aggregate number of
our common shares that could be acquired.
Underwriters’ Warrants
We have agreed to issue the Underwriters’ Warrants to the Underwriters. The Underwriters’
Warrants will be exercisable to acquire that number of common shares equal to 3% of the
aggregate number of common shares issued pursuant to this offering (other than with respect to
an agreed upon president’s list for which the number of Underwriters’ Warrants will be 1.5% of
the number of common shares purchased in the offering). Each Underwriter Warrant shall entitle
the holder to purchase one common share at $1.92 at any time on or before the date which is 36
months after the closing date of this offering. The Underwriters’ Warrants will have the same
terms as the Warrants, and the Underwriter Warrant Shares are identical to those common
shares issued pursuant to this offering. The material terms and provisions of the Warrants are
summarized herein, which summary is subject to and qualified in its entirety by the form of
Warrant and the Warrant Indenture, which we will file on SEDAR under our profile at
www.sedar.com and with the SEC on a Form 8-K following the closing of this offering
MARKET FOR COMMON SHARES
Our common shares are listed on the NYSE MKT and the TSX in each case under the symbol
“VGZ”. The majority of the trading of our common shares takes place on the NYSE MKT. The
following table sets out the reported high and low sale prices and volume of sales traded by
month for the periods indicated in the United States on the NYSE MKT, and in Canada on the
TSX.
NYSE MKT ($)
 
 High   Low   Volume
Month
2015
 
  
 $0.33  $0.24   3,358,300  
July
August
 $0.31  $0.27   2,616,300  
September $0.32  $0.25   1,931,500  
 $0.37  $0.28   1,957,500  
October
November  $0.30  $0.26   880,100
 
December  $0.33  $0.27   1,933,600  
    
2016
 
January
 $0.33  $0.27   1,631,400  
February  $0.50  $0.28   7,153,800  
 $0.58  $0.43   5,695,100  
March
 $0.89  $0.44   12,593,300 
April
May
 $0.89  $0.64   12,395,300 
 $2.06  $0.66   52,318,900 
June
July
 $2.05  $1.21   35,455,600 
August 1-2 $1.72  $1.53   2,397,800
S-16
On August 2, 2016, the closing price of our common shares on the NYSE MKT was $1.55 per
common share.
Low
Volume
TSX (Cdn$)
 
 High
Month
2015
  
 
  Cdn$0.40   Cdn$0.31   121,500  
July
August
  Cdn$0.40   Cdn$0.33   139,600  
September  Cdn$0.41   Cdn$0.34   135,300  
October
  Cdn$0.47   Cdn$0.38   109,700  
November   Cdn$0.40   Cdn$0.35   92,100
 
December   Cdn$0.47   Cdn$0.35   254,700  
   
2016
 
January
  Cdn$0.45   Cdn$0.39   194,300  
February   Cdn$0.69   Cdn$0.39   519,300  
March
  Cdn$0.80   Cdn$0.58   565,900  
  Cdn$1.15   Cdn$0.57   792,700  
April
May
June
July
August 1-2  Cdn$2.23   Cdn$2.04   77,400
Cdn$1.15   Cdn$0.81   875,500  
  Cdn$2.73   Cdn$0.87   2,666,600 
  Cdn$2.60   Cdn$1.60   2,361,900
On August 2, 2016, the closing price of the common shares on the TSX was Cdn$2.04 per
common share.
PRIOR SALES
The following table sets forth, for the 12-month period prior to the date of this prospectus
supplement, details of the price at which securities have been issued by us, the number and type
of securities issued and the date on which such securities were issued:
Date of Issue
Type of
 
Securities
No. of
 
Securities
August 4, 2015
August 9, 2015
September 14,
2015
March 5, 2016
Common Shares  115,586
 Common Shares  185,500
Common Shares  192,259
Common Shares  20,570
Issue or
Exercise 
  
Price per
Security
  n/a
  n/a
n/a
n/a
Description of
 
Transaction
Vested RSU’s
 Vested RSU’s
Vested RSU’s
Vested RSU’s
S-17
MATERIAL UNITED STATES FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The following is a general summary of certain U.S. federal income tax considerations applicable
to a U.S. Holder (as defined below) arising from and relating to the acquisition, ownership and
disposition of Units acquired pursuant to this prospectus supplement, the acquisition, ownership,
and disposition of Offered Shares acquired as part of the Units, the exercise, disposition, and
lapse of Warrants acquired as part of the Units, and the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of
Warrant Shares received upon exercise of the Warrants.
This summary is for general information purposes only and does not purport to be a complete
analysis or listing of all potential U.S. federal income tax considerations that may apply to a U.S.
Holder as a result of the acquisition of Units pursuant to this Offering. In addition, this summary
does not take into account the individual facts and circumstances of any particular U.S. Holder
that may affect the U.S. federal income tax consequences to such U.S. Holder. Accordingly, this
summary is not intended to be, and should not be construed as, legal or U.S. federal income tax
advice with respect to any particular U.S. Holder. In addition, except as specifically set forth
below, this summary does not discuss applicable tax reporting requirements. Each U.S. Holder
should consult its own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal, U.S. federal alternative minimum,
U.S. federal estate and gift, U.S. state and local, and non-U.S. tax consequences relating to the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Units, Offered Shares, Warrants, and Warrant Shares.
No ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has been requested, or will be obtained,
regarding the U.S. federal income tax considerations applicable to U.S. Holders as discussed in
this summary. This summary is not binding on the IRS, and the IRS is not precluded from taking a
position that is different from, and contrary to, the positions taken in this summary. In addition,
because the authorities on which this summary is based are subject to various interpretations,
the IRS and the U.S. courts could disagree with one or more of the positions taken in this
summary.
Scope of this Summary
Authorities
This summary is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”),
Treasury Regulations (whether final, temporary, or proposed) promulgated under the Code,
published rulings of the IRS, published administrative positions of the IRS, U.S. court decisions
and the United States-Canada tax convention (“U.S. Treaty”), that are in effect and available as
of the date of this document. Any of the authorities on which this summary is based could be
changed in a material and adverse manner at any time, and any such change could be applied
on a retroactive basis or prospective basis which could affect the U.S. federal income tax
considerations described in this summary. This summary does not discuss the potential effects,
whether adverse or beneficial, of any proposed legislation that, if enacted, could be applied on a
retroactive or prospective basis.
U.S. Holders
For purposes of this summary, the term “U.S. Holder” means a beneficial owner of Units, Offered
Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares acquired pursuant to this prospectus supplement that is for
U.S. federal income tax purposes:
· a citizen or individual resident of the United States;
a corporation (or other entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes)
·
organized under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
·an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
a trust that (1) is subject to the primary supervision of a court within the United States and the
·
control of one or more U.S. persons for all substantial decisions or (2) has a valid election in
effect under applicable Treasury Regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
S-18
U.S. Holders Subject to Special U.S. Federal Income Tax Rules Not Addressed
This summary does not address the U.S. federal income tax considerations applicable to U.S.
Holders that are subject to special provisions under the Code, including U.S. Holders that: (a) are
tax-exempt organizations, qualified retirement plans, individual retirement accounts, or other tax-
deferred accounts; (b) are financial institutions, underwriters, insurance companies, real estate
investment trusts, or regulated investment companies; (c) are brokers or dealers in securities or
currencies or U.S. Holders that are traders in securities that elect to apply a mark-to-market
accounting method; (d) have a “functional currency” other than the U.S. dollar; (e) own Units,
Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares as part of a straddle, hedging transaction,
conversion transaction, constructive sale, or other arrangement involving more than one position;
(f) acquired Units, Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares in connection with the exercise of
employee stock options or otherwise as compensation for services; (g) hold Units, Offered
Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares other than as a capital asset within the meaning of Section
1221 of the Code (generally, property held for investment purposes); (h) are partnerships and
other pass-through entities (and investors in such partnerships and entities); or (i) own, have
owned or will own (directly, indirectly, or by attribution) 10% or more of the total combined voting
power of our outstanding shares. This summary also does not address the U.S. federal income
tax considerations applicable to U.S. Holders who are (a) U.S. expatriates or former long-term
residents of the U.S., (b) persons that have been, are, or will be a resident or deemed to be a
resident in Canada for purposes of the Tax Act (as defined below); (c) persons that use or hold,
will use or hold, or that are or will be deemed to use or hold Units, Offered Shares, Warrants or
Warrant Shares in connection with carrying on a business in Canada; (d) persons whose Units,
Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares constitute “taxable Canadian property” under the
Tax Act; or (e) persons that have a permanent establishment in Canada for the purposes of the
U.S. Treaty. U.S. Holders that are subject to special provisions under the Code, including U.S.
Holders described immediately above, should consult their own tax advisor regarding the U.S.
federal, U.S. federal alternative minimum, U.S. federal estate and gift, U.S. state and local, and
non-U.S. tax consequences relating to the acquisition, ownership and disposition of Units,
Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares.
If an entity or arrangement that is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes
holds Units, Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares, the U.S. federal income tax
consequences to such entity or arrangement and the owners of such entity or arrangement
generally will depend on the activities of such entity or arrangement and the status of such
owners. This summary does not address the tax consequences to any such entity or arrangement
or owner. Owners of entities or arrangements that are classified as partnerships for U.S. federal
income tax purposes should consult their own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal income tax
consequences arising from and relating to the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of Units,
Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
Tax Consequences Not Addressed
This summary does not address the U.S. federal alternative minimum, U.S. federal estate and
gift, U.S. state and local, and non-U.S. tax consequences to U.S. Holders of the acquisition,
ownership, and disposition of Units, Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares. Each U.S.
Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal alternative minimum, U.S.
federal estate and gift, U.S. state and local, and non-U.S. tax consequences of the acquisition,
ownership, and disposition of Units, Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Acquisition of Units
There is no authority directly addressing the treatment, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, of
securities with terms substantially the same as the Units, and, therefore, such treatment is not
entirely clear. We intend to treat the acquisition by a U.S. Holder of a Unit as the acquisition of
one Offered Share and one-half of one Warrant for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The
purchase price for each Unit will be allocated between these two components in proportion to
their relative fair market values at the time the Unit is purchased by the U.S. Holder. This
allocation of the purchase price for each Unit will establish a U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis for
U.S. federal income tax purposes in the Offered Share and one-half of one Warrant that comprise
each Unit. For this purpose, we will allocate $1.316 of the purchase price for the Unit to the
Offered Share and $0.1324 of the purchase price for each Unit to one-half of one Warrant.
Our view of the characterization of the Units, and the purchase price allocation, are not, however,
binding on the IRS or the courts. Because there are no authorities that directly address
instruments that are similar to the Units, no assurance can be given that the IRS or the courts will
agree with the characterization described above or the discussion below. Accordingly,
prospective investors are urged to consult their own tax advisors regarding the U.S. federal tax
consequences of an investment in a Unit (including alternative characterizations of a Unit) and
with respect to any tax consequences arising under the laws of any state, local or non-U.S. taxing
jurisdiction. Unless otherwise stated, the following discussions are based on the assumption that
the characterization of the Units and the allocation described above are accepted for U.S. federal
income tax purposes.
S-19
Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules
The following sections generally describe the U.S. federal income tax consequences to U.S.
Holders of the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of Units, Offered Shares, Warrants or
Warrant Shares if we are considered a PFIC at any time during a U.S. Holder’s holding period for
the Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares.
We believe that we were classified as a PFIC for the tax year ended December 31, 2015, and,
based on current business plans and financial expectations, we believe that we may be a PFIC
for the current and future taxable years. No opinion of legal counsel or ruling from the IRS
concerning our status as a PFIC has been obtained or is currently planned to be requested. The
determination of whether any corporation was, or will be, a PFIC for a tax year requires the
application of complex U.S. federal income tax rules, which are subject to differing
interpretations. Whether any corporation will be a PFIC for any tax year depends on the assets
and income of such corporation over the course of such tax year and, as a result, our PFIC status
for the current year and future years cannot be predicted with certainty as of the date of this
document. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the IRS will not challenge any PFIC
determination made by us (or by one of our subsidiaries). Each U.S. Holder should consult its
own tax advisor regarding our status as a PFIC and the PFIC status of each of our non-U.S.
subsidiaries.
We generally will be a PFIC for any tax year in which (a) 75% or more of our gross income for
such tax year is passive income (the “PFIC income test”) or (b) 50% or more of the value of our
assets either produce passive income or are held for the production of passive income, based on
the quarterly average of the fair market value of such assets (the “PFIC asset test”). “Gross
income” generally includes sales revenues less the cost of goods sold, plus income from
investments and from incidental or outside operations or sources, and “passive income”
generally includes, for example, dividends, interest, certain rents and royalties, certain gains from
the sale of stock and securities, and certain gains from commodities transactions. Active
business gains arising from the sale of commodities generally are excluded from passive income
if substantially all of a foreign corporation’s commodities are stock in trade or inventory,
depreciable property used in a trade or business, or supplies regularly used or consumed in the
ordinary course of its trade or business, and certain other requirements are satisfied.
For purposes of the PFIC income test and PFIC asset test described above, if we own, directly or
indirectly, 25% or more of the total value of the outstanding shares of another corporation, it will
be treated as if we (a) held a proportionate share of the assets of such other corporation and (b)
received directly a proportionate share of the income of such other corporation.
Under certain attribution rules, if we are a PFIC, U.S. Holders will be deemed to own their
proportionate share of any subsidiary that is also a PFIC (a “Subsidiary PFIC”), and will
generally be subject to U.S. federal income tax, as discussed in the section below titled “Default
PFIC Rules Under Section 1291 of the Code,” on their proportionate share of any (i) distribution
on the shares of a Subsidiary PFIC and (ii) disposition or deemed disposition of shares of a
Subsidiary PFIC, in each case, as if such U.S. Holders directly held the shares of such
Subsidiary PFIC. In addition, U.S. Holders may be subject to U.S. federal income tax on any
indirect gain realized on the stock of a Subsidiary PFIC on the sale or disposition of Units,
Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares. Accordingly, U.S. Holders should be aware that
they could be subject to tax under the PFIC rules even if no distributions are received and no
redemptions or other dispositions of Units, Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares are
made.
Default PFIC Rules Under Section 1291 of the Code
If we are a PFIC, the U.S. federal income tax consequences to a U.S. Holder of the ownership
and disposition of Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares will depend on whether such
U.S. Holder makes a “qualified electing fund” or “QEF” election (a “QEF Election”) or makes a
mark-to-market election under Section 1296 of the Code (a “Mark-to-Market Election”) with
respect to Offered Shares or Warrant Shares. A U.S. Holder that does not make either a QEF
Election or a Mark-to-Market Election (a “Non-Electing U.S. Holder”) will be taxable as
described below. Under proposed Treasury Regulations that are prospectively effective until
finalized, if a U.S. holder has an option, warrant, or other right to acquire stock of a PFIC (such as
the Warrants), such option, warrant or right is considered to a PFIC stock subject to the default
rules of Section 1291 of the Code. Under the proposed Treasury Regulations, a U.S. Holder’s
holding period for the Warrant Shares will begin on the date the U.S. Holder acquires the Units.
This will impact the availability of the QEF Election and Mark-to-Market Election with respect to
the Warrant Shares. Thus, a U.S. Holder may have to account for Warrant Shares and Offered
Shares under the PFIC rules and the applicable elections differently.
S-20
A Non-Electing U.S. Holder will be subject to the rules of Section 1291 of the Code with respect
to (a) any gain recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition of Offered Shares, Warrants
and Warrant Shares and (b) any excess distribution received on the Offered Shares and Warrant
Shares. A distribution generally will be an “excess distribution” to the extent that such distribution
(together with all other distributions received in the current tax year) exceeds 125% of the
average distributions received during the three preceding tax years (or during a U.S. Holder’s
holding period for the Offered Shares and Warrant Shares, if shorter).
Under Section 1291 of the Code, any gain recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition of
Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares of a PFIC (including an indirect disposition of
shares of a Subsidiary PFIC), and any excess distribution received on such Offered Shares and
Warrant Shares (or a distribution by a Subsidiary PFIC to its shareholder that is deemed to be
received by a U.S. Holder in respect of the U.S. Holder’s Offered Shares or Warrant Shares) must
be ratably allocated to each day in a Non-Electing U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Offered
Shares or Warrant Shares. The amount of any such gain or excess distribution allocated to the
tax year of disposition or distribution of the excess distribution and to years before the entity
became a PFIC, if any, would be taxed as ordinary income (and not eligible for certain
preferential tax rates, as discussed below). The amounts allocated to any other tax year would be
subject to U.S. federal income tax at the highest tax rate applicable to ordinary income in each
such year, and an interest charge would be imposed on the tax liability for each such year,
calculated as if such tax liability had been due in each such year. A Non-Electing U.S. Holder
that is not a corporation must treat any such interest paid as “personal interest,” which is not
deductible.
If we are a PFIC for any tax year during which a Non-Electing U.S. Holder holds Offered Shares,
Warrant Shares or Warrants, we will continue to be treated as a PFIC with respect to such Non-
Electing U.S. Holder, regardless of whether we cease to be a PFIC in one or more subsequent
tax years. If we cease to be a PFIC, a Non-Electing U.S. Holder may terminate this deemed PFIC
status with respect to Offered Shares and Warrant Shares by electing to recognize gain (which
will be taxed under the rules of Section 1291 of the Code as discussed above) as if such Offered
Shares and Warrant Shares were sold on the last day of the last tax year for which we are a
PFIC. No such election, however, may be made with respect to the Warrants.
In any year in which we are classified as a PFIC, a U.S. Holder of Offered Shares and Warrant
Shares will be required to file an annual report with the IRS containing such information as
Treasury Regulations and/or other IRS guidance may require. It is unclear whether U.S. Holders
will be required to file an annual report with the IRS with respect to their interests in Warrants. In
addition to penalties, a failure to satisfy such reporting requirements may result in an extension of
the time period during which the IRS can assess a tax. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax
advisors regarding the requirements of filing such information returns under these rules, including
the requirement to file an IRS Form 8621 annually.
QEF Election
A U.S. Holder that makes a QEF Election for the first tax year of the U.S. Holder’s holding period
of its Offered Shares in which we are a PFIC generally will not be subject to the rules of Section
1291 of the Code discussed above with respect to its Offered Shares. However, a U.S. Holder
that makes a QEF Election will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on such U.S. Holder’s pro
rata share of (a) our net capital gain, which will be taxed as long-term capital gain to such U.S.
Holder, and (b) our ordinary earnings, which will be taxed as ordinary income to such U.S.
Holder. Generally, “net capital gain” is the excess of (a) net long-term capital gain over (b) net
short-term capital loss, and “ordinary earnings” are the excess of (a) “earnings and profits” over
(b) net capital gain. A U.S. Holder that makes a QEF Election will be subject to U.S. federal
income tax on such amounts for each tax year in which we are a PFIC, regardless of whether
such amounts are actually distributed to such U.S. Holder by us. However, for any tax year in
which we are a PFIC and has no net income or gain, U.S. Holders that have made a QEF
Election would not have any income inclusions as a result of the QEF Election. If a U.S. Holder
that made a QEF Election has an income inclusion, such a U.S. Holder may, subject to certain
limitations, elect to defer payment of current U.S. federal income tax on such amounts, subject to
an interest charge. If such U.S. Holder is not a corporation, any such interest paid will be treated
as “personal interest,” which is not deductible. A U.S. Holder makes a QEF Election by attaching
a completed IRS Form 8621, including a PFIC Annual Information Statement, to a timely filed
U.S. federal income tax return.
S-21
A U.S. Holder that makes a timely QEF Election generally (a) may receive a tax-free distribution
from us to the extent that such distribution represents “earnings and profits” that were previously
included in income by the U.S. Holder because of such QEF Election and (b) will adjust such
U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Offered Shares to reflect the amount included in income or allowed
as a tax-free distribution because of such QEF Election. In addition, a U.S. Holder that makes a
QEF Election generally will recognize capital gain or loss on the sale or other taxable disposition
of Offered Shares.
A QEF Election will apply to the tax year for which such QEF Election is made and to all
subsequent tax years, unless such QEF Election is invalidated or terminated or the IRS consents
to revocation of such QEF Election. If a U.S. Holder makes a QEF Election and, in a subsequent
tax year, we cease to be a PFIC, the QEF Election will remain in effect (although it will not be
applicable) during those tax years in which we are not a PFIC. Accordingly, if we become a PFIC
in another subsequent tax year, the QEF Election will be effective and the U.S. Holder will be
subject to the QEF rules described above during any subsequent tax year in which we qualify as
a PFIC.
As discussed above, under proposed Treasury Regulations, if a U.S. holder has an option,
warrant or other right to acquire stock of a PFIC (such as the Warrants), such option, warrant or
right is considered to be PFIC stock subject to the default rules of Section 1291 of the Code.
However, a U.S. Holder of an option, warrant or other right to acquire stock of a PFIC may not
make a QEF Election that will apply to the option, warrant or other right to acquire PFIC stock.
Consequently, under the proposed Treasury Regulations, if a U.S. Holder of Offered Shares
makes a QEF Election, such election generally will not be treated as a timely QEF Election with
respect to Warrant Shares and the rules of Section 1291 of the Code discussed above will
continue to apply with respect to such U.S. Holder’s Warrant Shares. However, a U.S. Holder of
Warrant Shares should be eligible to make a timely QEF Election if such U.S. Holder elects in
the tax year in which such Warrant Shares are received to recognize gain (which will be taxed
under the rules of Section 1291 of the Code discussed above) as if such Warrant Shares were
sold for fair market value on the date such U.S. Holder acquired them by exercising the
corresponding Warrant. In addition, gain recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition
(other than by exercise) of the Warrants by a U.S. Holder will be subject to the rules of Section
1291 of the Code discussed above. Each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor
regarding the application of the PFIC rules to the Units, Offered Shares, Warrants, and Warrant
Shares.
U.S. Holders should be aware that there can be no assurances that we will satisfy the record
keeping requirements that apply to a QEF, or that we will supply U.S. Holders with a PFIC
Annual Information Statement or other information that such U.S. Holders are required to report
under the QEF rules, in the event that we are a PFIC. Thus, U.S. Holders may not be able to
make a QEF Election with respect to their Offered Shares. Each U.S. Holder should consult its
own tax advisors regarding the availability of, and procedure for making, a QEF Election.
Mark-to-Market Election
A U.S. Holder may make a Mark-to-Market Election with respect to Offered Shares and Warrant
Shares only if the Offered Shares and Warrant Shares are marketable stock. The Offered Shares
and Warrant Shares generally will be “marketable stock” if the Offered Shares and Warrant
Shares are regularly traded on (a) a national securities exchange that is registered with the
Securities and Exchange Commission, (b) the national market system established pursuant to
Section 11A of the U.S. Exchange Act or (c) a foreign securities exchange that is regulated or
supervised by a governmental authority of the country in which the market is located, provided
that (i) such foreign exchange has trading volume, listing, financial disclosure, and other
requirements and the laws of the country in which such foreign exchange is located, together
with the rules of such foreign exchange, ensure that such requirements are actually enforced and
(ii) the rules of such foreign exchange ensure active trading of listed stocks. If such stock is
traded on such a qualified exchange or other market, such stock generally will be considered
“regularly traded” for any calendar year during which such stock is traded, other than in de
minimis quantities, on at least 15 days during each calendar quarter. Provided that the Offered
Shares and Warrant Shares are “regularly traded” as described in the preceding sentence, the
Offered Shares and Warrant Shares are expected to be marketable stock. We believe that our
common shares were “regularly traded” in the first two calendar quarters of 2016 and expect that
the common shares will be “regularly traded” in the third calendar quarter of 2016. However,
there can be no assurance that our common shares will be “regularly traded” in subsequent
calendar quarters. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the marketable
stock rules.
S-22
Any Mark-to-Market Election made by a U.S. Holder for the Offered Shares will also apply to such
U.S. Holder’s Warrant Shares. As a result, if a Mark-to-Market Election has been made by a U.S.
Holder with respect to Offered Shares, any Warrant Shares received will automatically be
marked-to-market in the year of exercise of the Warrant. Because, under the proposed Treasury
Regulations, a U.S. Holder’s holding period for Warrant Shares includes the period during which
such U.S. Holder held the Warrants, a U.S. Holder will be treated as making a Mark-to-Market
Election with respect to its Warrant Shares after the exercise of the Warrant unless the Warrant
Shares are acquired in the same tax year as the year in which the U.S. Holder acquired its Units.
Consequently, the default rules under Section 1291 described above generally will apply to the
mark-to-market gain realized in the tax year in which Warrant Shares are received. However, the
general mark-to-market rules will apply to subsequent tax years.
A U.S. Holder that makes a Mark-to-Market Election with respect to its Offered Shares and
Warrant Shares generally will not be subject to the rules of Section 1291 of the Code discussed
above with respect to such Offered Shares. However, if a U.S. Holder does not make a Mark-to-
Market Election and such U.S. Holder has not made a timely QEF Election, the rules of Section
1291 of the Code discussed above will apply to certain dispositions of, and distributions on, the
Offered Shares and Warrant Shares.
A U.S. Holder that makes a Mark-to-Market Election will include in ordinary income, for each tax
year in which the we are a PFIC, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of (a) the fair market
value of the Offered Shares and any Warrant Shares, as of the close of such tax year over (b)
such U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Offered Shares and any Warrant Shares. A U.S.
Holder that makes a Mark-to-Market Election will recognize an ordinary loss in an amount equal
to the excess, if any, of (i) such U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Offered Shares and any
Warrant Shares, over (ii) the fair market value of such Offered Shares and any Warrant Shares
(but only to the extent of the net amount of previously included income as a result of the Mark-to-
Market Election for prior tax years).
A U.S. Holder that makes a Mark-to-Market Election generally also will adjust such U.S. Holder’s
tax basis in the Offered Shares and Warrant Shares to reflect the amount included in gross
income or allowed as a loss because of such Mark-to-Market Election. In addition, upon a sale or
other taxable disposition of Offered Shares and Warrant Shares in any taxable year in which we
are a PFIC, any gain from the sale or other taxable disposition would be treated as ordinary
income and any loss from such sale or other taxable disposition would be treated first as ordinary
loss (to the extent of any net mark-to-market gains previously included in income) and thereafter
as capital loss.
A U.S. Holder makes a Mark-to-Market Election by attaching a completed IRS Form 8621 to a
timely filed U.S. federal income tax return. A timely Mark-to-Market Election applies to the tax
year in which such Mark-to-Market Election is made and to each subsequent tax year, unless the
Offered Shares and Warrant Shares cease to be “marketable stock” or the IRS consents to
revocation of such election. Each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the
availability of, and procedure for making, a Mark-to-Market Election.
Although a U.S. Holder may be eligible to make a Mark-to-Market Election with respect to the
Offered Shares and Warrant Shares, no such election may be made with respect to the stock of
any Subsidiary PFIC that a U.S. Holder is treated as owning because such stock is not
marketable. Hence, the Mark-to-Market Election will not be effective to eliminate the interest
charge and other income inclusion rules described above with respect to deemed dispositions of
Subsidiary PFIC stock or distributions from a Subsidiary PFIC to its shareholder.
The PFIC rules are complex, and each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding
the PFIC rules (including the applicability and advisability of a QEF Election and Mark-to-Market
Election) and how the PFIC rules may affect the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the
acquisition, ownership, and disposition of Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Exercise and Disposition of Warrants
The following discussion is subject in its entirety to the rules described above under the heading
"Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules."
S-23
Exercise of Warrants
A U.S. Holder will not recognize gain or loss on the exercise of a Warrant and related receipt of a
Warrant Share (unless, and to the extent that, cash is received in lieu of the issuance of a
fractional Warrant Share). A U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis in the Warrant Share received on the
exercise of a Warrant will be equal to the sum of (a) such U.S. Holder’s tax basis in such Warrant
plus (b) the exercise price paid by such U.S. Holder on the exercise of such Warrant. If, as
anticipated, we are a PFIC, a U.S. Holder's holding period for the Warrant Share received on the
exercise of a Warrant should begin on the date on which such U.S. Holder acquired its Warrants.
If we are not a PFIC with respect to a U.S. Holder at the time the U.S. Holder exercises its
Warrants, the holding period for the Warrant Shares received by the U.S. Holder will begin on the
date following the date of exercise and will not include the period during which the U.S. Holder
held its Warrants.
In certain limited circumstances, a U.S. Holder may be permitted to undertake a cashless
exercise of Warrants into Warrant Shares. The U.S. federal income tax treatment of a cashless
exercise of Warrants into Warrant Shares is unclear, and the tax consequences of a cashless
exercise could differ from the consequences upon the exercise of a Warrant described in the
preceding paragraph. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the U.S.
federal income tax consequences of a cashless exercise of Warrants.
Disposition of Warrants
A U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss on the sale or other taxable disposition of a Warrant in
an amount equal to the difference, if any, between (a) the amount of cash plus the fair market
value of any property received and (b) such U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant sold or
otherwise disposed of. Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, any such gain or loss
generally will be a capital gain or loss, which will be long-term capital gain or loss if the Warrant
is held for more than one year. Deductions for capital losses are subject to complex limitations
under the Code.
Expiration of Warrants Without Exercise
Upon the lapse or expiration of a Warrant, a U.S. Holder will recognize a loss in an amount equal
to such U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant. Any such loss generally will be a capital loss and
will be long-term capital loss if the Warrants are held for more than one year. Deductions for
capital losses are subject to complex limitations under the Code.
Certain Adjustments to the Warrants
Under Section 305 of the Code, an adjustment to the number of Warrant Shares that will be
issued on the exercise of the Warrants, or an adjustment to the exercise price of the Warrants,
may be treated as a constructive distribution to a U.S. Holder of the Warrants if, and to the extent
that, such adjustment has the effect of increasing such U.S. Holder’s proportionate interest in our
“earnings and profits” or our assets, depending on the circumstances of such adjustment (for
example, if such adjustment is to compensate for a distribution of cash or other property to the
shareholders). Adjustments to the exercise price of Warrants made pursuant to a bona fide
reasonable adjustment formula that has the effect of preventing dilution of the interest of the
holders of the Warrants should generally not be considered to result in a constructive distribution.
Any such constructive distribution would be taxable whether or not there is an actual distribution
of cash or other property. (See more detailed discussion of the rules applicable to distributions
made by us at “U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Acquisition, Ownership, and
Disposition of Offered Shares and Warrant Shares – Distributions on Offered Shares and Warrant
Shares” below).
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Acquisition, Ownership, and Disposition of
Offered Shares and Warrant Shares
The following discussion is subject in its entirety to the rules described above under the heading
“Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules.”
S-24
Distributions on Offered Shares and Warrant Shares
A U.S. Holder that receives a distribution, including a constructive distribution, with respect to
Offered Shares or Warrant Shares will be required to include the amount of such distribution in
gross income as a dividend (without reduction for any Canadian income tax withheld from such
distribution) to the extent of our current or accumulated “earnings and profits”, as computed for
U.S. federal income tax purposes. A dividend generally will be taxed to a U.S. Holder at ordinary
income tax rates. To the extent that a distribution exceeds our current and accumulated “earnings
and profits,” such distribution will be treated first as a tax-free return of capital to the extent of a
U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Offered Shares or Warrant Shares and thereafter as gain from the
sale or exchange of such Offered Shares or Warrant Shares (see “Sale or Other Taxable
Disposition of Offered Shares and Warrant Shares” below). However, we may not maintain the
calculations of earnings and profits in accordance with U.S. federal income tax principles, and
each U.S. Holder may be required to assume that any distribution by us with respect to the
Offered Shares or Warrant Shares will constitute a dividend. Dividends received on Offered
Shares or Warrant Shares generally will not be eligible for the “dividends received deduction.”
Subject to applicable limitations and provided we are eligible for the benefits of the U.S. Treaty or
the Offered Shares are readily tradable on a United States securities market, dividends paid by
us to non-corporate U.S. Holders, including individuals, generally will be eligible for the
preferential tax rates applicable to long-term capital gains for dividends, provided certain holding
period and other conditions are satisfied, including that we are not classified as a PFIC in the tax
year of distribution or in the preceding tax year. As discussed above, under the heading “Passive
Foreign Investment Company Rules,” we believe that we were classified as a PFIC for the tax
year ended December 31, 2015, and, based on current business plans and financial
expectations, we believe that we may be a PFIC for the current and future taxable years.
The dividend rules are complex, and each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor
regarding the application of such rules.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Offered Shares and Warrant Shares
Upon the sale or other taxable disposition of Offered Shares or Warrant Shares, a U.S. Holder
generally will recognize capital gain or loss in an amount equal to the difference between (a) the
amount of cash plus the fair market value of any property received and (b) such U.S. Holder’s
adjusted tax basis in such Offered Shares or Warrant Shares sold or otherwise disposed of. Gain
or loss recognized on such sale or other disposition generally will be long-term capital gain or
loss if, at the time of the sale or other disposition, the Offered Shares or Warrant Shares have
been held for more than one year.
Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, preferential tax rates may apply to long-term capital
gain of a U.S. Holder that is an individual, estate, or trust. There are no preferential tax rates for
long-term capital gain of a U.S. Holder that is a corporation. Deductions for capital losses are
subject to significant limitations under the Code.
Additional Tax Considerations
Receipt of Foreign Currency
The amount of any distribution paid to a U.S. Holder in foreign currency or on the sale, exchange
or other taxable disposition of Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares generally will be
equal to the U.S. dollar value of such foreign currency based on the exchange rate applicable on
the date of receipt (regardless of whether such foreign currency is converted into U.S. dollars at
that time). If the foreign currency received is not converted into U.S. dollars on the date of receipt,
a U.S. Holder will have a tax basis in the foreign currency equal to its U.S. dollar value on the
date of receipt. Any U.S. Holder who receives payment in foreign currency and engages in a
subsequent conversion or other disposition of the foreign currency may have a foreign currency
exchange gain or loss that would be treated as ordinary income or loss, and generally will be
U.S. source income or loss for foreign tax credit purposes. Different rules apply to U.S. Holders
who use the accrual method of tax accounting. Each U.S. Holder should consult its own U.S. tax
advisor regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences of receiving, owning, and disposing
of foreign currency.
S-25
Foreign Tax Credit
Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, a U.S. Holder that pays (whether directly or through
withholding) Canadian income tax with respect to dividends paid on the Offered Shares or
Warrant Shares (or with respect to any deemed dividend on the Warrants) generally will be
entitled, at the election of such U.S. Holder, to receive either a deduction or a credit for such
Canadian income tax paid. Generally, a credit will reduce a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income
tax liability on a dollar-for-dollar basis, whereas a deduction will reduce a U.S. Holder’s income
subject to U.S. federal income tax. This election is made on a year-by-year basis and applies to
all foreign taxes paid (whether directly or through withholding) by a U.S. Holder during a year.
Complex limitations apply to the foreign tax credit, including the general limitation that the credit
cannot exceed the proportionate share of a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability that
such U.S. Holder’s “foreign source” taxable income bears to such U.S. Holder’s worldwide
taxable income. In applying this limitation, a U.S. Holder’s various items of income and deduction
must be classified, under complex rules, as either “foreign source” or “U.S. source.” Generally,
dividends paid by a foreign corporation (including constructive dividends) should be treated as
foreign source for this purpose, and gains recognized on the sale of stock of a foreign corporation
by a U.S. Holder should be treated as U.S. source for this purpose, except as otherwise provided
in an applicable income tax treaty, and if an election is properly made under the Code. However,
the amount of a distribution with respect to the Offered Shares, Warrant Shares or Warrants that
is treated as a “dividend” may be lower for U.S. federal income tax purposes than it is for
Canadian federal income tax purposes, resulting in a reduced foreign tax credit allowance to a
U.S. Holder. In addition, this limitation is calculated separately with respect to specific categories
of income. The foreign tax credit rules are complex, and each U.S. Holder should consult its own
tax advisor regarding the foreign tax credit rules.
Additional Tax on Passive Income
Certain U.S. Holders that are individuals, estates or trusts (other than trusts that are exempt from
tax) will be subject to a 3.8% tax on all or a portion of their “net investment income,” which
includes dividends on the Offered Shares and Warrant Shares, and net gains from the disposition
of the Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares. Further, excess distributions treated as
dividends, gains treated as excess distributions, and mark-to-market inclusions and deductions
under the PFIC rules discussed above are all included in the calculation of net investment
income.
U.S. Holders that are individuals or estates or trusts subject to this tax should consult their own
tax advisors regarding the applicability of this tax to any of their income or gains in respect of the
Offered Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
Information Reporting; Backup Withholding Tax
Under U.S. federal income tax law certain categories of U.S. Holders must file information returns
with respect to their investment in, or involvement in, a foreign corporation. For example, U.S.
return disclosure obligations (and related penalties) are imposed on U.S. Holders that hold
certain specified foreign financial assets in excess of certain threshold amounts. The definition of
specified foreign financial assets includes not only financial accounts maintained in foreign
financial institutions, but also, unless held in accounts maintained by a financial institution, any
stock or security issued by a non-U.S. person. U. S. Holders may be subject to these reporting
requirements unless their Offered Shares, Warrants, and Warrant Shares are held in an account
at certain financial institutions. Penalties for failure to file certain of these information returns are
substantial. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the requirements of
filing information returns, including the requirement to file IRS Form 8938.
Payments made within the United States, or by a U.S. payor or U.S. middleman, of dividends on,
and proceeds arising from the sale or other taxable disposition of the Offered Shares, Warrants
and Warrant Shares generally may be subject to information reporting and backup withholding
tax, at the rate of 28%, if a U.S. Holder (a) fails to furnish its correct U.S. taxpayer identification
number (generally on Form W-9), (b) furnishes an incorrect U.S. taxpayer identification number,
(c) is notified by the IRS that such U.S. Holder has previously failed to properly report items
subject to backup withholding tax, or (d) fails to certify, under penalty of perjury, that it has
furnished its correct U.S. taxpayer identification number and that the IRS has not notified such
U.S. Holder that it is subject to backup withholding tax. However, certain exempt persons, such
as U.S. Holders that are corporations, generally are excluded from these information reporting
and backup withholding tax rules. Any amounts withheld under the U.S. backup withholding tax
rules will be allowed as a credit against a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability, if any, or
will be refunded, if such U.S. Holder furnishes required information to the IRS in a timely manner.
S-26
The discussion of reporting requirements set forth above is not intended to constitute a complete
description of all reporting requirements that may apply to a U.S. Holder. A failure to satisfy
certain reporting requirements may result in an extension of the time period during which the IRS
can assess a tax, and under certain circumstances, such an extension may apply to assessments
of amounts unrelated to any unsatisfied reporting requirement. Each U.S. Holder should consult
its own tax advisors regarding the information reporting and backup withholding rules.
THE ABOVE SUMMARY IS NOT INTENDED TO CONSTITUTE A COMPLETE ANALYSIS
OF ALL TAX CONSIDERATIONS APPLICABLE TO U.S. HOLDERS WITH RESPECT TO
THE ACQUISITION, OWNERSHIP, AND DISPOSITION OF OFFERED SHARES,
WARRANTS AND WARRANT SHARES. U.S. HOLDERS SHOULD CONSULT THEIR OWN
TAX ADVISORS AS TO THE TAX CONSIDERATIONS APPLICABLE TO THEM IN THEIR
OWN PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES.
MATERIAL CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The following fairly summarizes, as of the date of this prospectus supplement, the principal
Canadian federal income tax considerations under the Income Tax Act (Canada) (the “Tax Act”)
generally applicable to a purchaser who acquires a Unit consisting of one Offered Share and one
half of one Warrant pursuant to this offering.
Each term in this summary that is otherwise undefined and first appears in quotation marks
means that term as defined in the Tax Act.
This summary applies only to purchaser each of whom, at all material times for the purposes of
the Tax Act,
beneficially owns each Offered Share and Warrant acquired pursuant to this offering and each
·
Warrant Share acquired on exercise of a Warrant,
·holds all the purchaser’s Offered Shares, Warrants, and Warrant Shares as capital property,
deals at arm's length and is not affiliated with the Company, the Underwriters, and each person
·
to whom the purchaser disposes of an Offered Share, Warrant, or Warrant Share,
is not a “financial institution” for the purpose of the mark-to-market rules in the Tax Act or a
·
“specified financial institution”,
·has not elected to report its “Canadian tax results” in a currency other than Canadian currency,
·is not a person or partnership an interest in which is a “tax shelter investment”,
is not a corporation resident in Canada that is controlled by a non-resident corporation for the
·
purposes of the “foreign affiliate dumping” rules in section 212.3 of the Tax Act, and
has not entered into a “derivative forward agreement” in respect of any of the purchaser’s Offered
·
Shares, Warrants, or Warrant Shares
(each such purchaser, a “Holder”).
A Holder’s Offered Shares, Warrant Shares and Warrants will generally be capital property of the
Holder unless the Holder holds them in the course of carrying on a business of trading or dealing
in securities or acquired them in one or more transactions considered to be an adventure or
concern in the nature of trade. A Resident Holder (as defined below under “Holders Resident in
Canada”) whose Offered Shares or Warrant Shares might not otherwise qualify as capital
property may be entitled to elect irrevocably under subsection 39(4) of the Tax Act that the
Resident Holder’s Offered Shares, Warrant Shares, and every other “Canadian security” owned
by the Resident Holder in the taxation year of the election or any subsequent taxation year be
deemed to be capital property. Any Resident Holder who is considering making such an election
should consult the Resident Holder’s tax advisers before doing so. An election under subsection
39(4) of the Tax Act is not available in respect of Warrants.
S-27
This summary is based on the current provisions of the Tax Act and the regulations thereunder
(“Regulations”) in force as of the date hereof, all specific proposals to amend the Tax Act or
Regulations publicly announced by or on behalf of the Minister of Finance (Canada) to the date
hereof, and the current published administrative policies and assessing practices of the Canada
Revenue Agency (the “CRA”). It is assumed that all such amendments will be enacted as
currently proposed, and that there will be no other change in any relevant law, administrative
practice, or assessing policy, although no assurance can be given in these respects. This
summary does not otherwise take into account or anticipate any change in law, administrative
policy or assessing practice, whether by legislative, regulatory, administrative, governmental or
judicial decision or action, and does not take into account any provincial, territorial or foreign tax
laws.
This summary is of a general nature only, is not exhaustive of all possible Canadian
federal income tax considerations applicable to any particular Holder. It is not intended to
be, and should not be construed as, legal or tax advice to any particular Holder.
Accordingly, each Holder should consult the Holder’s own tax advisers with respect to the
Canadian federal income tax consequences of acquiring, holding and disposing of
Offered Shares, Warrants, and Warrant Shares applicable to the Holder’s particular
circumstances.
Currency Conversion
Subject to certain exceptions that are not discussed herein, each Holder for the purposes of the
Tax Act, determine each amount relating to the acquisition, holding or disposition of an Offered
Share, Warrant, or Warrant Share (including dividends, adjusted cost base, and proceeds of
disposition) in Canadian currency based on the relevant rate of exchange quoted by the Bank of
Canada at noon on the date the amount first arose, or such other rate of exchange as is
acceptable to the Minister.
Allocation of Cost
A Holder who acquires a Unit pursuant to this offering will be required to allocate the purchase
price paid for the Unit on a reasonable basis to the cost of the Offered Share and the [one-half]
Warrant that comprise the Unit.
Management of the Company advises that the Company intends for its purposes to allocate
US$1.2676 of the subscription price for each Unit to the cost of the Offered Share included in the
Unit, and the remaining US$0.1324 to the cost of the [one-half] Warrant, and believes such
allocation to be reasonable. The Company's allocation, however, is not binding on the CRA or
Holders.
For purposes of determining the adjusted cost base of the Holder’s Offered Shares, the cost of
such Offered Shares will be averaged with the Holder’s adjusted cost base of all other common
shares (if any) or Warrants, respectively, held by the Holder as capital property immediately
before that time.
Holders Resident in Canada
This portion of the summary applies solely to Holders each of whom at all relevant times is, or is
deemed to be, resident solely in Canada for the purposes of the Tax Act (each a “Resident
Holder”).
Exercise or Expiry of Warrants
A Resident Holder who at a particular time acquires a Warrant Share on the exercise of a
Warrant will not thereby realize a capital gain or capital loss, including on the cashless exercise
of a Warrant, as discussed under the heading “Description of the Securities Distributed –
Warrants”). The Resident Holder will acquire the Warrant Share at a cost equal to the Resident
Holder’s adjusted cost base of the Warrant plus the amount paid by the Resident Holder, if any,
on the exercise of the Warrant, and will determine the adjusted cost base of the Warrant Share by
averaging its cost with the Resident Holder’s adjusted cost base of all other common shares (if
any) held by the Holder as capital property immediately before the particular time.”
A Resident Holder whose unexercised Warrants expire will generally realize a capital loss equal
to the adjusted cost base of the Warrant immediately before the expiry. Any such capital loss will
generally be deductible as described below under “Capital Gains and Capital Losses”.
S-28
Dividends
A Resident Holder who receives or is deemed to receive a dividend on an Offered Share or
Warrant Share in a taxation year will generally be required to include the amount of the dividend
in the Resident Holder’s income for the taxation year. A Resident Holder who is an individual
(other than certain trusts) will be subject to the dividend gross-up and tax credit rules applicable
to taxable dividends received from taxable Canadian corporations in respect of the dividend
including, if applicable, the enhanced dividend gross-up and tax credit rules applicable to
“eligible dividends”. A Resident Holder that is a corporation will generally be entitled to deduct an
amount equal to the dividend in computing its taxable income. The amount of a corporate
Resident Holder’s dividend that would otherwise be deductible may, in certain circumstances
and subject to the detailed rules set out in section 55 of the Tax Act, be deemed to be a capital
gain of the Resident Holder. Any such deemed capital gain would be subject to tax as described
below under “Capital Gains and Capital Losses”.
A Resident Holder that is a “private corporation” or a “subject corporation” will generally be liable
to pay a refundable tax of 38 1/3% on any dividend that it receives or is deemed to receive on an
Offered Share or Warrant Share in a taxation year and is deductible in computing the Resident
Holder's taxable income for the year. The tax generally will be refunded to the Resident Holder at
the rate of US$1.15 for every US$3.00 (subject to prorating in respect of a taxation year that ends
after 2015 and begins before 2016) of taxable dividends that it pays while it is a private
corporation or a subject corporation.
Capital Gains and Capital Losses
A Resident Holder who disposes of or is deemed to have disposed of an Offered Share, Warrant
(other than on the exercise of the Warrant), or Warrant Share in a taxation year will generally
realize a capital gain (or capital loss) in the taxation year equal to the amount by which the
proceeds of disposition, less reasonable costs of disposition, exceed (or are exceeded by) the
Resident Holder’s adjusted cost base of the Offered Share, Warrant Share or Warrant, as
applicable. The Resident Holder will generally be required to include one half of any such capital
gain (a “taxable capital gain”) in its income for the year, and be entitled to deduct one half of any
such capital loss year (an “allowable capital loss”) against its taxable capital gains realized in the
taxation year or, to the extent not so deductible, in any of its three preceding taxation years or any
subsequent taxation year, subject to the detailed rules in the Tax Act regarding the deductibility
of allowable capital losses.
The amount of a capital loss realized on the disposition or deemed disposition of an Offered
Share or Warrant Share by a Resident Holder that is a corporation may, in certain circumstances,
be reduced by the amount of any dividends that it received or is deemed to have received on the
Offered Share or Warrant Share to the extent and in the circumstances set out in the Tax Act.
Similar rules may apply to a corporate Resident Holder that is a member of a partnership or a
beneficiary of a trust that directly or indirectly owns Offered Shares or Warrant Shares. A
Resident Holder to whom these rules may apply should consult its own tax advisers.
A Resident Holder that is a “Canadian-controlled private corporation” throughout a taxation year
may be liable to pay a refundable tax of 10⅔% (subject to prorating for a taxation year that ends
after 2015 and begins before 2016) of its “aggregate investment income” for the year, including its
taxable capital gains for the year but excluding dividends or deemed dividends that it may deduct
in computing its taxable income for the year. The tax will generally be refundable to the Resident
Holder at the rate of US$1.15 for every US$3.00 of taxable dividends that it pays in the year
(subject to prorating for a taxation year that ends after 2015 and begins before 2016).
Alternative Minimum Tax
A Resident Holder who is an individual (other than certain trusts) and realizes or is deemed to
realize a capital gain on the disposition of an Offered Share or Warrant Share, or receives or is
deemed to receive a taxable dividend on the Resident Holder’s Offered Shares or Warrant
Shares, may thereby be may be liable for alternative minimum tax under the Tax Act. Resident
Holders who are individuals should consult their own tax advisers in this regard.
Holders Not Resident in Canada
This portion of the summary is generally applicable solely to Holders each of whom, at all
relevant times for purposes of the Tax Act, is not and is not deemed to be resident in Canada,
does not use or hold Offered Shares, Warrants, or Warrant Shares in connection with a business
carried in Canada, and does not and is not deemed to carry on an insurance business in Canada
(each such Holder, a “Non-resident Holder”).
S-29
Dividends
A Non-resident Holder who is paid or credited with, or is deemed to be paid or credited with, a
dividend on the Non-resident Holder`s Offered Shares or Warrant Shares will generally be
subject to Canadian withholding tax at the rate of 25% of the gross amount of the dividend, or
such lower rate as may be available under an income tax convention, if any, between Canada
and the country in which the Non-resident Holder is resident. For example, the rate under the
Canada-United States Income Tax Convention (1980) applicable to a Non-resident Holder who
is a resident of the United States for the purposes of the convention and entitled to its benefits is
generally 15%.
Dispositions
A Non-resident Holder who disposes of an Offered Share, Warrant, or Warrant Share generally
will not be subject to Canadian federal income tax in respect of any capital gain thereby realized
unless the Offered Share, Warrant Share, or Warrant (as applicable) both is “taxable Canadian
property”, and is not “treaty-protected property”, of the Non-resident Holder, at the time of
disposition.
Generally, an Offered Share, Warrant Share or Warrant (as applicable) will not be taxable
Canadian property of a Non-resident Holder at the time of disposition if the Offered Shares or (in
the case of a Warrant or Warrant Share) Warrant Shares are listed on a “designated stock
exchange” (which currently includes the TSX) at that time unless, at any time in the preceding 60
months, the Non-resident Holder, one or more persons with whom the Non-resident Holder did
not deal at arm’s length, or one or more partnerships in which the Non-resident Holder or a
person with whom the Non-resident Holder did not deal at arm`s length directly or indirectly held
a membership interest, alone or in any combination owned 25% or more of the issued shares of
any class or series of shares in the capital stock of the Company, and the Offered Share or
Warrant Share (as applicable) derived more than 50% of its fair market value directly or indirectly
from, or from any combination of, real or immovable property situated in Canada, “Canadian
resource property”, “timber resource property”, or options in respect of or interests in, or for civil
law rights in, any such property, whether or not such property exists.
In general a Non-Resident Holder’s Offered Share, Warrant, or Warrant Share (as applicable) will
be treaty-protected property of the Non-Resident Holder at any time at which any income or gain
from the disposition of the Offered Share, Warrant, or Warrant Share (as applicable) by the Non-
resident Holder would be exempt from Canadian federal income tax under Part I of the Tax Act
because of a tax treaty with another country.
A Non-resident Holder who disposes of an Offered Share, Warrant, or Warrant Share at a time
when the security is taxable Canadian property, and is not treaty-protected property, of the
Resident Holder will generally be subject to the rules described above under “Holders Resident
in Canada – Capital Gains and Capital Losses” in respect of any resulting capital gain or capital
loss. A Non-resident Holder whose Offered Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares are taxable
Canadian property should consult their own tax advisor.
S-30
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, we have agreed to issue and sell, and the Underwriters
have severally agreed to purchase, as principals, subject to compliance with all necessary legal
requirements and the terms and conditions contained in the Underwriting Agreement, a total of
10,750,000 Units at the public offering price of $1.40 per Unit, payable in cash to us against
delivery of such Units, on the closing of this offering. In consideration for their services in
connection with this offering, the Underwriters will be paid the Underwriters’ Fee equal to 6.0% of
the gross proceeds of this offering ($0.084 per Unit, for an aggregate fee payable by us of
$903,000, exclusive of the Additional Units) (other than certain Units that are subject to an
agreed upon president’s list for which the fee will be 3.0%). Cantor Fitzgerald Canada
Corporation and Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC will be acting as Co-
Lead Underwriters and joint book-running managers in respect of the offering in consideration of
a 5% work fee. The public offering price was determined by negotiation between us and the joint
bookrunners on their own behalf and on behalf of the other Underwriters. Subject to the terms
and conditions of the Underwriting Agreement, we have agreed to sell to the Underwriters, and
each Underwriter has severally agreed to purchase, at the Offering Price less the Underwriting
Fee set forth on the cover page of this prospectus supplement, the number of Units listed next to
its name in the following table:
Number of Units 
Underwriter
 
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
  4,568,750
Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC  4,568,750
 
 
Sprott Private Wealth LP
 
Roth Capital Partners, LLC
 
Jett Capital Advisors, LLC
Total
537,500
  537,500
  537,500
  10,750,000
Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, we have granted to the Underwriters the Over-Allotment
Option, exercisable in whole or in part at any time one business day prior to the closing date of
this offering, to purchase up to an additional 1,612,500 Units at the public offering price to cover
over-allocations, if any, and for market stabilization purposes, on the same terms and conditions
as apply to the purchase of Offered Shares thereunder. The Over-Allotment Option may be
exercisable by the Underwriters in respect of: (i) Additional Units at the public offering price; or (ii)
Additional Unit Shares at a price of $1.2676 per Additional Unit Share; or (iii) Additional Warrants
at a price of $0.2649 per Additional Warrant; or (iv) any combination of the Additional Units, so
long as the aggregate number of Additional Unit Shares and Additional Warrants which may be
issued under the Over-Allotment Option does not exceed 1,612,500 Additional Unit Shares and
806,250 Additional Warrants.
In addition, the Company has agreed to grant Underwriters’ Warrants to the Underwriters to
purchase common shares equal to 3.0% of the number of Units sold in this Offering (other than
with respect to an agreed upon president’s list for which the number of Underwriters’ Warrants
will be 1.5% of the number of common shares purchased in the offering). The Underwriters’
Warrants will have the same terms as the Warrants issued to investors in the Offering. See
“Description of the Securities Distributed—Warrants—Underwriters’ Warrants” for more
information regarding the Underwriters’ Warrants.
This prospectus supplement qualifies for distribution the Units as well as the grant of the Over-
Allotment Option, the issuance of the Additional Units pursuant to the exercise of the Over-
Allotment Option, the Underwriters’ Warrants issuable in relation to the issuance of the Units and
Additional Units and the common shares issuable upon exercise of such Underwriters’ Warrants.
A purchaser who acquires Additional Units forming part of the Underwriters’ over-allocation
position acquires those Additional Units under this Prospectus Supplement, regardless of
whether the over-allocation position is ultimately filled through the exercise of the Over-Allotment
Option or secondary market purchases.
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation may sell Units in the United States through its U.S.
affiliate, Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, Roth
Capital Partners, LLC and Jett Capital Advisors, LLC are not registered as investment dealers in
any Canadian jurisdiction and, accordingly, will only sell Units into the United States and will not,
directly or indirectly, solicit offers to purchase or sell the Units in Canada. Subject to applicable
law, the Underwriters may offer to sell the Units outside of Canada and the United States.
S-31
The Warrants and Underwriters’ Warrants will be created and issued pursuant to the terms of a
warrant indenture (the “Warrant Indenture”) dated the date of the closing of this offering to be
entered into between us and Computershare Trust Company of Canada, as warrant agent
thereunder (the “Warrant Agent”). Each Warrant will entitle the holder thereof to purchase one
common share at a price of $1.92 at any time prior to 4:30 p.m. (Toronto time) on the date that is
36 months after the closing of this offering, after which time the Warrants will expire and be void
and of no value. The Warrant Indenture will contain provisions designed to protect the holders of
Warrants against dilution upon the happening of certain events. No fractional common shares
will be issued upon the exercise of any Warrants. There is currently no market through which the
Warrants may be sold and purchasers may not be able to resell the Warrants purchased under
this prospectus supplement. This may affect the price of the Warrants in the secondary market,
the transparency and availability of trading prices, the liquidity of the securities and the extent of
issuer regulation. We do not intend to apply to list the Warrants on the TSX, the NYSE MKT or
any other securities exchange. See “Risk Factors”.
In addition, the Warrant holders are entitled to a “cashless exercise” option if, at any time of
exercise, there is no effective registration statement registering, or no current prospectus
available for, the issuance or resale of Warrant Shares under the U.S. Securities Act. This option
entitles the Warrant holders to elect to receive fewer Warrant Shares without paying the cash
exercise price. The number of Warrant Shares to be issued would be determined by a formula
based on the total number of common shares with respect to which the Warrant is being
exercised, the daily volume weighted average price for our common shares on the trading day
immediately prior to the date of exercise and the applicable exercise price of the Warrants.
We have been advised by the Underwriters that, in connection with this offering, the Underwriters
may effect transactions that stabilize or maintain the market price of our common shares at levels
other than those that might otherwise prevail in the open market. Such transactions, if
commenced, may be discontinued at any time. The Underwriters propose to offer the Units
initially at the public offering price. After a reasonable effort has been made to sell all of the Units
at the public offering price, the Underwriters may subsequently reduce the selling price to
investors from time to time in order to sell any of the Units remaining unsold. In the event that the
Units are sold at a price that is below the public offering price set out on the cover page of this
prospectus supplement, the compensation realized by the Underwriters will be decreased by the
amount that the aggregate price paid by purchasers for the Units is less than the gross proceeds
paid by the Underwriters to us.
The obligations of the Underwriters under the Underwriting Agreement are several, and not joint,
and may be terminated at their discretion upon the occurrence of certain events specified in the
Underwriting Agreement including standard “litigation out”, “financial out”, “disaster out”, “material
adverse effect out” and “market out” rights of termination.
The Underwriters are obligated to take up and pay for all the Units offered by this prospectus
supplement (not including the Additional Units issuable upon exercise of the Over-Allotment
Option) if any are purchased under the Underwriting Agreement, subject to certain exceptions.
We have agreed in the Underwriting Agreement to reimburse the Underwriters for their legal fees
in connection with this offering, in an amount not to exceed $150,000. We estimate that the total
expenses for this offering, excluding compensation and expense reimbursements payable to the
Underwriters under the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, will be approximately $405,000.
We have agreed, pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, to indemnify the Underwriters and
their respective affiliates and their respective directors, officers, employees shareholders and
agents and each other person, if any, controlling any of the Underwriters or their affiliates and
against certain liabilities, including liabilities under Canadian and U.S. securities legislation in
certain circumstances or to contribute to payments the Underwriters may have to make because
of such liabilities.
We have agreed in the Underwriting Agreement that it shall not issue, negotiate or enter into any
agreement to sell or issue, or announce the issue of, any equity securities of the Company for a
period of 90 days from the closing of this offering, other than: (i) the issuance of the Offered
Shares and the Warrant Shares; (ii) pursuant to the grant of options in the normal course
pursuant to our employee stock option plan or issuance of securities pursuant to the exercise of
options of the Company outstanding as of the date of the Underwriting Agreement; (iii) pursuant
to the grant of restricted stock units in the normal course pursuant to our long-term incentive plan
or issuance of securities pursuant to the vesting of restricted share units of the Company
outstanding as of the date of the Underwriting Agreement; or (iv) an issuance of options or
securities in connection with a bona fide acquisition by us (other than a direct or indirect
acquisition, whether by way of one or more transactions, of an entity all or substantially all of the
assets of which are cash, marketable securities or financial in nature or an acquisition that is
structured primarily to defeat the intent of this provision).
S-32
As a condition precedent to the Underwriters’ obligation to close this offering, subject to
customary exemptions permitting dispositions to trusts for the direct or indirect benefit of the
director or officer and/or the immediate family of such person, dispositions required for tax
withholdings in connection with the exercise or vesting of any stock options or restricted share
units issued under the Company’s equity incentive compensation plans, tenders to a take-over
bid or acquisition transaction and pursuant to any existing 10b5-1 plans, all of our directors and
senior officers shall be required to execute and deliver written undertakings in favor of the
Underwriters agreeing not to sell, transfer, pledge (other than as disclosed to the Underwriters in
writing), assign, or otherwise dispose of any securities of the Company owned, directly or
indirectly by such directors or senior officers, until 90 days following the closing of this offering,
without the prior written consent of the joint bookrunners on behalf of the Underwriters.
Subscriptions for the Units will be received subject to rejection or allotment in whole or in part
and the right is reserved to close the subscription books at any time without notice. The closing of
this offering is expected to occur on or about August 8, 2016. Except with respect to U.S.
purchasers of the Units, it is anticipated that the Offered Shares and Warrants forming part of the
Units will be issued in “book-entry only” form and represented by a global certificate or
certificates, or be represented by uncertificated securities, registered in the name of CDS
Clearing and Depository Services Inc. (“CDS”) or its nominee or, with respect to the Offered
Shares only, The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”), as directed by the Underwriters, and will
be deposited with CDS or DTC, as the case may be. U.S. Purchasers of the Units will be issued
certificates representing the Warrants comprising portion of their purchased Units. Except in
limited circumstances, no beneficial holder of Offered Shares or Warrants will receive definitive
certificates representing their interest in the Offered Shares or Warrants. Beneficial holders of
Offered Shares or Warrants will receive only a customer confirmation from the Underwriters or
other registered dealer who is a CDS or DTC participant and from or through whom a beneficial
interest in the Offered Shares or Warrants is acquired. If the Warrants are not able to be issued in
“book-entry only” form through CDS or DTC in advance of the date of the closing of this offering,
then certain other holders will receive definitive certificates representing their interests in the
Offered Shares or Warrants.
This prospectus supplement and the prospectus in electronic format may be made available on
the websites maintained by one or more of the Underwriters or their U.S. affiliates participating in
this offering. The Underwriters may agree to allocate a number of Units to the Underwriters and
their U.S. affiliates for sale to their online brokerage account holders. Internet distributions will be
allocated by the representatives to the Underwriters and their U.S. affiliates that may make
Internet distributions on the same basis as other allocations. Other than the prospectus and the
prospectus supplement in electronic format, the information on these websites is not part of this
prospectus supplement or the registration statement of which this prospectus supplement forms a
part, has not been approved or endorsed by us or any Underwriter in its capacity as underwriter,
and should not be relied upon by investors.
Certain of the Underwriters and their affiliates have provided in the past to us and our affiliates,
and may provide from time to time in the future, certain commercial banking, financial advisory,
investment banking and other services for us and such affiliates in the ordinary course of their
business, for which they have received and may continue to receive customary fees and
commissions. In addition, from time to time, certain of the Underwriters and their affiliates may
effect transactions for their own account or the account of customers, and hold on behalf of
themselves or their customers, long or short positions in our debt or equity securities or loans,
and may do so in the future.
We have applied to the TSX and NYSE MKT for the listing of the Offered Shares, the Warrant
Shares and the Underwriter Warrant Shares. Listing of the Offered Shares, the Warrant Shares
and the Underwriter Warrant Shares will be subject to us fulfilling all the listing requirements of
each of the TSX and NYSE MKT respectively. We do not intend to apply to the TSX or the NYSE
MKT for the listing of the Warrants.
S-33
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
This prospectus supplement is deemed, as of the date hereof, to be incorporated by reference
into the accompanying base prospectus solely for the purpose of offering the Units. Other
documents are also incorporated, or are deemed to be incorporated, by reference into the
accompanying base prospectus, and reference should be made to the accompanying base
prospectus for full particulars thereof.
The following documents which have been filed by us with securities commissions or similar
authorities in Canada and with the SEC, are also specifically incorporated by reference into, and
form an integral part of the accompanying base prospectus, as supplemented by this prospectus
supplement (excluding, unless otherwise provided therein or herein, information furnished
pursuant to Item 2.02 and Item 7.01 of any Current Report on Form 8-K):
(a)
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, which report
contains our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto as at
December 31, 2015 and 2014, together with the auditors’ report thereon and the related
management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations for the
years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014;
(b)
our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, for the quarter ended March 31, 2016, which report
contains the unaudited consolidated financial statements of the Company and the notes
thereto as at March 31, 2016 and for the three months ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, and
for the quarter ended June 30, 2016, which report contains the unaudited consolidated
financial statements of the Company and the notes thereto as at June 30, 2016 and for the
three and six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015;
(c)
our Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A, dated March 11, 2016, as amended, in connection with
our April 26, 2016 annual general meeting of shareholders, including the information
specifically incorporated by reference into our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended December 31, 2015;
(d) our Current Report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on April 29, 2016;
(e)
the description of our common shares contained in our registration statement on Form 8-A filed
on January 4, 1988, including any amendment or report filed for purposes of updating such
description; and
(f)
all other documents filed by us with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the
U.S. Exchange Act (excluding, unless otherwise provided therein or herein, information
furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 and Item 7.01 on any Current Report on Form 8-K), after the
date of this prospectus supplement but before the end of the offering of securities made by this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus.
Any documents of the types referred to in the preceding paragraph (excluding confidential
material change reports) or of any other type required to be incorporated by reference into a short
form prospectus pursuant to National Instrument 44-101 Short Form Prospectus Distributions that
are filed by us with a securities commission or similar authority in Canada after the date of this
prospectus supplement and prior to the termination of the offering under any prospectus
supplement, shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference into this prospectus supplement.
Any statement contained in the accompanying base prospectus or in a document
incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by reference herein or therein shall be deemed
to be modified or superseded for the purposes of this prospectus supplement to the
extent that a statement contained in this prospectus supplement, any free writing
prospectus (unless otherwise specifically indicated therein) or in any other subsequently-
filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference in this
prospectus supplement modifies or supersedes that statement. The modifying or
superseding statement need not state that it has modified or superseded a prior statement
or include any other information set forth in the document that it modifies or supersedes.
The making of a modifying or superseding statement is not to be deemed an admission for
any purposes that the modified or superseded statement, when made, constituted a
misrepresentation, an untrue statement of material fact or an omission to state a material
fact that is required to be stated or is necessary to make a statement not misleading in
light of the circumstances in which it was made. Any statement so modified or superseded
shall not constitute a part of this prospectus supplement, except as so modified
or superseded.
S-34
You may obtain copies of any of these documents by contacting us at the address and telephone
number indicated below or by contacting the SEC as described below. You may request a copy
of these documents, and any exhibits that have specifically been incorporated by reference as an
exhibit in this prospectus supplement, at no cost, by writing or telephoning to:
Vista Gold Corp.
7961 Shaffer Parkway, Suite 5
Littleton, Colorado 80127
Attention: John F. Engele, Chief Financial Officer
(720) 981-1185
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the Offered Shares, the Warrants and the Warrant Shares offered hereby will be
passed upon for us by Borden Ladner Gervais LLP.  Certain legal matters relating to the common
shares offered pursuant to this prospectus supplement will be passed upon for us by Borden
Ladner Gervais LLP, with respect to Canadian legal matters, and Dorsey & Whitney LLP, with
respect to U.S. legal matters, and for the underwriters by Stikeman Elliott LLP, Toronto, Ontario,
with respect to Canadian legal matters, and by Cooley LLP, New York, New York, with respect to
U.S. legal matters. As of the date of this prospectus supplement, the partners and associates of
each of Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Dorsey & Whitney LLP, Stikeman Elliott LLP and Cooley
LLP beneficially own less than 1% of the outstanding common shares.
EXPERTS
Information relating to our mineral properties in this prospectus supplement, the accompanying
base prospectus, any free writing prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference
herein and therein have been derived from reports, statements or opinions prepared or certified
by Tetra Tech, Inc., Rex Bryan, Thomas Dyer, Jackie Blumberg, Deepak Malhotra, Benjamin
Johnson, Nick Michael, David Richers, Keith Thompson, Lachlan Walker, Anthony Clark, John
Rozelle. Each of Rex Bryan, Thomas Dyer, Jackie Blumberg, Deepak Malhotra, Benjamin
Johnson, Nick Michael, David Richers, Keith Thompson, Lachlan Walker, Anthony Clark, John
Rozelle is a qualified person as such term is defined in NI 43-101.
None of Tetra Tech, Inc., Rex Bryan, Thomas Dyer, Jackie Blumberg, Deepak Malhotra,
Benjamin Johnson, Nick Michael, David Richers, Keith Thompson, Lachlan Walker, Anthony
Clark, John Rozelle, each being companies and persons who have prepared or certified the
preparation of reports, statements or opinions relating to our mineral properties, or any director,
officer, employee or partner thereof, as applicable, received or has received a direct or indirect
interest in our property or of any of our associates or affiliates. As at the date hereof, the
aforementioned persons, companies and persons at the companies specified above who
participated in the preparation of such reports, statements or opinions, as a group, beneficially
own, directly or indirectly, less than 1% of our outstanding common shares.
The financial statements and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control
over financial reporting (which is included in Management’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting) incorporated in this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base
prospectus by reference to the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015 have been so incorporated in reliance on the report of EKS&H LLLP, Denver, independent
registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and
accounting.
CANADIAN PURCHASERS’ STATUTORY RIGHTS AND OTHER RIGHTS OF RESCISSION
In an offering of exercisable securities, investors are cautioned that the statutory right of action for
damages for a misrepresentation contained in the prospectus is limited, in certain provincial and
territorial securities legislation, to the price at which the Warrant is offered to the public under the
prospectus offering. This means that, under the securities legislation of certain provinces and
territories, if the purchaser pays additional amounts upon exercise of the security, those amounts
may not be recoverable under the statutory right of action for damages that applies in those
provinces and territories. The purchaser should refer to any applicable provisions of the
securities legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory for the particulars of this right of
action for damages or consult with a legal adviser.
S-35
WHERE TO FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the
SEC. You may read and copy materials we have filed with the SEC at the SEC’s public
reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, DC 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-
SEC-0330 for further information on the operation of its public reference room. Our SEC filings
also are available to the public on the SEC’s Internet site at www.sec.gov. In addition, we
maintain a website that contains information about us, including our SEC filings, at
www.vistagold.com. The information contained on our website does not constitute a part of this
prospectus supplement, the accompanying base prospectus, the Canadian Prospectus or any
other report or documents we file with or furnish to the SEC or with the securities regulatory
authorities in Canada.
S-36
PROSPECTUS
VISTA GOLD CORP.
$50,000,000
Common Shares
Warrants
Subscription Receipts
Units
Vista Gold Corp. (the “Company”) may offer and sell, from time to time, up to $50,000,000
aggregate initial offering price of common shares in the capital of the Company, without par value
(which we refer to herein as “Common Shares”), warrants to purchase Common Shares (which
we refer to herein as “Warrants”), subscription receipts for Common Shares, Warrants or any
combination thereof (which we refer to herein as “Subscription Receipts”), or any combination
thereof (which we refer to herein as “Units”) (collectively, the Common Shares, Warrants,
Subscription Receipts, and Units are referred to herein as the “Securities”) in one or more
transactions under this base prospectus (which we refer to herein as the “Prospectus”).  This
Prospectus also covers (i) Common Shares that may be issued upon exercise of warrants and
(ii) such indeterminate amount of securities as may be issued in exchange for, or upon
conversion of, as the case may be, the securities registered hereunder, including, in each case,
an indeterminate number of Common Shares that may be issued pursuant to anti-dilution or
adjustment provisions in Warrants or Subscription Receipts issuable hereunder.
This Prospectus provides you with a general description of the Securities that the Company may
offer. Each time the Company offers Securities, it will provide you with a prospectus supplement
(which we refer to herein as the “Prospectus Supplement”) that describes specific information
about the particular Securities being offered and may add, update or change information
contained in this Prospectus. You should read both this Prospectus and the Prospectus
Supplement, together with any additional information which is incorporated by reference into this
Prospectus.  This Prospectus may not be used to offer or sell securities without the
Prospectus Supplement which includes a description of the method and terms of that
offering.
The aggregate market value of our outstanding voting and non-voting common equity held by
non-affiliates on August 15, 2014, was approximately $30 million.  We have issued securities
pursuant to Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3 during the 12 calendar month period that ends on and
includes the date hereof in an amount equal to approximately $857 thousand.
The Company may sell the Securities on a continuous or delayed basis to or through
underwriters, dealers or agents or directly to purchasers. The Prospectus Supplement, which the
Company will provide to you each time it offers Securities, will set forth the names of any
underwriters, dealers or agents involved in the sale of the Securities, and any applicable fee,
commission or discount arrangements with them.  For additional information on the methods of
sale, you should refer to the section entitled “Plan of Distribution” in this Prospectus.
The Common Shares are traded on the NYSE MKT exchange (which we refer to as “NYSE
MKT”) and on the Toronto Stock Exchange (which we refer to as the “TSX”) under the symbol
“VGZ”. On August 15, 2014, the last reported sale price of the Common Shares on the NYSE
MKT was $0.47 per share and on the TSX was C$0.50 per share. There is currently no market
through which the Securities, other than the Common Shares, may be sold and
purchasers may not be able to resell the Securities purchased under this
Prospectus.  This may affect the pricing of the Securities, other than the Common Shares,
in the secondary market, the transparency and availability of trading prices, the liquidity of
these Securities and the extent of issuer regulation.  See “Risk Factors”.
Investing in the Securities involves risks.  See “Risk Factors” on page 5.
These Securities have not been approved or disapproved by the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (“SEC”) or any state securities commission nor has the SEC or
any state securities commission passed upon the accuracy or adequacy of this
Prospectus.   Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
THE DATE OF THIS PROSPECTUS IS August 15, 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
 
THE COMPANY
1
 
2
BUSINESS OF THE COMPANY
 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
 
RISK FACTORS
 
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
 
CAUTIONARY NOTE FOR U S  INVESTORS REGARDING RESERVE AND RESOURCE
ESTIMATES
 
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
 
PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION AND EXCHANGE RATE DATA
 
USE OF PROCEEDS
 
MARKET FOR COMMON SHARES AND WARRANTS
 
CHANGES TO CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
 
CERTAIN INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
 
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES
 
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
 
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
 
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
 
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
 
EXPERTS
 
LEGAL MATTERS
 
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
2
 
2
 
5
 
10
13
13
 
14
 
15
 
15
 
16
 
18
 
18
 
18
 
20
 
23
 
24
 
26
 
26
 
27
 
27
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This Prospectus is a part of a registration statement that the Company filed with the SEC utilizing
a “shelf” registration process.  Under this shelf registration process, the Company may sell any
combination of the Securities described in this Prospectus in one or more offerings up to a total
dollar amount of initial aggregate offering price of $50,000,000. This Prospectus provides you
with a general description of the Securities that we may offer. The specific terms of the Securities
in respect of which this Prospectus is being delivered will be set forth in a Prospectus
Supplement and may include, where applicable: (i) in the case of Common Shares, the number
of Common Shares offered, the offering price and any other specific terms of the offering; (ii) in
the case of Warrants, the designation, number and terms of the Common Shares purchasable
upon exercise of the Warrants, any procedures that will result in the adjustment of those
numbers, the exercise price, dates and periods of exercise, and the currency or the currency unit
in which the exercise price must be paid and any other specific terms; (iii) in the case of
Subscription Receipts, the designation, number and terms of the Common Shares or Warrants
receivable upon satisfaction of certain release conditions, any procedures that will result in the
adjustment of those numbers, any additional payments to be made to holders of Subscription
Receipts upon satisfaction of the release conditions, the terms of the release conditions, terms
governing the escrow of all or a portion of the gross proceeds from the sale of the Subscription
Receipts, terms for the refund of all or a portion of the purchase price for Subscription Receipts in
the event the release conditions are not met and any other specific terms; and (iv) in the case of
Units, the designation, number and terms of the Common Shares, Warrants, or Subscription
Receipts comprising the Units.  A Prospectus Supplement may include specific variable terms
pertaining to the Securities that are not within the alternatives and parameters set forth in this
Prospectus.
In connection with any offering of the Securities (unless otherwise specified in a Prospectus
Supplement), the underwriters or agents may over-allot or effect transactions which stabilize or
maintain the market price of the Securities offered at a higher level than that which might exist in
the open market.  Such transactions, if commenced, may be interrupted or discontinued at any
time.  See “Plan of Distribution”.
Please carefully read both this Prospectus and any Prospectus Supplement together with the
documents incorporated herein by reference under “Documents Incorporated by Reference” and
the additional information described below under “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Owning securities may subject you to tax consequences both in Canada and the United
States.  This Prospectus or any applicable Prospectus Supplement may not describe
these tax consequences fully.  You should read the tax discussion in any Prospectus
Supplement with respect to a particular offering and consult your own tax advisor with
respect to your own particular circumstances.
References in this Prospectus to “$” are to United States dollars. Canadian dollars are indicated
by the symbol “C$”.
You should rely only on the information contained in this Prospectus.  The Company has not
authorized anyone to provide you with information different from that contained in this
Prospectus.  The distribution or possession of this Prospectus in or from certain jurisdictions may
be restricted by law.  This Prospectus is not an offer to sell these Securities and is not soliciting
an offer to buy these Securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted or
where the person making the offer or sale is not qualified to do so or to any person to whom it is
not permitted to make such offer or sale.  The information contained in this Prospectus is
accurate only as of the date of this Prospectus, regardless of the time of delivery of this
Prospectus or of any sale of the Securities.  The Company’s business, financial condition, results
of operations and prospects may have changed since that date.
In this Prospectus and in any Prospectus Supplement, unless the context otherwise requires,
references to “Vista” and the “Company” refer to Vista Gold Corp., either alone or together with its
subsidiaries.
1
THE COMPANY
Vista Gold Corp. was originally incorporated on November 28, 1983 under the name “Granges
Exploration Ltd.” Effective November 1, 1996, two predecessor entities amalgamated under the
name “Vista Gold Corp.” and, effective December 17, 1997, Vista Gold continued from British
Columbia to the Yukon Territory, Canada under the Business Corporations Act (Yukon
Territory).  On June 11, 2013, Vista Gold continued from the Yukon Territory, Canada to the
Province of British Columbia, Canada under the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia).
The current addresses, telephone and facsimile numbers of the offices of the Company are:
Executive Office
Suite 5 - 7961 Shaffer Parkway
Littleton, Colorado, USA 80127
Registered and Records Office
1200 Waterfront Centre – 200 Burrard Street
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V7X 1T2
Telephone: (720) 981-1185
Facsimile: (720) 981-1186
Telephone: (604) 687-5744
Facsimile: (604) 687-1415
BUSINESS OF THE COMPANY
The Company operates in the gold mining industry. We are focused on the evaluation,
acquisition, exploration and advancement of gold exploration and potential development
projects, which may lead to gold production or value adding strategic transactions such as earn-
in right agreements, option agreements or leases to third parties, joint venture arrangements with
other mining companies, or outright sales of assets for cash and/or other consideration. As such,
we are considered an exploration stage enterprise. Our approach to acquisitions of gold projects
has generally been to seek projects within political jurisdictions with well-established mining,
land ownership and tax laws, which have adequate drilling and geological data to support the
completion of a third-party review of the geological data and to complete an estimate of the gold
mineralization. In addition, we look for opportunities to improve the value of our gold projects
through exploration drilling and/or technical studies resulting in changes to the operating
assumptions underlying previous engineering work.
Our principal assets include our flagship Mt. Todd gold project in Northern Territory (“NT”),
Australia, and an 11.2% holding of common shares in the capital of Midas Gold Corp. (“Midas
Gold Shares”). We also hold non-core projects in Mexico and California and royalty interests in
projects in Bolivia and Indonesia. Additional information about these projects is available herein
under the heading “Recent Developments” and in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2013, filed on Form 10-K, under “Item 2. Properties”, which
Annual Report is incorporated herein by reference, see below under the heading “Documents
Incorporated by Reference”.
We do not produce gold and do not currently generate operating earnings. We expect to raise
capital through the sale of non-core assets, additional equity and/or debt financings, and through
the exercise of stock options and warrants.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Filing of Canadian Preliminary Short Form Base Shelf Prospectus
On June 4, 2014, the Company filed a preliminary short form base shelf prospectus with certain
Canadian securities regulators which, when effective, will permit the Company to offer and sell
the Securities for gross proceeds of up to $50,000,000 in the provinces and territories of Canada
(other than Quebec).  The Securities that may be sold in the U.S., together with the Securities that
the Company may sell in Canada, are expected to generate aggregate gross proceeds of up to
$50,000,000.
Guadalupe de los Reyes Option Agreement
During January 2014, we announced that we signed a non-binding letter of intent (the “LOI”) to
option our interest in the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project in Sinaloa, Mexico to
Cangold Limited (“Cangold”).
2
The LOI provided that a non-refundable $50,000 payment be made to Vista for which Cangold
would have a 90 day period of exclusivity (the “Exclusivity Period”) to complete due diligence
and negotiate and enter into a definitive option agreement with Vista (the “Option Agreement”).
During April 2014, Minera Gold Stake S.A. de C.V. (“MGS”), Vista’s wholly-owned subsidiary,
entered into an Option Agreement to option its interest in the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver
project in Sinaloa, Mexico to Cangold.
Pursuant to the terms of the Option Agreement, Vista has granted Cangold the right to earn a
70% interest in the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project by:
·
making payments totaling $5,000,000 in five payments over a three-year period, with payments
totaling $1,000,000 in the first year ($150,000 of which was paid at signing), $1,500,000 in the
second year and $2,500,000 in the third year;
·
operating the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project and maintaining the concessions
comprising the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project in good standing; and
· fulfilling all of the obligations of MGS to the Ejido La Tasajera (the “Ejido”) as set out in the
temporary occupation contract between MGS and the Ejido.
The Option Agreement provides that all cash payments are non-refundable and optional to
Cangold, and in the event Cangold fails to pay any of the required amounts on the scheduled
dates or fails to comply with its other obligations, the Option Agreement will terminate and
Cangold will have no interest in the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project. Provided it is not
in breach of the Option Agreement, Cangold may at its discretion advance the above payment
schedule and exercise the initial option for a 70% interest in the Guadalupe de los Reyes
gold/silver project any time during the three-year period.
Subject to Cangold earning a 70% interest in the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project,
MGS has granted Cangold the option to earn the remaining 30% interest in the Guadalupe de los
Reyes gold/silver project by notifying MGS of a production decision no later than the tenth
anniversary of exercising the first option and by making a cash payment to MGS of $3,000,000
plus an additional cash payment based on a formula that includes the growth, if any, in estimated
measured and indicated mineral resources of the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project,
and the then prevailing spot gold price (“Escalator Payment”).
Should Cangold determine not to put the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project into
production, the Option Agreement provides MGS with the right to buy back Cangold’s 70%
interest in the Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project for a cash payment of $5,000,000 plus
the Escalator Payment described above.  If MGS does not exercise its buyback option, MGS will
still retain a right of first refusal should Cangold elect to sell its 70% interest in the Guadalupe de
los Reyes gold/silver project to a third party.
Debt
During March 2013, we entered into a credit agreement with Sprott Resources Lending
Partnership (the “Lender”) for purposes of establishing a C$10,000,000 ($9,764,000) loan facility
(the “2013 Facility”). The 2013 Facility originally matured March 2014, with early repayment of
the 2013 Facility allowed, at our option, provided that at least four months interest has been
paid. We reached an agreement with the Lender to extend the maturity date of the 2013 Facility
to March 2015. Subsequently, we repaid the principal balance in full as of March 31, 2014.
THE SECURITIES OFFERED UNDER THIS PROSPECTUS
The Company may offer the Common Shares, Warrants, Subscription Receipts or Units with a
total value of up to $50,000,000 from time to time under this Prospectus, together with any
applicable Prospectus Supplement, at prices and on terms to be determined by market
conditions at the time of offering.  This Prospectus provides you with a general description of the
Securities the Company may offer.  Each time the Company offers Securities, it will provide a
Prospectus Supplement that will describe the specific amounts, prices and other important terms
of the Securities, including, to the extent applicable:
· designation or classification;
· aggregate offering price;
· original issue discount, if any;
3
· rates and times of payment of dividends, if any;
· redemption, conversion or exchange terms, if any;
·
conversion or exchange prices, if any, and, if applicable, any provisions for changes to or
adjustments in the conversion or exchange prices and in the securities or other property
receivable upon conversion or exchange;
· restrictive covenants, if any;
· voting or other rights, if any; and
· important United States and Canadian federal income tax considerations.
A Prospectus Supplement may also add, update or change information contained in this
Prospectus or in documents the Company has incorporated by reference.  However, no
Prospectus Supplement will offer a security that is not described in this Prospectus.
The Company may sell the Securities on a continuous or delayed basis to or through
underwriters, dealers or agents or directly to purchasers. The Prospectus Supplement, which the
Company will provide each time it offers Securities, will set forth the names of any underwriters,
dealers or agents involved in the sale of the Securities, and any applicable fee, commission or
discount arrangements with them.
Common Shares
The Company may offer Common Shares.  The Company may issue Common Shares
independently or together with Warrants or Subscription Receipts, and the Common Shares may
be attached to or separate from such securities. Holders of Common Shares are entitled to one
vote per Common Share on all matters that require shareholder approval.  Holders of Common
Shares are entitled to dividends when and if declared by the Board of Directors of the
Company.  The Common Shares are described in greater detail in this Prospectus under
“Description of Common Shares.”
Warrants
The Company may offer Warrants for the purchase of Common Shares, in one or more series,
from time to time.  The Company may issue Warrants independently or together with Common
Shares or Subscription Receipts, and the Warrants may be attached to or separate from such
securities.  Certain warrants to purchase Common Shares of the Company (“Listed Warrants”)
are listed on the TSX under the symbol VGZ.WT.U. However, Warrants to be issued under this
Prospectus may or may not be listed on the TSX or on any other securities exchange.  The
Prospectus Supplement regarding any Warrant to be issued under this Prospectus will provide
disclosure regarding whether the Warrants to be issued under such Prospectus Supplement will
be listed or are listed on a securities exchange and will be filed in Canada on the System for
Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval (“SEDAR”) and in the United States with the SEC.
The Warrants will be evidenced by warrant certificates and may be issued under one or more
warrant indentures, which are contracts between the Company and a warrant trustee for the
holders of the Warrants.  In this Prospectus, the Company has summarized certain general
features of the Warrants under “Description of Warrants.”  The Company urges you, however, to
read any Prospectus Supplement related to the series of Warrants being offered, as well as the
complete warrant indentures and warrant certificates that contain the terms of the
Warrants.  Specific warrant indentures will contain additional important terms and provisions and
will be filed in the United States on Form 8-K with the SEC and will be filed in Canada on
SEDAR.
Subscription Receipts
The Company may issue Subscription Receipts, which will entitle holders to receive upon
satisfaction of certain release conditions and for no additional consideration, Common Shares,
Warrants or any combination thereof.  Subscription Receipts will be issued pursuant to one or
more subscription receipt agreements, each to be entered into between the Company and an
escrow agent, which will establish the terms and conditions of the Subscription Receipts.  Each
escrow agent will be a financial institution organized under the laws of Canada or a province
thereof and authorized to carry on business as a trustee.  A copy of the form of subscription
receipt agreement will be filed in the United States on Form 8-K with the SEC and will be filed in
Canada on SEDAR.
In the Prospectus, the Company has summarized certain general features of the Subscription
Receipts under “Description of Subscription Receipts”. The Company urges you, however, to
read any Prospectus Supplement related to Subscription Receipts being offered, as well as the
complete subscription receipt agreement.
4
Units
The Company may offer Units consisting of Common Shares, Warrants and/or Subscription
Receipts to purchase any of such securities in one or more series.  This Prospectus contains a
summary of certain general features of the Units under “Description of Units.”  The Company
urges you, however, to read any Prospectus Supplement related to the series of Units being
offered.  The Company may evidence each series of units by unit certificates that the Company
will issue under a separate unit agreement with a unit agent.  The Company will file in the United
States on Form 8-K with the SEC and will filed in Canada on SEDAR the unit agreements that
describe the terms of the series of Units the Company is offering before the issuance of the
related series of Units.
THIS PROSPECTUS MAY NOT BE USED TO OFFER OR SELL ANY SECURITIES UNLESS
ACCOMPANIED BY A PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT.
RISK FACTORS
Investing in the Securities involves a high degree of risk.  Prospective investors in a particular
offering of Securities should carefully consider the following risks as well as the other information
contained in this Prospectus, any applicable Prospectus Supplement, and the documents
incorporated by reference herein before investing in the Securities.  If any of the following risks
actually occurs, the Company’s business could be materially harmed.  The risks and
uncertainties described below are not the only ones the Company faces.  Additional risks and
uncertainties, including those of which the Company is currently unaware or that the Company
deems immaterial, may also adversely affect the Company’s business.
Operating Risks
We cannot be assured that our Mt. Todd gold project is feasible or that a feasibility study
will accurately forecast operating results.
Before arranging financing for the Mt. Todd gold project, we will have to complete a feasibility
study.  There can be no assurance that the results of the feasibility study will be positive or that
such study will be completed when expected.
If the Mt. Todd gold project feasibility study is favorable, and if the project can be financed, there
is no assurance that actual production rates, revenues, capital and operating costs at the Mt.
Todd gold project will not vary unfavorably from the estimates and assumptions included in the
feasibility study.
Our Mt. Todd gold project requires substantial capital investment and we may be unable to
raise sufficient capital on favorable terms or at all.
The construction and operation of our Mt. Todd gold project will require significant capital. Our
ability to raise sufficient capital will depend on several factors, including a favorable feasibility
study, acquisition of the requisite permits, macroeconomic conditions, and future gold prices.
Uncontrollable factors such as lower gold prices, unanticipated operating or permitting
challenges, illiquidity in the debt markets or a further dislocation in the gold mining equity
markets as experienced in recent years, could prohibit our ability to finance the Mt. Todd gold
project on acceptable terms, if at all.
If we decide to construct the mine at our Mt. Todd gold project, we will be assuming certain
reclamation obligations resulting in a material financial obligation.
The Mt. Todd gold project site was not reclaimed when the original mine closed.  Although we
are not currently responsible for the reclamation of these historical disturbances, we will accept
full responsibility if we make a decision to finance and construct the mine.  At that time, we will be
required to provide a bond in a form satisfactory to the NT Government (in whose jurisdiction the
Mt. Todd gold project is located) that would cover the expense of the reclamation of the
property.  In addition, the regulatory authorities may increase reclamation and bonding
requirements from time to time.  The satisfaction of these bonding requirements and continuing or
future reclamation obligations will require a significant amount of capital.
5
We may not be able to get the required permits to begin construction at our Mt. Todd gold
project in a timely manner or at all.
Any delay in acquiring the requisite permits, or failure to receive required governmental
approvals (including the approval of the environmental impact statement), could delay or prevent
the start of construction of our Mt. Todd gold project.  If we are unable to acquire permits to mine
the property, then it will have no reserves under SEC Industry Guide 7 and Canadian National
Instrument 43-101 (“NI 43-101”), which would result in an impairment of the carrying value of the
project.
There may be other delays in the construction of our Mt. Todd gold project.
Delays in commencement of construction could result from factors such as availability and
performance of engineering and construction contractors, suppliers and consultants; availability
of required equipment; and availability of capital. Any delay in the performance of any one or
more of the contractors, suppliers, consultants or other persons on which we depend, or lack of
availability of required equipment, or delay or failure to receive required governmental approvals,
or financing could delay or prevent commencement of construction at the Mt. Todd gold project.
There can be no assurance of whether or when construction at the Mt. Todd gold project will start
or that the necessary personnel, equipment or supplies will be available to the Company if and
when construction is started.
We cannot be assured that we will have an adequate water supply at our Mt. Todd gold
project.
Water at the Mt. Todd gold project is expected to be provided from a fresh water reservoir which
is fed by seasonal rains. Drought or drought-like conditions in the area feeding the reservoir
could limit or extinguish this water supply, and all operations would have to stop until the water
supply is replenished.
We could incur substantial costs or disruptions to our business if we cannot obtain, renew
or maintain the necessary authorizations and permits.
In order to conduct our operations, we must obtain authorizations and permits from governmental
authorities.  Delays in obtaining authorizations or permits, failure to obtain an authorization or
permit or receipt of an authorization or permit with unreasonable conditions or costs could have a
material adverse effect on our ability to develop our gold projects.
The failure to obtain necessary permits could result in an impairment of the carrying value of our
projects as the project(s) will not have mineral reserves under SEC Industry Guide 7 or NI 43-
101.
We rely on third parties to fulfill their obligations under agreements.
Our business strategy includes entering into agreements with third-parties (“Partners”) which may
earn the right to obtain a majority interest in certain of our projects, in part by managing the
respective project. Whether or not we hold a majority interest in a respective project, our
Partner(s) may: (i) have economic or business interests or goals that are inconsistent with or
opposed to ours; (ii) exercise veto rights to block actions that we believe to be in the best
interests of the project; (iii) take action contrary to our policies or objectives; or (iv) as a result of
financial or other difficulties, be unable or unwilling to fulfill their obligations under the respective
joint venture, option, earn-in right or other agreement(s), such as contributing capital for the
expansion or maintenance of projects.  Any one or a combination of these could result in
liabilities for us and/or could adversely affect the value of the related project(s) and, by
association, damage our reputation and consequently our ability to acquire or advance other
projects and/or attract future co-venturers.
Our exploration and development operations are subject to evolving environmental
regulations.
All phases of our operations are subject to environmental regulation. Environmental legislation is
becoming more restrictive in some countries or jurisdictions in a manner that will require stricter
standards and enforcement, increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent
environmental assessments of proposed projects and a heightened degree of responsibility for
companies and their officers, directors and employees. There is no assurance that future
changes in environmental regulation, if any, will not adversely affect our projects. Currently, we
are subject to U.S. federal and state environmental regulations in California, as well as
government environmental regulations in Australia and Mexico.
6
We could be subject to environmental lawsuits.
Neighboring landowners and other third parties could file claims based on environmental
statutes and common law for personal injury and property damage allegedly caused by the
release of hazardous substances or other waste material into the environment on or around our
properties.  There can be no assurance that our defense of such claims would be
successful.  This could have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial
condition, results of operation, and corporate reputation.
There may be challenges to our title to mineral properties.
There may be challenges to our title to our mineral properties. If there are title defects with
respect to any of our properties, we may be required to compensate other persons or perhaps
reduce our interest in the affected property. Also, in any such case, the investigation and
resolution of title issues would divert management’s time from company business, including any
ongoing exploration and development programs.
Our interests in Mexico, Bolivia and Indonesia are subject to risks from political and
economic instability.
We have interests in Mexico, Bolivia and Indonesia that may be affected by risks associated with
political or economic instability in those countries. The risks include, but are not limited to,
military repression, extreme fluctuations in currency exchange rates, labor instability or militancy,
mineral title irregularities and high rates of inflation. In addition, changes in mining or investment
policies or shifts in political attitude in these countries may adversely affect our business. We
may be affected in varying degrees by government regulation with respect to restrictions on
production, price controls, export controls, income taxes, expropriation of property, maintenance
of claims, environmental legislation, land use, land claims of local people, water use and mine
safety. The effect of these factors cannot be accurately predicted.
Financial and Business Risks
The Purchasers of the Los Cardones project may elect to not make a $6,250,000 payment
to us by July 31, 2014, which would severely reduce our expected working capital and
negatively affect our planned liquidity.
During October 2013, Vista and Invecture Group S.A. de C.V. (“Invecture”) terminated the 2012
Earn-in Right Agreement whereby Invecture could have earned a 62.5% interest in the Los
Cardones gold project located in Baja California Sur, Mexico, and entered into new agreements
whereby Vista sold 100% of its debt and equity interests in the Los Cardones gold project (the
“Los Cardones Sale”) to Invecture and RPG Structured Finance S.a.R.L.  (together, the
“Purchasers”), for a total of $13,000,000, $7,000,000 of which was paid in October 2013 and
$6,000,000 was payable in January 2014, subject to the Purchasers’ option to elect to not make
this payment. As a result of permitting delays, we and the Purchasers have agreed to extend the
due date of the $6,000,000 payment to July 31, 2014 for consideration of $250,000. If the
Purchasers elect to not make the $6,250,000 payment, Vista will retain the $7,000,000 already
paid and 100% of the Los Cardones gold project will be returned to Vista. The Company would
also assume all of the responsibilities associated with maintaining the Los Cardones gold project
on a going forward basis.
We may be unable to raise additional capital on favorable terms, if at all.
The exploration and development of our properties, specifically the construction of any mining
facilities and commencement of any mining operations, require substantial additional financing.
We will have to raise additional funds from external sources (through equity or debt financing or
through the sale of our assets) in order to maintain and advance our existing property positions
and to acquire new gold projects. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be
available at all or on acceptable terms. In addition, there can be no assurance that we will be
able to timely monetize our assets at a value acceptable to us or at all. If additional financing or
sale of our noncore assets are not available, we may have to substantially reduce or cease
operations.
A substantial or extended decline in gold prices would have a material adverse effect on
the value of our assets, on our ability to raise capital and could result in lower than
estimated economic returns.
The value of our assets, our ability to raise capital and our future economic returns are
substantially dependent on the price of gold. The gold price fluctuates on a daily basis and is
affected by numerous factors beyond our control. Factors tending to influence gold prices
include:
7
·
gold sales or leasing by governments and central banks or changes in their monetary policy,
including gold inventory management and reallocation of reserves;
· speculative short positions taken by significant investors or traders in gold;
· the relative strength of the U.S. dollar;
· expectations of the future rate of inflation;
· interest rates;
·
changes to economic activity in the United States, China, India and other industrialized or
developing countries;
· geopolitical conflicts;
· changes in industrial, jewelry or investment demand;
· changes in supply from production, disinvestment and scrap; and
· forward sales by producers in hedging or similar transactions.
A substantial or extended decline in the gold price could:
· negatively impact our ability to raise capital on favorable terms, or at all;
· jeopardize the development of our Mt. Todd gold project;
·
reduce our existing estimated mineral resources and reserves by removing resources from
these estimates that could not be economically processed at the lower gold price;
· reduce the potential for future revenues from gold projects  in which we have an interest;
·
reduce funds available to us for exploration with the result that we may not be able to further
advance any of our projects;
· reduce the market value of our assets; and
·
reduce the value of our investment in Midas Gold Shares and our royalty interests in projects in
Bolivia and Indonesia.
We have a history of losses, and we do not expect to generate earnings from operations or
pay dividends in the near term.
We are an Exploration Stage Enterprise.  As such, we devote our efforts to exploration, analysis
and development of our projects.  We do not currently produce gold and do not currently generate
operating earnings.  We finance our business activities principally by issuing equity and/or debt
and the sale of non-core assets.
We have incurred losses in all periods since 1998, except for the year ended December 31,
2011, during which we recorded non-cash net gains. Our historic accumulated deficit totals
approximately $394 million as at December 31, 2013, $334 million as at December 31, 2012 and
$264 million as at December 31, 2011.  Additionally, we had negative cash flow from operating
activities of $25 million for the year ended December 31, 2013.  We expect to continue this trend
of incurring losses, until one or more of our gold properties becomes a producing mine(s), or is
otherwise monetized, and generates sufficient revenues to fund all of our operations, including
our corporate headquarters.  We have no history of paying dividends and we do not expect to pay
dividends or to make any similar distribution in the foreseeable future.
We cannot be certain that any of our exploration and development activities or any
acquisition activities will be commercially successful.
Substantial expenditures are required to acquire gold properties, to establish mineral reserves
through drilling and analysis, to develop metallurgical processes to extract metal from the ore and
to develop the mining and processing facilities and infrastructure at any site chosen for mining.
We cannot be assured that any mineral reserves or mineral resources acquired, established or
discovered will be in sufficient quantities to justify commercial operations or that the funds
invested in them will ever be recovered.
We face intense competition in the mining industry.
The mining industry is intensely competitive in all of its phases. Some of our competitors are
much larger, established mining companies with greater financial and technical resources than
ours.  We compete with other mining companies for attractive mining claims, for capital, for
equipment and supplies, for outside services and for qualified managerial and technical
employees.
If we are unable to acquire attractive mining claims we could lose an opportunity to improve our
business. Competition for capital recently reduced the amount of capital available and raised the
associated cost.  If we are
8
unable to raise sufficient capital, our exploration and development programs may be reduced in
scope or stopped completely, as done at our Guadalupe de los Reyes gold/silver project during
2013, for example.  Competition for equipment and supplies could result in shortage of necessary
supplies and/or increased costs. Competition for outside services could result in increased costs,
reduced quality of service and/or delays in completing services. If we cannot successfully attract
and retain qualified employees our exploration and development programs may be slowed down
or suspended.
The occurrence of events for which we are not insured may affect our cash flow and
overall profitability.
We maintain insurance policies that mitigate certain risks related to our operations. This
insurance is maintained in amounts that we believe to be reasonable based on the
circumstances surrounding each identified risk. However, we may elect not to have insurance for
certain risks because of the high premiums associated with insuring those risks or for various
other reasons; in other cases, insurance may not be available for certain risks. We do not insure
against political risk. Occurrence of events for which we are not insured could result in significant
costs that could materially adversely affect our financial condition and our ability to fund our
business.  A significant loss or liability could force us to reduce or terminate operations on a
specific project.
Currency fluctuations may adversely affect our costs.
Currency exchange rate fluctuations may affect the costs that we incur at our projects as those
costs are incurred in the local currency.  The appreciation of the local currencies against the U.S.
dollar increases our costs of exploration and development activities in U.S. dollar terms at our
projects located outside of the United States.  As a result, our results of operations and financial
condition could be adversely affected.
The Company is likely a “passive foreign investment company,” which will likely have
adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences for U.S. shareholders.
U.S. shareholders of shares of our common stock (the “Common Shares”) should be aware that
the Company believes it was classified as a PFIC during the taxable year ended December 31,
2013, and based on current business plans and financial projections, management believes
there is a significant likelihood that the Company will be a PFIC during the current taxable
year.  If the Company is a PFIC for any year during a U.S. shareholder’s holding period, then
such U.S. shareholder generally will be required to treat any gain realized upon a disposition of
Common Shares, or any so-called “excess distribution” received on their Common Shares, as
ordinary income, and to pay an interest charge on a portion of such gain or distributions, unless
the shareholder makes a timely and effective “qualified electing fund” (“QEF Election”) or a “mark-
to-market” election with respect to the Common Shares.  A U.S. shareholder who makes a QEF
Election generally must report on a current basis its share of the net capital gain and ordinary
earnings for any year in which the Company is PFIC, whether or not the Company distributes any
amounts to its shareholders.  However, U.S. shareholders should be aware that there can be no
assurance that the Company will satisfy record keeping requirements that apply to a QEF
Election, or that the Company will supply U.S. shareholders with information that such U.S.
shareholders require to report under the QEF Election rules, in event that the Company is a PFIC
and a U.S. shareholder wishes to make a QEF Election.  Thus, U.S. shareholders may not be
able to make a QEF Election with respect to their Common Shares.  A U.S. shareholder who
makes the mark-to-market election generally must include as ordinary income each year the
excess of the fair market value of the Common Shares over the taxpayer’s basis therein.  This
paragraph is qualified in its entirety by the discussion below under the heading “Certain U.S.
Federal Income Tax Considerations.”  Each U.S. shareholder should consult his or her own tax
advisor regarding the U.S. federal, U.S. state and local, and foreign tax consequences of the
PFIC rules and the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of Common Shares.
Lack of Public Market.
Neither the Warrants, Subscription Receipts or Units have a public market history.  No assurance
can be made that an active trading market for these securities will develop in the future, and the
Company does not expect that an active trading market will develop.  There is no intention to list
the Warrants, Subscription Receipts or Units on any stock exchange.  The lack of public market
for the Warrants, Subscription Receipts and Units may inhibit purchasers’ ability to resell these
securities.  In addition, the lack of public market may affect the pricing of the Warrants,
Subscription Receipts and Units in the secondary market, the transparency and availability of
trading prices of such securities, the liquidity of such securities and the extent of regulation of the
Company.
Industry Risks
9
Cost inflation could negatively affect the long-term viability of our industry.
Operating costs within the gold mining industry have been increasing dramatically in recent
years.   Deepening political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, strong economic growth
in China, India and other developing economies could have the effect of constraining supplies of
oil and other commodities, which could force related prices higher. A similar trend in labor costs
has been observed, resulting mainly from a shortage of skilled labor and growing pressure for the
extractive industries to provide compensation commensurate with higher metals prices.  There is
also a growing trend for governments to expect more income from their natural resources in the
form of increased royalties, taxes and fees. These factors undermine the long-term viability of the
mining industry generally, and potentially reduce the availability of, and/or increase the cost of,
financing for new mining projects.
Calculations of mineral reserves and mineral resources are estimates only and subject to
uncertainty.
The estimating of mineral reserves and mineral resources is an imprecise process and the
accuracy of such estimates is a function of the quantity and quality of available data, the
assumptions used and judgments made in interpreting engineering and geological information
and estimating future capital and operating costs. There is significant uncertainty in any reserve
or resource estimate, and the economic results of mining an ore deposit may differ materially from
the estimates.
Feasibility and other studies are estimates only and subject to uncertainty.
Feasibility studies are used to determine the economic viability of an ore deposit, as are pre-
feasibility studies and preliminary economic assessments. Feasibility studies are the most
detailed studies and reflect a higher level of confidence in the estimated production rates, and
capital and operating costs. Generally accepted levels of confidence are plus or minus 15% for
feasibility studies, plus or minus 25-30% for pre-feasibility studies and plus or minus 35-40% for
preliminary economic assessments. These levels reflect the levels of confidence that exist at the
time the study is completed.  Subsequent changes to metal prices, foreign exchange rates (if
applicable), reclamation requirements, operating and capital costs may differ materially from
these estimates.
Regulations and pending legislation involving climate change could result in increased
operating costs.
Gold production is energy intensive, resulting in a significant carbon footprint. A number of
governments and/or governmental bodies have introduced or are contemplating regulatory
changes in response to various climate change interest groups and the potential impact of
climate change. For example, Australia passed the Clean Energy Act in 2011 that establishes a
mechanism to combat climate change by imposing a carbon tax on greenhouse gas emissions
and encourages investment in clean energy.  This type of legislation and possible future
legislation and increased regulation regarding climate change could impose significant costs
related to increased energy requirements, capital equipment, environmental monitoring and
reporting and other costs to comply with such regulations.
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This Prospectus and any documents that are incorporated by reference as set forth under
“Documents Incorporated By Reference”, contains “forward-looking statements” within the
meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and “forward-
looking information” under Canadian securities laws, that are intended to be covered by the safe
harbor created by such legislation.  All statements, other than statements of historical facts,
included in this Prospectus, and documents incorporated herein by reference and filed with the
SEC and with securities commissions and other similar authorities in Canada that address
activities, events or developments that the Company expects or anticipates will or may occur in
the future are forward-looking statements and forward-looking information, including, but not
limited to, such things as those listed below:
·
the receipt by the Company of the $6,250,000 payment for the sale of the Los Cardones gold
project;
·
the potential monetization of our non-core assets, including our mill equipment which is held for
sale;
·
the receipt by the Company of the $4,850,000 option payments related to the Guadalupe de los
Reyes gold/silver project Option Agreement;
· estimates of future operating and financial performance;
10
·
the NT Government agreeing to share the cost of management of water and associated
environmental monitoring at the Mt Todd gold project;
·
potential funding requirements and sources of capital, including near-term sources of additional
cash;
·
our expectation that we will continue to raise capital through the sale of non-core assets, equity
and/or debt financings and through the exercise of stock options and warrants;
· our anticipated cash burn rate for 2014;
·
our expectation that the Company will continue to incur losses and will not pay dividends for
the foreseeable future;
· our estimates of our future cash position;
· our intention to identify and execute cost cutting initiatives;
·
our expectation that raising capital for mining companies without producing assets will continue
to be difficult for the foreseeable future, and the potential impact of this on our ability to raise
capital in sufficient amounts on reasonable terms;
· our planned deferral of significant development commitments until market conditions improve;
· our potential ability to generate proceeds from operations or the disposition of our assets;
· the timing, performance and results of feasibility studies;
· plans for and anticipated effects of holding 11.2% Midas Gold Shares;
· our potential entry into agreements to find, lease, purchase, option or sell mineral interests;
·
plans for evaluation and advancement of the Mt Todd gold project, including our plans to
complete the environmental impact statement approval process for the project;
· our ability to raise sufficient capital to complete a feasibility study of the Mt Todd gold project;
· the feasibility of the Mt Todd gold project;
·
future business strategy, competitive strengths, goals and expansion and growth of our
business;
·
plans and estimates concerning potential project development, including matters such as
schedules, estimated completion dates and estimated capital and operating costs;
· estimates of mineral reserves and mineral resources; and
·
our expectation that we will continue to be a passive foreign investment company (“PFIC”) in
the future.
Forward-looking statements and forward-looking information have been based upon our
approved business plans, exploration and assay results, mineral resource and reserve estimates
and results of preliminary economic assessments, pre-feasibility studies and feasibility studies
on our projects, if any, current market conditions and project development plans. The words
“estimate”, “plan”, “anticipate”, “expect”, “intend”, “believe”, “will”, “may” and similar expressions
are intended to identify forward-looking statements and forward-looking information. These
statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors
which may cause or actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from
any results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking
statements and forward-looking information.  These factors include risks such as:
· our ability to raise additional capital on favorable terms, if at all;
·
pre-feasibility and feasibility study results and preliminary assessment results and the accuracy
of estimates and assumptions on which they are based;
·
resource and reserve estimate results, the accuracy of such estimates and the accuracy of
sampling and subsequent  assays and geologic interpretations on which they are based;
· technical and operational feasibility and the economic viability of deposits;
11
·
our ability to obtain, renew or maintain the necessary authorizations and permits for our
business, including its development plans and operating activities;
·
the NT Government not agreeing to and/or not implementing the sharing of costs of
management of water and associated environmental monitoring at the Mt Todd gold project;
· the timing and results of a feasibility study on the Mt Todd gold project;
· delays in commencement of construction at the Mt Todd gold project;
·
our ability to secure the permits for the Mt Todd gold project including the environmental impact
statement;
·
likelihood that we will receive the payment in July 2014 from the Purchasers of the Los
Cardones gold project;
·
likelihood that we will receive the option payments related to the Guadalupe de los Reyes
gold/silver project option agreement;
· increased costs that affect our operations or our financial condition;
· our reliance on third parties to fulfill their obligations under our agreements;
· whether projects not managed by us will comply with our standards or meet our objectives;
· a shortage of skilled labor, equipment and supplies;
whether our acquisition, exploration and development activities, as well as the realization of the
· market value of our assets, will be commercially successful and whether any transactions we
enter into will maximize the realization of the market value of our assets;
·
trading price of our securities and our ability to raise funds in new share offerings due to future
sales of common shares in the public or private market and our ability to raise funds from the
exercise of our warrants;
· the lack of dividend payments by us;
·
the success of future joint ventures, partnerships and other arrangements relating to our
properties;
· the market price of the securities held by us;
· our ability to timely monetize Midas Gold Shares;
· our lack of production and experience in producing;
· perception of environmental impact of the Mt Todd gold project;
· reclamation liabilities, including reclamation requirements at the Mt Todd gold project;
· our history of losses from operations;
· future water supply issues at the Mt Todd gold project;
· environmental lawsuits;
· lack of adequate insurance to cover potential liabilities;
· our ability to retain and hire key personnel;
· fluctuations in the price of gold;
· inherent hazards of mining exploration, development and operating activities;
·
the accuracy of calculations of mineral reserves, mineral resources and mineralized material
fluctuations therein based on metal prices, inherent vulnerability of the ore and recoverability of
metal in the mining process;
·
changes in environmental regulations to which our exploration and development operations
are subject;
· changes in climate change regulations;
· changes in corporate governance and public disclosure regulations;
· intense competition in the mining industry;
12
·
conflicts of interest of some of our directors as a result of their involvement with other natural
resource companies;
· potential challenges to the title to our mineral properties;
· political and economic instability in Mexico;
· fluctuation in foreign currency values; and
· our likely status as a PFIC for U.S. federal tax purposes.
For a more detailed discussion of such risks and other important factors that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those in such forward-looking statements and forward-looking
information, please see “Risk Factors” in this Prospectus.  Although the Company has attempted
to identify important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those
described in forward-looking statements and forward-looking information, there may be other
factors that cause results not to be as anticipated, estimated or intended. There can be no
assurances that these statements will prove to be accurate as actual results and future events
could differ materially from those anticipated in the statements. Except as required by law, the
Company assumes no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements and forward-
looking information, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
CAUTIONARY NOTE FOR U.S. INVESTORS REGARDING RESERVE AND RESOURCE
ESTIMATES
The terms “mineral reserve”, “proven mineral reserve” and “probable mineral reserve” are
Canadian mining terms as defined in accordance with NI 43-101 and the Canadian Institute of
Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum (the ”CIM”)—CIM Definition Standards on Mineral Resources
and Mineral Reserves, adopted by the CIM Council, as amended. These definitions differ from
the definitions in the SEC Industry Guide 7 under Regulation S-K of the U.S. Securities Act of
1933 (the “U.S. Securities Act”). Under SEC Industry Guide 7 standards, a “final” or “bankable”
feasibility study is required to report reserves, the three-year historical average price is used in
any reserve or cash flow analysis to designate reserves and the primary environmental analysis
or report must be filed with the appropriate governmental authority.
In addition, the terms “mineral resource”, “measured mineral resource”, “indicated mineral
resource” and “inferred mineral resource” are defined in and required to be disclosed by NI 43-
101; however, these terms are not defined terms under SEC Industry Guide 7 and are normally
not permitted to be used in reports and registration statements filed with the SEC. Investors are
cautioned not to assume that any part or all of mineral deposits in these categories will ever be
converted into reserves. “Inferred mineral resources” have a great amount of uncertainty as to
their existence, and great uncertainty as to their economic and legal feasibility. It cannot be
assumed that all, or any part, of an inferred mineral resource will ever be upgraded to a higher
category. Under Canadian rules, estimates of inferred mineral resources may not form the basis
of feasibility or pre-feasibility studies, except in rare cases. Investors are cautioned not to assume
that all or any part of an inferred mineral resource exists or is economically or legally mineable.
Disclosure of “contained ounces” in a resource is permitted disclosure under Canadian
regulations; however, the SEC normally only permits issuers to report mineralization that does
not constitute “reserves” by SEC standards as in place tonnage and grade without reference to
unit measures.
Accordingly, information contained in this Prospectus and the documents incorporated by
reference herein and any Prospectus Supplement contain descriptions of our mineral deposits
that may not be comparable to similar information made public by U.S. companies subject to the
reporting and disclosure requirements under the United States federal securities laws and the
rules and regulations thereunder
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows the Company to “incorporate by reference” information it files with the
SEC.  This means that the Company can disclose important information to you by referring you to
those documents.  Any information the Company references in this manner is considered part of
this Prospectus.  Information the Company files with the SEC after the date of this Prospectus will
automatically update and, to the extent inconsistent, supersede the information contained in this
Prospectus.
The following documents which have been filed by the Company with securities commissions or
similar authorities in Canada and with the SEC, are specifically incorporated by reference into,
and form an integral part of, this Prospectus.
13
(a)
the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company, for the year ended December 31, 2013, as
filed with the SEC on March 17, 2014, including Schedule A – the consolidated financial
statements of Midas Gold Corp. as at and for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
and the report of Midas Gold Corp.’s auditor thereon dated March 12, 2014;
the audited consolidated financial statements of the Company and the notes thereto as at
December 31, 2013 and 2012 and for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011,
together with the auditors’ reports thereon and the auditor’s attestation report on internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2013 and the related management’s
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations for the years ended
December 31, 2013 and 2012 as filed with the SEC as exhibits 99.1 and 99.2 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on June 4, 2014, which
(b)
supersedes Items 7 an 8 of our Annual Report of Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2013;
(c)
the Company’s Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A, dated March 20, 2014, in connection with
the Company’s April 29, 2014 annual general meeting of shareholders, including the
information specifically incorporated by reference into our Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013, as filed with the SEC on March 20, 2014;
(d)
the Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q of the Company, for the quarter ended March 31, 2014,
which report contains the unaudited consolidated financial statements of the Company and
the notes thereto as at March 31, 2014 and 2013 and for the quarter ended March 31, 2014
and 2013 and the related management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, as filed with the SEC on
May 2, 2014;
(e)
the Company’s Current Reports on Form 8-K as filed on February 4, 2014, February 7, 2014,
February 21, 2014, March 7, 2014, March 14, 2014, April 17, 2014 and May 5, 2014 and the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K/A as filed on February 21, 2014;
(f)
the description of the Company’s common stock contained in its registration statement on
Form 8-A filed on January 4, 1988, including any amendment or report filed for purposes of
updating such description; and
(g)
all other documents filed by us with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the
Exchange Act (excluding, unless otherwise provided therein or herein, information furnished
pursuant to Item 2.02 and Item 7.01 on any Current Report on Form 8-K), after the date of this
Prospectus but before the end of the offering of the securities made by this Prospectus.
We also hereby specifically incorporate by reference all filings filed by us pursuant to Sections
13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act after the date of the initial registration statement on
Form S-3 to which this Prospectus relates and prior to effectiveness of such registration
statement.
You may obtain copies of any of these documents by contacting us at the address and telephone
number indicated below or by contacting the SEC as described below. You may request a copy
of these documents, and any exhibits that have specifically been incorporated by reference as an
exhibit in this prospectus supplement, at no cost, by writing or telephoning to:
Vista Gold Corp.
7961 Shaffer Parkway, Suite 5
Littleton, Colorado 80127
Attention: John F. Engele, Chief Financial Officer
(720) 981-1185
PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION AND EXCHANGE RATE DATA
14
The Company presents its consolidated financial statements in United States dollars.  All
references in this Prospectus to “dollars” and  “$” are to United States dollars and all references
to “C$” are to Canadian dollars, unless otherwise noted.  Except as otherwise indicated, all
financial statements and financial data contained in, or incorporated by reference into, this
Prospectus have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles (“GAAP”), which differ in certain significant respects from International Financial
Reporting Standards (“IFRS”).
The following table sets forth, for each period indicated, the exchange rates of the Canadian
dollar to the U.S. dollar for the end of each period indicated and the high, low and average
exchange rates for each of such periods (such rates, which are expressed in Canadian dollars
are based on the noon buying rates for U.S. dollars reported by the Bank of Canada).
Year ended December 31,
 
  2013   2012   2011
 
C$1.0697C$1.0418 C$1.0604
High
  0.9839  0.9710   0.9449
Low
Average
  1.0299  0.9996   0.9891
End of period  0.9402  1.0051   0.9833
On August 15, 2014, the noon buying rate reported by the Bank of Canada was $1.00 =
C$1.0910.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, the net proceeds from the
sale of the Securities will be used by the Company to fund existing or acquired mineral properties
and may also be used for acquisitions, working capital requirements, to repay indebtedness
outstanding from time to time, if any, or for other general corporate purposes, which include costs
of corporate development initiatives, ongoing regulatory, legal and accounting expenses, and
management and administrative expenses.  The Company may, from time to time, issue
Common Shares or other securities otherwise than through the offering of Securities pursuant to
this Prospectus.
In 2012, the Company raised $24.5 million net proceeds in two equity financings.  The actual use
of proceeds was consistent with the intended use of proceeds at the time of the completion of the
financings.  The proceeds were principally used to fund ongoing technical evaluations and
engineering studies (including advancing a feasibility study on the Mt Todd gold project in
Australia), exploration and resource conversion drilling programs at the Mt Todd gold project,
preparation and filing of an environmental impact statement for the Mt Todd gold project and
treatment of contaminated water at the Mt Todd gold project.  In addition, the Company
completed and filed a preliminary economic assessment on the Guadalupe de los Reyes
gold/silver project in Mexico.
MARKET FOR COMMON SHARES AND WARRANTS
The Common Shares are listed on the NYSE MKT and the TSX under the symbol VGZ.  The
majority of the trading of the Common Shares takes place on the NYSE MKT.  The following
table sets out the reported high and low sale prices and volume of sales traded on the NYSE
MKT and on the TSX by month during the last 12-month period before the date hereof.
TSX
 Month
  High  Low Volume
 2013
   
$1.66 $1.13 8,630,300  May
  1.50   0.95 16,771,300  June
  1.04   0.72 11,360,800  July
  1.15   0.70 15,670,700  August
NYSE MKT
Month
2013
May
June
July
August
September  0.90   0.45 33,733,900  September  0.91   0.47 1,475,700
October
  0.50   0.45 458,100
November   0.50   0.34 7,649,500   November   0.52   0.37 389,300
0.50   0.42 13,824,500  October
High  Low Volume
 
C$1.66 C$1.27 145,400
  1.54   1.01 164,800
  1.07   0.79 253,200
  1.16   0.74 385,700
December   0.44   0.33 11,003,600  December   0.46   0.36 394,400
2014
January
February   0.78   0.55 11,216,100  February   0.85   0.61 873,100
0.70   0.40 18,144,300  January
0.76   0.47 1,707,100
2014
15
March 0.72 0.48 14,788,100  March 0.81 0.54 895,500
 0.65 0.51 380,300
April
 0.59 0.47 6,947,500  April
May  0.50 0.38 4,359,200  May 
 0.54 0.41 399,700
June  0.55 0.37 7,700,600  June  0.60 0.41 429,900
July  0.54 0.44 5,015,158  July  0.56 0.47 455,377
On August 15, 2014, the closing price of the Common Shares on the NYSE MKT and the TSX
was $0.47 and C$0.50 per Common Share, respectively.
Certain warrants to purchase Common Shares (the “Listed Warrants”) of the Company are listed
on the TSX under the symbol VGZ.WT.U.
The following table sets out the reported high and low sale prices and volume of sales traded on
the TSX by month since the Listed Warrants began trading.
TSX
Month
  High   Low  Volume
2013
 
May
C$0.125C$0.075 13,000
June
  N/A   N/A   -
July
  N/A   N/A   -
August
  0.10   0.10  10,000
September  0.05   0.01  40,000
October
  0.045  0.045 2,500
November   N/A   N/A   -
December   0.10   0.005 36,500
2014
 
January
  0.05   0.05  1,000
February   0.05   0.05  85,100
0.08   0.04  37,500
  0.04   0.04  800
  0.02   0.02  4,000
  0.025  0.005 439,000
March
April
May
June
On June 30, 2014, the closing price of the Listed Warrants on the TSX was C$0.005 per Listed
Warrant.
PRIOR SALES
The following table sets forth for the 12 month period prior to the date of this Prospectus, details
of the price at which securities have been issued by us, the number and type of securities issued
and the date on which such securities were issued:
Date of
issue
 
May 29,
2013
August 9,
2013
November
8, 2013
Type of
Securities
  
Common
 
Shares
Restricted
 
Stock Units
Common
 
Shares
Number of
Securities
Issue or Exercise
Price of Security
66,875
$1.50
1,851,000
NA
486,382
0.45
Description of Transaction
Restricted Stock Units exercise
 
for Common Shares
Restricted Stock Units granted
 
to certain employees
Common Shares issued for
 
Lender fees
16
December 30,
2013
March 15, 2014
175,000  0.52
Stock
 
Options
Stock
Options
985,000  0.36
Stock Options granted to certain employees and
directors
Stock Options granted to certain employees and
directors
CHANGES TO CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth the consolidated capitalization of the Company as at the dates
indicated.  The table should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of
the Company for the year ended December 31, 2013 and management’s discussion and
analysis thereof, which are incorporated by reference herein.
17
Long-term debt, including current portion
Shareholders' equity
 Common shares
 Additional paid-in capital
 Accumulated deficit and other comprehensive loss  (395,031)
Total share capital
Total capitalization
42,340
$42,340
$6,506
   
  404,470
  32,487
  (393,944)
  43,013
$49,519
March 31, 2014  December 31, 2013
$ -
   
  404,470
  32,901
CERTAIN INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The applicable Prospectus Supplement will describe certain Canadian federal income tax
consequences to investors described therein of acquiring Securities including, in the case of
investors who are not residents of Canada for purposes of the Income Tax Act (Canada), whether
payment of any amount in respect of a security will be subject to Canadian non-resident
withholding tax.
The applicable Prospectus Supplement will also describe certain U.S. federal income tax
consequences of the acquisition, ownership and disposition of Securities by an initial investor
who is a U.S. person (within the meaning of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code), if applicable,
including, to the extent applicable, any such consequences relating to Securities payable in a
currency other than the U.S. dollar, issued at an original issue discount for U.S. federal income
tax purposes or containing early redemption provisions or other special terms.
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES
The Company is authorized to issue an unlimited number of Common Shares, without par value,
of which 82,275,217 are issued and outstanding as at the date of this Prospectus.  There are
15,219,802 Listed Warrants to acquire 15,219,802 Common Shares, which expire on October 22,
2015 (subject to any acceleration event).  The Listed Warrants were issued on December 15,
2010 and each Listed Warrant can be exercised to acquire one Common Share at a purchase
price $5.00 until the expiry of the Listed Warrant.  There are 2,666,666 unlisted warrants which
can be exercised to acquire 2,666,666 Common Shares at a purchase price of between $3.18
and $3.60 per share, which expire on July 27, 2014 and 2,091,275 unlisted warrants which can
be exercised to acquire 2,091,275 Common Shares at a purchase price of $3.30 per share which
expire on December 21, 2014.   There are options outstanding to purchase up to 2,197,500
Common Shares at prices ranging from $0.36 to $3.67.  There are 2,594,464 restricted stock
units outstanding.  Upon the vesting conditions being met a holder of restricted stock units is
entitled to receive one Common Share for each restricted stock unit held.
The Company may issue Common Shares independently or together with Warrants or
Subscription Receipts, and the Common Shares may be attached to or separately from such
securities.
Holders of Common Shares are entitled to receive notice of and to attend any meetings of
shareholders of the Company and at any meetings of shareholders to one vote for each Common
Share held, to receive dividends as and when declared by the directors of the Company and to
receive a pro rata share of the assets of the Company available for distribution to the
shareholders in the event of the liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Company.  There are
no pre-emptive, conversion or redemption rights attached to the Common Shares.
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
The following description, together with the additional information the Company may include in
any applicable Prospectus Supplements, summarizes the material terms and provisions of the
Warrants that the Company may offer under this Prospectus, which will consist of Warrants to
purchase Common Shares and may be issued in one or more series.  Warrants may be offered
independently or together with Common Shares or Subscription Receipts offered by any
Prospectus Supplement, and may be attached to or separate from those Securities.  While the
terms the Company has summarized below will apply generally to any Warrants that it may offer
under this Prospectus, the Company will describe the particular terms of any series of Warrants
that it may offer in more detail in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.  The terms of any
Warrants offered under a Prospectus Supplement may differ from the terms described below.
18
General
Warrants will be issued under and governed by the terms of one or more warrant indentures
(each a “Warrant Indenture”) between the Company and a warrant trustee (the “Warrant Trustee”)
that the Company will name in the relevant Prospectus Supplement.  Each Warrant Trustee will
be a financial institution organized under the laws of Canada or any province thereof and
authorized to carry on business as a trustee.
This summary of some of the provisions of the Warrants is not complete.  The statements made in
this Prospectus relating to any Warrant Indenture and Warrants to be issued under this
Prospectus are summaries of certain anticipated provisions thereof and do not purport to be
complete and are subject to, and are qualified in their entirety by reference to, all provisions of the
applicable Warrant Indenture.  Prospective investors should refer to the Warrant Indenture
relating to the specific Warrants being offered for the complete terms of the Warrants. The
Company urges you to read the applicable Prospectus Supplement related to the applicable
Warrants that the Company sells under this prospectus, as well as the complete Warrant
Indenture and Warrant Certificate.  In the United States the Company will file as exhibits to the
registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or will incorporate by reference from a
current report on Form 8-K that the Company files with the SEC, any Warrant Indenture
describing the terms and conditions of Warrants the Company is offering before the issuance of
such Warrants. In Canada the Company will file on SEDAR a copy of any Warrant Indenture after
the Company has entered into it.
Warrants
The particular terms of each issue of Warrants will be described in the applicable Prospectus
Supplement. This description will include, where applicable:
· the designation and aggregate number of Warrants;
· the price at which the Warrants will be offered;
· the currency or currencies in which the Warrants will be offered;
·
the date on which the right to exercise the Warrants will commence and the date on which the
right will expire;
·
the number of Common Shares that may be purchased upon exercise of each Warrant and the
price at which and currency or currencies in which the Common Shares may be purchased
upon exercise of each Warrant;
·
the designation and terms of any Securities with which the Warrants will be offered, if any, and
the number of the Warrants that will be offered with each Security;
·
the date or dates, if any, on or after which the Warrants and the other Securities with which the
Warrants will be offered will be transferable separately;
·
whether the Warrants will be subject to redemption and, if so, the terms of such redemption
provisions;
·
whether the Company will issue the Warrants as global securities and, if so, the identity of the
depositary of the global securities;
· whether the Warrants will be listed on any exchange;
·
material United States and Canadian federal income tax consequences of owning the
Warrants; and
· any other material terms or conditions of the Warrants.
Rights of Holders Prior to Exercise
Prior to the exercise of their Warrants, holders of Warrants will not have any of the rights of
holders of the Common Shares issuable upon exercise of the Warrants.
Exercise of Warrants
Each Warrant will entitle the holder to purchase the Common Shares that the Company specifies
in the applicable Prospectus Supplement at the exercise price that the Company describes
therein.  Unless the Company otherwise specifies in the applicable Prospectus Supplement,
holders of the Warrants may exercise the Warrants at any time up
19
to the specified time on the expiration date that the Company sets forth in the applicable
Prospectus Supplement.  After the close of business on the expiration date, unexercised
warrants will become void.
Holders of the Warrants may exercise the Warrants by delivering the Warrant Certificate
representing the Warrants to be exercised together with specified information, and paying the
required amount to the Warrant Trustee in immediately available funds, as provided in the
applicable Prospectus Supplement.  The Company will set forth on the Warrant Certificate and in
the applicable Prospectus Supplement the information that the holder of the Warrant will be
required to deliver to the Warrant Trustee.
Upon receipt of the required payment and the Warrant Certificate properly completed and duly
executed at the corporate trust office of the Warrant Trustee or any other office indicated in the
applicable Prospectus Supplement, the Company will issue and deliver the Common Shares
purchasable upon such exercise.  If fewer than all of the Warrants represented by the Warrant
Certificate are exercised, then the Company will issue a new Warrant Certificate for the
remaining amount of Warrants.  If the Company so indicates in the applicable Prospectus
Supplement, holders of the Warrants may surrender securities as all or part of the exercise price
for Warrants.
Anti-Dilution
The Warrant Indenture will specify that upon the subdivision, consolidation, reclassification or
other material change of the Common Shares or any other reorganization, amalgamation, merger
or sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets, the Warrants will thereafter evidence
the right of the holder to receive the securities, property or cash deliverable in exchange for, or on
the conversion of, or in respect of, the Common Shares to which the holder of a Common Share
would have been entitled immediately after such event.  Similarly, any distribution to all or
substantially all of the holders of Common Shares of rights, options, warrants, evidences of
indebtedness or assets will result in an adjustment in the number of Common Shares to be
issued to holders of Warrants.
Global Securities
The Company may issue Warrants in whole or in part in the form of one or more global securities,
which will be registered in the name of and be deposited with a depositary, or its nominee, each
of which will be identified in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.  The global securities may
be in temporary or permanent form. The applicable Prospectus Supplement will describe the
terms of any depositary arrangement and the rights and limitations of owners of beneficial
interests in any global security. The applicable Prospectus Supplement will describe the
exchange, registration and transfer rights relating to any global security.
Modifications
The Warrant Indenture will provide for modifications and alterations to the Warrants issued
thereunder by way of a resolution of holders of Warrants at a meeting of such holders or a
consent in writing from such holders.  The number of holders of Warrants required to pass such a
resolution or execute such a written consent will be specified in the Warrant Indenture.
The Company may amend any Warrant Indenture and the Warrants, without the consent of the
holders of the Warrants, to cure any ambiguity, to cure, correct or supplement any defective or
inconsistent provision, or in any other manner that will not materially and adversely affect the
interests of holders of outstanding Warrants.
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
The Company may issue Subscription Receipts, which will entitle holders to receive upon
satisfaction of certain release conditions and for no additional consideration, Common Shares,
Warrants or a combination thereof.  Subscription Receipts will be issued pursuant to one or more
subscription receipt agreements (each, a “Subscription Receipt Agreement”), each to be entered
into between the Company and an escrow agent (the “Escrow Agent”), which will establish the
terms and conditions of the Subscription Receipts.  Each Escrow Agent will be a financial
institution organized under the laws of Canada or a province thereof and authorized to carry on
business as a trustee.  In the United States the Company will file as exhibits to the registration
statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or will incorporate by reference from a current report
on Form 8-K that the Company files with the SEC, any Subscription Receipt Agreement
describing the terms and conditions of Subscription Receipts the Company is offering before the
issuance of such Subscription Receipts.  In Canada the Company will file on SEDAR a copy of
any Subscription Receipt Agreement after the Company has entered into it.
20
The following description sets forth certain general terms and provisions of Subscription Receipts
and is not intended to be complete.  The statements made in this Prospectus relating to any
Subscription Receipt Agreement and Subscription Receipts to be issued thereunder are
summaries of certain anticipated provisions thereof and are subject to, and are qualified in their
entirety by reference to, all provisions of the applicable Subscription Receipt Agreement and the
Prospectus Supplement describing such Subscription Receipt Agreement. The Company urges
you to read the applicable Prospectus Supplement related to the particular Subscription Receipts
that the Company  sells under this Prospectus, as well as the complete Subscription Receipt
Agreement.
The Prospectus Supplement relating to any Subscription Receipts the Company offers will
describe the Subscription Receipts and include specific terms relating to their offering.  All such
terms will comply with the requirements of the TSX and NSYE MKT relating to Subscription
Receipts.  If underwriters or agents are used in the sale of Subscription Receipts, one or more of
such underwriters or agents may also be parties to the Subscription Receipt Agreement
governing the Subscription Receipts sold to or through such underwriters or agents.
General
The Prospectus Supplement and the Subscription Receipt Agreement for any Subscription
Receipts the Company offers will describe the specific terms of the Subscription Receipts and
may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
· the designation and aggregate number of Subscription Receipts offered;
· the price at which the Subscription Receipts will be offered;
· the currency or currencies in which the Subscription Receipts will be offered;
·
the designation, number and terms of the Common Shares, Warrants or combination thereof to
be received by holders of Subscription Receipts upon satisfaction of the release conditions,
and the procedures that will result in the adjustment of those numbers;
·
the conditions (the “Release Conditions”) that must be met in order for holders of Subscription
Receipts to receive for no additional consideration Common Shares, Warrants or a combination
thereof;
·
the procedures for the issuance and delivery of Common Shares, Warrants or a combination
thereof to holders of Subscription Receipts upon satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
·
whether any payments will be made to holders of Subscription Receipts upon delivery of the
Common Shares, Warrants or a combination thereof upon satisfaction of the Release
Conditions (e.g., an amount equal to dividends declared on Common Shares by the Company
to holders of record during the period from the date of issuance of the Subscription Receipts to
the date of issuance of any Common Shares pursuant to the terms of the Subscription Receipt
Agreement);
·
the terms and conditions under which the Escrow Agent will hold all or a portion of the gross
proceeds from the sale of Subscription Receipts, together with interest and income earned
thereon (collectively, the “Escrowed Funds”), pending satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
·
the terms and conditions pursuant to which the Escrow Agent will hold Common Shares,
Warrants or a combination thereof pending satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
·
the terms and conditions under which the Escrow Agent will release all or a portion of the
Escrowed Funds to the Company upon satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
·
if the Subscription Receipts are sold to or through underwriters or agents, the terms and
conditions under which the Escrow Agent will release a portion of the Escrowed Funds to such
underwriters or agents in payment of all or a portion of their fees or commission in connection
with the sale of the Subscription Receipts;
·
procedures for the refund by the Escrow Agent to holders of Subscription Receipts of all or a
portion of the subscription price for their Subscription Receipts, plus any pro rata entitlement to
interest earned or income generated on such amount, if the Release Conditions are not
satisfied;
·
any contractual right of rescission to be granted to initial purchasers of Subscription Receipts in
the event this Prospectus, the Prospectus Supplement under which Subscription Receipts are
issued or any amendment hereto or thereto contains a misrepresentation;
21
·
any entitlement of the Company to purchase the Subscription Receipts in the open market by
private agreement or otherwise;
·
whether the Company will issue the Subscription Receipts as global securities and, if so, the
identity of the depositary for the global securities;
·
whether the Company will issue the Subscription Receipts as bearer securities, registered
securities or both;
·
provisions as to modification, amendment or variation of the Subscription Receipt Agreement or
any rights or terms attaching to the Subscription Receipts;
· the identity of the Escrow Agent;
· whether the Subscription Receipts will be listed on any exchange;
· material United States and Canadian federal tax consequences of owning the Subscription
Receipts; and
· any other terms of the Subscription Receipts.
The holders of Subscription Receipts will not be shareholders of the Company.  Holders of
Subscription Receipts are entitled only to receive Common Shares, Warrants or a
combination thereof on exchange of their Subscription Receipts, plus any cash payments
provided for under the Subscription Receipt Agreement, if the Release Conditions are
satisfied.  If the Release Conditions are not satisfied, the holders of Subscription Receipts
shall be entitled to a refund of all or a portion of the subscription price therefor and all or a
portion of the pro rata share of interest earned or income generated thereon, as provided
in the Subscription Receipt Agreement.
Escrow
The Escrowed Funds will be held in escrow by the Escrow Agent, and such Escrowed Funds will
be released to the Company (and, if the Subscription Receipts are sold to or through underwriters
or agents, a portion of the Escrowed Funds may be released to such underwriters or agents in
payment of all or a portion of their fees in connection with the sale of the Subscription Receipts)
at the time and under the terms specified by the Subscription Receipt Agreement.  If the Release
Conditions are not satisfied, holders of Subscription Receipts will receive a refund of all or a
portion of the subscription price for their Subscription Receipts plus their pro rata entitlement to
interest earned or income generated on such amount, in accordance with the terms of the
Subscription Receipt Agreement.  Common Shares or Warrants may be held in escrow by the
Escrow Agent, and will be released to the holders of Subscription Receipts following satisfaction
of the Release Conditions at the time and under the terms specified in the Subscription Receipt
Agreement.
Anti-Dilution
The Subscription Receipt Agreement will specify that upon the subdivision, consolidation,
reclassification or other material change of the Common Shares or Warrants or any other
reorganization, amalgamation, merger or sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets,
the Subscription Receipts will thereafter evidence the right of the holder to receive the securities,
property or cash deliverable in exchange for, or on the conversion of, or in respect of, the
Common Shares or Warrants to which the holder of a Common Share or Warrant would have
been entitled immediately after such event.  Similarly, any distribution to all or substantially all of
the holders of Common Shares of rights, options, warrants, evidences of indebtedness or assets
will result in an adjustment in the number of Common Shares to be issued to holders of
Subscription Receipts whose Subscription Receipts entitle the holders thereof to receive
Common Shares.  Alternatively, such securities, evidences of indebtedness or assets may, at the
option of the Company, be issued to the Escrow Agent and delivered to holders of Subscription
Receipts on exercise thereof.  The Subscription Receipt Agreement will also provide that if other
actions of the Company affect the Common Shares or Warrants, which, in the reasonable opinion
of the directors of the Company, would materially affect the rights of the holders of Subscription
Receipts and/or the rights attached to the Subscription Receipts, the number of Common Shares
or Warrants which are to be received pursuant to the Subscription Receipts shall be adjusted in
such manner, if any, and at such time as the directors of the Company may in their discretion
reasonably determine to be equitable to the holders of Subscription Receipts in such
circumstances.
22
Rescission
The Subscription Receipt Agreement will also provide that any misrepresentation in this
Prospectus, the Prospectus Supplement under which the Subscription Receipts are offered, or
any amendment thereto, will entitle each initial purchaser of Subscription Receipts to a
contractual right of rescission following the issuance of the Common Shares or Warrants to such
purchaser entitling such purchaser to receive the amount paid for the Subscription Receipts upon
surrender of the Common Shares or Warrants, provided that such remedy for rescission is
exercised in the time stipulated in the Subscription Receipt Agreement.  This right of rescission
does not extend to holders of Subscription Receipts who acquire such Subscription Receipts
from an initial purchaser, on the open market or otherwise, or to initial purchasers who acquire
Subscription Receipts in the United States.
Global Securities
The Company may issue Subscription Receipts in whole or in part in the form of one or more
global securities, which will be registered in the name of and be deposited with a depositary, or
its nominee, each of which will be identified in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.  The
global securities may be in temporary or permanent form. The applicable Prospectus
Supplement will describe the terms of any depositary arrangement and the rights and limitations
of owners of beneficial interests in any global security. The applicable Prospectus Supplement
also will describe the exchange, registration and transfer rights relating to any global security.
Modifications
The Subscription Receipt Agreement will provide for modifications and alterations to the
Subscription Receipts issued thereunder by way of a resolution of holders of Subscription
Receipts at a meeting of such holders or a consent in writing from such holders.  The number of
holders of Subscriptions Receipts required to pass such a resolution or execute such a written
consent will be specified in the Subscription Receipt Agreement.
The Company may amend the Subscription Receipt Agreement, without the consent of the
holders of the Subscription Receipts, to cure any ambiguity, to cure, correct or supplement any
defective or inconsistent provision, or in any other manner that will not materially and adversely
affect the interests of holders of outstanding Subscription Receipts.
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
The following description, together with the additional information the Company may include in
any applicable Prospectus Supplements, summarizes the material terms and provisions of the
Units that the Company may offer under this Prospectus.  While the terms the Company has
summarized below will apply generally to any Units that the Company may offer under this
Prospectus, the Company will describe the particular terms of any series of Units in more detail in
the applicable Prospectus Supplement.  The terms of any Units offered under a Prospectus
Supplement may differ from the terms described below.
The Company will enter into a form of unit agreement (“Unit Agreement”) between the Company
and a unit agent (“Unit Agent”) that describes the terms and conditions of the series of Units the
Company is offering, and any supplemental agreements, before the issuance of the related
series of Units.  In the United States the Company will file as exhibits to the registration statement
of which this Prospectus is a part, or will incorporate by reference from a current report on
Form 8-K that the Company files with the SEC and in Canada the Company will file on SEDAR,
the form of Unit Agreement that describes the terms and conditions of the series of Units the
Company is offering, and any supplemental agreements, before the issuance of the related
series of Units.
The following summary of material terms and provisions of the Units are subject to, and qualified
in their entirety by reference to, all the provisions of the Unit Agreement and any supplemental
agreements applicable to a particular series of Units.  The Company urges you to read the
applicable Prospectus Supplements related to the particular series of Units that the Company
sells under this Prospectus, as well as the complete Unit Agreement and any supplemental
agreements that contain the terms of the Units.
23
General
The Company may issue units comprising two or more of Common Shares, Warrants and
Subscription Receipts in any combination.  Each Unit will be issued so that the holder of the Unit
is also the holder of each security included in the Unit.  Thus, the holder of a Unit will have the
rights and obligations of a holder of each included security.  The Unit Agreement under which a
Unit is issued may provide that the Securities included in the Unit may not be held or transferred
separately, at any time or at any time before a specified date.
The Company will describe in the applicable Prospectus Supplement the terms of the series of
Units, including:
·
the designation and terms of the Units and of the securities comprising the Units, including
whether and under what circumstances those securities may be held or transferred separately;
· any provisions of the governing Unit Agreement that differ from those described below; and
·
any provisions for the issuance, payment, settlement, transfer or exchange of the Units or of the
securities comprising the Units.
The provisions described in this section, as well as those described under “Description of
Common Shares”, “Description of Warrants” and “Description of Subscription Receipts” will apply
to each Unit and to any Common Share, Warrant or Subscription Receipt included in each Unit,
respectively.
Issuance in Series
The Company may issue Units in such amounts and in numerous distinct series as the Company
determines.
Enforceability of Rights by Holders of Units
Each Unit Agent will act solely as the Company’s agent under the applicable Unit Agreement
and will not assume any obligation or relationship of agency or trust with any holder of any
Unit.  A single bank or trust company may act as Unit Agent for more than one series of Units.  A
Unit Agent will have no duty or responsibility in case of any default by the Company under the
applicable Unit Agreement or Unit, including any duty or responsibility to initiate any proceedings
at law or otherwise, or to make any demand upon the Company.  Any holder of a Unit may,
without the consent of the related Unit Agent or the holder of any other Unit, enforce by
appropriate legal action its rights as holder under any security included in the Unit.
The Company, the Unit Agents and any of their agents may treat the registered holder of any Unit
Certificate as an absolute owner of the Units evidenced by that certificate for any purpose and as
the person entitled to exercise the rights attaching to the Units so requested, despite any notice to
the contrary.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
General
The Company may offer and sell the Securities on a continuous or delayed basis, separately or
together: (a) to one or more underwriters or dealers; (b) through one or more agents; or (c) directly
to one or more other purchasers. The Securities offered pursuant to any Prospectus Supplement
may be sold from time to time in one or more transactions at: (i) a fixed price or prices, which may
be changed from time to time; (ii) market prices prevailing at the time of sale; (iii) prices related to
such prevailing market prices; or (iv) other negotiated prices.  The Company may only offer and
sell the Securities pursuant to a Prospectus Supplement during the 25-month period that this
Prospectus, including any amendments hereto, remains effective.  The Prospectus Supplement
for any of the Securities being offered thereby will set forth the terms of the offering of such
Securities, including the type of Security being offered, the name or names of any underwriters,
dealers or agents, the purchase price of such Securities, the proceeds to the Company from such
sale, any underwriting commissions or discounts and other items constituting underwriters’
compensation and any discounts or concessions allowed or re-allowed or paid to dealers.  Only
underwriters so named in the Prospectus Supplement are deemed to be underwriters in
connection with the Securities offered thereby.
24
By Underwriters
If underwriters are used in the sale, the Securities will be acquired by the underwriters for their
own account and may be resold from time to time in one or more transactions, including
negotiated transactions, at a fixed public offering price or at varying prices determined at the time
of sale.  Unless otherwise set forth in the Prospectus Supplement relating thereto, the obligations
of underwriters to purchase the Securities will be subject to certain conditions, but the
underwriters will be obligated to purchase all of the Securities offered by the Prospectus
Supplement if any of such Securities are purchased.  The Company may agree to pay the
underwriters a fee or commission for various services relating to the offering of any
Securities.  Any such fee or commission will be paid out of the proceeds of the offering or the
general corporate funds of the Company.
By Dealers
If dealers are used, and if so specified in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, the Company
will sell such Securities to the dealers as principals.  The dealers may then resell such Securities
to the public at varying prices to be determined by such dealers at the time of resale.  Any public
offering price and any discounts or concessions allowed or re-allowed or paid to dealers may be
changed from time to time.
By Agents
The Securities may also be sold through agents designated by the Company.  Any agent
involved will be named, and any fees or commissions payable by the Company to such agent
will be set forth, in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.  Any such fees or commissions will be
paid out of the proceeds of the offering or the general corporate funds of the Company.  Unless
otherwise indicated in the Prospectus Supplement, any agent will be acting on a best efforts
basis for the period of its appointment.
Direct Sales
Securities may also be sold directly by the Company at such prices and upon such terms as
agreed to by the Company and the purchaser.  In this case, no underwriters, dealers or agents
would be involved in the offering.
General Information
Underwriters, dealers and agents that participate in the distribution of the Securities offered by
this Prospectus may be deemed underwriters under the U.S. Securities Act, and any discounts or
commissions they receive from us and any profit on their resale of the securities may be treated
as underwriting discounts and commissions under the U.S. Securities Act.
With respect to the sale of Securities under this Prospectus and any Prospectus Supplement, the
maximum commission or discount to be received by any member of the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority, Inc. or independent broker or dealer will not be greater than
eight percent (8%).
Underwriters, dealers or agents who participate in the distribution of Securities may be entitled
under agreements to be entered into with the Company to indemnification by the Company
against certain liabilities, including liabilities under Canadian provincial and territorial and United
States securities legislation, or to contribution with respect to payments which such underwriters,
dealers or agents may be required to make in respect thereof.  Such underwriters, dealers or
agents may be customers of, engage in transactions with, or perform services for, the Company
in the ordinary course of business.
The Company may enter into derivative transactions with third parties, or sell securities not
covered by this Prospectus to third parties in privately negotiated transactions. If the applicable
Prospectus Supplement indicates, in connection with those derivatives, the third parties may sell
securities covered by this Prospectus and the applicable Prospectus Supplement, including in
short sale transactions. If so, the third parties may use securities pledged by us or borrowed from
us or others to settle those sales or to close out any related open borrowings of stock, and may
use securities received from us in settlement of those derivatives to close out any related open
borrowings of stock. The third parties in such sale transactions will be identified in the applicable
Prospectus Supplement.
One or more firms, referred to as “remarketing firms,” may also offer or sell the Securities, if the
Prospectus Supplement so indicates, in connection with a remarketing arrangement upon their
purchase. Remarketing firms will
25
act as principals for their own accounts or as agents for us. These remarketing firms will offer or
sell the Securities in accordance with the terms of the Securities. The Prospectus Supplement
will identify any remarketing firm and the terms of its agreement, if any, with us and will describe
the remarketing firm’s compensation. Remarketing firms may be deemed to be underwriters in
connection with the Securities they remarket.
In connection with any offering of Securities (unless otherwise specified in the Prospectus
Supplement), underwriters may over-allot or effect transactions which stabilize or maintain the
market price of the Securities offered at a level above that which might otherwise prevail in the
open market.  Such transactions may be commenced, interrupted or discontinued at any time.
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
The transfer agent and registrar for the Common Shares is Computershare Investor Services
Inc.  and the transfer agent and registrar for the Listed Warrants is Computershare Trust
Company of Canada at the principal offices in Vancouver and Toronto.
EXPERTS
Information relating to the Company’s mineral properties in this Prospectus and the documents
incorporated by reference herein has been derived from reports, statements or opinions prepared
or certified by Tetra Tech MM, Inc., Tetra Tech, Inc., John Rozelle, Rex Bryan, Thomas Dyer,
Edwin Lips, Deepak Malhotra, Erik Spiller, Nick Michael, David Richers, Patrick Donlon, Vicki
Scharnhorst, and Lachlan Walker, and this information has been included in reliance on such
companies and persons’ expertise.  Each of Rex Bryan, Thomas Dyer, Edwin Lips, Deepak
Malhotra, Erik Spiller, Nick Michael, David Richers, Patrick Donlon, Vicki Scharnhorst, and
Lachlan Walker is a qualified person as such term is defined NI 43-101.
None of Tetra Tech MM, Inc., Tetra Tech, Inc., Rex Bryan, Thomas Dyer, Edwin Lips, Deepak
Malhotra, Erik Spiller, Nick Michael, David Richers, Patrick Donlon, Vicki Scharnhorst, and
Lachlan Walker, each being companies and persons who have prepared or certified the
preparation of reports, statements or opinions relating to the Company’s mineral properties, or
any director, officer, employee or partner thereof, as applicable, received or has received a direct
or indirect interest in the property of the Company or of any associate or affiliate of the
Company.  As at the date hereof, the aforementioned persons, companies and persons at the
companies specified above who participated in the preparation of such reports, statements or
opinions, as a group, beneficially own, directly or indirectly, less than 1% of the Company’s
outstanding Common Shares.
The financial statements of the Company as at December 31, 2013 and 2012 and for each of the
two years in the period ended December 31, 2013 and, cumulatively, for the period from January
1, 2012 to December 31, 2013, and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting (which is included in Management’s Report on Internal Control
over Financial Reporting) as of December 31, 2013 included in Exhibit 99.1 of the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K dated June 4, 2014 have been incorporated in this Prospectus in
reliance on the report (which contains an explanatory paragraph relating to the Company’s
liquidity as described in Note 2 to the financial statements) of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Denver, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as
experts in auditing and accounting.
The financial statements of the Company for the year ended December 31, 2011 included in
Exhibit 99.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated June 4, 2014 have been
incorporated in this Prospectus in reliance on the report of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP,
Vancouver, British Columbia, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the
authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
The Midas Gold Corp. financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2013 included in
Schedule A to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K and incorporated  in the Prospectus
by reference have been audited by Deloitte LLP, chartered accountants, as stated in their report,
which is incorporated herein by reference. Such financial statements and financial statement
schedules have been so incorporated in reliance upon the report of such firm given upon their
authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
26
LEGAL MATTERS
Certain legal matters related to the Securities offered by this Prospectus will be passed upon on
the Company’s behalf by Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, with respect to matters of Canadian law,
and Dorsey & Whitney LLP, with respect to matters of United States law.  As of the date of this
Prospectus, the partners and associates of Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, as a group and Dorsey
& Whitney LLP, as a group, beneficially own, directly or indirectly less than 1% of the Company’s
outstanding Common Shares.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
The Company files annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information
with the SEC.  Our SEC filings are available to the public over the Internet at the SEC’s web site
at http://www.sec.gov.
This Prospectus is part of a registration statement and, as permitted by SEC rules, does not
contain all of the information included in the registration statement.  Whenever a reference is
made in this Prospectus to any of our contracts or other documents, the reference may not be
complete and, for a copy of the contract or document, you should refer to the exhibits that are part
of the registration statement.  You may call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for more information on
the public reference rooms and their copy charges.   You may also read and copy any document
we file with the SEC at the SEC’s public reference rooms at:
100 F Street, N.E.
Room 1580
Washington, D.C. 20549
27
10,750,000 Units
10,750,000 Common Shares underlying the Units
5,375,000 Warrants to Purchase Common Shares
5,375,000 Common Shares underlying the Warrants
322,500 Underwriters’ Warrants to Purchase Common Shares
322,500 Common Shares underlying the Underwriters’ Warrants
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada CorporationRodman & Renshaw,
a unit of HC Wainwright & Co., LLC
August 2, 2016