
S-8 1 s8081216_s8.htm FORM S-8 REGISTRATION STATEMENT Form S-8 Registration
Statement
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-8
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
MEXUS GOLD US
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nevada
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
1805 N. Carson Street, Suite 150,
Carson City, NV
(Address of Principal Executive Offices)
20-4092640
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
89701
(Zip Code)
2016 Stock Incentive Plan
(Full title of the plan)
Paul Thompson, Sr.
Chief Executive Officer
Mexus Gold US
1805 N. Carson Street, Suite 150
Carson City, NV 89701
(Name and address of agent for service)
(916) 776-2166
(Telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
_______________________________
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filed, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated
filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large Accelerated filer      .
Non-accelerated filer      . (Do not check if a smaller
reporting company)
Accelerated filer      .  
Smaller reporting company
 X .
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Proposed
maximum
offering
price per
share (2)
Proposed
maximum
aggregate
offering
price (2)
Amount to
be
registered
(1)
Amount of
registration
fee (3)
Title of securities to be
registered
Common stock, par value
Common stock, par value
$0.001 per share (Reserved for issuance
under the Mexus Gold US 2016 Stock
Incentive Plan)
30,000,000
$0.06
$1,800,000
$181.26
(1) Represents the maximum number of shares of common stock issuable pursuant to awards
under the Mexus Gold US 2016 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Plan”). This Registration Statement
shall also cover any additional shares of common stock that become issuable by reason of any
stock dividend, stock split, recapitalization or other similar transaction of or by the registrant that
results in an increase in the number of the registrant’s outstanding shares of common stock or
shares issuable pursuant to awards granted under the Plan.
(2) Estimated solely for purposes of calculating the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(c) and
457(h) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The above calculation is based on the closing
price of the common stock reported on OTCMarkets.com on August 11, 2016.
(3) Represents the Proposed Maximum Aggregate Offering Price multiplied by $0.0001162.
2
PART I
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE SECTION 10(a) PROSPECTUS
Mexus Gold US (the “Company”) prepared this Registration Statement in accordance with the
requirements of Form S-8 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), to
register an aggregate of 30,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock that may be issued
pursuant  to  the  Mexus  Gold  US  2016  Stock  Incentive  Plan  (the  “Plan”).  The  documents
containing the information specified in Part I of this Registration Statement will be sent or given to
participants in the Plan, as specified by Rule 428(b)(1) promulgated under the Securities Act.
Such  documents  need  not  be  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the
“Commission”)  either  as  part  of  this  Registration  Statement  or  as  prospectuses  or  prospectus
supplements pursuant to Rule 424 promulgated under the Securities Act. These documents and
the documents incorporated by reference in this Registration Statement pursuant to Item 3, Part II
of this Registration Statement, taken together, constitute a prospectus that meets the requirement
of Section 10(a) of the Securities Act.
PART II
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT
Item 3. Incorporation of Documents by Reference.
The following documents filed by the registrant with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(the “SEC”) are incorporated in and made a part of this Registration Statement by reference as of
their respective dates:
(a) The Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016, filed
with the Commission on July 27, 2016.
(b) All other reports filed pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act since the end of
the fiscal year covered by the Company's latest annual report referred to in (a) above.
(c) The description of the Company’s Common Stock contained in the Company’s Registration
Statement  on  Form  10-SB,  as  filed  with  the  Commission  on  January  24,  2007,  including
amendments or reports filed for the purpose of updating such description.
All  documents  filed  by  the  registrant  after  the  date  of  this  Registration  Statement  pursuant  to
Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, prior to the filing of a
post-effective  amendment  which  indicates  that  all  securities  offered  have  been  sold  or  which
deregisters all securities then remaining unsold, will be deemed to be incorporated by reference
in this Registration Statement and to be a part hereof from the date of filing of such documents.
Any  statement  contained  in  this  Registration  Statement,  or  in  a  document  incorporated  by
reference herein, shall be deemed to be modified or superseded for purposes of this Registration
Statement  to  the  extent  that  a  statement  contained  herein,  or  in  any  other  subsequently  filed
document  which  also  is  or  is  deemed  to  be  incorporated  by  reference  herein,  modifies  or
supersedes  such  statement.  Any  such  statement  so  modified  or  superseded  shall  not  be
deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this Registration Statement.
Item 4. Description of Securities.
Not applicable.
Item 5. Interests of Named Experts and Counsel.
Not applicable.
3
Item 6. Indemnification of Officers and Directors.
Subsection 1 of Section 78.037 of the Nevada Revised Statutes (the “Nevada Law”) empowers a
corporation to eliminate or limit the personal liability of a director or officer to the corporation or its
stockholders for damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a director or officer, but such a provision
must  not  eliminate  or  limit  the  liability  of  a  director  or  officer  for  (a)  acts  or  omissions  which
involve  intentional  misconduct,  fraud  or  a  knowing  violation  of  law  or  (b)  the  payment  of
distributions in violation of Section 78.300 of the Nevada Law.
Subsection 1 of Section 78.7502 of the Nevada Law empowers a corporation to indemnify any
person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or
completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative (other
than an action by or in the right of the corporation) by reason of the fact that he or she is or was a
director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation or is or was serving at the request of the
corporation  as  a  director,  officer,  employee  or  agent  of  another  corporation,  partnership,  joint
venture, trust or other enterprise (an “Indemnified Party”), against expenses (including attorneys’
fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by the
Indemnified  Party  in  connection  with  such  action,  suit  or  proceeding  if  the  Indemnified  Party
acted in good faith and in a manner the Indemnified Party reasonably believed to be in or not
opposed  to  the  best  interests  of  the  corporation,  and,  with  respect  to  any  criminal  action  or
proceedings, had no reasonable cause to believe the Indemnified Party’s conduct was unlawful.
Subsection 2 of Section 78.7502 of the Nevada Law empowers a corporation to indemnify any
Indemnified Party who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened,
pending or completed action or suit by or in the right of the corporation to procure a judgment in
its  favor  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  such  person  acted  in  the  capacity  of  an  Indemnified  Party
against  expenses,  including  amounts  paid  in  settlement  and  attorneys’  fees  actually  and
reasonably  incurred  by  the  Indemnified  Party  in  connection  with  the  defense  or  settlement  of
such action or suit if the Indemnified Party acted under standards similar to those set forth above,
except that no indemnification may be made in respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which
the Indemnified Party shall have been adjudged to be liable to the corporation or for amounts
paid in settlement to the corporation unless and only to the extent that the court in which such
action or suit was brought determines upon application that in view of all the circumstances the
Indemnified Party is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such expenses as the court
deems proper.
Section 78.7502 of the Nevada Law further provides that to the extent an Indemnified Party has
been  successful  on  the  merits  or  otherwise  in  the  defense  of  any  action,  suit  or  proceeding
referred to in subsection (1) or (2) described above or in the defense of any claim, issue or matter
therein,  the  corporation  shall  indemnify  the  Indemnified  Party  against  expenses  (including
attorneys’  fees)  actually  and  reasonably  incurred  by  the  Indemnified  Party  in  connection
therewith.
Subsection  1  of  Section  78.751  of  the  Nevada  Law  provides  that  any  discretionary
indemnification  under  Section  78.7502  of  the  Nevada  Law,  unless  ordered  by  a  court  or
advanced pursuant to Subsection 2 of Section 78.751, may be made by a corporation only as
authorized  in  the  specific  case  upon  a  determination  that  indemnification  of  the  Indemnified
Person is proper in the circumstances. Such determination must be made (a) by the stockholders,
(b) by the board of directors of the corporation by majority vote of a quorum consisting of directors
who were not parties to the action, suit or proceeding, (c) if a majority vote of a quorum of such
disinterested  directors  so  orders,  by  independent  legal  counsel  in  a  written  opinion,  or  (d)  by
independent legal counsel in a written opinion if a quorum of such disinterested directors cannot
be obtained.
Subsection  2  of  Section  78.751  of  the  Nevada  Law  provides  that  a  corporation’s  articles  of
incorporation or bylaws or an agreement made by the corporation may require the corporation to
pay  as  incurred  and  in  advance  of  the  final  disposition  of  a  criminal  or  civil  action,  suit  or
proceeding, the expenses of officers and directors in defending such action, suit or proceeding
upon receipt by the corporation of an undertaking by or on behalf of the officer or director to repay
the amount if it is ultimately determined by a court that he is not entitled to be indemnified by the
corporation. Said Subsection 2 further provides that the provisions of that Subsection 2 do not
affect any rights to advancement of expenses to which corporate personnel other than officers
and directors may be entitled under contract or otherwise by law.
Subsection  3  of  Section  78.751  of  the  Nevada  Law  provides  that  indemnification  and
advancement of expenses authorized in or ordered by a court pursuant to said Section 78.751
does  not  exclude  any  other  rights  to  which  the  Indemnified  Party  may  be  entitled  under  the
articles of incorporation or any by-law, agreement, vote of stockholders or disinterested directors
or otherwise, for either an action in his official capacity or in another capacity while holding his
office. However, indemnification, unless ordered by a court pursuant to Section 78.7502 or for the
advancement of expenses under Subsection 2 of Section 78.751 of the Nevada Law, may not be
made to or on behalf of any director or officer of the corporation if a final adjudication establishes
that his or her acts or omissions involved intentional misconduct, fraud or a knowing violation of
the law and was material to the cause of action. Additionally, the scope of such indemnification
and advancement of expenses shall continue as to an Indemnified Party who has ceased to hold
one of the positions specified above, and shall inure to the benefit of his or her heirs, executors
and administrators.
4
Section 78.752 of the Nevada Law empowers a corporation to purchase and maintain insurance
or make other financial arrangements on behalf of an Indemnified Party for any liability asserted
against such person and liabilities and expenses incurred by such person in his or her capacity
as an Indemnified Party or arising out of such person’s status as an Indemnified Party whether or
not  the  corporation  has  the  authority  to  indemnify  such  person  against  such  liability  and
expenses.
The  Bylaws  of  the  Company  provide  for  indemnification  of  Indemnified  Parties  substantially
identical  in  scope  to  that  permitted  under  the  Nevada  Law.  Such  Bylaws  provide  that  the
expenses  of  directors  and  officers  of  the  Company  incurred  in  defending  any  action,  suit  or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, must be paid by the Company
as they are incurred and in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit or proceeding, upon
receipt  of  an  undertaking  by  or  on  behalf  of  such  director  or  officer  to  repay  all  amounts  so
advanced  if  it  is  ultimately  determined  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  that  the  director  or
officer is not entitled to be indemnified by the Company.
Item 7. Exemption from Registration Claimed.
Not applicable.
Item 8. Exhibits
Exhibit
No. Description
4.1 Mexus Gold US 2016 Stock Incentive Plan
4.2
Form of Stock Award Agreement
4.3
Form of Stock Option Grant Notice
5.1 Opinion of Phillip E. Koehnke, APC
23.1 Consent of RBSM LLC
24
Power of Attorney (included on signature
page)
Item 9. Undertakings
The Company hereby undertakes to file, during the period in which any offers or sales are being
made,  a  post-effective  amendment  to  this  registration  statement  to  include  any  prospectus
required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act, and to reflect in such prospectus any material
change in the information contained in this registration statement and to remove from registration
by  means  of  a  post-effective  amendment  any  of  the  securities  being  registered  which  remain
unsold at the termination of the offering.
The Company hereby undertakes to deliver or cause to be delivered with the prospectus, to each
person to whom the prospectus is sent or given, the latest annual report to security holders that is
incorporated  by  reference  to  the  prospectus  and  furnish  pursuant  to  any  meeting  the
requirements of Rule 14a-3 or Rule 14c-3 under the Exchange Act; and, to deliver or cause to be
delivered to each person to whom the prospectus is sent or given, the latest quarterly report that
is specifically incorporated by reference in the prospectus.
The  undersigned  hereby  undertakes  that,  for  purposes  of  determining  any  liability  under  the
Securities Act, each filing of the Company’s annual report pursuant to section 13(a) or section
15(d)  of  the  Exchange  Act  (and,  where  applicable,  each  filing  of  an  employee  benefit  plan's
annual report pursuant to section 15(d) of the Exchange Act) that is incorporated by reference in
the  registration  statement  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  new  registration  statement  relating  to  the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be
the initial bona fide offering thereof.
Insofar  as  indemnification  for  liabilities  arising  under  the  Securities  Act  may  be  permitted  to
directors, officers and controlling persons of the Company pursuant to the foregoing provisions,
or  otherwise,  the  Company  has  been  advised  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  Commission  such
indemnification  is  against  public  policy  as  expressed  in  the  Exchange  Act  and  is,  therefore,
unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the
payment by the Company of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person
of the Company in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such
director,  officer  or  controlling  person  in  connection  with  the  securities  being  registered,  the
Company  will,  unless  in  the  opinion  of  its  counsel  the  matter  has  been  settled  by  controlling
precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification
by it is against public policy as expressed in the Exchange Act and will be governed by the final
adjudication of such issue.
5
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Company certifies that it has reasonable
grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-8 and has duly caused
this  registration  statement  to  be  signed  on  its  behalf  by  the  undersigned,  thereunder  duly
authorized in Walnut Grove, California.
MEXUS GOLD US
/s/ Paul Thompson, Sr.
By: Paul Thompson, Sr., Chief Executive Officer
6
POWER OF ATTORNEY
The undersigned sole director and officer of Mexus Gold US does hereby constitute and appoint
Paul Thompson, Sr., his true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution,
for  him,  and  in  his  name,  place  and  stead,  in  any  and  all  capacities,  to  sign  the  Registration
Statement filed herewith and any and all amendments (including post-effective amendments) to
the Registration Statement, with all exhibits thereto and all documents in connection therewith,
with the Commission, granting unto said attorney-in-fact and agent, and each of them, full power
and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done
in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he might or could do in person,
hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorney-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or his or
their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, this Registration Statement has been signed
by the following persons in the listed capacities on August 15, 2016.
Name
 
/s/ Paul Thompson, Sr. Director
Paul Thompson, Sr.
Title
7