
NORTHERN IRON LIMITED
(TO BE RENAMED “DOTZ NANO LIMITED”)
ACN 125 264 575
NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
TIME:
DATE:
10:00am (WST)
2 September 2016
PLACE:
108 Outram Street, West Perth, Western Australia, 6005
This  Notice  of  Meeting  should  be  read  in  its  entirety.    If  Shareholders  are  in  doubt  as  to  how  they 
should vote, they should seek advice from their professional advisers prior to voting.
Should you wish to discuss the matters in this Notice of Meeting please do not hesitate to contact the 
Company Secretary on +61 8 6377 8043.
C O N T E N T S
Business of the Meeting (setting out the proposed Resolutions)
Explanatory Statement (explaining the proposed Resolutions)
Glossary
Schedule 1 – Terms and Conditions of Performance Shares
Schedule 2 – Terms and Conditions of Lead Manager Options
Schedule 3 – Terms and Conditions of Transaction Options
Schedule 4 – Summary of Employee Incentive Option Plan
Schedule 5 – Pro Forma Balance Sheets
3
12
64
67
70
72
74
76
Proxy Form
Enclosed
I M P O R T A N T   I N F O R M A T I O N
Time and place of Meeting
Notice is given that the Meeting will be held at 10:00am (WST) on 2 September 2016 at:
108 Outram Street,
West Perth, Western Australia, 6005
Your vote is important
The business of the Meeting affects your shareholding and your vote is important.
Voting eligibility
The  Directors  have  determined  pursuant  to  Regulation  7.11.37  of  the  Corporations 
Regulations 2001 (Cth) that the persons eligible to vote at the Meeting are those who are 
registered Shareholders at 5:00pm on 31 August 2016.
Voting in person
To vote in person, attend the Meeting at the time, date and place set out above.
Voting by proxy
To vote by proxy, please complete and sign the enclosed Proxy Form and return by the 
time and in accordance with the instructions set out on the Proxy Form.
In accordance with section 249L of the Corporations Act, Shareholders are advised that:



each Shareholder has a right to appoint a proxy;
the proxy need not be a Shareholder of the Company; and
a Shareholder who is entitled to cast 2 or more votes may appoint 2 proxies and 
may  specify  the  proportion  or  number  of  votes  each  proxy  is  appointed  to
Notice of Meeting
1
exercise.    If  the  member  appoints  2  proxies  and  the  appointment  does  not 
specify  the  proportion  or  number  of  the  member’s  votes,  then  in  accordance 
with section 249X(3) of the Corporations Act, each proxy may exercise one-half 
of the votes.
Shareholders  and  their  proxies  should  be  aware  that  changes  to  the  Corporations  Act 
made in 2011 mean that:


if proxy holders vote, they must cast all directed proxies as directed; and
any directed proxies which are not voted will automatically default to the Chair, 
who must vote the proxies as directed.
Further details on these changes are set out below.
Proxy vote if appointment specifies way to vote
Section 250BB(1) of the Corporations Act provides that an appointment of a proxy may 
specify the way the proxy is to vote on a particular resolution and, if it does:




the proxy need not vote on a show of hands, but if the proxy does so, the proxy 
must vote that way (ie as directed); and
if  the  proxy  has  2  or  more  appointments  that  specify  different  ways  to  vote  on 
the resolution, the proxy must not vote on a show of hands; and
if  the  proxy  is  the  chair  of  the  meeting  at  which  the  resolution  is  voted  on,  the 
proxy must vote on a poll, and must vote that way (ie as directed); and
if the proxy is not the chair, the proxy need not vote on the poll, but if the proxy 
does so, the proxy must vote that way (ie as directed).
Transfer of non-chair proxy to chair in certain circumstances
Section 250BC of the Corporations Act provides that, if:




an appointment of a proxy specifies the way the proxy is to vote on a particular 
resolution at a meeting of the Company's members; and
the appointed proxy is not the chair of the meeting; and
at the meeting, a poll is duly demanded on the resolution; and
either of the following applies:


the proxy is not recorded as attending the meeting; or
the proxy does not vote on the resolution,
the  chair  of  the meeting  is  taken,  before voting  on  the  resolution  closes,  to  have been 
appointed as the proxy for the purposes of voting on the resolution at the meeting.
Notice of Meeting
2
B U S I N E S S   O F   T H E   M E E T I N G
AGENDA
1.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND REPORTS
To  receive  and  consider  the  annual  financial  report  of  the  Company  for  the 
financial  year  ended  31  December  2015  together  with  the  declaration  of  the 
directors,  the  director’s  report,  the  Remuneration  Report  and  the  auditor’s 
report.
2.
RESOLUTION 1 – ADOPTION OF REMUNERATION REPORT
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as a non-binding resolution:
“That,  for  the  purposes  of  section  250R(2)  of  the  Corporations  Act  and 
for  all  other  purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  adoption  of  the 
Remuneration  Report  as  contained  in  the  Company’s  annual  financial 
report for the financial year ended 31 December 2015.”
Note:  the  vote  on  this  Resolution  is  advisory  only  and  does  not  bind  the  Directors  or  the 
Company.
Voting Prohibition Statement:
A vote on this Resolution must not be cast (in any capacity) by or on  behalf of either of 
the following persons:
(a)
a  member  of  the  Key  Management  Personnel,  details  of  whose  remuneration 
are included in the Remuneration Report; or
(b)
a Closely Related Party of such a member.
However, a person (the voter) described above may cast a vote on this Resolution as a 
proxy if the vote is not cast on behalf of a person described above and either:
(a)
(b)
the voter is appointed as a proxy by writing that specifies the way the proxy is to 
vote on this Resolution; or
the voter is the Chair and the appointment of the Chair as proxy:
(i)
(ii)
does not specify the way the proxy is to vote on this Resolution; and
expressly  authorises  the  Chair  to  exercise  the  proxy  even  though  this 
Resolution is connected  directly or indirectly  with  the remuneration of 
a member of the Key Management Personnel.
3.
RESOLUTION 2 – RE-ELECTION OF DIRECTOR – MICHAEL DAVY
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  for the purpose of clause  6.3 of the Constitution,  ASX Listing Rule 
14.4  and  for  all  other  purposes,  Michael  Davy,  a  Director,  retires  by 
rotation, and being eligible, is re-elected as a Director.”
Notice of Meeting
3
4.
RESOLUTION 3 – CHANGE TO NATURE AND SCALE OF ACTIVITIES
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
Resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purpose  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  11.1.2  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  make  a  significant 
change  in  the  nature  and  scale  of  its  activities  as  described  in  the 
Explanatory Statement accompanying this Notice.”
Voting Exclusion: The Company will disregard any votes cast on this Resolution by any person 
who  (or  any  of  whose  associates)  might  obtain  a  benefit,  except  a  benefit  solely  in  the 
capacity of a holder of ordinary securities, if the Resolution is passed. However, the Company 
need  not  disregard  a  vote  if it is  cast  by  a  person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to 
vote, in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form or it is cast by the person chairing 
the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on 
the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
5.
RESOLUTION  4  –  CREATION  OF  A  NEW  CLASS  OF  SECURITIES  –  PERFORMANCE 
SHARES
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as a special resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential  
Resolutions, for the purpose of clause 2.6 of the Constitution and section 
246B of the Corporations Act and for all other purposes, the Company is 
authorised to issue Performance Shares on the terms and conditions set 
out in the Explanatory Statement.”
6.
RESOLUTION 5 – ISSUE OF CONSIDERATION SECURITIES
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  and  for  all  other 
purposes, approval is given for the Company to issue:
(a)  66,000,000 Consideration Shares; and
(b)  66,000,000 Performance Shares,
(each  on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  at  Settlement,  on  the  terms  and 
conditions set out in the Explanatory Statement.”
Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  any 
person  who  (and  any  of  whose  associates)  may  participate  in  the  proposed  issue  and 
any person who (and any of whose associates) might obtain a benefit, except a benefit 
solely  in  the  capacity  of  a  holder  of  ordinary  securities,  if  the  Resolution  is  passed.  
However, the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for 
a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form, or, 
it is cast by the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, 
in accordance with a direction on the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
Notice of Meeting
4
7.
RESOLUTION  6  –  ISSUE  OF  LEAD  MANAGER  SECURITIES  AND  TRANSACTION 
OPTIONS TO FACILITATORS
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That, subject to and conditional upon the passing of all of the Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  and  for  all  other 
purposes, approval is given for the Company to issue:
(a)  1,750,000 Lead Manager Shares;
(b)  4,500,000 Lead Manager Options; and
(c)  1,000,000 Transaction Options,
(each  on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  parties  that  will  assist  with  the 
Capital Raising and facilitation of the Acquisition (or their nominees) on 
the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Statement.”
Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  any 
person  who  may  participate  in  the  proposed  issue  and  a  person  who  might  obtain  a 
benefit,  except  a  benefit  solely  in  the  capacity  of  a  holder  of  ordinary  securities,  if  the 
Resolution is passed and any associates of those persons.  However, the Company need 
not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, 
in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form, or, it is cast by the person chairing 
the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction 
on the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
8.
RESOLUTION 7 – ISSUE OF LEAD MANAGER SECURITIES TO OTSANA PTY LTD
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other 
purposes, approval is given for the Company to issue up to:
(a)  750,000 Lead Manager Shares; and
(b)  2,000,000 Lead Manager Options,
(on a post-Consolidation basis) to Otsana Pty Ltd (or its nominee) on the 
terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Statement.”
Voting Exclusion Statement:  The Company will disregard any votes cast on this Resolution 
by Otsana Pty Ltd (and its nominee) and any of their associates.  However, the Company 
need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled 
to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form, or, it is cast by the person 
chairing the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a 
direction on the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
9.
RESOLUTION 8 – ISSUE OF SHARES – CAPITAL RAISING
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purpose  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  and  for  all  other
Notice of Meeting
5
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  30,000,000 
Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis) at $0.20 per Share to raise up to 
$6,000,000  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the  Explanatory 
Statement.”
Short  Explanation:    The  Company  must  issue  a  Prospectus  in  order  to  satisfy  the 
requirements  of  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  and  as  a  condition  of  the 
Company’s  securities  recommencing  trading  on  the  ASX  following  the  Acquisition.  
Please refer to the Explanatory Statement for details.
Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  any 
person  who  may  participate  in  the  proposed  issue  and  a  person  who  might  obtain  a 
benefit,  except  a  benefit  solely  in  the  capacity  of  a  holder  of  ordinary  securities,  if  the 
Resolution is passed and any associates of those persons.  However, the Company need 
not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, 
in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form, or, it is cast by the person chairing 
the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction 
on the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
10.
RESOLUTION  9  –  ISSUE  OF  SHARES  UPON  CONVERSION  UNDER  NFE  CONVERTIBLE 
LOAN AGREEMENTS
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  4,750,000 
Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  the NFE  Lenders  on  the terms 
and conditions set out in the Explanatory Statement.”
ASX  Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  any 
person who may participate in the proposed issue and a person who might obtain a benefit, 
except  a  benefit  solely  in  the  capacity  of  a  holder  of  ordinary  securities,  if  the  Resolution  is 
passed and any  associates of those persons.  However, the Company need not  disregard a 
vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with 
the directions on the Proxy Form, or, it is cast by the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a 
person  who is  entitled  to  vote,  in  accordance  with  a direction  on  the  Proxy  Form  to  vote  as 
the proxy decides.
11.
RESOLUTION  10  –  ISSUE  OF  SHARES  TO  BENEFICO  PTY  LTD  UPON  CONVERSION 
UNDER NFE CONVERTIBLE LOAN AGREEMENT
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  250,000 
Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  Benefico  Pty  Ltd  (or  its 
nominee)  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the  Explanatory 
Statement.”
Voting Exclusion Statement:  The Company will disregard any votes cast on this Resolution 
by  Benefico  Pty  Ltd  (and  its  nominee)  and  any  of  their  associates.    However,  the 
Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person who 
is  entitled  to  vote,  in  accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  Proxy  Form,  or,  it  is  cast  by 
the  person  chairing  the  meeting  as  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in 
accordance with a direction on the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
Notice of Meeting
6
12.
RESOLUTION 11 – ISSUE OF SHARES UPON CONVERSION UNDER DOTZ CONVERTIBLE 
LOAN AGREEMENTS
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  1,750,000 
Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis) to the Dotz Lenders on the terms 
and conditions set out in the Explanatory Statement.”
ASX  Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  any 
person who may participate in the proposed issue and a person who might obtain a benefit, 
except  a  benefit  solely  in  the  capacity  of  a  holder  of  ordinary  securities,  if  the  Resolution  is 
passed and any  associates of those persons.  However, the Company need not  disregard a 
vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with 
the directions on the Proxy Form, or, it is cast by the person chairing the meeting as proxy for a 
person  who is  entitled  to  vote,  in  accordance  with  a direction  on  the  Proxy  Form  to  vote  as 
the proxy decides.
13.
RESOLUTION 12 – CHANGE OF COMPANY NAME
To  consider  and,  if  thought  fit,  to  pass  the  following  Resolution  as  a  special 
resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  upon  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, for the purposes of section 157(1)(a) of the Corporations Act 
and  for  all  other  purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  name  of  the 
Company  to  be  changed  to  “Dotz  Nano  Limited”  with  effect  from  the 
date that ASIC alters the Company’s registration following Settlement.”
14.
RESOLUTION  13  –  PARTICIPATION  OF  RELATED  PARTY  IN  CAPITAL  RAISING  -  MR 
FALDI ISMAIL
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
Resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  2,000,000 
Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis) to Faldi Ismail (or his nominee) as 
part  of  the  Capital  Raising  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the 
Explanatory Statement.”
ASX Voting Exclusion:   The Company will disregard any votes cast on  this Resolution  by Faldi 
Ismail  (and  his  nominee)  and  any  of  their  associates.    However,  the  Company  need  not 
disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  a  person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in 
accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  Proxy  Form,  or,  it  is  cast  by  the  person  chairing  the 
meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the 
Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
15.
RESOLUTION  14  –  PARTICIPATION  OF  RELATED  PARTY  IN  CAPITAL  RAISING  –  DR 
MOTI GROSS
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
Resolution as an ordinary resolution:
Notice of Meeting
7
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  500,000 
Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis) to Dr Moti Gross (or his nominee) 
as part of the Capital Raising on the terms and conditions set out in the 
Explanatory Statement.”
ASX  Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  Dr  Moti 
Gross  (and  his  nominee)  and  any  of  their  associates.    However,  the  Company  need  not 
disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  a  person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in 
accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  Proxy  Form,  or,  it  is  cast  by  the  person  chairing  the 
meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the 
Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
16.
RESOLUTION  15  –  PARTICIPATION  OF  RELATED  PARTY  IN  CAPITAL  RAISING  –  MR 
MENASHE BARUCH
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
Resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  500,000 
Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  Mr  Menashe  Baruch  (or  his 
nominee) as part of the Capital Raising on the terms and conditions set 
out in the Explanatory Statement.”
ASX  Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  Mr 
Menashe  Baruch  (and  his  nominee)  and  any  of  their  associates.    However,  the  Company 
need  not  disregard  a  vote  if it is  cast  by  a  person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to 
vote, in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form, or, it is cast by the person chairing 
the meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on 
the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
17.
RESOLUTION  16  –  PARTICIPATION  OF  RELATED  PARTY  IN  CAPITAL  RAISING  –  MR 
STEVE BAJIC
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
Resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  500,000 
Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis) to Mr Steve Bajic (or his nominee) 
as part of the Capital Raising on the terms and conditions set out in the 
Explanatory Statement.”
ASX  Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  Mr 
Steve Bajic (and his nominee) and any of their associates.  However, the Company need not 
disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  a  person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in 
accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  Proxy  Form,  or,  it  is  cast  by  the  person  chairing  the 
meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the 
Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
18.
RESOLUTION  17  –  PARTICIPATION  OF  RELATED  PARTY  IN  CAPITAL  RAISING  –  MR 
ATHAN LEKKAS
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
Resolution as an ordinary resolution:
Notice of Meeting
8
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other 
purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  up  to  1,000,000 
Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  Mr  Athan  Lekkas  (or  his 
nominee) as part of the Capital Raising on the terms and conditions set 
out in the Explanatory Statement.”
ASX  Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  Mr 
Athan  Lekkas  (and  his  nominee)  and  any  of  their  associates.    However,  the  Company  need 
not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in 
accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  Proxy  Form,  or,  it  is  cast  by  the  person  chairing  the 
meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with a direction on the 
Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
19.
RESOLUTION 18 – ELECTION OF DIRECTOR – MR FALDI ISMAIL
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, for the purpose of  clause  6.2 of the Constitution and for  all 
other  purposes,  Mr  Faldi  Ismail,  a  Proposed  Director  who  being  eligible 
and  having  consented  to  act,  be  appointed  as  a  Director  of  the 
Company on and from Settlement.”
20.
RESOLUTION 19 – ELECTION OF DIRECTOR – DR MOTI GROSS
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, for the purpose of  clause  6.2 of the Constitution and for  all 
other  purposes,  Dr  Moti  Gross,  a  Proposed  Director  who  being  eligible 
and  having  consented  to  act,  be  appointed  as  a  Director  of  the 
Company on and from Settlement.”
21.
RESOLUTION 20 – ELECTION OF DIRECTOR – MR MENASHE BARUCH
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, for the purpose of  clause  6.2 of the Constitution and for  all 
other  purposes,  Mr  Menashe  Baruch,  a  Proposed  Director  who  being 
eligible and having consented to act, be appointed as a Director of the 
Company on and from Settlement.”
22.
RESOLUTION 21 – ELECTION OF DIRECTOR – MR STEVE BAJIC
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, for the purpose of  clause  6.2 of the Constitution and for  all 
other  purposes,  Mr  Steve  Bajic,  a  Proposed  Director  who  being  eligible 
and  having  consented  to  act,  be  appointed  as  a  Director  of  the 
Company on and from Settlement.”
Notice of Meeting
9
23.
RESOLUTION 22 – ELECTION OF DIRECTOR – MR ATHAN LEKKAS
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, for the purpose of  clause  6.2 of the Constitution and for  all 
other  purposes,  Mr  Athan  Lekkas,  a  Proposed  Director  who  being 
eligible and having consented to act, be appointed as a Director of the 
Company on and from Settlement.”
24.
RESOLUTION 23 – CONSOLIDATION OF CAPITAL
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
"That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, pursuant to section 254H of the Corporations Act and for all 
other purposes, the issued capital of the Company be consolidated on 
the basis that every ten (10) Shares be consolidated into one (1) Share, 
and, where this Consolidation results in a fraction of a Share being held, 
the  Company  be  authorised  to  round  that  fraction  up  to  the  nearest 
whole Share (as the case may be)."
25.
RESOLUTION 24 – ADOPTION OF EMPLOYEE INCENTIVE OPTION PLAN
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following 
resolution as an ordinary resolution:
“That,  subject  to  and  conditional  on  the  passing  of  all  the  Essential 
Resolutions, for the purposes of ASX Listing Rule 7.2 (Exception 9(b)) and 
for  all  other  purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  adopt  an 
employee incentive scheme titled Employee Incentive Option Plan and 
for  the  issue  of  securities  under  that  plan,  on  the  terms  and  conditions 
set out in the Explanatory Statement.”
Voting  Exclusion:    The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  this  Resolution  by  any 
person  who  (or  any  of  whose  associates)  is  eligible  to  participate  in  the  employee 
incentive scheme, including any Director, other  than any Directors  who are ineligible  to 
participate  in  any  employee  incentive  scheme  in  relation  to  the  Company.    However, 
the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as a proxy for a person 
who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions on the Proxy Form, or, it is cast 
by  the  person  chairing  the  meeting  as  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in 
accordance with a direction on the Proxy Form to vote as the proxy decides.
Voting Prohibition Statement:
A person appointed as a proxy must not vote, on the basis of that appointment, on this 
Resolution if:
(a)
the proxy is either:
(i)
(ii)
a member of the Key Management Personnel; or
a Closely Related Party of such a member; and
(b)
the  appointment  does  not  specify  the  way  the  proxy  is  to  vote  on  this 
Resolution.
Notice of Meeting
10
However, the above prohibition does not apply if:
(c)
(d)
the proxy is the Chair; and
the  appointment  expressly  authorises  the  Chair  to  exercise  the  proxy  even 
though this Resolution is connected directly or indirectly with remuneration of a 
member of the Key Management Personnel.
Dated: 2 August 2016
By order of the Board
Peter Webse 
Company Secretary
Notice of Meeting
11
E X P L A N A T O R Y   S T A T E M E N T
This  Explanatory  Statement  has  been  prepared  to  provide  information  which  the 
Directors believe  to  be  material  to  Shareholders in  deciding whether  or  not  to  pass  the 
Resolutions.
The Directors recommend Shareholders read the accompanying Notice of Meeting and 
this  Explanatory  Statement  in  full  before  making  any  decision  in  relation  to  the 
Resolutions.
Resolutions  3-12  and  18-23  are  Essential  Resolutions  and  will  be  taken  to  have  been 
rejected  by  Shareholders  and  the  Acquisition  will  not  proceed  if  any  of  the  Essential 
Resolutions are not passed.  All Essential Resolutions must be passed for the Acquisition to 
proceed.
1.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND REPORTS
In  accordance  with  the  Constitution,  the  business  of  the  Meeting  will  include 
receipt and consideration of the annual financial report of the Company for the 
financial  year  ended  31  December  2015  together  with  the  declaration  of  the 
directors,  the  directors’  report,  the  Remuneration  Report  and  the  auditor’s 
report.
The Company  will  not  provide a hard  copy  of  the Company’s  annual financial 
report  to  Shareholders  unless  specifically  requested  to  do  so.    The  Company’s 
annual financial report is available on the ASX website at www.asx.com.au.
2.
RESOLUTION 1 – ADOPTION OF REMUNERATION REPORT
2.1
General
The  Corporations  Act  requires  that  at  a  listed  company’s  annual  general 
meeting,  a  resolution  that  the remuneration  report  be adopted must  be put  to 
the shareholders.  However, such a resolution is advisory only and does not bind 
the company or the directors of the company.
The remuneration report sets out the company’s remuneration arrangements for 
the directors and senior management of the company.  The remuneration report 
is  part  of  the  directors’  report  contained  in  the  annual  financial  report  of  the 
company for a financial year.
The chair of the meeting must allow a reasonable opportunity for its shareholders 
to  ask  questions  about  or  make  comments  on  the  remuneration  report  at  the 
annual general meeting.
2.2
Voting consequences
Under changes to the Corporations Act which came into effect on 1 July 2011, a 
company is required to put to its shareholders a resolution proposing the calling 
of another meeting of shareholders to consider the appointment of directors of 
the  company  (Spill  Resolution)  if,  at  consecutive  annual  general  meetings,  at 
least 25% of the votes cast on a remuneration report resolution are voted against 
adoption  of  the  remuneration  report  and  at  the  first  of  those  annual  general 
meetings  a  Spill  Resolution  was  not  put  to  vote.    If  required,  the  Spill  Resolution 
must be put to vote at the second of those annual general meetings.
Notice of Meeting
12
If more than 50% of votes cast are in favour of the Spill Resolution, the company 
must  convene  a  shareholder  meeting  (Spill  Meeting)  within  90  days  of  the 
second annual general meeting.
All of the directors of the company who were in office when the directors' report 
(as  included  in  the  company’s  annual  financial  report  for  the  most  recent 
financial  year)  was  approved,  other  than  the  managing  director  of  the 
company,  will  cease  to  hold  office  immediately  before  the  end  of  the  Spill 
Meeting but may stand for re-election at the Spill Meeting.
Following  the  Spill  Meeting  those  persons  whose  election  or  re-election  as 
directors of the company is approved will be the directors of the company.
2.3
Previous voting results
At  the Company’s  previous annual  general meeting the votes  cast  against  the 
remuneration report considered at that annual general meeting were less than 
25%.    Accordingly,  the  Spill  Resolution  is  not  relevant  for  this  Annual  General 
Meeting.
2.4
Proxy voting restrictions
Shareholders appointing a proxy for this Resolution should note the following:
Proxy
Directions given
No directions given
Key Management Personnel1  Vote as directed  Unable to vote3
Chair2
Other
Notes:
Vote as directed  Able  to  vote  at  discretion  of
Proxy4
Vote as directed  Able  to  vote  at  discretion  of
Proxy
1 Refers to Key Management Personnel (other than the Chair) whose remuneration details are 
included in the Remuneration Report, or a Closely Related Party of such a member.
2  Refers  to  the  Chair  (where  he/she  is  also  a  member  of  the  Key  Management  Personnel 
whose  remuneration  details  are  included  in  the  Remuneration  Report),  or  a  Closely  Related 
Party of such a member).
3  Undirected  proxies  granted  to  these  persons  will  not  be  voted  and  will  not  be  counted  in 
calculating the required majority if a poll is called on this Resolution.
4  The Proxy Form notes it is the Chair’s intention  to vote all undirected proxies  in favour  of all 
Resolutions.
3.
RESOLUTION 2 – RE-ELECTION OF DIRECTOR – MICHAEL DAVY
ASX  Listing  Rule  14.4  provides  that  a  director  of  an  entity  must  not  hold  office 
(without re-election) past the third AGM following the director’s appointment or 
3 year, whichever is the longer.
Clause 6.3 of the Constitution provide that:
(a)
at  the  Company's  annual  general  meeting  in  every  year,  one-third  of 
the Directors for the time being, or, if their number is not a multiple of 3, 
then the number nearest one-third (rounded upwards in case of doubt), 
shall  retire  from  office,  provided  always  that  no  Director  (except  a 
Managing Director) shall hold office for a period in excess of 3 years, or
Notice of Meeting
13
(b)
(c)
(d)
until the third annual general meeting following his or her appointment, 
whichever  is  the  longer,  without  submitting  himself  or  herself  for  re-
election;
The Directors to retire at an annual general meeting are those who have 
been longest in office since their last election, but, as between persons 
who  became  Directors  on  the  same  day,  those  to  retire  shall  (unless 
they  otherwise  agree  among  themselves)  be  determined  by  drawing 
lots;
A Director who retires by rotation under clause 6.3 of the Constitution is 
eligible for re-election; and
In  determining  the  number  of  Directors  to  retire,  no  account  is  to  be 
taken of:
(i)
a  Director  who  only  holds  office  until  the  next  annual  general 
meeting pursuant to clause 6.2 of the Constitution; and/ or
(ii)
a Managing Director,
each  of  whom  are  exempt  from  retirement  by  rotation.    However,  if 
more  than  one  Managing  Director  has  been  appointed  by  the 
Directors, only one of them (nominated by the Directors) is entitled to be 
excluded  from  any  determination  of  the  number  of  Directors  to  retire 
and/or retirement by rotation.
The  Company  currently  has  three  (3)  Directors  and  accordingly  one  (1)  must 
retire.
As all current Directors were appointed on 16 May 2016, they have agreed that 
Mr Michael Davy will retire by rotation and seek re-election.
Mr  Davy  is  an  accountant  with  15  years’  experience.    His  experience  is  broad 
having  worked  in  oil  and  gas,  resources,  property,  food  distribution,  restaurants 
and start-up technology companies.  During the past 5 years, Mr Davy has held 
directorships in ASX listed companies, Cossack Energy Ltd and Advance Energy 
Ltd.
The Board (other than Mr Davy) recommend that Shareholders vote in favour of 
Resolution 2.
4.
BACKGROUND TO PROPOSED ACQUISITION OF DOTZ
4.1
General background
The  Company  was  incorporated  on  22  May  2007  and  was  admitted  to  the 
official list of the ASX on 13 December 2007. The Company’s primary operations 
during  this  time  have  been  the  production  of  magnetite  iron  concentrate  in 
northern Norway via its wholly-owned Norwegian subsidiary Sydvaranger Gruve 
AS.
The  Company's  securities  were  suspended  from  official  quotation  on  16 
November 2015 at the request of the Company, and have remained suspended 
since that date.
Notice of Meeting
14
On  19  November  2015,  the  Company’s  then  directors  resolved  to  appoint  Mr 
James  Thackray  of  The  Headquarters  Corporate  Advisory  as  voluntary 
administrator of the Company.
On  16  May  2016,  the  voluntary  administration  came  to  an  end  and  a  deed  of 
company  arrangement  was  wholly  effectuated,  with  control  being  handed  to 
the  current  directors  of  the  Company.  Following  effectuation  of  the  deed  of 
company arrangement the Company did not have any assets.
On  23  May  2016  the  Company  announced  it  had  entered  into  a  heads  of 
agreement  (HOA)  (amended  on  15  June  2016)  with  Dotz  Nano  Ltd  (Israel 
Registrar of Companies ID No. 515063790) (Dotz) under which the Company will 
be  granted  a  conditional  option  to  acquire  100%  of  the  issued  capital  of  Dotz 
from all securityholders of Dotz (Vendors) (Acquisition).
Pursuant to the terms of the HOA, Dotz will merge with a wholly-owned subsidiary 
of  the  Company  that  will  be  incorporated  in  Israel  (Israel  Subsidiary),  following 
which  Dotz  will  be  the  surviving  corporation  and  shall  be  a  wholly  owned 
subsidiary of the Company (Merger).
A  summary  of  the  material  terms  of  the  HOA  together  with  summaries  of  key 
agreements referred to in the HOA are set out in Section 4.7 below.
This  Notice  of  Meeting  sets  out  the  Resolutions  necessary  to  complete  the 
Acquisition  and  associated  transactions.  Each  of  the  Resolutions  is  conditional 
upon the approval by Shareholders of each of the Essential Resolutions. If any of 
the Essential Resolutions are not approved by Shareholders, all of the Resolutions 
will fail and Settlement will not occur.
A summary of the Resolutions is as follows:
(a)
adoption  of  the  remuneration  report  for  the  financial  year  ended  31 
December 2015 (Resolution 1);
(b)
re-election of Mr Michael Davy as a Director (Resolution 2);
(c)
(d)
as  the  Company  is  currently  a  mineral  exploration  company,  the 
Acquisition, if successfully completed, will represent a significant change 
in  the  nature  or  scale  of  the  Company’s  operations  to  a  technology 
company,  for which  Shareholder  approval  is required  under  ASX  Listing 
Rule 11.1.2 (Resolution 3);
approval to issue a new class of shares, being the Performance Shares, 
which  are  to  be  issued  to  Vendors  as  part-consideration  for  the 
Acquisition (Resolution 4);
(e)
the issue at Settlement of:
(i)
(ii)
66,000,000 Shares; and
66,000,000 Performance Shares;
(each on a post-Consolidation basis) to the Vendors (or their nominees) 
in  consideration  for  the  Company’s  acquisition  of  100%  of  the  issued 
capital in Dotz (Resolution 5)
Notice of Meeting
15
(f)
the issue at Settlement of:
(i)
(ii)
1,750,000 Lead Manager Shares;
4,500,000 Lead Manager Options; and
(iii)
1,000,000 Transaction Options,
(each  on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  parties  that  assisted  with 
facilitating  the  Acquisition  and  completing  the  Capital  Raising  (or  their 
nominees) (Resolution 6);
(g)
the issue at Settlement of up to:
(i)
(ii)
750,000 Lead Manager Shares; and
2,000,000 Lead Manager Options,
(each  on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  Otsana  Pty  Ltd,  a  company  in 
which  Mr  Faldi  Ismail  is  a  director  and  the  sole  shareholder  (or  its 
nominee),  which  may  be  issued  as  part  of,  and  not  in  addition  to,  the 
issue of Securities approved under Resolution 6 (Resolution 7);
the issue at Settlement of up to 25,000,000 Shares to raise a minimum of 
$5,000,000  and  a  maximum  of  $6,000,000  via  a  prospectus  offer 
(Prospectus) by the offer of up to 30,000,000 Shares at an issue price of 
$0.20 per Share (Capital Raising) (Resolution 8);
the  issue  at  Settlement  of  4,750,000  Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation 
basis)  to  the  NFE  Lenders  upon  conversion  under  the  NFE  Convertible 
Loan Agreements (Resolution 9);
the issue at Settlement of 250,000 Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis) 
to Benefico Pty Ltd, a company controlled by Mr Faldi Ismail’s spouse (or 
its nominee), in its capacity as an NFE Lender (Resolution 10);
the  issue  at  Settlement  of  1,750,000  Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation 
basis)  to  the Dotz  Lenders  upon  conversion  under  the  Dotz  Convertible 
Loan Agreements (Resolution 11);
change  the  Company’s  name  to  “Dotz  Nano  Limited”  subject  to 
Settlement  and  with  effect  from  when  ASIC  alters  the  details  of  the 
Company’s registration (Resolution 12);
the issue of up to 2,000,000 Capital Raising Shares to Mr Faldi Ismail,  up 
to 1,000,000 Capital Raising Shares to Mr Athan Lekkas and up to 500,000 
Capital  Raising Shares  each  to  Dr  Moti  Gross,  Mr  Menashe Baruch  and 
Mr  Steve  Bajic  at  Settlement  (Resolutions  13  to  17)  (on  a  post-
Consolidation basis);
the  appointment  of  five  Proposed  Directors  nominated  by  Dotz  to  the 
Board, being Mr Faldi Ismail, Dr Moti Gross, Mr Menashe Baruch, Mr Steve 
Bajic and Mr Athan Lekkas (Resolutions 18 to 22);
the  Company’s  issued  capital  being  consolidated  on  a  10:1  basis 
(Consolidation) (Resolution 23); and
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
Notice of Meeting
16
(p)
the  adoption  of  an  Employee 
(Resolution 24).
Incentive  Option  Plan
(Plan)
4.2
Overview of Dotz
(a)
Background
Dotz  Nano  Ltd.  was  incorporated  in  March  2014,  to  develop  and 
industry, 
commercialize  technologies 
specifically  Graphene  and  Graphene 
including 
Graphene Quantum Dots.
in  the  advanced  materials 
related  products
In  June 2014,  Dotz  began  negotiations with  the Marshall  Rice University 
in  Houston,  Texas  (Rice  University),  for  the  licensing  of  intellectual 
property  (Rice  Intellectual  Property)  relating  to  the  production  of 
graphene quantum dots (GQDs), developed by Professor James Tour, of 
the  Tour  Lab  Group  at  Rice  University.  Subsequently,  the  Rice  University 
Licence  Agreement  and  Sponsored  Research  Agreement  were  signed 
between Dotz and Rice University in relation to the Intellectual Property 
(a summary of which is included at Section 4.7(b)).
Dotz is also party to the BGN Licence Agreement (a summary of which is 
included at Section 4.7(d)) under which Dotz is licensed rights in respect 
of  intellectual  property  relating  to  the  production  of  graphene  and 
GQDs  based  on  sonication  technology,  further  details  of  which  are  set 
out in Section 4.2(d).
GQDs  are  microscopic  discs  of  Graphene  Oxide  that  are  made  up  of 
layers  that  are  one  atom  thick.    GQDs  are  used  in  applications  that 
include  medical 
sensing,  consumer  electronics, 
photovoltaic systems and computer storage.
imaging,  visual
There  are  currently  many  ways  to  produce  GQDs.    However,  current 
methods  require  graphite  for  the  production  process  resulting  in  GQD 
production being expensive and yielding only small quantities of GQDs.
(b)
Technological Review
(i)
What are Nanoparticles and Quantum Dots?
When  at  least  one  of  a  particle's  dimensions  is  in  the  1-100 
nanometer range (approximately 10,000 times narrower than a 
human  hair)  it  will  generally  be  referred  to  as  a  nanoparticle. 
Due  to  their  nanoscale  size,  nanoparticles  possess  novel 
mechanical,  electrical  or  optical  properties,  and  are  used  by 
nanotechnology researchers to explore for new uses for existing 
elements.
Quantum  Dots  (QDs)  are  semiconducting  nanoparticles.  As  a 
semiconductor nanoparticle, QDs are able to convert incoming 
energy to a variety of visible colours from the light spectrum.
QDs  have  some  unique  optical  properties,  specifically  they 
possess  the  ability  to  convert  shortwave  light  (ultra  violet  (UV) 
light)  into  nearly  any  colour  in  the  visible  spectrum  with  very 
high  efficiency.    Namely,  QDs  emit  a  particular  colour  after 
being illuminated by UV light. The colour they emit depends on 
the size of the nanoparticle (e.g., small QDs are blue fluoresce,
Notice of Meeting
17
while the bigger ones are red-shifted fluoresce). When the QDs 
are  illuminated  by  UV  light,  some  of  the  electrons  receive 
enough  energy  to  break  free  from  the  atoms.  This  capability 
allows  them  to  move  around  the  nanoparticle,  creating  a 
specific area (the conduction band) in which electrons are free 
to  move  through  a  material  and  conduct  electricity.  When 
these electrons drop back into the outer orbit around the atom 
(the  valence  band),  they  emit  light.  The  colour  of  that  light 
depends  on  the  energy  difference  between  the  conduction 
band and the valence band.
(ii)
What are QDs made from?
Typical  QDs  that  are  currently  in  production  are  made  from 
inorganic  materials  such  as  lead  sulphide,  lead  selenide, 
cadmium  selenide,  cadmium  sulphide,  indium  arsenide  and 
indium  phosphide.  Some  QDs  are  made  from  rare  earth 
materials. As a result, there are various types of QDs such as:
(A)
silicon QDs;
(B)
lead sulphide QDs;
(C)
cadmium QDs; and
(D)
cadmium free QDs.
Existing  forms  of  QDs  are  toxic  materials,  being  made  from 
inorganic  metallic  elements.  Due  to  this  toxicity,  QDs  are  not 
presently  usable 
in  biological  applications,  and  can  be 
problematic in other applications such as textiles, coatings and 
paints.
(iii)
Other Types of QDs - Carbon-Dots and Graphene Quantum Dots
Carbon  dots  (C-dots)  and  GQDs  recently  emerged  as superior 
optical  brighteners  known  as 
fluorophores  (which  are 
fluorescent chemicals used in, for example, laundry detergents 
and  paper  production),  due  to  their  unique  combination  of  a 
number of key merits, including:
(A)
excellent photo stability;
(B)
small size;
(C)
biocompatibility;
(D)
highly tunable; and
(E)
easily 
chemicals.
integrated  with  other  biomolecules  and
While  typical  QDs  are  produced  from  inorganic  metallic 
elements,  GQDs  produced  using  the  Rice  Intellectual  Property 
are  derived  from  an  inexpensive  organic  coal  source  (such  as 
bituminous  coal,  anthracite  and  coke). 
  These  methods 
produce  GQDs  between  2  and  80  nanometers.    As  GQDs  are
Notice of Meeting
18
derived from organic substances, they do not have the toxicity 
issues associated with typical QDs.
The production process licensed to Dotz allows for control of the 
colour  tuning  (which  is  important  to  determine  what  colour 
flouroscense is achieved) and the size of the GQD by changing 
production  process  variables  such  as  coal  type,  process 
temperature and filter pore size.
Due  to  the  non-toxicity,  GQDs  provide  opportunities  for  bio-
imaging  (such  as  CTs,  MRI's  PET/CTs  which  are  used  for  health 
imaging  purposes)  and  optical  sensing  (such  as  displays, 
smartphones and smart "heartbeat" watches). Because of their 
small size and biocompatibility, these  types of GQDs are being 
researched to serve as effective carriers for drug delivery whilst 
allowing  simultaneous  visual  monitoring  of  releasing  kinetics. 
Furthermore, 
their  unique  catalytic  and  physicochemical 
properties  indicate  potential  for  use  in  various  biomedical 
applications such as photothermal therapy.
C-dots  and  GQDs  may  be  particularly  significant  for  optical 
applications  due  to  their  capability  to  absorb  light  at  a  given 
wavelength (known as their extinction coefficient). In electronic 
applications  they  have  been  proven  to  operate  like  a  single-
electron  transistor  and  show  the  'Coulomb  blockade  effect' 
(the measure of the increased resistance at small voltages of an 
electronic  device,  which  is  an  important  effect  in  quantum 
electronics).  This  is  an  essential  effect  for  use  in  silicone 
structures  such  as  semi-conductor  chips  and  memory  storage.  
C-dots  and  GQDs  have  also  been 
suggested  as 
implementations  of  qubits  (a  unit  of  quantum  information)  for 
quantum information processing (future generation information 
processing systems).
At  present,  GQDs  are  not  suitable  for  display  and  screen 
applications, due to their low quantum yield coefficient (ratio of 
photons  absorbed  to  photons  emitted  through  fluorescence), 
however, Dotz Nano is performing research aimed at increasing 
the quantum yield to the required levels. Current GQD quantum 
yields  are  suitable  for  lower  end  markets,  such  as  lighting, 
bioimaging and solar cells.
(iv)
Market analysis
Some  examples  of  the  markets  in  which  QDs  are  currently 
applicable include:
(A)
technology  providers
Electronic  Displays:  Several  companies  including  Sony 
Corp,  LG  Display  and  others  are  currently  forming 
alliances  with  QD 
to 
commercialize  QD  displays.  The  QD 
technology 
enhances  the  colour  display  by  at  least  50%,  with  a 
further  benefit  of 
improved  energy  efficiency.  
However, factors including the current high cost of the 
technology  and  the  slow  adoption  due  to  extended 
research  requirements,  are  currently  serving  as  existing 
restraints for market growth.
Notice of Meeting
19
(B)
(C)
(D)
significant  market
Healthcare  Imaging:  The  healthcare  industry  is  the 
leading  industry  in  the  existing  QD  technology  market, 
gaining 
Healthcare 
applications  require  high  precision  for  uses  including 
tissue labelling, cancer therapy, and tumour detection. 
QD-based  devices  such  as  spectrometers  provide  for 
such precision.
share.
Lighting:  The  lighting  industry  represents  another  large 
market  and  growing  consumer  of  QDs.  After  the 
introduction  of  efficient  lighting  solutions  such  as  LED 
lighting  and  fixtures,  the  lighting  industry  has  seen 
substantial  growth  and  is  expected  to  expand  further. 
Today,  companies  are  looking  for  the  next  generation 
alternate  technology  for  LED  lighting.  QD  lighting  has 
potential  to  fulfil  this  need  as  it  is  highly  efficient  and 
cost-effective.  QD  Vision  has collaborated with  Nexxus 
Lighting to launch its first QD LED light, and is poised to 
capture the market,  with  further  plans to launch  in  the 
display market.
Solar:  QD  technology  may  also  play  a  crucial  role  in 
solar  energy-oriented  industries.  In  an  effort  to  make 
solar  technology  economically  viable,  nanomaterials 
have  emerged  as  new  building  blocks  for  the  next 
generation  of  solar  technology.  Semiconductor  QDs 
are  of  specific  interest  for  use  in  QD  Sensitized  Solar 
Cells (QDSCs) due to their unique properties.
Research  shows  that  QDs  may  also  be  able  to  increase  the 
efficiency  of  solar  cells.  In  normal  solar  cells,  a  photon  of  light 
generates  one  electron.  Experiments  with  QDs  have 
demonstrated  that  two  electrons  for  a  single  photon  of  light 
can be generated.
By  replacing current  solar  cell  coatings (such  as silicon, copper 
indium  gallium  selenide or cadmium  telluride),  it  has  been 
demonstrated  that  QDs  allow  for  improved  efficiency  in  solar 
cells.
QDs  are  "tuneable"  across  a  wide  range  of  energy  levels  by 
changing the dots' size. This property makes QDs very attractive 
for multi-junction solar cells, where a variety of materials coating 
the  cells  are  used  to  improve  efficiency  by  allowing  multiple 
portions of the solar spectrum to be transferred to solar energy.
The  QD  market  today  has  mainly  catered  for  specialised 
applications,  with  a  small  number  of  companies  selling  QDs 
directly to researchers to use the particles to develop their own 
products,  or  for  licensing  their  technologies  to  third  party 
partners.  This  is  largely  because  of  the  existing  higher  cost  to 
manufacture  QDs  has  prevented  them  being  used  in  other 
industries.
Dotz intends to approach the low end markets (such as laundry 
detergents,  textile  manufacturing,  oil  and  gas  applications, 
monitoring  applications,  coatings,  paint  and  dyes,  cosmetics,
Notice of Meeting
20
etc.)  QDs are  not  presently  used  in  these markets due  to  costs 
of production.
(v)
Current stage of development of Dotz' technology
The Rice Intellectual  Property  has been  developed  to  'proof of 
concept' stage.  In this regard, Rice University has demonstrated 
that  GQDs  can  be  produced  from  coal  using  Professor  Tour's 
developed  method.
Dotz  entered  into  the  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement  in 
December  2014  (see  Section  4.7(b)),  and  since  then  have 
further developed the technology by scaling up the production 
from nano-sized samples to gram sized samples that have been 
sent to potential customers for evaluation.
In parallel, Dotz has begun scaling up its production facilities so 
that  they  have  the  ability  to  produce  GQD’s  in  kilogram  sizes. 
Since 
technology,  Dotz  has  produced 
approximately 50 grams of GQDs (for testing and sampling).
licensing
the
Dotz,  together  with  Professor  Tour's  lab  at  Rice  University, 
continue  to  integrate  GQDs  into  various  applications,  testing 
them for superior properties and expanding the applications for 
which GQDs may be used. In addition, Rice University scientists 
are continuously improving the properties of GQDs produced.
(vi)
Graphene Quantum Dots using Rice Intellectual Property
The  process  for  producing  GQDs  licensed  to  Dotz  is  based  on 
the  Rice 
Intellectual  Property,  which  was  developed  by 
Professor  James  Tour  of  the  Marshall  Rice  University  in  Houston, 
Texas.  His  lab  found  simple  methods  to  reduce  three  kinds  of 
coal  into  GQDs.    This  is  an  important  discovery  as  the  current 
methods for developing GQDs require graphite as a production 
input, which is less available and more expensive to source than 
coal, and which limits the production capabilities of GQDs.
As  explained  in  Section  4.2(b)(i),  band  gaps  determine  how  a 
semiconducting  material  carries  an  electric  current.  In  QDs, 
band  gaps  are  responsible  for  their  fluorescence  and  can  be 
tuned by changing the QDs’ size. The GQD technology licensed 
to Dotz allows controlling the size of the GQDs, generally from 2 
to 70 nanometres, depending on the source of the coal. This is 
significant since it allows Dotz to produce specific sized QDs for 
utilisation by customers specifically in their applications, such as 
a  specific  GQD  to  be  used  in  laundry  detergents,  while  a 
different sized GQD to be used in coatings or in paints.
As  discussed  in  section  4.2(b)(ii),  there  are  many  ways  to 
produce  GQDs,  but  most  are  expensive  and  yield  very  small 
quantities.  The  production  of  GQDs  using  coal  yields  much 
greater  quantities  of  GQDs  than  other  GQD  production 
processes.  This  is  primarily  due  to  graphite  being  a  more  rigid 
chemical structure than coal.
The  production  process  developed  using  the  Rice  Intellectual 
Property  permits  the  production  of  GQDs  via  a  more  cost
Notice of Meeting
21
effective and simplistic one step chemical process. This process 
involves  the  treatment  of  coal  through  a  very  simple oxidation 
procedure that involves crushing the coal and bathing it in acid 
solutions  to  break  the  bonds  that  hold  the  tiny  graphene 
domains together. By breaking the bonds in the coal molecules, 
the  GQDs  are  released  and  are  harvested  to  be  filtered  and 
sized  in  order  to  receive  the  "spectrum"  of  GQDs  (colours) 
required by the user.
(vii)
Graphene and GQDs using BGN Licensed IP
including  additional
Graphene  Materials  was  purchased  by  Dotz  to  commercialise 
the  BGN  Licensed  IP,  which  relates  to  the  production  of 
graphene, 
the 
development  of  GQDs  based  on  sonification  technology. 
Sonification  is  the  act  of  applying  sound  energy  to  agitate 
particles  to  produce  nano-particles  by  evenly  dispersing 
nanoparticles in liquids.
technology
for
If  successfully  developed,  it  is  anticipated  that  the  technology 
developed  based  on  the  BGN  Licensed  IP  will  allow  Dotz  to 
produce  another  form  of  GQDs,  which  Dotz  hopes  will  be 
suitable 
including  high  end 
applications.
for  various  applications,
The  license  to  use  BGN  technology  for  graphene  production 
(utilizing micro fluidation techniques),  if successfully developed, 
is  anticipated  to  supplement  the  GQD  technology  developed 
using  the  Rice  Intellectual  Property.  Dotz'  objective  is  that  a 
successfully  developed  BGN  technology  will  permit  Dotz  to 
interact  with  graphene  manufacturers  and  other  customers  in 
the graphene industry, thus allowing Dotz, through its subsidiary, 
to be a graphene, or graphene application, producer.
If  Dotz  can  successfully  develop  the  Rice  Intellectual  Property 
IP,  Dotz  will  have  complementary 
and  BGN  Licensed 
technologies  and  products,  allowing 
full 
packaged solution to the Graphene/GQD industry.
it  to  supply  a
(c)
Current Market Participants
Nanoco  Group  plc  has  a  partnership  with  a  major  Japanese  LED 
manufacturer  to  produce  LEDs  for  the  general  lighting  and  LCD 
backlight market. Furthermore, Samsung has produced a full-colour QD 
panel as a potential replacement for LCD and OLED. When compared 
to  LCD,  QD  capable  technology  uses  one  fifth  of  the  power.  LG  is 
currently  working  with  QD  Vision  to  produce  QD  displays,  and  Sony 
shipped QD-based TVs in 2014.
In March 2015, Nanosys Inc announced its plans to increase production 
to  over  25  tons  of  QDs  per  year.  With  the  advent  of  new  synthetic 
approaches  and  the  graduation  of  QDs  from  the  specialty  to 
commodity  markets,  the  Proposed  Directors  expect  that  the  price  of 
QDs will benefit greatly from economies of scale, thus allowing for rapid 
penetration into a myriad of markets.
Notice of Meeting
22
At  the  Consumer  Electronics  Show  in  Las  Vegas  in  January  2015, 
Samsung  announced  that  it  was  "re-tooling"  its  TV  strategy  around  the 
use of QDs.  LG has also indicated it is following Samsung’s lead.
The  current  key  suppliers  of  QDs  are;  Evident  Technologies  Inc.,  Life 
Technologies Corp., Nanoco Group plc, Nanosys Inc., Ocean NanoTech 
LLC, and QD Vision Inc.
(d)
Market for Dotz Ltd. GQDs
lighting  and  energy
While GQDs are suitable for use in the conventional QD market (such as; 
healthcare,  displays, 
the 
unconventional  and  ‘low  specification’  application  QD  markets  that 
Dotz  has  recognised  a  potential  point  for  market  entry.  The  Proposed 
Directors plan to focus on this ‘low end’ market during the initial stages 
of Dotz business development, then move to cater to the ‘conventional 
QD  market’  at  a  later  stage  (pending  that  focus  being  commercially 
worthwhile  and  whether  the  development  of  the  BGN  technology  is 
successful).
related),
in
it
is
For  this  discussion,  ‘low  end’  markets  are  markets  outputting  lower 
priced end products. In this case, it is currently deemed uneconomical 
to  use  QDs  for  these  applications,  due  to  the  current  high  costs  of 
production  and  supply.  As  Dotz  produced  GQDs  are  anticipated  to 
have  lower  production  costs,  the  Proposed  Directors’  objective  is  for 
Dotz produced GQDs to penetrate these untapped markets.
Based  on  Dotz’  initial  investigations,  Dotz  initially  aims  to  focus  on  the 
following products and services:
(i)
(ii)
GQDs  for  use  as  a  replacement  for  fluorescent  brightening 
agents  in  detergents  and  optical  brightening  agents  in  paper, 
carpets and textiles; and
GQDs for  use  as tracers  (in  place  of  radiotracers current  being 
utilised)  in  tracing  operations  in  the  oil  &  gas  industry,  water 
management and other monitoring applications; and
(iii)
GQDs  for  use  as taggants in  security  derived applications such 
as anti-counterfeiting and marking.
However,  GQDs  may  also  be  appropriate  for  use  in  other  ‘low  end’ 
fields  such  as  paints,  cosmetics  and  coatings  as  well  as  the  ‘high  end’ 
applications identified in Section 4.2(e) above.
(e)
Business strategy
Dotz  has  developed  a  three  phase  model  for  commercialisation  of  its 
intellectual property interests, largely based on the milestones set out in 
the Rice University Licence Agreement discussed in section 4.7(b):
(i)
Phase  1:  Engagement  of  a  laboratory  for  the  development  of 
manufacturing  protocols  and  manufacturing  of  commercial 
samples.  This  is  a  simple  set  up  requiring  purchase  of  off-the-
shelf  laboratory  equipment  such  as  reactors,  filtering  devices 
and 
and 
photospectrometers).
(spectrometers
technologies
classification
Notice of Meeting
23
Contemporaneously,  Dotz  will  begin  to  engage  in  commercial 
and  business  development  activities  in  the  various  market 
industries referred to in Section  above (including commencing 
discussions  with  potential  customers,  distributors  and  sub-
licensees).
If Dotz is able to sublicense its technology interests during Phase 
1,  it  expects  to  be  in  a  position  to  generate  revenue  through 
licence fees and royalties in the short to medium term.
(ii)
Phase 2: Assuming completion of Phase 1, Dotz intends to ramp-
up its manufacturing and sales of GQDs to demonstrate that its 
technologies  are  suitable  for  production  on  a  commercial 
scale.
During Phase 2,  Dotz  will  aim  to  produce GQDs for  sale to  end 
users and distributors with a view to generating further revenue.
(iii)
Phase 3: Assuming Dotz is able to successfully commercialise its 
technologies during Phase 2, Dotz intends to further ramp-up its 
GQD manufacturing capabilities to an industrial level.
During  Phase  3,  Dotz  intends  to  market  its  products  at  an 
industrial  level,  with  marketing  efforts  to  be  focussed  on 
industries  identified  following  research  into  the  most  suitable 
applications  for  GQDs  produced  by  Dotz  (initially  expected  to 
be 
laundry  detergents,  textile  manufacturers  and  carpet 
manufacturers).
Dotz  will  also  consider  additional  sub-licensing  opportunities  in 
bio-imaging  applications  and  other  “high  end” 
industries 
identified  in  Section  4.2(e)  above.    Dotz  will  also  monitor  other 
potential markets as further research is undertaken with respect 
to  the  suitability  of  QDs  to  other  commercial  and  industrial 
applications.
The  business  strategy  set  out  above  is  consistent  with  the  milestones 
under  the  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement  (as  set  out  in  Section 
4.7(b)(v)).    The  Company  and  Dotz  will  work  towards  meeting  these 
milestones  in  order  to  continue  development  of  the  GQD  technology 
and ensure that it retains its interest in the relevant intellectual property.
The  above  sets  out  Dotz’  intentions  as  at  the  date  of  this  Notice  of 
Meeting  and  Dotz  will  continue  to  monitor  the  QD  market  and  its 
ongoing  operations  with  a  view  to  identifying  other  potential  revenue 
sources.
4.3
Intellectual Property
Dotz  is  a  party  to  the  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement  under  which  Dotz  has 
been  granted  a  license  to  use,  develop,  manufacture,  market,  sublicense  and 
exploit the inventions disclosed and claimed in certain patent applications and 
to commercialise Rice University’s licensed products.
Under the Rice University Licence Agreement, the following patent applications 
have been licensed to Dotz:
Notice of Meeting
24
Rice 
Tech ID
Applicatio
n No.
Country 
Region
/
Title
ID  2013-
093
PCT/US2014
International
/036604
US
U.S.A.
14/888,301
CN2014800
36235.4
China
EP2991929
European
Union
KR20160003
Korea
231
SG11201509
Singapore
011S
IL242393
Israel
JP-2016-
512070
Japan
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Methods of Producing 
Graphene Quantum 
Dots from Coal and
Coke
Filing Date
Priority 
Document(s)
Status
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Filed
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Pending
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Pending
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Pending
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Pending
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Pending
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Pending
2 May 2014  US 61/818,800 
– 2 May 2013
Pending
PCT/US2015
International
Graphene Quantum
22 May
US 62/002,982
Filed
/032209
Dot-Polymer Composites 
and Methods of Making
2015
– 26 May
2014
the same
PCT/US2015
International
/036729
Bandgap Engineering of 
Carbon Quantum Dots
PCT/US2015
International
/059437
Methods of Making 
Graphene Quantum
Dots from Various 
Carbon Sources
19 June
US 62/014,627
Filed
2015
– 19 June
2014
6 Nov  2015  US 62/076,394
Filed
– 6
November
2014
ID  2014-
112
ID  2014-
118
ID  2015-
033-01
Dotz is also a party to the BGN Licence Agreement under which Dotz is licensed 
rights  in  respect  of  intellectual  property  relating  to  the  production  of  graphene 
and  GQDs  based  on  sonification  technology.  Under  the  BGN  Licence 
Agreement, the following patent application has been licensed to Dotz:
Notice of Meeting
25
Application
Country /
Title
Filing Date
Status
No.
US
62/204,481
Region
U.S.A.
Graphene Manufacturing
13 August 2015
Pending
Method
US
U.S.A.
62/234,696
A Process for Production of 
Few Layers Graphene Nano
30 September
Pending
2015
Platelets
US
U.S.A.
Method of Producing
10 November
Pending
62/253,155
Graphene Quantum Dots
2015
4.4
Re-compliance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules
ASX  has  advised  the  Company  that,  given  that  the  Company  is  proposing  to 
make  a  change  in  its  activities  from  a  resource  exploration  and  development 
company to a technology company, it has exercised its discretion to require the 
Company to re-comply with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules prior to the 
Company completing the Acquisition.
For this purpose, the Company will be required to re-comply with the conditions 
to  listing on  ASX  set  out  in  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  in  order  to 
achieve Settlement and before it can be re-instated to trading on ASX following 
Settlement.
4.5
Capital Raising
For the purposes of the Company re-complying with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX 
Listing Rules, the Company intends to undertake the Capital Raising through the 
issue of 25,000,000 Shares at an issue price of $0.20 per Share to raise $5,000,000 
(Minimum  Subscription)  with  the  ability  to  accept  oversubscriptions  of  a  further 
5,000,000  Shares  at  $0.20  per  Share  to  raise  up  to  a  further  $1,000,000 
(Oversubscription) pursuant to a full form Prospectus.
The Company expects to lodge the Prospectus with ASIC before the date of the 
Meeting  which  will  be  conditional  upon  Shareholders  approving  the  Essential 
Resolutions.
Funds  raised  under  the  Capital  Raising  are  intended  to  be  used  in  the manner 
set out in Section 4.6 below.
The  Capital  Raising  is  intended  to  be  completed  in  accordance  with  the 
timetable set out in Section 4.10 below.
Notice of Meeting
26
4.6
Use of Funds
Following Settlement,  the  Company  expects  to  use  its  cash  funds  as follows  for 
the next two years:
Fund Available
Existing cash
reserves of the
Company
Minimum
Subscription
($5,000,000)
Percentage of
Assuming full
Percentage of
Funds (%)
oversubscriptions of
Funds (%)
an additional
$1,000,000
($6,000,000)
$575,000
9.06%
$575,000
7.83%
Funds raised from
$5,000,000
78.80%
$6,000,000
81.60%
the Capital
Raising
Funds to be
raised by Dotz
prior to
Settlement
$769,995
12.14%
$769,995
10.48%
Total
$6,344,995
100%
$7,344,995
100%
Allocation of
Funds
Minimum
Subscription
$5,000,000
Percentage of
Assuming full
Percentage of
Funds (%)
oversubscriptions of
Funds (%)
an additional
$1,000,000
($6,000,000)
$2,160,417
$1,424,851
29.41%
19.40%
Research1
$1,781,734
Development
and Fabrication2
$1,026,228
28.08%
16.17%
Sales and 
Marketing3
Business
Development4
Expenses
associated with 
the Acquisition5
$1,115,789
17.59%
$1,197,368
6.30%
$80,000
1.26%
$81,767
1.11%
$901,840
14.21%
$961,840
13.10%
Working Capital6
$1,439,404
Total
$6,344,995
22.67%
100%
$1,518,751
$7,344,995
20.68%
100%
Notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Research  includes  amounts  payable  to  Rice  University  and  BGN  in  developing  the 
intellectual property interests licensed to Dotz.
Development and fabrication includes all costs related to identification and operations 
of a laboratory for the proposed production of GQDs on behalf of Dotz.
Sales  and  Marketing  includes  all  costs  related  to  advertising  and  promoting  Dotz’ 
products.
includes all business development costs, including trade shows, corporate events,  non-
marketing sponsorships and the cost of business development staff
Refer  to  the  table  below  for  the  itemised  costs  of  the  expenses  associated  with  the 
Acquisition:
Notice of Meeting
27
Estimated Costs of Acquisition
Proposed Minimum
Assuming full
Subscription 
($5,000,000)
oversubscriptions of
an additional
$1,000,000 
($6,000,000)
ASX Fees
ASIC Fees
Legal, Accounting and Due Diligence 
Expenses
Otsana Completion Fee
Shareholder Meeting / Share Registry Costs
Printing
Capital Raising Fees
TOTAL
$87,350
$2,320
$350,000
$135,000
$20,170
$7,000
$300,000
$901,840
$87,350
$2,320
$350,000
$135,000
$20,170
$7,000
$360,000
$961,840
6.
Working  capital  includes  the  general  costs  associated  with  the  management  and 
operation  of  the  business  including  administration  expenses,  management  salaries, 
directors’ fees, rent and other associated costs.
In  the  event  the  Company  raises  more  than  the  Minimum  Subscription  of 
$5,000,000, the additional funds raised will be first applied towards research and 
development and fabrication. On completion of the Capital Raising, the Board 
believes  our  Company  will  have  sufficient  working  capital  to  achieve  these 
objectives.
The  above  tables  are  statements  of  current  intentions  as  of  the  date  of  this 
Notice  of  Meeting.    As  with  any  budget,  intervening  events  and  new 
circumstances  have  the  potential  to  affect  the  manner  in  which  the  funds  are 
ultimately  applied.    The  Board  reserves  the  right  to  alter  the  way  funds  are 
applied on this basis.
4.7
Key Contracts
(a)
HOA
(i)
(ii)
(Merger):  Dotz  will  merge  with  the  Israel  Subsidiary,  a  wholly-
owned  subsidiary  of  NFE  that  will  be  incorporated  in  Israel, 
following which  Dotz  will  be the surviving corporation  and  shall 
be a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  NFE  and  the  Vendors  shall be 
issued Consideration Shares and Performance Shares.
(Conditions  Precedent):  Completion  of  the  Acquisition 
is 
conditional  upon  the  satisfaction  (or  waiver)  of  the  following 
outstanding conditions precedent:
(A)
NFE  undertaking  a  capital  raising  and  receiving  valid 
non-revocable  applications  for  at  least  AUD$3,500,000 
worth of fully paid ordinary shares in the capital of NFE 
(NFE  Shares)  under  the capital  raising (Capital  Raising) 
at an issue price of not less than $0.20 per share;
(B)
NFE undertaking the Consolidation;
(C)
the  conditional  approval  by  ASX  to  reinstate  the 
securities  of  NFE  to  trading  on  ASX  (after  NFE  re-
complies with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules)
Notice of Meeting
28
(D)
(E)
(F)
(G)
(H)
those  conditions  being
and 
satisfaction of NFE and Dotz;
to
the
reasonable
the parties obtaining all necessary regulatory approvals 
(including  ASX  approvals  and  waivers  and  ASIC  relief) 
to  complete  the  Merger,  the  expiration  of  any 
necessary  statutory  waiting periods and  the filing of  all 
merger  notices  and  proposals 
required  under 
applicable law;
Dotz  receiving  initial  approval  from  the  Israeli  Tax 
Authority,  within  60  days 
the  date  of 
execution  of  this  Agreement,  that  the  structure  of  the 
Acquisition will provide the Vendors with "roll-over" relief 
for 
taxation 
regulations,  and  will  not  otherwise  have  any  material 
adverse taxation implications for the Vendors, and that 
neither  NFE  nor  Dotz  will  be  required  to  withhold  any 
part of the Consideration payable to the Vendors;
the  purposes  of  applicable
following
Israeli
the  parties  obtaining  any  relief  from  ASIC  or  any  ASX 
waiver  required  to  permit  a  holding  agent  (to  be 
appointed to give effect to the Merger) to perform the 
functions contemplated in the HOA;
Vendors holding more than 50% of the voting power of 
Dotz having passed a resolution approving the Merger;
NFE  obtaining  all 
requisite  shareholder  approvals 
pursuant  to  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  (including  but  not 
limited  to  ASX  Listing  Rule  11.1),  the  Corporations  Act 
and its Constitution to give effect to:
(I)
(II)
the  transactions  contemplated  by  the  HOA; 
and
the  change  of  name  from  “Northern  Iron  Ltd” 
to  “Dotz  Nano Limited (or  such  other  name as 
is agreed between Dotz and NFE); and
(I)
there  has  been  no  material  adverse  change  in  the 
condition  (financial  or  otherwise),  results  of  operations, 
prospects,  business,  assets  or  properties  of  either  party 
prior to settlement of the Acquisition.
If  the  conditions  set  out  above  are  not  satisfied  (or  waived  by 
each  party  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  respective  condition) 
on or before 5.00pm (WST) on the date set out in the condition 
or  if  no  period  is  specified,  the  date  that  is  9  months  following 
the date of the HOA, NFE or Dotz may terminate the agreement 
constituted by the HOA by written notice to the other.
(iii)
(Consideration):  In  the  event  of  the  completion  of  the  Merger, 
the consideration (Consideration) payable to Vendors by NFE is 
the issue of:
Notice of Meeting
29
(A)
(B)
66,000,000  Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  free 
and  clear  of  any  third  party’s  rights  (Consideration 
Shares); and
66,000,000  performance 
(on  a  post-
Consolidation basis) on the terms set out in Schedule 1 
(Performance Shares),
shares
(together, the Consideration Securities).
(iv)
(Lead Manager Securities and Transaction Options): The parties 
acknowledge and agree that at Settlement, NFE will issue:
(A)
(B)
1,750,000 Shares  (Lead Manager  Shares)  and  4,500,000 
Options (on a post-Consolidation basis)  to acquire NFE 
Shares on the terms and conditions set out in Schedule 
2 
the  Lead 
Manager  Securities)  to  persons  nominated  by  NFE  in 
consideration  for  those  persons  assisting  to  raise  funds 
under the Capital Raising; and
(Lead  Manager  Options)
(together,
1,000,000  Options  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to 
acquire NFE Shares on the terms and conditions set out 
in  Schedule  3 
to  persons 
nominated  by  NFE  in  consideration  for  those  persons 
assisting with the Acquisition.
(Transaction  Options)
(b)
Rice University Licence Agreement
On 16 December 2014, Dotz and Rice University entered into a licence 
agreement (Rice University Licence Agreement) pursuant to which Dotz 
is  granted  an  exclusive,  sub-licensable,  assignable  worldwide  licence 
(Licence) 
the  Rice 
Intellectual Property.
to  use,  develop,  manufacture  and  market
A  summary  of  the  key  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Rice  University 
Licence Agreement is set out below:
(i)
(ii)
(Term): The Rice University Licence Agreement commenced on 
16 December 2014 and continues until the date of expiration of 
the last  to  expire of  Rice University’s  rights in  the Rice University 
Patents unless terminated earlier;
(Rice  University’s  continuing  rights):  Notwithstanding  the  grant 
of  the  Licence  to  Dotz,  Rice  University  retains  a  continuing 
irrevocable  worldwide  right  to  exploit  the  Rice  Intellectual 
Property  to  make,  have  made,  use  or  transfer  on  a  non-
exclusive  royalty  free  basis  for  education,  academic  and 
research purposes only;
(iii)
(Fees and Royalties): Dotz is required  to pay Rice University the 
following royalties and fees:
(A)
a  royalty  calculated  at  4%  on  adjusted  gross  sales 
(sales  of  products  developed  using  the  Licence  less 
costs attributable to such sales); and
Notice of Meeting
30
(B)
25% of any cash or non-cash consideration received as 
consideration under a sub-licence;
(iv)
(Annual Minimum Royalties): in addition to the above, Dotz shall 
pay  Rice  University  annual  minimum  royalties  on  the  following 
milestone dates:
(A)
1 January 2017 - $50,000;
(B)
1 January 2018 - $100,000;
(C)
1 January 2019 - $100,000;
(D)
1 January 2020 - $450,000; and
(E)
1  January  2021  and  each  1  January  of  every  year 
thereafter - $1,000,000,
with  each  annual  minimum  milestone  payment  creditable 
towards royalties due in the forthcoming year;
(v)
(First  Commercial  Sale):    Dotz  shall  fulfil,  and  shall  cause  any 
sub-licensee to fulfil, the following obligations:
(A)
(B)
(C)
a  first  commercial  sale  of  a  product  developed  using 
the Rice Intellectual Property (Rice Licensed Product) in 
on  or  before  30  June  2017,  and  shall  thereafter  keep 
such Rice Licensed Product available for sale;
achieve  production  of  Rice  Licensed  Products  on  a 
semi-industrial 
through 
establishing  or  contracting  a  suitable  manufacturing 
facility by 1 January 2018; and
(5  kilograms/month)
scale
achieve  production  of  Rice  Licensed  Products  at 
industrial 
through 
establishing  or  contracting  a  suitable  manufacturing 
facility by 1 January 2020.
kilogram/year)
scale
(1,000
Rice  University  may  terminate  or  render  the  agreement  non-
exclusive  at  any  time  after  4  years  from  the  execution  date  of 
the  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement 
if  Rice  University 
determine  that  progress  reports  do  not  demonstrate  effective 
achievement  of 
licensed 
products;
the  commercialisation  of
the
(vi)
(Termination):  The  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement  may  be 
terminated as follows:
(A)
by  Dotz,  at  its  option,  by  giving  thirty  (30)  days  prior 
written notice;
(B)
by Rice University, at its option, as follows:
(I)
upon Dotz failure to rectify a monetary breach 
within  thirty  (30)  days  after  receiving  written 
notice;
Notice of Meeting
31
(II)
(III)
(IV)
upon  Dotz  failure  to  rectify  any  other  breach 
within  forty  five  (45)  days  of  receiving  written 
notice;
upon any underreporting or underpayment by 
Dotz  in  excess  of  20%  for  a  twelve  (12)  month 
period;
upon  Dotz  providing  any  false  report,  which  is 
not  corrected  within 
(30)  days  of 
receiving  written  notice  or  within  thirty  (30) 
days  after  Dotz  becomes  aware  that  false 
information  has  been  provided,  whichever 
occurs earlier; or
thirty
(V)
immediately upon Dotz becoming insolvent.
The  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement  otherwise  contains  terms  which 
are customary for an agreement of its nature.
(c)
Sponsored Research Agreement
On  1  January  2015  Dotz  and  Rice  University  entered  into  a  sponsored 
research  agreement  (Sponsored  Research  Agreement)  pursuant  to 
which  Dotz  agreed  to  fund  and  support  the  scientific  research  related 
to coal derived GQDs for energy and biological applications (Research 
Project), which is being supervised and directed by Professor James Tour 
(Principal Investigator).
A summary of the key terms and conditions of the Sponsored Research 
Agreement is set out below:
(i)
(Term):
The  term  of  the  Sponsored  Research  Agreement  commenced 
on  1  January  2015  and  continues  until  1  January  2018  unless 
terminated  prior  by  either  party  or  extended  by  written 
agreement between the parties.
(ii)
(Project Funds):
(A)
(B)
(C)
Dotz  shall  pay  Rice  University  the  direct  and  indirect 
costs  associated  with  the  Research  Project  up  to  an 
amount  of  US$500,000  over  a  period  of  2  years 
(US$250,000 per year).
Dotz  has  the  option  to  proceed  with  a  third  year  of 
funding for  the Research  Project  through  the payment 
of  up  to  an  additional  US$250,000  over  a  period  of  1 
year.
Rice  University  must  notify  Dotz  in  the  event  that 
additional 
the 
Research  Project,  following  which  Dotz  may  elect 
whether it wishes to provide such additional funds.
to  complete
funds  are
required
(iii)
(Ownership):  All  intellectual  property  invented,  reduced  to 
practice, created or developed:
Notice of Meeting
32
(A)
(B)
(C)
solely  by  Rice  University  shall  be  owned  by  Rice 
University (Rice Created Intellectual Property);
solely by Dotz shall be owned by Dotz (Dotz Intellectual 
Property); or
jointly by Rice University and Dotz shall be owned jointly 
by Rice University and Dotz (Joint Intellectual Property).
(iv)
(Licensing Options):
(A)
Any Rice Created Intellectual Property may be used by 
Dotz  on  a  non-exclusive  royalty-free  basis,  solely  for 
internal  research  purposes  to  evaluate  whether  or  not 
Dotz  is  interested  in  licensing  the  technology  at  which 
point Dotz has an option to request:
(I)
(II)
a non-exclusive, non-transferable, limited term, 
royalty bearing licence; or
an  exclusive,  non-transferable,  limited  term, 
royalty bearing licence,
to  the  Rice  Created  Intellectual  Property  and  or  Rice 
University’s  ownership  in  the  Joint  Intellectual  Property; 
and
(B)
Rice  University  will  have  a  non-exclusive,  non-
transferrable,  non-royalty  bearing  license  to  use  and 
make  derivative  works  for  all  Dotz  Intellectual  Property 
solely  for  the  purpose  of  fulfilling  its  obligations  to 
complete the Research Project.
(v)
(Termination):
The  Sponsored  Research  Agreement  may  be  terminated  as 
follows:
(A)
by mutual written agreement between the parties;
(B)
(C)
by  either  party  in  the  event  the  other  party  fails  to 
rectify,  within  30  days  of  receiving  written  notice  of  a 
breach from the other party, any material breach; and
by  either  party 
in  the  event  that  the  Principal 
Investigator is no longer able to conduct the Research 
Project on behalf of Rice University.
The  Sponsored  Research  Agreement  otherwise  contains  terms  and 
conditions which are customary for an agreement of its nature.
(d)
B.G. Negev Technologies and Applications Ltd  – Research and  Licence 
Agreement
On 6 March 2014, Graphene Materials Ltd (a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Dotz)  (GML)  and  B.G.  Negev  Technologies  and  Applications  Ltd  (BGN) 
(a  company  wholly  owned  by  Ben-Gurion  University  (BGU)  and
Notice of Meeting
33
incorporated  in Israel)  entered  into  a  research  and licence  agreement 
(BGN Research and Licence Agreement) for the purposes of:
(i)
(ii)
GML engaging BGN to conduct a feasibility study in relation to 
the  production  of  sheets  of  graphene,  as  well  as  other  related 
research (BGN Research); and
BGN  granting  an  exclusive,  sub-licensable,  worldwide,  royalty-
bearing  licence  (BGN  Licence)  to  develop,  exploit,  utilize  and 
commercialise:
(A)
(B)
(C)
the  BGN  Patent 
(being  US  provisional  patent 
application  numbers  62/204,481,  62/234,696  and 
62/253,155);
any  results  derived  from  the  BGN  Research  (BGN 
Research Results); and
any  know-how  and/or  information  related  to  the  BGN 
Patent and BGN Research Results,
(together  the  Licensed  BGN  IP)  and  the  Licenced  Products 
(being  a  product  created  by,  or  in  connection  with  the 
Licenced  BGN  IP)  in  relation  to  graphene  production  and 
applications.
A  summary  of  the  key  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Research  and 
Licence Agreement are set out below:
(i)
(Term):  The  term  of  the  Research  and  Licence  Agreement 
commenced  on  6  March  2014  (Commencement  Date)  and 
shall continue until the later of the following:
(A)
(B)
the date of expiration of both the BGN Patent, and the 
last  of  any  new  patents  derived  from  any  BGN 
Research (New IP); or
fifteen  (15)  years from  the date of  the first  commercial 
sale  of  a  Licenced  Product  by  a  licensee  party  to  a 
third party.
(the Term).
(ii)
(Grant of Licence): In relation to BGN’s grant of the BGN licence 
to GML:
(A)
(B)
(C)
BGN  grants  the  BGN  Licence  to  GML  to  develop, 
exploit, utilise, and commercialise the Licenced BGN IP, 
and  any  Licenced  Products  in  relation  to  graphene 
production and applications;
BGN and BGU retain the right to use the Licenced BGN 
IP  solely 
internal,  non-commercial,  non-profit, 
educational and academic research purposes; and
for
GML  shall  be  entitled  to  grant  any  sub-licences  in 
writing  consistent  with  the  terms  of  the  Research  and 
Licence Agreement (Sub-Licence Agreement).
Notice of Meeting
34
(iii)
(Consideration  and  Payment  Terms):  GML  is  required  to  pay 
BGN:
(A)
an annual licence fee of:
(I)
US$5,000 for each of the first three (3) calendar 
years  commencing  on  the  beginning  of  the 
calendar 
the  date  of 
completion of the BGN Research; and
following
year
(II)
US$15,000 for any calendar year thereafter;
(B)
the  following  for  all  amounts  received  by  GML  from  a 
third party in connection with the commercialisation of 
the  Licenced  BGN  IP  or  the  New  IP,  including  all 
amounts actually received from a third party which are 
generated from sales of the Licenced Products less any 
costs attributable to such sales (Net Sales):
(I)
(II)
(III)
2% of all Net Sales in respect of sales by GML of 
the 
raw 
materials;
Licenced  Products  which  are
3% of all Net Sales in respect of sales by GML of 
the  Licenced  Products  which  are  not  raw 
materials  of  up  to  an  aggregate  of  US$20 
million; or
4% of all Net Sales in respect of sales by GML of 
the  Licenced  Products  which  are  not  raw 
materials exceeding in the aggregate of US$20 
million,
(together the Running Royalties);
(C)
starting  from  the  earlier  of  the  calendar  year  in  which 
an aggregate net amount of US$250,000 was achieved 
from the sale of the Licenced Products or four (4) years 
from  the  date  of  completion  of  the  BGN 
Initial 
Research, GML shall pay BGN:
(I)
US$20,000 per year with regard to each of the 
first three (3) calendar years; and
(II)
US$35,000 with regard to any year thereafter,
(together the Minimum Annual Royalties). The Minimum 
Annual  Royalties  shall  be  creditable  against  the 
aggregate  sum  of  the  Running  Royalties  paid  to  BGN 
with respect to that specific calendar year;
(D)
the  following  with  respect  to  income  derived  from  the 
Sub-Licence Agreements:
(I)
an  amount  equal  to  10%  of  all  amounts 
received  by  GML  pursuant  to  a  Sub-Licence 
Agreement  that  are  not  attributable  to  sub-
licensee Net Sales; and
Notice of Meeting
35
(II)
the  lesser  of  the  rate  set  out  in  section  (B) 
above  and  one  third  (1/3)  of  all  income 
attributable to sub-licensee Net Sales,
(E)
(F)
an  agreed  research  budget  of  $195,295  to  assist  with 
the  BGN  Research  and  any  future  agreed  research 
budget; or
an exit fee of 4% of all amounts and other rights and/or 
assets  actually  received  by  GML  in  connection  with 
certain specified exit events.
(iv)
(Intellectual  Property):  Pursuant  to  the  Research  and  Licence 
Agreement:
(A)
(B)
(C)
all  rights,  title and  interest  in  and  to  the Licenced  BGN 
IP shall be owned by BGN;
all rights, title and interest in and to the New IP and any 
intellectual 
acquired 
independently by GML shall be owned by GML; and
developed
property
or
during the Term both parties are not entitled to licence, 
sell,  transfer,  convey,  create  any  encumbrance,  lien, 
mortgage,  pledge  or  any  other  right  in  or  over  their 
respective intellectual property.
(v)
(Termination):  The  Research  and  Licence  Agreement  may  be 
terminated:
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
by  either  party  by  given  notice  in  writing  to  the  other 
party  in  the  event  of  an  insolvency  event  that  is  not 
rectified within sixty (60) days;
by  either  party  by  giving  written  notice  to  the  other 
party,  if  the  other  party  has  committed  a  breach  and 
such  breach  is  not  rectified  within  sixty  (60)  days  of 
receiving such notice;
immediately  by  either  party 
incurable material breach;
in  the  event  of  an
immediately  by  BGN  by  written  notice  to  GML  in  the 
event  that  GML  files  an  opposition  to  any  of  the 
Licenced IP; or
(E)
mutually by written consent of both parties.
The  Research  and  Licence  Agreement  otherwise  contains  terms  and 
conditions  which  are  considered  standard  for  an  agreement  of  its 
nature, 
termination, 
confidentiality, indemnities, representations, and warranties.
to  actions  upon
including
relating
those
(e)
NFE Convertible Loan Agreements
NFE  has  entered 
loan  agreements  (NFE  Convertible  Loan 
Agreements) with various lenders (NFE Lenders) pursuant to which it has
into
Notice of Meeting
36
been  provided  with  aggregate  loans  of  up  to  AUD$1,000,000  (NFE 
Convertible Loan).
A  summary  of  the  material  terms  of  the  NFE  Convertible  Loan 
Agreements is set out below:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(Interest):  The  NFE  Convertible  Loan  is  provided  on  an  interest-
free basis.
(Conversion):  The  NFE  Convertible  Loan  shall  automatically 
convert  into  Shares  on  the  day  which  is  immediately  prior  to 
settlement  of  the  Acquisition  (Conversion  Date)  –  through  the 
issue of 5,000,000 Shares at a deemed issue price of $0.20 each; 
and
(Repayment):  in  the  event  that  the  NFE  Convertible  Loan  has 
not been converted, the NFE Convertible Loan together with all 
outstanding monies shall be repaid by NFE on the date which is 
the earlier of:
(A)
31 October 2016; and
(B)
5 Business Days after the date on which NFE receives a 
notice for repayment of the NFE Convertible Loan upon 
default by NFE.
(f)
Dotz Loan Agreements
Dotz has entered into agreements  (Dotz Convertible Loan  Agreements)  
with  various  lenders  (Dotz  Lenders)  pursuant  to  which  it  has  been 
provided with a loan facility of AUD$350,000 (Dotz Convertible Loan).
A  summary  of  the  material  terms  of  the  Dotz  Convertible  Loan 
Agreement is set out below:
(i)
Repayment:  Repayment  of  the  Dotz  Convertible  Loan  will  be 
the date that is the earlier of:
(A)
14 October 2016; and
(B)
the day which is immediately prior to settlement of the 
Acquisition,
(Repayment Date);
(ii)
(iii)
Interest:  The  Dotz  Convertible  Loan  is  provided  on  an  interest-
free basis; and
Conversion: The Dotz Convertible Loan must be repaid by Dotz 
on the Repayment Date through Dotz procuring the issue by the 
Company, of 1,750,000 Shares at a deemed issue price of $0.20 
per Share.
4.8
Effect on Capital Structure
A  pro  forma  capital  structure  following  Settlement  is  set  out  below,  assuming 
Shares are issued under the Capital Raising at an issue price of $0.20 per Share:
Notice of Meeting
37
Shares based on a
minimum raising
Shares based on 
the assumption of
of $5,000,000
acceptance of
Performance
Shares based on 
achievement of
Options
full
oversubscriptions 
for an additional
$1,000,000 
($6,000,000)
all three 
millstones
Current
54,844,503
54,844,503
Post-Consolidation 
Shares
5,484,450
5,484,450
50,000,000
5,000,000
Consideration Shares
66,000,000
66,000,000
66,000,000
Prospectus Offer
25,000,000
30,000,000
Dotz Convertible Loans
1,750,000
1,750,000
NFE Convertible Loans
5,000,000
5,000,000
Facilitator Securities
1,750,000
1,750,000
Transaction Options
4,500,000
1,000,000
TOTAL
104,984,450
109,984,450
66,000,000
10,500,000
4.9
Pro Forma Statement of Financial Position
Set  out  in  Schedule  5  are  two  pro  forma  balance  sheets  of  the  Company 
assuming  that  all  Essential  Resolutions  have  been  passed,  Settlement  has 
occurred  and  showing alternatively  the minimum  and maximum  amount  to  be 
raised  under  the  Capital  Raising  which  is  proposed  to  be  $5,000,000  and 
$6,000,000 respectively.  The historical and pro-forma information is presented in 
an abbreviated form, insofar as it does not include all of the disclosure required 
by  the  Australian  Accounting  Standards  applicable  to  annual  financial 
statements.
4.10
Indicative timetable
An indicative timetable for Settlement and the associated transactions is set out 
below:
Event
Announcement of Acquisition
Company  announces  Consolidation  and  sends  out 
Notice of Meeting
Date
23 May 2016
2 August 2016
Annual General Meeting of Shareholders
2 September 2016
ASX  notified  whether  Shareholder  approval  has  been 
granted for the Essential Resolutions
2 September 2016
Last  day  for  trading  Securities  on  a  pre-Consolidation 
basis
5 September 2016
Trading  of  post-Consolidation  Securities  on  a  deferred 
settlement basis starts
6 September 2016
Last  day  for  Company  to  register  transfers  on  a  pre-
7 September 2016
Notice of Meeting
38
Consolidation basis
First  day  for  the  Company  to  send  notice  to  each 
security holder of the change in their details of holdings
8 September 2016
First day for the Company to register securities on a post-
Consolidation basis
8 September 2016
First  day  for  issue  of  new  holding  statements  and 
certificates
8 September 2016
Issue date
Last day for Securities to be entered into holders’ Security 
holdings
14 September 2016
14 September 2016
Last  day  for  the  Company  to  send  notice  to  each 
Security holder of the change in their details of holdings
14 September 2016
Commencement of trading of Shares on ASX
16 September 2016
Settlement of the Acquisition
19 September 2016
Please  note  this  timetable  is  indicative  only  and  the  directors  of  the  Company 
reserve the right to amend the timetable as required.
4.11
Board Intention if Settlement occurs
In the event that Settlement occurs, the Company proposes to:
(a)
continue development  of  the  Rice Intellectual  Property  in  accordance 
with the Rice University Licence Agreement (see Section 4.7(b));
(b)
undertake marketing throughout Australia and internationally; and
(c)
pursue  business  development  opportunities  for  the  GQD  applications 
both  in  Australia  and  internationally  (in  accordance  with  the  business 
strategy set out in Section 4.2(h)).
It  is  intended  to  allocate  the  funds  raised  from  the  Capital  Raising  and  existing 
cash reserves as set out in Section 4.6.
4.12
Composition of the Board of Directors
It  is  intended  that  the  Board  of  Directors  will  comprise  the  following  upon 
Settlement occurring:
(a)
Dr. Moti Gross;
(b)
Mr. Menashe Baruch;
(c)
Mr. Steve Bajic;
(d)
Mr. Faldi Ismail; and
(e)
Mr. Athan Lekkas.
It  is  currently  intended  that  Kyla  Garic,  Robert  Jewson  and  Michael  Davy  will 
retire on Settlement.
Notice of Meeting
39
4.13
Advantages of the Proposals in the Resolutions -
The Directors are of the view that the following non-exhaustive list of advantages 
may  be  relevant  to  a  Shareholder’s  decision  on  how  to  vote  on  the  Essential 
Resolutions:
(a)
the  Acquisition  represents  an  attractive  investment  opportunity  for  the 
Company  to  change  its  business  focus  to  that  of  a  technology 
company;
(b)
the Company will obtain 100% ownership of Dotz;
(c)
(d)
with increasing global requests for the unique capabilities of GQDs, the 
Company  will  be  exposed  to  an  industry  which  has  the  potential  to 
grow significantly; and
the Company will be managed by directors and officers with significant 
experience  in  the  technology  industry  with  a  view  to  guiding  the 
Company to be a significant player in the global GQD industry.
4.14
Disadvantages of the Proposals in the Resolutions
The  Directors  are  of  the  view  that  the  following  non-exhaustive 
list  of 
disadvantages may be relevant to a Shareholder’s decision on how to vote on 
the Essential Resolutions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the  Company  will  be  changing  the  nature  and  scale of  its  activities  to 
primarily be a technology company, which may not be consistent with 
the objectives of all Shareholders;
the  Acquisition  will  result  in  the  Capital  Raising,  the  issue  of  the 
Consideration  Shares,  the  Lead  Manager  Options,  the  Transaction 
Options,  and  the  issue  of  Shares  upon  conversion  of  the  Convertible 
Loans,  which  will  have  a  dilutionary  effect  on  the  holdings  of 
Shareholders;
given the development stage of the GQD technology, future outlays of 
funds  from  the  Company  may  be  required  for  the  operations  of  Dotz; 
and
there are additional risk factors associated with the change in nature of 
the Company’s activities resulting from the Acquisition. Some of the key 
risks are summarised in Section 4.15 below.
4.15
Risk Factors
if  the  Acquisition
Shareholders  should  be  aware  that 
is  approved  and 
completed, the Company will be changing the nature and scale of its activities 
and  will  be  subject  to  additional  or  increased  risks  arising  from  Dotz,  parties 
contracted  or  associated  with  Dotz  and  the  HOA.  The  risks  and  uncertainties 
described  below  are  not  intended  to  be  exhaustive.  There  may  be  additional 
risks  and  uncertainties  that  the  Company  is  unaware  of  or  that  the  Company 
currently considers to be immaterial, which may affect the Company. Based on 
the  information  available,  a  non-exhaustive  list  of  risk  factors  for  the  Company 
associated  with  the  Company’s  proposal  to  acquire  all  Dotz  Shares  is  set  out 
below.
Notice of Meeting
40
(a)
Risks relating to the Change in Nature and Scale of Activities
(i)
Re-Quotation of Shares on ASX
The  Acquisition  constitutes  a  significant  change  in  the  nature 
and scale of the Company’s activities and the Company needs 
to re-comply with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules as if 
it were seeking admission to the official list of ASX.
There is a risk that the Company may not be able to meet the 
requirements  of  the  ASX  for  re-quotation  of  its  Shares  on  the 
ASX.   Should this occur, the Shares will not be able to be traded 
on the ASX until such time as those requirements can be met, if 
at all.  Shareholders may be prevented from trading their Shares 
should the Company be suspended until such time as it does re-
comply with the ASX Listing Rules.
(ii)
Dilution Risk
The  Company  currently  has  5,484,450  Shares  (on  a  post 
Consolidation-basis)  on  issue.  At  Settlement,  the  Company 
proposes to issue:
(A)
the Consideration Shares; and
(B)
the Lead Manager Shares;
(C)
(D)
the  Shares  upon  conversion  under 
Agreements; and
the
Loan
Shares  to  raise  at  least  $5,000,000  with  the  ability  to 
accept  oversubscriptions  to  raise  up  to  a  further 
$1,000,000 under the Offer.
On  issue  of  the  Consideration  Shares  and  the  maximum 
subscription of Shares under the Capital Raising of $6,000,000 at 
an issue price of $0.20 per Share (and no exercise of Options):
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
the existing Shareholders will retain approximately 4.99% 
of the Company’s issued Share capital;
the  Vendors  will  hold  approximately  60.01%  of  the 
Company’s issued Share capital;
the 
investors  under  the  Capital  Raising  will  hold 
approximately  27.28%  of  the  Company’s  issued  Share 
capital;
the  Dotz  Lenders  will  hold  approximately  1.59%  of  the 
Company’s issued Share capital;
the  NFE  Lenders  will  hold  approximately  4.55%  of  the 
Company’s issued Share capital; and
the  Facilitators  will  hold  approximately  1.59%  of  the 
Company’s issued Share capital.
Notice of Meeting
41
If subsequently the Lead Manager Options and the Transaction 
Options  are  exercised  and  the  Performance  Shares  are 
converted,  the  interests  of  the  existing  Shareholders  in  the 
Company  will 
reduce  to  approximately  3.02%,  assuming 
maximum subscription under the Capital Raising.
There  is  also  a  risk  that  the  interests  of  Shareholders  will  be 
further  diluted  as  a  result  of  future  capital  raisings  required  in 
order to fund the development of the business.
(iii)
Liquidity Risk
the  Company  proposes
On  Settlement, 
the 
Consideration  Shares,  Lead  Manager  Options  and  Transaction 
Options.  The  Directors  understand  that  ASX  will  treat  these 
securities  as  restricted  securities  in  accordance  with  Chapter  9 
of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules.  However,  submissions  will  be  made  to 
the  ASX  to  apply  for  cash  formula  relief  in  respect  of  these 
Securities.
issue
to
issued  or  Options  exercised),
Based  on  the  post-Acquisition  capital  structure  (assuming  no 
further  Shares  are 
the 
Consideration  Shares  will  equate  to  approximately  57%  of  the 
issued Share capital on an undiluted basis (assuming maximum 
subscription  under  the  Capital  Raising). 
  This  could  be 
considered an increased liquidity risk as a large portion of issued 
capital  may  not  be  able  to  be  traded  freely  for  a  period  of 
time.
(iv)
Contractual Risk
Pursuant  to  the  HOA,  the  Company  has  been  granted  the 
Option  to  acquire  100%  of  Dotz.  The  Company  exercised  the 
Option on 22 May 2016. Settlement of the Acquisition is subject 
to  the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions  precedent.  The  ability  of 
the  Company  to  achieve  its  stated  objectives  will  depend  on 
the  performance  by  the  parties  of  their  obligations  under  the 
HOA. 
in  the  performance  of  their 
obligations, it may be necessary for the Company to approach 
a  court  to  seek  a  legal  remedy,  which  can  be  costly.  Further, 
certain  parties  to  the  HOA  reside  outside  Australia.  It  may  be 
difficult  for  the  Company  to  seek  a  legal  remedy  in  any 
jurisdiction  outside  Australia  which  may  adversely  impact  the 
Company’s performance and financial position.
If  any  party  defaults
(b)
Risks in respect of Dotz’ current operations
(i)
Development and commercialisation of the Dotz Technology
The success of the Company post completion of the Acquisition 
will  depend  upon  Dotz’  ability  to  develop  and  commercialise 
the  GQD  technology.    A  failure  to  successfully  develop  and 
commercialise  the  GQD  technology  could  lead  to  a  loss  of 
opportunities  and  adversely 
the  Company’s 
operating results and financial position.
impact  on
intends  to
its  GQD  commercialisation 
Dotz 
activities  for  use  as  optical  brightening  agents,  tracers  in
initially  focus
Notice of Meeting
42
monitoring  applications  and  taggants  in  security  applications 
(refer  to  Section  4.2(d)  for  further  details).    There is currently  no 
market for QDs or GQDs for use in these applications and there 
is  a  risk  that  GQDs  produced  by  Dotz  will  not  be  accepted  by 
market participants in these (or other fields).  Failure to create a 
market  in  these  fields  will  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the 
Company’s potential profitability.
As  set  out  above,  Dotz  is  seeking  to  develop  the  GQD 
technology  with  organisations 
that  provide  chemical 
production  industry  services.  If  Dotz  is  successful  in  developing 
the  GQD  technology,  there  may  be  further  additional  risks 
associated  with  how 
industry 
standards (including legal and regulatory standards), and issues 
faced with production which may affect yields.
technology
the
fits  within
The global marketplace for most products is ever changing due 
to  new  technologies,  new  products,  changes  in  preferences, 
changes  in  regulation  and  other  factors  influencing  market 
acceptance  or  market  rejection.    This  market  volatility  and  risk 
exists  despite  the  best  endeavours  of  market 
research, 
promotion,  and  sales  and  licensing  campaigns.    There  is  a  risk 
that  if  the  GQD  technology  is  not  accepted  by  the  market  or 
GQDs  are  not  utilised  in  Dotz’  proposed  markets  or  continuing 
to  be  utilised  in  the  existing  markets  that  currently  use  GQDs, 
Dotz will not be able to commercialise its products, which could 
adversely impact the Company’s operations.
(ii)
Competition and new technologies
The  industry  in  which  Dotz  is  involved  is  subject  to  increasing 
domestic and global competition which is fast-paced and fast-
changing.  While  the  Company  will  undertake  all  reasonable 
due  diligence  in  its  business  decisions  and  operations,  the 
Company will have no influence or control over the activities or 
actions  of  its  competitors,  whose  activities  or  actions  may 
positively  or  negatively  affect  the  operating  and  financial 
performance  of  the  Company’s  projects  and  business.  For 
instance, new technologies could result in the Dotz Technology 
not being differentiated to other similar offerings.
The  size  and  financial  strength  of  some  of  Dotz’  competitors 
may make it difficult for it to maintain a competitive position in 
the  technology  market.  In  particular,  Dotz’  ability  to  acquire 
additional technology interests could be adversely affected if it 
is  unable  to  respond  effectively  and/or  in  a  timely  manner  to 
the  strategies  and  actions  of  competitors  and  potential 
competitors  or  the  entry  of  new  competitors  into  the  market. 
This  may  in  turn  impede  the  financial  condition  and  rate  of 
growth of the Company.
The  key  competition  risk  is  in  achieving  appreciable  market 
share and differentiation from its key competitors.
(iii)
Licensed intellectual property
Pursuant  to  the  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement  and  BGN 
Research  and  Licence Agreement,  Dotz  is  licensed  intellectual
Notice of Meeting
43
property for a fixed period of time and contingent on meeting 
specified  milestones.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  the  Rice 
University  Licence  Agreement  and/or  BGN  Research  and 
Licence Agreement will not be terminated and as a result, other 
competitors may  gain  access  to  the  intellectual  property  used 
by  Dotz  in  developing  the  GQD  technology  or  any  know-how 
and/or information related to the Licensed BGN IP in relation to 
graphene  production  and  applications.  Breach  of  any  licence 
agreements by Dotz, or infringement of the licensed intellectual 
property by third parties, may have an adverse impact on Dotz’ 
ability to develop its technology.
In  particular,  the  Rice  University  Licence  Agreement  contains 
specified  milestones  which  must  be  met  in  order  for  Dotz  to 
retain  its  interest  the  Rice Intellectual  Property  (refer  to  Section 
4.7(b)(v)  for more details).    Failure to meet  these milestones,  or 
breach by Dotz of its other obligations under the Rice University 
Licence Agreement, may result in termination by Rice University, 
which is likely to have an adverse effect on the Company.
(iv)
Staff Risk
There  is  a  risk  that,  where  there  is  a  turnover  of  development 
staff  who  have  knowledge  of  the  technology  and  business, 
knowledge  will  be  lost  in  the  event  that  those  staff  resign  or 
retire.  This involves  the risk  that  those  staff  will have information 
in respect of Dotz’ intellectual property which has a commercial 
value to Dotz as well as an opportunity cost for replacement of 
those staff and subsequent training.
This risk is mitigated as Dotz has historically had low levels of staff 
turnover  in  the  development  teams.  In  addition,  all  staff 
contracts  contain  express  provisions  with  respect  to  ownership 
of  intellectual  property  and  restraints  of  trade  to  limit  any 
potential loss suffered by Dotz to the maximum extent possible.
(v)
Patent application risk
The  intellectual  property  licensed  to  Dotz  under  the  Rice 
University  Licence Agreement  and BGN  Research  and Licence 
Agreement consist of pending patent applications.  There is no 
guarantee  that  these  patent  applications  will  be  granted  or 
that Dotz will receive enforceable patent rights.
There  is  a  risk  that  Dotz  will  not  be  entitled  to  practice  the 
inventions  claimed  in  the  patents,  and  that  the  working  of  its 
patented  invention  may  be  prevented  by  another  patent  or 
patent  application  which  has  an  earlier  priority  date  to  the 
patent applications licensed to Dotz.
Even  if  Dotz  succeeds  in  obtaining  patent  protection  for  its 
products,  its  patents  could  be  partially  or  wholly  invalidated 
following  challenges  by  third  parties.    The  grant  of  a  patent 
does  not  guarantee  validity  of  that  patent  since  it  may  be 
revoked on the grounds of invalidity at any time during its life.  If 
none of the claims of a granted patent are valid, the patent is 
unenforceable.
Notice of Meeting
44
(vi)
Protection of intellectual property rights
Dotz  intends  to  pursue  intellectual  property  protection  in  the 
form  of  patents  post-Settlement 
for  newly  developed 
technologies.    However,  if  the  Company  fails  to  protect  the 
intellectual property rights of Dotz adequately, competitors may 
gain access to its technology which may harm its business.
intellectual  property,  and
Securing  rights  to 
in  particular 
patents,  is  an  integral  part  of  securing  potential  product  value 
from the development of information technology.  Competition 
in  retaining  and  sustaining  protection  of  intellectual  property 
and  the  complex  nature  of  intellectual  property  can  lead  to 
expensive and lengthy patents disputes for which there can be 
no guaranteed outcome.
Legal  standards  relating  to  the  validity,  enforceability  and 
scope of protection of intellectual property rights are uncertain. 
Effective  patent,  trademark,  copyright  and  trade  secret 
protection  may  not  be  available  to  the  Company  in  every 
country  in  which  the  Dotz  Technology  may  eventually  be  sold. 
Accordingly, despite its efforts,  the Company may not be able 
to prevent third parties from infringing upon or misappropriating 
the intellectual property.
Market  conditions  depending,  the  Company  may  be  required 
to incur significant expenses in monitoring and protecting future 
intellectual  property  rights.  It  may  initiate  or  otherwise  be 
involved  in  litigation  against  third  parties  for  infringement,  or  to 
establish the validity, of its rights. Any litigation, whether or not it 
is successful, could result in significant expense to the Company 
and cause a distraction to management.
As  Dotz  licenses  its  intellectual  from  third  parties,  there  is  an 
additional  risk  that  these  third  parties  fail  to  keep  the  patents 
licensed to Dotz valid, resulting in competitors being entitled to 
apply for patents in the same area.
In addition, unauthorised use of the “Dotz” brand in counterfeit 
products  or  services  may  not  only  result  in  potential  revenue 
loss,  but  also  have  an  adverse  impact  on  its  brand  value  and 
perceptions of its product qualities.
(vii)
Limited operating history
Incorporated  in  March  2014,  Dotz  is  a  company  with  limited 
operating  history.  To  date,  Dotz  has  principally  developed  its 
technology and has not commenced commercialisation. Given 
Dotz’ limited operating history, there can be no guarantee that 
Dotz will achieve commercial viability.
(viii)
Currency Risk
Dotz expects to derive a majority of its revenue from the United 
States, in US dollars. Dotz will also be required to pay fees in the 
currency for the State of Israel (shekel). Accordingly, changes in 
the  exchange  rate  between  the  US  dollar  and  the  Australian
Notice of Meeting
45
dollar  or  the  Israel  shekel  and  the  Australian  dollar  would  be 
expected to have a direct effect on the performance of Dotz.
(c)
General Risks Relating to the Company
(i)
Additional Requirements for Capital
requirements  of
The  capital 
the  Company  depend  on 
numerous factors. Depending on the ability of the Company to 
generate  income  from  its  operations,  the  Company  may 
require further financing in addition to amounts raised under the 
Capital  Raising.  Any  additional  equity  financing  will  dilute 
shareholdings,  and  debt  financing,  if  available,  may  involve 
restrictions  on 
the 
Company is unable to obtain additional financing as needed, it 
may be required to reduce the scope of its operations.
financing  and  operating  activities.
If
(ii)
Reliance on Key Management
strategic  management  of
The  responsibility  of  overseeing  the  day-to-day  operations  and 
the 
the  Company  depends 
substantially on its senior management and directors. There can 
be  no  assurance  that  there  will  be  no  detrimental  impact  on 
the performance of the Company or its growth potential if one 
or  more  of  these  employees  cease  their  employment  and 
suitable  replacements  are  not  identified  and  engaged  in  a 
timely manner.
(iii)
Risk of High Volume of Share Sales
If Settlement occurs, the Company will have issued a significant 
number  of  new  Securities  to  various  parties.  Some  of  the 
Vendors  and  others  that  receive  Shares  as  a  result  of  the 
Acquisition or the Capital Raising may not intend to continue to 
hold those Shares and may wish to sell them on ASX (subject to 
any applicable escrow period). There is a risk that an increase in 
the  amount  of  people  wanting  to  sell  Shares  may  adversely 
impact on the market price of the Company’s Shares.
There can be no assurance that there will be, or continue to be, 
an  active  market  for  Shares  or  that  the  price  of  Shares  will 
increase.  As  a  result,  Shareholders  may,  upon  selling  their 
Shares, receive a market price for their securities that is less than 
the price of Shares offered pursuant to the Capital Raising.
(iv)
Trading Price of Shares
The  Company’s  operating  results,  economic  and  financial 
prospects  and  other  factors  will  affect  the  trading  price  of  the 
Shares. In  addition,  the price of Shares  is subject  to  varied  and 
often  unpredictable  influences  on  the  market  for  equities, 
including,  but  not  limited  to  general  economic  conditions 
including  the  performance  of  the  Australian  dollar  on  world 
markets,  inflation  rates,  foreign  exchange  rates  and  interest 
rates,  variations  in  the  general  market  for  listed  stocks  in 
general,  changes 
legislation  or 
regulation, industrial disputes, general operational and business
to  government  policy,
Notice of Meeting
46
risks and hedging or arbitrage trading activity that may develop 
involving the Shares.
In  particular,  the  share  prices  for  many  companies  have  been 
and  may  in  the  future  be  highly  volatile,  which  in  many  cases 
may reflect a diverse range of non-company specific influences 
such  as  global  hostilities  and  tensions  relating  to  certain 
unstable regions of the world, acts of terrorism and the general 
state of the global economy. No assurances can be made that 
the  Company’s  market  performance  will  not  be  adversely 
affected by any such market fluctuations or factors.
(v)
Litigation Risks
The  Company  is  exposed  to  possible  litigation  risks  including 
intellectual property claims, contractual disputes, occupational 
health  and  safety  claims  and  employee  claims.  Further,  the 
Company may be involved in disputes with other parties in the 
future which may result in litigation. Any such claim or dispute if 
proven,  may  impact  adversely  on  the  Company’s  operations, 
financial  performance  and  financial  position.  Neither  the 
Company nor Dotz are currently engaged in any litigation.
(vi)
Economic Risks
General  economic  conditions,  movements  in  interest  and 
inflation  rates  and  currency  exchange  rates  may  have  an 
adverse  effect  on  the  Company’s  activities,  as  well  as  on  its 
ability to fund those activities.
Further,  share  market  conditions  may  affect  the  value  of  the 
Company’s  securities  regardless  of  the  Company’s  operating 
performance.  Share  market  conditions  are  affected  by  many 
factors such as:
(A)
general economic outlook;
(B)
interest rates and inflation rates;
(C)
currency fluctuations;
(D)
(E)
(F)
changes in investor sentiment toward particular market 
sectors;
the demand for, and supply of, capital; and
terrorism or other hostilities.
(vii)
Force Majeure
The Company, now or in the future may be adversely affected 
by  risks  outside  the  control  of  the  Company  including  labour 
unrest,  civil  disorder,  war,  subversive  activities  or  sabotage, 
extreme  weather  conditions,  fires,  floods,  explosions  or  other 
catastrophes, epidemics or quarantine restrictions.
Notice of Meeting
47
(viii)
Acquisitions
and/or
products
that
investments
technologies
As  part  of  its  business  strategy,  the  Company  may  make 
in,  companies, 
acquisitions  of,  or  significant 
products, 
are 
complementary  to  the  Company’s  business.  Any  such  future 
transactions  are  accompanied  by 
risks  commonly 
encountered  in  making  acquisitions  of  companies,  products 
and  technologies,  such  as  integrating  cultures  and  systems  of 
operation, relocation of operations, short term strain on working 
capital 
sales  and  margins 
anticipated  and  retaining  key  staff  and  customer  and  supplier 
relationships.
requirements,  achieving
the
the
(d)
Investment Speculative
The above list of risk factors ought not to be taken as exhaustive of the 
risks faced by the Company or by investors in the Company.  The above 
factors, and others not specifically referred to above may, in the future, 
materially  affect  the  financial  performance  of  the  Company  and  the 
value of the Company’s securities.
4.16
Plans for the Company if the Resolutions are not passed
If  the  Essential  Resolutions  are  not  passed  and  the  Acquisition 
is  not 
implemented,  the  Company  will  continue  to  look  for  potential  business 
acquisitions  to  take  the  Company  forward.    Its  securities  will  remain  suspended 
until it has successfully re-complied with chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.
4.17
Directors’ Interests in the Agreement
None  of  the  Company’s  existing  Directors  have  any  interest  in  the  proposed 
Acquisition, other than as disclosed in this Notice.
4.18
Vendors
None  of  the  Vendors  or  their  associates  are  related  parties  of  the  Company 
(other than by virtue of becoming Directors upon Settlement) and they have no 
existing interest in the Company’s Securities.
5.
RESOLUTION 3 – CHANGE TO NATURE AND SCALE OF ACTIVITIES
5.1
General
Resolution  3  seeks  approval  from  Shareholders  for  a  change  in  the  nature  and 
scale of the activities of the Company to change the focus to development and 
commercialisation of the Dotz Technology.
As  outlined  in  Section  4.1  of  this  Explanatory  Statement,  the  Company  has 
entered into the HOA pursuant to which the Company shall acquire 100% of the 
issue capital of Dotz.
A  detailed  description  of  Dotz  and  its  business  is  outlined  in  Section  4.2  above 
and  a  summary  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  HOA  is  set  out  in  Section 
4.7(a) above.
Notice of Meeting
48
5.2
ASX Listing Rule 11.1
ASX Listing Rule 11.1 provides that where an entity proposes to make a significant 
change, either directly or indirectly, to the nature or scale of its activities, it must 
provide  full  details  to  ASX  as  soon  as  practicable  (and  before  making  the 
change) and comply with the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
provide  to  ASX  information  regarding  the  change  and  its  effect  on 
future potential earnings, and any information that ASX asks for;
if ASX requires, obtain the approval of holders of its shares and comply 
with any requirements of ASX in relation to the notice of meeting; and
if  ASX  requires,  meet  the  requirements  of  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  ASX 
Listing Rules as if the entity were applying for admission to the official list 
of ASX.
ASX has indicated to the Company that the change in the nature and scale of 
the  Company’s  activities  as  a  result  of  Acquisition  requires  the  Company  in 
accordance with ASX Listing Rule 11.1.2 to obtain Shareholder approval and the 
Company must comply with any requirements of ASX in relation to the Notice of 
Meeting.
ASX has also indicated to the Company that the change in the nature and scale 
of  the  Company’s  activities  constitutes  a  listing  of  Dotz  which  consequently 
requires the Company to (in accordance with ASX Listing Rule 11.1.3) re-comply 
with  the  admission  requirements  set  out  in  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  ASX  Listing 
Rules  (including  any  ASX  requirement  to  treat  the  Company’s  securities  as 
restricted securities).
Accordingly,  if  the  Essential  Resolutions  are  approved  at  the  Meeting,  it  is 
expected  that  the  Company’s  Shares  will  remain  in  suspension  from  quotation 
until the Company has acquired Dotz pursuant to the HOA and re-complied with 
Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules, including by satisfaction of ASX’s conditions 
precedent to reinstatement.
6.
RESOLUTION 4 – CREATION OF NEW CLASS OF SECURITIES – PERFORMANCE SHARES
6.1
Requirements for Shareholder approval
Resolution  4  seeks  Shareholder  approval  for  the  Company  to  be  authorised  to 
issue the Performance Shares.
A  company  with  a  single  class  of  shares  on  issue  which  proposes  to  issue  new 
shares not having the same rights as its existing shares, is taken to vary the rights 
of  existing  Shareholders  unless  the  Constitution  already  provides  for  such  an 
issue.
Section 246B of the Corporations Act and clause 2.3 of the Constitution provide 
that the rights attaching to a class of shares cannot be varied without:
(a)
(b)
a special resolution passed at a meeting of the members holding shares 
in that class; or
the written consent of the members who are entitled to at least 75% of 
the votes that may be cast in respect of shares in that class.
Notice of Meeting
49
Pursuant to the HOA, the Company proposes to issue (amongst other securities) 
66,000,000 Performance Shares, on the terms and conditions set out in Schedule 
1.
The  purpose  of  the  issue  of  the  Performance  Shares  is  to  link  part  of  the 
consideration  for  the  Acquisition  to  certain  key  performance  criteria.    If  the 
milestones are not achieved within the prescribed timeframe, the Company will 
redeem the Performance Shares.
The  Company  currently  has  only  one  class  of  shares  on  issue  being  fully  paid 
ordinary  shares.    The terms of  the Performance  Shares  are not  the same as the 
Shares.    Accordingly,  the  Company  seeks  approval  from  Shareholders  for  the 
issue of the Performance Shares.
Resolution 4 is a special resolution and is subject to the passing of all the Essential 
Resolutions.
6.2
ASX Approval pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 6.1
ASX  Listing  Rule  6.1  provides  that  the  terms  that  apply  to  each  class  of  equity 
security must, in ASX’s opinion, be appropriate and equitable.
The  Company  has  received  ASX  approval  for  the  issuance  of  the  Performance 
Shares required under ASX Listing Rule 6.1.
7.
RESOLUTION 5 – ISSUE OF CONSIDERATION SECURITIES
7.1
General
Resolution 5 seeks Shareholder approval for the issue of:
(a)
66,000,000 Consideration Shares; and
(b)
66,000,000  Performance  Shares  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in 
Schedule 1,
(together,  the  Consideration  Securities)  (each  on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  in 
consideration for the acquisition of 100% of the issued capital of Dotz.
ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  provides  that  a  company  must  not,  subject  to  specified 
exceptions,  issue  or  agree  to  issue  more  equity  securities  during  any  12  month 
period  than  that  amount  which  represents  15%  of  the  number  of  fully  paid 
ordinary securities on issue at the commencement of that 12 month period.
The  effect  of  Resolution  5  will  be  to  allow  the  Company  to  issue  the 
Consideration  Securities  during  the  period  of  3  months  after  the  Meeting  (or  a 
longer  period,  if  allowed  by  ASX),  without  using  the  Company’s  15%  annual 
placement capacity.
The  Directors  understand  that  ASX  may  treat  each  of  the  Consideration 
Securities  as  restricted  securities  for  the  purpose  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules. 
However, submissions will be made to the ASX to apply for cash formula relief in 
respect of the Consideration Shares.
7.2
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 7.1
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.3,  the  following 
information is provided in relation to the issue of the Consideration Shares:
Notice of Meeting
50
(a)
the maximum number of Securities to be issued at Settlement is:
(i)
66,000,000 Consideration Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis); 
and
(ii)
66,000,000 Performance Shares (on a post-Consolidation basis).
the  Consideration  Securities  will  be  issued  no  later  than  3  months  after 
the date of the Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by 
any  ASX  waiver  or  modification  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules)  and  it  is 
intended  that  issue  of  all  the  Consideration  Securities  will  occur  on  the 
same date;
the  Consideration  Securities  will  be  issued  for  nil  cash  consideration  in 
satisfaction of the Acquisition of the Dotz Shares;
the  Consideration  Securities  will  be  issued  to  the  Vendors,  who  are  not 
related  parties  of  the  Company  (other  than  as  a  result  of  the 
Acquisition), in consideration for their respective Dotz Shares (pro rata to 
the number of Dotz Shares held by each Vendor);
the Consideration Shares to be issued will be fully paid ordinary shares in 
the capital of the Company issued on the same terms and conditions as 
the Company’s existing Shares;
the  Performance  Shares  proposed  to  be  issued  will  be  a  new  class  of 
securities  (Shareholder  approval  for  which  is  being  sought  pursuant  to 
Resolution  4)  and  will  be  issued  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in 
Schedule 1; and
no  funds  will  be  raised  from  the  proposed  issue  as  the  Consideration 
Securities are proposed to be issued in consideration for the acquisition 
by  the Company  of all of  the Dotz  Shares  and  in  accordance with  the 
terms of the HOA.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
8.
RESOLUTION  6  –  ISSUE  OF  LEAD  MANAGER  SECURITIES  AND  TRANSACTION 
OPTIONS TO FACILITATORS
8.1
General
Resolution 6 seeks Shareholder approval for the issue of 1,750,000 Lead Manager 
Shares,  4,500,000  Lead  Manager  Options  and  1,000,000  Transaction  Options 
(each  on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  parties  that  have  assisted  with 
facilitating  the  Acquisition  and  completing  the  Capital  Raising  (or  their 
nominees) (Facilitators).
A summary of ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is set out in Section 7.1 above.
The  effect  of  Resolution  6  will  be  to  allow  the  Company  to  issue  the  Lead 
Manager Securities and Transaction Options during the period of 3 months after 
the  Meeting  (or  a  longer  period,  if  allowed  by  ASX),  without  using  the 
Company’s 15% annual placement capacity.
Resolution 6 is an Essential Resolution and is subject to Shareholders passing each 
of the Essential Resolutions.
Notice of Meeting
51
8.2
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 7.1
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.3,  the  following 
information  is  provided  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  the  Shares  the  subject  of 
Resolution 6:
(a)
the maximum number of:
(i)
(ii)
Lead Manager Shares to be issued is 1,750,000;
Lead Manager Options to be issued is 4,500,000; and
(iii)
Transaction Options to be issued is 1,000,000,
(each on a post-Consolidation basis);
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
the Lead Manager Securities and the Transaction Options will be issued 
no later than 3 months after the date of the Meeting (or such later date 
to  the  extent  permitted  by  any  ASX  waiver  or  modification  of  the  ASX 
Listing Rules) and it is intended that issue of all of the Securities will occur 
on the same date;
the Lead Manager Securities and the Transaction Options will be issued 
for  nil  cash  consideration  in  satisfaction  of  services  provided  by  the 
Facilitators  who  have  assisted,  or  will  assist,  the  Company  with  the 
Capital Raising and Acquisition;
the Lead Manager Securities and the Transaction Options will be issued 
to  the  Facilitators,  who  are  not  related  parties  of  the  Company  other 
than  Otsana  Capital  Pty  Ltd,  for  whom  Shareholder  approval  is  being 
sought under Resolution 7;
the Lead Manager Shares to be issued will be fully paid ordinary shares 
in the capital of the Company issued on the same terms and conditions 
as the Company’s existing Shares;
the  Lead  Manager  Options  will  be  issued  on  the  terms  and  conditions 
set out in Schedule 2 and the Transaction Options will be issued on the 
terms and conditions set out in Schedule 3; and
no  funds  will  be  raised  from  the  proposed  issue  as  the  Lead  Manager 
Securities  and  Transaction  Options  are  proposed  to  be  issued  in 
satisfaction of services provided by the Facilitators.
9.
RESOLUTION 7 – ISSUE OF LEAD MANAGER SECURITIES TO OTSANA PTY LTD
9.1
General
As  stated  above  in  Section  8.1,  the  Company  has  agreed  to  issue  the  Lead 
Manager Securities and Transaction Options to the Facilitators.
While  the  recipients  of  the  Lead  Manager  Securities  have  not  yet  been 
identified,  it  is  anticipated  that  the  Company  may  issue  up  to  750,000  of  the 
Lead Manager Shares and 2,000,000 of the Lead Manager Options (each on a 
post-Consolidation basis) to Otsana Pty Ltd (Otsana) (or its nominee), an entity in 
which Faldi Ismail is a director and the sole shareholder.
Notice of Meeting
52
Resolution  7  seeks  Shareholder  approval  for  the  issue  of  up  to  750,000  Lead 
Manager  Shares  and  2,000,000  Lead  Manager  Options  (both  on  a  post-
Consolidation basis) to Otsana (or its nominee).
9.2
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act
For a public company, or an entity that the public company controls, to give a 
financial benefit to a related party of the public company, the public company 
or entity must:
(a)
obtain  the  approval  of  the  public  company’s  members  in  the  manner 
set out in sections 217 to 227 of the Corporations Act; and
(b)
give the benefit within 15 months following such approval,
unless  the  giving  of  the  financial  benefit  falls  within  an  exception  set  out  in 
sections 210 to 216 of the Corporations Act.
The  issue  of  Lead  Manager  Securities  to  Otsana  constitutes  giving  a  financial 
benefit  and  Otsana  is  a  related  party  of  the  Company  by  virtue  of  being  an 
entity controlled by Faldi Ismail.
The Directors consider that Shareholder approval pursuant to Chapter 2E of the 
Corporations  Act  is  not  required  because  giving  of  the  financial  benefit  is  on 
arm’s length terms.
9.3
ASX Listing Rule 10.11
ASX  Listing  Rule 10.11  also  requires shareholder approval  to  be  obtained where 
an  entity  issues,  or  agrees  to  issue,  securities  to  a  related  party,  or  a  person 
whose relationship with the entity or a related party is, in ASX’s opinion, such that 
approval  should  be  obtained  unless  an  exception  in  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.12 
applies.
As the issue of Lead Manager Securities to Otsana involves the issue of Securities 
to a related party of the Company, Shareholder approval pursuant to ASX Listing 
Rule 10.11 is required unless an exception applies.  It is the view of the Directors 
that  the exceptions  set  out  in  ASX Listing Rule 10.12  do not  apply  in  the current 
circumstances.
9.4
Technical Information required by ASX Listing Rule 10.13
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.13,  the  following 
information is provided in relation to the Participation:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the  maximum  number  of  Securities  to  be  issued  is  750,000  Lead 
Manager Shares and 2,000,000 Lead Manager Options (each on a post-
Consolidation basis);
the  Shares  will  be  issued  no  later  than  1  month  after  the  date  of  the 
Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by any ASX waiver 
or modification of the ASX Listing Rules);
the  Lead  Manager  Securities  will  be  issued  for  nil  cash  consideration  in 
satisfaction of services provided by  Otsana who have assisted, and will 
continue  to  assist,  the  Company  with  the  Capital  Raising  and 
Acquisition;
Notice of Meeting
53
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
the Shares will be issued to Otsana (or its nominee), an entity controlled 
by Faldi Ismail;
the Lead Manager Shares issued will be fully paid ordinary shares in the 
capital of the Company issued on the same terms and conditions as the 
Company’s existing Shares;
the  Lead  Manager  Options  will  be  issued  on  the  terms  and  conditions 
set out in Schedule 2; and
no funds will be raised from the issue of the Lead Manager Securities to 
Otsana (or its nominee) as the Lead Manager Securities are being issued 
in satisfaction of services provided by Otsana.
Approval pursuant  to  ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is not  required  for  the Participation  as 
approval is being obtained under ASX Listing Rule 10.11.  Accordingly, the issue 
of Shares to Otsana Pty Ltd (or its nominee) will not be included in the use of the 
Company’s 15% annual placement capacity pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 7.1.
10.
RESOLUTION 8 – ISSUE OF SHARES – CAPITAL RAISING
10.1
General
Resolution 8 seeks Shareholder approval for the issue of up to 30,000,000 Shares 
(on a post-Consolidation basis) at $0.20 per Share to raise up to $6,000,000 (with 
a minimum of $5,000,000 to be raised pursuant to the Capital Raising).
A summary of ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is set out in Section 7.1 above.
The  effect  of  Resolution  8  will  be  to  allow  the  Company  to  issue  the  Shares 
pursuant to the Capital Raising during the period of 3 months after the Meeting 
(or a longer period, if allowed by ASX), without using the Company’s 15% annual 
placement capacity.
10.2
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 7.1
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.3,  the  following 
information is provided in relation to the Capital Raising:
(a)
(b)
the  maximum  number  of  Shares  to  be  issued  is  30,000,000  (on  a  post-
Consolidation basis);
the  Shares  will  be  issued  no  later  than  3  months  after  the  date  of  the 
Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by any ASX waiver 
or modification of the ASX Listing Rules) and it is intended that issue of all 
the Shares pursuant to the Capital Raising will occur on the same date;
(c)
the issue price of the Shares will be $0.20 per Share;
(d)
(e)
the  Shares  are proposed  to  be  issued  to  the pursuant  to  a  public  offer 
by  way  of  the  Prospectus  for  the  purpose  of  ASX  Listing  Rule  1.1 
condition  3.  None  of  the  subscribers  for  the  Capital  Raising  will  be 
related  parties  of  the  Company,  other  than  the  Directors  who  will 
participate in the Capital Raising pursuant to Resolutions 13 to 17;
the Shares proposed to be issued will be fully paid ordinary shares in the 
capital of the Company issued on the same terms and conditions as the 
Company’s existing Shares; and
Notice of Meeting
54
(f)
the  Company  intends  to  use  the  funds  raised  from  the  Capital  Raising 
towards the budgeted expenditure described at Section 4.6.
11.
RESOLUTION  9  –  ISSUE  OF  SHARES  UPON  CONVERSION  UNDER  NFE  CONVERTIBLE 
LOAN AGREEMENTS
11.1
General
Resolution  9  seeks  Shareholder  approval  for  the  issue  of  4,750,000  Shares  (on  a 
post-Consolidation  basis)  at  $0.20  per  Share  upon  conversion  under  the  NFE 
Convertible Loan Agreements.
A summary of ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is set out in Section 7.1 above.
The  effect  of  this  Resolution  will  be  to  allow  the  Company  to  issue  the  Shares 
upon conversion under the NFE Convertible Loan Agreements during the period 
of  3  months  after  the  Meeting  (or  a  longer  period,  if  allowed  by  ASX),  without 
using the Company’s 15% annual placement capacity.
11.2
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 7.1
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.3,  the  following 
information is provided in relation to the issue of Shares under Resolution 9:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
The  maximum  number  of  Shares  to  be  issued  in  respect  of  the 
conversion  is  4,750,000  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis).  There  is  no 
interest payable under the NFE Convertible Loan Agreements;
the  Shares  will  be  issued  no  later  than  3  months  after  the  date  of  the 
Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by any ASX waiver 
or  modification  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules)  and  it  is  intended  that  issue  of 
the Shares will occur on the same date;
the  Shares  will  be  issued  upon  conversion  of  the  NFE  Convertible  Loan 
Agreements for nil cash consideration at a deemed issue price of $0.20 
each, and accordingly no funds will be raised;
the  Shares  will  be  issued  to  the  NFE  Lenders,  none  of  whom  will  be 
related parties of the Company;
the  Shares  issued  will  be  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  in  the  capital  of  the 
Company  issued  on  the same terms and  conditions as the Company’s 
existing Shares;
the funds raised from the NFE Convertible Loan Agreements have been 
or will be applied towards general working capital and costs associated 
with effectuation of the deed of company arrangement effectuated by 
the Company on 17 May 2016.  No funds will be raised from the issue of 
Shares pursuant to the NFE Convertible Loan Agreements.
12.
RESOLUTION  10  –  ISSUE  OF  SHARES  TO  FALDI  ISMAIL  UPON  CONVERSION  UNDER 
NFE CONVERTIBLE LOAN AGREEMENT
12.1
General
As  stated  above  in  Section  11.1,  the  Company  has  entered  into  the  NFE 
Convertible Loan Agreements with the NFE Lenders. Benefico Pty Ltd, an entity in 
which Faldi Ismail’s spouse is the sole director and shareholder, is an NFE Lender.
Notice of Meeting
55
Resolution  10  seeks  Shareholder  approval  for  the  issue  of  250,000  Shares  (on  a 
post-Consolidation  basis)  to  Benefico  Pty  Ltd  (or  its  nominee)  upon  conversion 
under the NFE Loan Agreement to which it is a party.
12.2
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act
For a public company, or an entity that the public company controls, to give a 
financial benefit to a related party of the public company, the public company 
or entity must:
(a)
obtain  the  approval  of  the  public  company’s  members  in  the  manner 
set out in sections 217 to 227 of the Corporations Act; and
(b)
give the benefit within 15 months following such approval,
unless  the  giving  of  the  financial  benefit  falls  within  an  exception  set  out  in 
sections 210 to 216 of the Corporations Act.
The conversion of the NFE Convertible Loan will result in the issue of Shares which 
constitutes  giving  a  financial  benefit  and  Benefico  Pty  Ltd  is  a  related  party  of 
the Company by virtue of being an entity controlled by Faldi Ismail’s spouse.
The Directors consider that Shareholder approval pursuant to Chapter 2E of the 
Corporations  Act  is  not  required  because  the  Shares  will  be  issued  to  Benefico 
Pty Ltd (or its nominee) on the same terms as Shares issued to non-related party 
NFE  Lenders  and  as  such  the  giving  of  the  financial  benefit  is  on  arm’s  length 
terms.
12.3
ASX Listing Rule 10.11
ASX  Listing  Rule 10.11  also  requires shareholder approval  to  be  obtained where 
an  entity  issues,  or  agrees  to  issue,  securities  to  a  related  party,  or  a  person 
whose relationship with the entity or a related party is, in ASX’s opinion, such that 
approval  should  be  obtained  unless  an  exception  in  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.12 
applies.
As conversion under the NFE Loan Agreements involves the issue of Shares to a 
related party of the Company, Shareholder approval pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 
10.11 is required unless an exception applies.  It is the view of the Directors that 
the  exceptions  set  out  in  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.12  do  not  apply  in  the  current 
circumstances.
12.4
Technical Information required by ASX Listing Rule 10.13
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.13,  the  following 
information is provided in relation to the Participation:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the  maximum  number  of  Shares  to  be  issued  is  250,000  (on  a  post-
Consolidation basis);
the  Shares  will  be  issued  no  later  than  1  month  after  the  date  of  the 
Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by any ASX waiver 
or modification of the ASX Listing Rules);
the deemed issue price of the Shares is $0.20 per Share, being the same 
as  all  other  Shares  issued  upon  conversion  under  the  NFE  Convertible 
Loan Agreements;
Notice of Meeting
56
(d)
(e)
(f)
the  Shares  will  be  issued  to  Benefico  Pty  Ltd  (or  its  nominee),  an  entity 
associated with Faldi Ismail;
the  Shares  issued  will  be  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  in  the  capital  of  the 
Company  issued  on  the same terms and  conditions as the Company’s 
existing Shares; and
no funds will be raised from the issue of the Shares to Benefico Pty Ltd (or 
its  nominee)  as  the  Shares  are  being  issued  in  repayment  of  the  loan 
provided by Benefico Pty Ltd to the Company pursuant to a Convertible 
Loan Agreement.
Approval pursuant  to  ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is not  required  for  the Participation  as 
approval is being obtained under ASX Listing Rule 10.11.   Accordingly, the issue 
of  Shares  to  Benefico  Pty  Ltd  (or  its  nominee)  will  not  be included  in  the  use  of 
the Company’s 15% annual placement capacity pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 7.1.
13.
RESOLUTION 11 – ISSUE OF SHARES UPON CONVERSION UNDER DOTZ CONVERTIBLE 
LOAN AGREEMENTS
13.1
General
Resolution 11 seeks Shareholder approval for the issue of 1,750,000 Shares (on a 
post-Consolidation  basis)  at  $0.20  per  Share  upon  conversion  under  the  Dotz 
Convertible Loan Agreements.
A summary of ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is set out in Section 7.1 above.
The  effect  of  this  Resolution  will  be  to  allow  the  Company  to  issue  the  Shares 
upon conversion under the Dotz Convertible Loan Agreements during the period 
of  3  months  after  the  Meeting  (or  a  longer  period,  if  allowed  by  ASX),  without 
using the Company’s 15% annual placement capacity.
13.2
Technical information required by ASX Listing Rule 7.1
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.3,  the  following 
information is provided in relation to the Conversion:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the  maximum  number  of  Shares  to  be  issued  in  respect  of  the 
conversion  is  1,750,000  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis).  There  is  no 
interest payable on the Dotz Convertible Loan Agreements;
the  Shares  will  be  issued  no  later  than  3  months  after  the  date  of  the 
Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by any ASX waiver 
or  modification  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules)  and  it  is  intended  that  issue  of 
the Shares will occur on the same date;
the Shares will be issued upon conversion of the  Dotz Convertible Loan 
Agreements for nil cash consideration at a deemed issue price of $0.20 
each, and accordingly no funds will be raised;
the Shares will be issued to the Dotz Lenders, none of whom are related 
parties of the Company;
the  Shares  issued  will  be  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  in  the  capital  of  the 
Company  issued  on  the same terms and  conditions as the Company’s 
existing Shares; and
Notice of Meeting
57
(f)
the funds raised from the Dotz Convertible Loan Agreements have been 
or  will  be  applied  towards  general  working  capital.    No  funds  will  be 
raised from the issue of Shares pursuant to the Conversion as the Shares 
will be issued in conversion of the Dotz Convertible Loan Agreements.
14.
RESOLUTION 12 – CHANGE OF COMPANY NAME
Section  157(1)(a)  of  the  Corporations  Act  provides  that  a  company  may 
change  its  name  if  the  company  passes  a  special  resolution  adopting  a  new 
name.
Resolution 12 seeks the approval of Shareholders for the Company to change its 
name to “Dotz Nano Ltd”. The Board proposes this change of name on the basis 
that  it  more  accurately  reflects  the  proposed  operations  of  the  Company 
following Settlement.
If  Resolution  12  is  passed  the  change  of  name  will  take  effect  after  ASIC  alters 
the details of the Company’s registration.
The proposed name has been reserved by the Company and if Resolution 12 is 
passed,  the  Company  will  lodge  a  copy  of  the  special  resolution  with  ASIC 
following Settlement in order to effect the change.
15.
RESOLUTIONS  13  TO  17  –  PARTICIPATION  OF  RELATED  PARTIES  IN  THE  CAPITAL 
RAISING  –  MR  FALDI  ISMAIL,  DR  MOTI  GROSS,  MR  MENASHE  BARUCH,  MR  STEVE 
BAJIC AND MR ATHAN LEKKAS
15.1
General
Pursuant  to  Resolution  8  the  Company  is  seeking  Shareholder  approval  for  the 
Capital Raising.
Mr Faldi Ismail, Dr Moti Gross, Mr Menashe Baruch, Mr Steve Bajic and Mr Athan 
Lekkas  wish  to  participate  in  the  Capital  Raising  (together,  the  Related  Party 
Participants), subject to Shareholder approval being obtained.
These  Resolutions  seek  Shareholder  approval  for  the  issue  of  up  to  2,000,000 
Capital Raising Shares to Mr Faldi Ismail, up to 1,000,000 Capital Raising Shares to 
Mr Athan Lekkas and up to 500,000 Capital Raising Shares each to Dr Moti Gross, 
Mr Menashe Baruch and Mr Steve Bajic (on a post-Consolidation basis) to each 
of  the Related  Party  Participants  (or  their  respective nominees)  arising from  the 
participation by the Related Party Participants in the Capital Raising on the terms 
and conditions set out below (Participation).
15.2
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act
A  summary  of  Chapter  2E  of  the  Corporations  Act  is  set  out  in  Section  12.2 
above.
The  Participation  will  result  in  the  issue  of  Shares  which  constitutes  giving  a 
financial  benefit  and  the  Related  Party  Participants  are  related  parties  of  the 
Company by virtue of being Proposed Directors.
The Directors consider that Shareholder approval pursuant to Chapter 2E of the 
Corporations  Act  is  not  required  in  respect  of  the  Participation  because  the 
Shares will be issued to the Related Party Participants on the same terms as the 
Shares to be issued to non-related party participants in the Capital Raising and 
as such the giving of the financial benefit is on arm’s length terms.
Notice of Meeting
58
15.3
ASX Listing Rule 10.11
A summary of ASX Listing Rule 10.11 is set out in Section 12.3 above.
As  the  Participation  involves  the  issue  of  Shares  to  related  parties  of  the 
Company,  Shareholder  approval  pursuant  to  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.11  is  required 
unless an exception applies.  It is the view of the Directors that the exceptions set 
out in ASX Listing Rule 10.12 do not apply in the current circumstances.
15.4
Technical Information required by ASX Listing Rule 10.13
Pursuant  to  and  in  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  10.13,  the  following 
information is provided in relation to the Participation:
(a)
the  Shares  will  be  issued  to  Messrs  Mr  Faldi  Ismail,  Dr  Moti  Gross,  Mr 
Menashe  Baruch,  Mr  Steve  Bajic  and  Mr  Athan  Lekkas  (or  their 
respective nominees);
(b)
the maximum number of Shares to be issued is:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
up  to  2,000,000  Shares  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  Mr 
Faldi Ismail (or his nominee);
up  to  500,000  Shares  to  Dr  Moti  Gross  (on  a  post-Consolidation 
basis) (or his nominee);
up  to  500,000  Shares  to  Mr  Menashe  Baruch  (on  a  post-
Consolidation basis) (or his nominee);
up to 500,000 Shares to Mr Steve Bajic (on a post-Consolidation 
basis) (or his nominee); and
(v)
up to 1,000,000 Shares to Mr Athan Lekkas (or his nominee).
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
the  Shares  will  be  issued  no  later  than  1  month  after  the  date  of  the 
Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by any ASX waiver 
or  modification  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules)  and  it  is  intended  that  issue  of 
the Shares will occur on the same date;
the issue price will be $0.20 per Share, being the same issue price as all 
other Shares to be issued under the Capital Raising;
the  Shares  issued  will  be  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  in  the  capital  of  the 
Company  issued  on  the same terms and  conditions as the  Company’s 
existing Shares; and
the funds raised will be  used for the same purposes as the funds raised 
under  the  Capital  Raising  as  set  out  in  Section  4.6  of  this  Explanatory 
Statement.
Approval pursuant  to  ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is not  required  for  the Participation  as 
approval is being obtained under ASX Listing Rule 10.11.  Accordingly, the issue 
of Shares to the Related Party Participants (or their respective nominees) will not 
be  included  in  the  use  of  the  Company’s  15%  annual  placement  capacity 
pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 7.1.
Notice of Meeting
59
16.
RESOLUTIONS 18 TO 22 – ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
Clause 6.2 of the Company’s Constitution allows the Company to elect a person 
or  persons  as  a  Director  by  resolution  passed  in  general  meeting.  A  Proposed 
Director elected at a general meeting is taken to have been elected with effect 
immediately after the end of that general meeting unless the resolution by which 
the Proposed Director is appointed or elected specifies a different time.
No person other than a Proposed Director seeking re-election shall be eligible for 
election  to  the  office  of  Director  at  any  general  meeting  unless  the  person  or 
some  Shareholder  intending  to  propose  his  or  her  nomination  has,  at  least 
30 Business  Days  before  the  meeting,  left  at  the  registered  office  of  the 
Company  a  notice  in  writing  duly  signed  by  the  nominee  giving  his  or  her 
consent to the nomination and signifying his or her candidature for the office or 
the intention of the Shareholder to propose the person.
Notice  of  every  candidature  for  election  as  a  Director  shall  be  given  to  each 
Shareholder with or as part of the notice of meeting at which the election is to 
take place.
If the number of nominations exceeds the maximum number of five (5) directors 
as set out in the Constitution, the order in which the candidates shall be put up 
for  election  shall  be  determined  by  the  drawing  of  lots  supervised  by  the 
Directors  and  once  sufficient  candidates  have  been  elected  to  fill  up  the 
vacancies  available,  the  remaining  candidates  shall  be  deemed  defeated 
without the need for votes to be taken on their election.
Pursuant  to  Resolutions  18  to  22,  Mr  Faldi  Ismail,  Dr  Moti  Gross,  Mr  Menashe 
Baruch, Mr Steve Bajic and Mr Athan Lekkas seek election from Shareholders to 
be appointed upon Settlement occurring.
The qualifications and experience of the Proposed Directors is set out below:
Dr. Moti Gross
Moti  Gross  has  extensive  managerial  experience 
leading  technological 
companies,  developing  business  strategy  for  ongoing  enterprises  and  start-ups. 
Dr. Gross has promoted various technological projects including raising capital in 
both  government  and  private  sectors,  developing  and  remodelling  business 
tactics and strategies and building business models for numerous companies. Dr. 
Gross earned his PhD in Economics and Finance at Oxford University.
Mr. Menashe Baruch
Mr. Menashe Baruch is an experienced entrepreneur in the field of retail sales. As 
an investor, Mr. Baruch invested in hi-tech companies over the past 10 years and 
has  substantial  holdings  in  real  estate  and  hi-tech  ventures.  Among  those 
investments  are:  Bluesphere  Corp. 
(NASDAQ:BLSP),  Savicell  Diagnostics, 
Ultracharge Ltd., Transbiodielsel, Global Energy and L.N. Incubator, an Israeli hi-
tech and green technology incubator with more than 15 startup ventures.
Mr. Steve Bajic
Since  1996,  Mr  Bajic  has  been  the  President  of  Hexagon  Ventures  Inc.,  a 
company  providing  financial  and  business  services  consulting  to  private  and 
publicly listed companies. Mr. Bajic has been in the finance industry for 20 years 
and  has  helped  raise  capital  in  various  industries  at  all  levels  of  company 
advancement.  He  has  an  extensive  resume  of  current  and  past  private  and
Notice of Meeting
60
public  director  and  officer  positions.  Mr.  Bajic  holds  a  Financial  Management 
Diploma from the British Columbia Institute of Technology.
Mr Faldi Ismail
Mr Ismail is an experienced corporate advisor specialising in the restructure and 
recapitalisation of ASX listed companies. He has a significant amount of ASX and 
investment  banking  experience  and  has  advised  on  numerous  cross  border 
transactions  including  capital  raisings,  structuring  of  acquisitions  and  joint 
ventures overseas. Mr Ismail is also the founder and operator of Otsana Capital, 
a boutique advisory firm specialising in mergers and acquisitions, capital raisings 
and  Initial  Public  Offerings.  Mr  Ismail  currently  sits  on  the  board  of  a  number  of 
ASX listed companies.
Mr Athan Lekkas
Mr  Lekkas  has  participated  in  a  broad  range  of  business  and  corporate 
transactions on the ASX and specialising in the restructure and recapitalisation of 
various  companies  through  his  institutional  funding  contacts  in  Asia  and  North 
America.  Mr  Lekkas  has  completed  successful 
in 
manufacturing,  logistics  and  implemented  successful  operational  changes 
restoring companies into profitability. He was instrumental in the structuring and 
funding  of  ASX  listed  Xped  Limited  (XPE)  transaction.  Mr  Lekkas  is  the  current 
CEO of XPE
turnaround  projects
Mr Lekkas is also a Director of ASX listed investment company First Growth Funds 
Limited.
17.
RESOLUTION 23 – CONSOLIDATION OF CAPITAL
17.1
Background
If  Resolution  23  is  passed  and  excluding  any  Securities  issued  pursuant  to  the 
other  Resolutions,  the  number  of  Shares  on  issue  will  be  reduced  from  ten  (10) 
Shares to one (1) Share (subject to rounding).
17.2
Legal requirements
Section  254H  of  the  Corporations  Act  provides  that  a  company  may,  by 
resolution  passed  in  a  general  meeting,  convert  all  or  any  of  its  shares  into  a 
larger or smaller number.
17.3
Fractional entitlements
Not  all  Security  Holders  will  hold  that  number  of  Shares  or  Options  (as  the  case 
may  be)  which  can  be  evenly  divided  by  ten.    Where  a  fractional  entitlement 
occurs, the Company will round that fraction up to the nearest whole Security.
17.4
Taxation
It  is  not  considered  that  any  taxation  implications  will  exist  for  Security  holders 
arising  from  the  Consolidation.    However,  Security  holders  are  advised  to  seek 
their  own  tax  advice  on  the  effect  of  the  Consolidation  and  neither  the 
Company,  nor  its  advisers,  accept  any  responsibility  for  the  individual  taxation 
implications arising from the Consolidation.
Notice of Meeting
61
17.5
Holding statements
From  the  date  of  the  Consolidation,  all  holding  statements  for  Securities  will 
cease  to  have  any  effect,  except  as  evidence  of  entitlement  to  a  certain 
number of Securities on a post-Consolidation basis.
After  the  Consolidation  becomes  effective,  the  Company  will  arrange  for  new 
holding statements for Securities to be issued to holders of those Securities.
It  is the responsibility  of  each  Security  Holder  to  check  the number  of  Securities 
held prior to disposal or exercise (as the case may be).
17.6
Effect on capital structure
The effect which the Consolidation will have on the Company’s capital structure 
is set out in the table in Section 4.8 above
17.7
Indicative timetable*
If  the  Essential  Resolutions  are  all  passed,  the  Consolidation  will  take  effect  in 
accordance with the timetable set out in Section 4.10 above.
18.
RESOLUTION 24 – APPROVAL OF EMPLOYEE INCENTIVE OPTION PLAN
Resolution  24  seeks  Shareholder  approval  for  the  adoption  of  the  employee
incentive scheme titled “Employee Incentive Option Plan” (Plan) in accordance
with ASX Listing Rule 7.2 (Exception 9(b)).
A summary of ASX Listing Rule 7.1 is set out in Section 7.1 above.
ASX Listing Rule 7.2 (Exception 9(b)) sets out an exception to ASX Listing Rule 7.1
which provides that issues under an employee incentive scheme are exempt for
a  period  of  3  years  from  the  date  on  which  shareholders  approve  the  issue  of
securities under the scheme as an exception to ASX Listing Rule 7.1.
If Resolution 24 is passed, the Company will be able to issue securities under the
Plan  to  eligible  participants  over  a  period  of  3  years  without  impacting  on  the
Company’s  ability  to  issue  up  to  15%  of  its  total  ordinary  securities  without
Shareholder  approval  in  any  12  month  period.    The  Company’s  Shareholders
have  not  previously  approved  the  Company’s  adoption  of  the  Plan  and,  as
such, no securities have been issued under the Plan to date.
The objective of the Plan is to attract, motivate and retain key employees and it
is considered by the Company that the adoption of the Plan and the future issue
of performance Option under the Plan will provide selected Directors (executive
or  non-executive)  and  permitted  employees  and  contractors  of  the  Company
with the opportunity to participate in the future growth of the Company.
Any future issues of securities under the Plan to a related party or a person whose
relation  with  the  Company  or  the  related  party  is,  in  ASX’s  opinion,  such  that
approval should be obtained will require additional Shareholder approval under
ASX Listing Rule 10.14 at the relevant time.
A summary of the key terms and conditions of the Plan is set out in  Schedule 4.
In  addition,  a  copy  of  the  Plan  is  available  for  review  by  Shareholders  at  the
registered office of the Company until the date of the Meeting.  A copy of the
Plan can also be sent to Shareholders upon request to the Company Secretary
Notice of Meeting
62
(+61  8  6377  8043).    Shareholders  are  invited  to  contact  the  Company  if 
they have any queries or concerns.
Notice of Meeting
63
G L O S S A R Y
$ means Australian dollars.
Acquisition has the meaning given at Section 4.1.
Annual General Meeting or Meeting means the meeting convened by the Notice.
ASIC means the Australian Securities & Investments Commission.
ASX  means  ASX  Limited  (ACN  008  624  691)  or  the  financial  market  operated  by  ASX 
Limited, as the context requires.
ASX Listing Rules means the Listing Rules of ASX.
BGN  means  B.G.  Negev  Technologies  and  Applications  Ltd  (a  company  wholly  owned 
by Ben-Gurion University in Israel).
BGN Licensed IP has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(d).
BGN Research and Licence Agreement has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(d).
Board means the current board of directors of the Company.
Business  Day  means  Monday  to  Friday  inclusive,  except  New  Year’s  Day,  Good  Friday, 
Easter Monday, Christmas Day, Boxing Day, and any other day that ASX declares is not a 
business day.
Capital Raising has the meaning given at Section 4.1.
Chair means the chair of the Meeting.
Closely Related Party of a member of the Key Management Personnel means:
(a)
a spouse or child of the member;
(b)
a child of the member’s spouse;
(c)
a dependent of the member or the member’s spouse;
(d)
anyone  else  who  is  one  of  the  member’s  family  and  may  be  expected  to 
influence  the  member,  or  be  influenced  by  the  member,  in  the  member’s 
dealing with the entity;
(e)
a company the member controls; or
(f)
a person prescribed by the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Cth) for the purposes 
of the definition of ‘closely related party’ in the Corporations Act.
Company  or  NFE  means  Northern  Iron  Limited  (to  be  renamed  “Dotz  Nano  Limited”) 
(ACN 125 264 575).
Consideration Shares means 66,000,000 Shares to be issued to the Vendors at Settlement.
Consideration Securities means the Consideration Shares and the Performance Shares.
Consolidation means the consolidation of the Company’s capital, on the basis of 1 Share 
for every 10 Shares held.
Notice of Meeting
64
Constitution means the Company’s constitution.
Convertible  Loan  Agreements  means  the  NFE  Convertible  Loan  Agreements  and  the 
Dotz Convertible Loan Agreement.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Directors means the current directors of the Company.
Dotz has the meaning given at Section 4.1.
Dotz Convertible Loan has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(f)
Dotz Convertible Loan Agreement has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(f).
Dotz Convertible Lenders has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(f).
Dotz Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Dotz.
Essential Resolutions means Resolutions 3-12 and 18-23 as set out in this Notice.
Explanatory Statement means the explanatory statement accompanying the Notice.
Facilitators has the meaning set out in Section 8.1.
GML means Graphene Materials Ltd (a wholly owned subsidiary of Dotz incorporated in 
Israel).
GQDs means graphene quantum dots.
HOA has the meaning given at Section 4.1.
Israel Subsidiary has the meaning given at Section 4.1.
Key  Management  Personnel  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  accounting  standards 
issued  by  the  Australian  Accounting Standards  Board  and  means  those  persons having 
authority  and  responsibility  for  planning,  directing  and  controlling  the  activities  of  the 
Company, or if the Company is part of a consolidated entity, of the consolidated entity, 
directly  or  indirectly,  including  any  director  (whether  executive  or  otherwise)  of  the 
Company,  or  if  the  Company  is  part  of  a  consolidated  entity,  of  an  entity  within  the 
consolidated group.
Lead Manager Securities means the Lead Manager Shares and Lead Manager Options.
Lead  Manager  Shares  means  1,750,0000  Shares  to  be  issued  to  the  Facilitators  in 
accordance with Resolutions 6 and 7.
Lead  Manager  Options  means  4,500,000  Options  to  be  issued  on  the  terms  and 
conditions set out in Schedule 2.
Maximum Subscription has the meaning given at Section 4.5.
Merger has the meaning given at Section 4.1.
Minimum Subscription has the meaning given at Section 4.5.
NFE Convertible Loan has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(e).
NFE Convertible Loan Agreement has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(e).
Notice of Meeting
65
NFE Convertible Lenders has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(e).
Notice  or  Notice  of  Meeting  means  this  notice  of  meeting  including  the  Explanatory 
Statement and the Proxy Form.
Option means an option to acquire a Share
Optionholder means a holder of an Option.
Performance Shares means 66,000,000 performance rights to be issued to the Vendors at 
Settlement with the terms and conditions set out in Schedule 1.
Proposed  Directors  means  Mr  Faldi  Ismail,  Dr  Moti  Gross,  Mr  Menashe  Baruch,  Mr  Steve 
Bajic and Mr Athan Lekkas.
Prospectus  means  the  prospectus  prepared  by  the  Company  in  accordance  with 
Chapter  6D  of  the  Corporations  Act,  pursuant  to  which  the  Capital  Raising  up  to  the 
Maximum Subscription.
Proxy Form means the proxy form accompanying the Notice.
QDs means quantum dots.
Research Project has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(b).
Resolutions  means  the  resolutions  set  out  in  the  Notice,  or  any  one  of  them,  as  the 
context requires.
Rice University Licence Agreement has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(b).
Securities  mean  all  securities  of  the  Company,  including  a  Share,  an  Option  or  a 
Performance Right (as the context requires).
Settlement  means  settlement  of  the  Acquisition  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the 
HOA.
Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
Shareholder means a registered holder of a Share.
Sponsored Research Agreement has the meaning set out in Section 4.7(c).
Transaction  Options  means  1,000,000  Options  to  be  issued  on  the  terms  and  conditions 
set out in Schedule 3.
Vendors has the meaning given at Section 4.1.
WST means Western Standard Time as observed in Perth, Western Australia.
Notice of Meeting
66
S C H E D U L E   1   –   T E R M S   A N D   C O N D I T I O N S   O F   P E R F O R M A N C E   S H A R E S
1.
Terms of Performance Shares
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(Performance Shares): Each Performance Share is a share in the capital 
of NFE.
(General Meetings): The Performance Shares shall confer on the holder 
(Holder)  the  right  to  receive  notices  of  general  meetings  and  financial 
reports  and  accounts  of  NFE  that  are  circulated  to  NFE  shareholders.  
Holders have the right to attend general meetings of NFE.
(No Voting Rights): The Performance Shares do not entitle the Holder to 
vote on any resolutions proposed at a general meeting of NFE, subject 
to  any  voting  rights  under  the  Corporations  Act  2001  (Cth)  or  the  ASX 
Listing Rules where such rights cannot be excluded by these terms.
(No Dividend Rights): The Performance Shares do not entitle the Holder 
to any dividends.
(No  Rights  to  Return  of  Capital):  The  Performance  Shares  may  not 
participate in the surplus profits or assets of NFE.
(Transfer  of  Performance  Shares):  The  Performance  Shares  are  not 
transferable.
(Reorganisation of Capital): In the event that the issued capital of NFE is 
reconstructed,  all  rights  of  a  Holder  will  be  changed  to  the  extent 
necessary  to  comply  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  at  the  time  of 
reorganisation provided that, subject to compliance with the ASX Listing 
Rules,  following  such  reorganisation  the  economic  and  other  rights  of 
the Holder are not diminished or terminated.
(Application to ASX): The Performance Shares will not be quoted on ASX.  
If  NFE  is  listed  on  the  ASX  at  the  time,  upon  conversion  of  the 
Performance  Shares  into  NFE  Shares  in  accordance  with  these  terms, 
NFE must within seven (7) days after the conversion, apply for and use its 
best  endeavours  to  obtain  the  official  quotation  on  ASX  of  the  NFE 
Shares arising from the conversion.
(Participation  in  Entitlements  and  Bonus  Issues):  Subject  always  to  the 
rights under item (g) (Reorganisation of Capital), holders of Performance 
Shares will not be entitled to participate in new issues of capital offered 
to holders of NFE Shares such as bonus issues and entitlement issues.
(Amendments  required  by  ASX):  The  terms  of  the  Performance  Shares 
may  be  amended  as  necessary  by  the  NFE  board  in  order  to  comply 
with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules,  or  any  directions  of  ASX  regarding  the  terms 
provided  that,  subject  to  compliance  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules, 
following  such  amendment,  the  economic  and  other  rights  of  the 
Holder are not diminished or terminated.
(k)
(No  Other  Rights):  The  Performance  Shares  give  the  Holders  no  rights 
other than those expressly provided by these terms and those provided 
at law where such rights at law cannot be excluded by these terms.
Notice of Meeting
67
2.
Conversion of the Performance Shares
(a)
(Milestones):  The  Performance  Shares  will  convert  upon  satisfaction  of 
any one of the following milestones:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
22,000,000  Performance  Shares  shall  convert  upon  Dotz 
achieving  the  production  and  distribution  of  an  aggregate  of 
20  kilograms  of  GQDs  through  formal  off-take  agreements  or 
commercial  samples with  a  reputable  third  party  within  an  18 
month period from the date of issue of the Performance Shares 
(Issue Date);
22,000,000  Performance  Shares  shall  convert  upon  Dotz 
achieving  the  production  and  distribution  of  an  aggregate  of 
50  kilograms  of  GQDs  in  any  12  month  period  through  formal 
off-take agreements with a reputable third party within a period 
of 30 months from the Issue Date; and
22,000,000  Performance  Shares  shall  convert  upon  Dotz 
achieving  the  production  and  distribution  of  an  aggregate  of 
100  kilograms  of  GQDs  in  any  12  month  period  through  formal 
off-take agreements with a reputable third party within a period 
of 48 months from the Issue Date,
(each referred to as a Milestone).
(b)
(Conversion of Performance Shares): Subject to paragraph (c) below, in 
the event a Milestone is satisfied, all of the Performance Shares held by 
the Holder will convert into an equal number of NFE Shares.
(c)
(No Conversion if Corporations Act Contravention): In the event that:
(i)
(ii)
the  conversion  of  the  Performance  Shares  into  Shares  would 
result  in  the  Holder  being  in  contravention  of  section  606(1)  of 
the  Corporations  Act,  then  the  conversion  of  such  number  of 
Performance Shares that would cause the contravention will be 
deferred  until  such  time  or  times  thereafter  the  conversion 
would not result in such a breach; and
the above paragraph (c)(i) applies, the Holder may, by notice 
in  writing,  require  the  Company  to  call  a  meeting  of  its 
Shareholders for the purposes of obtaining approval under item 
7, section 611 of the Corporations Act for the conversion of the 
Performance Shares, in which case the Company must as soon 
as  practicable  call  a  meeting  of  its  shareholders  for  the 
purposes of obtaining approval under item 7, section 611 of the 
Corporations Act for the conversion of the Performance Shares 
into Shares
(d)
(e)
(No Conversion  if Milestone not achieved):  Any Performance Share not 
converted  into  an  NFE  Share  within  the  period  required  under  the 
relevant Milestone will be automatically redeemed by NFE for a sum of 
$0.0000001 per Performance Share within 10 Business Days.
(After  Conversion):  The  NFE  Shares 
issued  on  conversion  of  the 
Performance Shares will, as and from 5.00pm (WST) on the date of issue, 
rank  equally  with  and  confer  rights  identical  with  all  other  NFE  Shares 
then on issue and, if NFE is listed on ASX at the time, application will be
Notice of Meeting
68
made by NFE to ASX for official quotation of the NFE Shares issued upon 
conversion.
(f)
(g)
(Conversion  Procedure)  NFE  will  issue  the  Holder  with  a  new  holding 
statement  for  the  NFE  Shares  as  soon  as  practicable  following  the 
conversion of the Performance Shares into NFE Shares.
(Ranking  of  Shares)  The  NFE  Shares  into  which  the  Performance  Shares 
will  convert  will  rank  pari  passu  in  all  respects  with  the  NFE  Shares  on 
issue at the date of conversion.
Notice of Meeting
69
S C H E D U L E   2   –   T E R M S   A N D   C O N D I T I O N S   O F   L E A D   M A N A G E R  
O P T I O N S
(a)
Entitlement
Each Lead Manager Option entitles the holder to subscribe for one Share upon 
exercise of the Lead Manager Option.
(b)
Exercise Price
Subject  to  paragraph  (j),  the  amount  payable  upon  exercise  of  each  Lead 
Manager Option will be $0.40 (Exercise Price)
(c)
Expiry Date
Each  Lead  Manager  Option  will  expire  at  5:00 pm  (WST)  on  the  date  that  is  36 
months  from  the  date  of  issue  (Expiry  Date).    A  Lead  Manager  Option  not 
exercised before the Expiry Date will automatically lapse on the Expiry Date.
(d)
Exercise Period
The Lead Manager Options are exercisable at any time on or prior to the Expiry 
Date (Exercise Period).
(e)
Notice of Exercise
The  Lead  Manager  Options  may  be  exercised  during  the  Exercise  Period  by 
notice  in  writing  to  NFE  in  the  manner  specified  on  the  Lead  Manager  Option 
certificate (Notice of Exercise) and payment of the Exercise Price for each Lead 
Manager  Option  being  exercised  in  Australian  currency  by  electronic  funds 
transfer or other means of payment acceptable to NFE.
(f)
Exercise Date
A Notice of Exercise is only effective on and from the later of the date of receipt 
of the Notice of Exercise and the date of receipt of the payment of the Exercise 
Price for each Lead Manager Option being exercised in cleared funds (Exercise 
Date).
(g)
Timing of issue of NFE Shares on exercise
Within 15 Business Days after the Exercise Date, NFE will:
(i)
(ii)
issue the number of Shares required under these terms and conditions in 
respect of the number of Lead Manager Options specified in the Notice 
of Exercise and for which cleared funds have been received by NFE;
if  required,  give  ASX  a  notice  that  complies  with  section  708A(5)(e)  of 
the  Corporations  Act,  or,  if  NFE  is  unable  to  issue  such  a  notice,  lodge 
with ASIC a prospectus prepared in accordance with the Corporations 
Act  and  do  all  such  things  necessary  to  satisfy  section  708A(11)  of  the 
Corporations Act to ensure that an offer for sale of the NFE Shares does 
not require disclosure to investors; and
(iii)
if  admitted  to  the  official  list  of  ASX  at  the  time,  apply  for  official 
quotation  on  ASX  of  NFE  Shares  issued  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  the  
Lead Manager Options.
Notice of Meeting
70
If  a  notice  delivered  under  paragraph  (g)(ii)  for  any  reason  is  not  effective  to 
ensure  that  an  offer  for  sale  of  the  NFE  Shares  does  not  require  disclosure  to 
investors, NFE must, no later than 20 Business Days after becoming aware of such 
notice being ineffective, lodge with ASIC a prospectus prepared in accordance 
with  the  Corporations  Act  and  do  all  such  things  necessary  to  satisfy  section 
708A(11)  of  the  Corporations  Act  to  ensure  that  an  offer  for  sale  of  the  NFE 
Shares does not require disclosure to investors.
(h)
NFE Shares issued on exercise
NFE Shares issued on exercise of the Lead Manager Options rank equally with 
the then issued shares of NFE.
(i)
Quotation of NFE Shares issued on exercise
If admitted to the official list of ASX at the time, application will be made by NFE 
to ASX for quotation of the NFE Shares issued upon the exercise of the Lead 
Manager Options.
(j)
Reconstruction of capital
If  at  any  time  the  issued  capital  of  NFE  is  reconstructed,  all  rights  of  an 
Optionholder  are to  be changed  in  a manner  consistent  with  the Corporations 
Act and the ASX Listing Rules at the time of the reconstruction.
(k)
Participation in new issues
There  are  no  participation  rights  or  entitlements  inherent  in  the  Lead  Manager 
Options  and  holders  will  not  be  entitled  to  participate  in  new  issues  of  capital 
offered  to  NFE  shareholders  during  the  currency  of  the  Lead  Manager  Options 
without exercising the Lead Manager Options.
(l)
Change in exercise price
A Lead Manager Option does not confer the right to a change in Exercise Price 
or  a  change  in  the  number  of  underlying  securities  over  which  the  Lead 
Manager Option can be exercised.
(m)
Unquoted
NFE will not apply for quotation of the Lead Manager Options on ASX.
(n)
Transferability
The Lead Manager Options are transferable subject to any restriction or escrow 
arrangements imposed by ASX or under applicable Australian securities laws.
Notice of Meeting
71
S C H E D U L E   3   –   T E R M S   A N D   C O N D I T I O N S   O F   T H E   T R A N S A C T I O N  
O P T I O N S
(a)
Entitlement
Each  Transaction  Option  entitles  the  holder  to  subscribe  for  one  Share  upon 
exercise of the Transaction Option.
(b)
Exercise Price
Subject  to  paragraph  (j)  below,  the  amount  payable  upon  exercise  of  each 
Transaction Option will be $0.30 (Exercise Price)
(c)
Expiry Date
Each  Transaction  Option  will  expire  at  5:00 pm  (WST)  on  the  date  that  is  36 
months from the date of issue (Expiry Date).  A Transaction Option not exercised 
before the Expiry Date will automatically lapse on the Expiry Date.
(d)
Exercise Period
The Transaction Options are exercisable at any time on or prior to the Expiry Date 
(Exercise Period).
(e)
Notice of Exercise
The Transaction Options may be exercised during the Exercise Period by notice 
in  writing  to  NFE  in  the  manner  specified  on  the  Transaction  Option  certificate 
(Notice  of  Exercise)  and  payment  of  the  Exercise  Price  for  each  Transaction 
Option  being  exercised  in  Australian  currency  by  electronic  funds  transfer  or 
other means of payment acceptable to NFE.
(f)
Exercise Date
A Notice of Exercise is only effective on and from the later of the date of receipt 
of the Notice of Exercise and the date of receipt of the payment of the Exercise 
Price  for  each  Transaction  Option  being  exercised  in  cleared  funds  (Exercise 
Date).
(g)
Timing of issue of NFE Shares on exercise
Within 15 Business Days after the Exercise Date, NFE will:
(i)
(ii)
issue the number of Shares required under these terms and conditions in 
respect of the number of Transaction Options specified in the Notice of 
Exercise and for which cleared funds have been received by NFE;
if  required,  give  ASX  a  notice  that  complies  with  section  708A(5)(e)  of 
the  Corporations  Act,  or,  if  NFE  is  unable  to  issue  such  a  notice,  lodge 
with ASIC a prospectus prepared in accordance with the Corporations 
Act  and  do  all  such  things  necessary  to  satisfy  section  708A(11)  of  the 
Corporations Act to ensure that an offer for sale of the NFE Shares does 
not require disclosure to investors; and
(iii)
if  admitted  to  the  official  list  of  ASX  at  the  time,  apply  for  official 
quotation  on  ASX  of  NFE  Shares  issued  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  the 
Transaction Options.
Notice of Meeting
72
If  a  notice  delivered  under  paragraph  (g)(ii)  for  any  reason  is  not  effective  to 
ensure  that  an  offer  for  sale  of  the  NFE  Shares  does  not  require  disclosure  to 
investors, NFE must, no later than 20 Business Days after becoming aware of such 
notice being ineffective, lodge with ASIC a prospectus prepared in accordance 
with  the  Corporations  Act  and  do  all  such  things  necessary  to  satisfy  section 
708A(11)  of  the  Corporations  Act  to  ensure  that  an  offer  for  sale  of  the  NFE 
Shares does not require disclosure to investors.
(h)
NFE Shares issued on exercise
NFE Shares issued on exercise of the Transaction Options rank equally with the 
then issued shares of NFE.
(i)
Quotation of NFE Shares issued on exercise
If admitted to the official list of ASX at the time, application will be made by NFE 
to ASX for quotation of the NFE Shares issued upon the exercise of the 
Transaction Options.
(j)
Reconstruction of capital
If  at  any  time  the  issued  capital  of  NFE  is  reconstructed,  all  rights  of  an 
Optionholder  are to  be changed  in  a manner  consistent  with  the Corporations 
Act and the ASX Listing Rules at the time of the reconstruction.
(k)
Participation in new issues
There  are  no  participation  rights  or  entitlements  inherent  in  the  Transaction 
Options  and  holders  will  not  be  entitled  to  participate  in  new  issues  of  capital 
offered  to  NFE  shareholders  during  the  currency  of  the  Transaction  Options 
without exercising the Transaction Options.
(l)
Change in exercise price
A Transaction Option does not confer the right to a change in Exercise Price or a 
change in the number of underlying securities over which the Transaction Option 
can be exercised.
(m)
Unquoted
NFE will not apply for quotation of the Transaction Options on ASX.
(n)
Transferability
The  Transaction  Options  are  transferable  subject  to  any  restriction  or  escrow 
arrangements imposed by ASX or under applicable Australian securities laws.
Notice of Meeting
73
S C H E D U L E   4   –   S U M M A R Y   O F   E M P L O Y E E   I N C E N T I V E   O P T I O N   P L A N
The material terms and conditions of the Employee Incentive Option Plan are as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Eligibility and Grant of Plan Options: The Board may grant Plan Options to any full 
or  part  time  employee  or  Director  of  the  Company  or  an  associated  body 
corporate  or  subject  to,  and  in  accordance  with,  any  necessary  ASIC  relief 
being obtained, a casual employee or contractor of the Company or any or an 
associated  body  corporate  (Eligible  Participant).  Plan  Options may  be granted 
by the Board at any time.
Consideration: Each Plan Option issued under the Plan will be issued for nil cash 
consideration.
Conversion:  Each  Plan  Option  is  exercisable  into  one  Share  in  the  Company 
ranking equally in all respect with the existing issued Shares in the Company.
Exercise  Price  and  Expiry  Date:  The  exercise  price  and  expiry  date  for  Plan 
Options  granted  under  the  Plan  will  be  determined  by  the  Board  prior  to  the 
grant of the Plan Options.
Exercise Restrictions: The Plan Options granted under the Plan may be subject to 
conditions on exercise as may be fixed by the Directors prior to grant of the Plan 
Options (Exercise Conditions). Any restrictions imposed by the Directors must be 
set out in the offer for the Plan Options.
Renounceability:  Eligible  Participants  may  renounce  their  offer  in  favour  of  a 
nominee (the Eligible Participants and their nominees are each Participants).
Lapsing of Plan Options: Subject to the terms of the offer made to a Participant, 
an unexercised Plan Option will lapse:
(i)
on the Eligible Participant ceasing employment with the Company and:
(A)
(B)
any  Exercise  Conditions  have  not  been  met  by  the  date  the 
Relevant  Person  ceases  to  be  an  Eligible  Participant  (Ceasing 
Date); or
where any Exercise Conditions have been met by the Ceasing 
Date  or  the  Plan  Option  is  not  subject  to  any  Exercise 
Conditions,  the  Participant  does  not  exercise  the  Plan  Option 
within  a  period  of  six  (6)  months  after  the  Ceasing  Date  (or  a 
further  date  as  determined  by  the  Board  after  the  Ceasing 
Date);
(ii)
if any Exercise Condition is unable to be met; or
(iii)
the expiry date has passed.
Share  Restriction  Period:  Shares  issued  on  the  exercise  of  Plan  Options  may  be 
subject  to a restriction that they may not be transferred or otherwise dealt with 
until a restriction period has expired, as specified in the offer for the Plan Options.
Disposal of Options: Plan Options will not be transferable and will not be quoted 
on  the  ASX,  unless  the  offer  provides  otherwise  or  the  Board  in  its  absolute 
discretion approves.
Notice of Meeting
74
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
Trigger Events: The Company may permit Plan Options to be exercised in certain 
circumstances where there is a change in control of the Company (including by 
takeover) or entry into a scheme of arrangement.
Participation: There are no participating rights or entitlements inherent in the Plan 
Options  and  holders  will  not  be  entitled  to  participate  in  new  issues  of  capital 
offered to Shareholders during the currency of the Plan Options.
Change in exercise price:   A Plan Option will not confer a right to  a change in 
exercise  price  or  a  change  in  the  number  of  underlying  Shares  over  which  the 
Plan Option can be exercised.
Reorganisation:  If  at  any  time  the  capital  of  the  Company  is  reorganised 
(including  consolidation,  subdivision,  reduction  or  return),  all  rights  of  a 
Participant are to be changed in a manner consistent with the Corporations Act 
and the ASX Listing Rules at the time of the reorganisation.
Limitations  on  Offers:  The  Company  must  take  reasonable  steps  to  ensure  that 
the number of Shares to be received on exercise of Plan Options offered under 
an offer when aggregated with:
(i)
(ii)
the number of Shares that would be issued if each outstanding offer for 
Shares, units of Shares or options to acquire Shares under the Plan or any 
other employee share scheme of the Company were to be exercised or 
accepted; and
the  number  of  Shares  issued  during  the  previous  5  years  from  the 
exercise  of  Plan  Options issued  under  the Plan  (or  any  other  employee 
share plan of the Company extended only to Eligible Participants),
does  not  exceed  5%  of  the  total  number  of  Shares  on  issue  at  the  time  of  an 
offer (but disregarding any offer of Shares or option to acquire Shares that can 
ASIC Class Order 03/184).
Notice of Meeting
75
S C H E D U L E   5   –   P R O   F O R M A   B A L A N C E   S H E E T S   B A S E D   O N   T H E  
A S S U M P T I O N   O F   A C C E P T A N C E   O F   F U L L   O V E R S U B C R I P T I O N S   F O R   A N  
A D D I T I O N A L   $ 1 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0   T O   R A I S E   A   T O T A L   O F   $ 6 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0   U N D E R  
T H E   C A P I T A L   R A I S I N G   A T   A   C A P I T A L   R A I S I N G   P R I C E   O F   $ 0 . 2 0
Min
Subscription
Pro-forma as
Max
Subscription
Pro-forma as
Audited 
as at 31
June 2015
Pro-Forma 
Adjustment
at 31
Pro-Forma
at 31
December
Adjustement
December
2015
2015
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
Current Assets
Note
$
Cash & cash equivalents
1,3
5,258
(2,071)
4,753
1,219
8,043
Trade and other 
receivables
Inventory
Prepayments
Other Current Assets
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets
Trade and other 
receivables
Mine properties
Property, plant and 
equipment
Deferred tax asset
Investment
Total Non-Current Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
Current Liabilities
6
2,653
(3,443)
19,486
(25,287)
310
(402)
51
(0)
(0)
0
51
(3,433)
(25,287)
(402)
51
(0)
(0)
0
51
27,707
(31,152
4,804
(27,862)
8094
1,417
(1,839)
(0)
(1,839)
38,828
(50,387)
151,839
(197,037)
3
(4)
0
5
(0)
(50,387)
(197,037)
(4)
12,371
12,371
12,371
192,087
(236,896)
12,375
(236,896)
(0)
0
5
(0)
12,371
12,375
219,794
(171,497)
(173)
171,497
(173)
Trade & other payables
2,4
(17,229)
22,185
(173)
22,185
(173)
Derivative financial 
liabilities
Provisions
Current tax liabilities
Interest bearing loans and 
borrowings
Total Current Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilites
Provisions
Interest bearing loans and
Notice of Meeting
4
4
4
4
4
(19,192)
(22,189)
-
24,905
28,795
-
(73,678)
95,612
(0)
0
-
0
24,905
28,795
-
95,612
(0)
0
-
0
(132,288)
171,497
(173)
171,497
(173)
(17,454)
(8,614)
22,650
10,895
(0)
(283)
22,650
10,895
(0)
(283)
76
borrowings
Total Non-Current 
Liabilities
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Issued Capital
Reserves
Accumulated Losses
TOTAL EQUITY
1
3
(26,068)
33,545
(158,356)
205,042
(284)
(457)
33,545
205,042
(284)
(457)
61,438
(63,006)
16,722
(59,716)
20,012
380,761
18,063
512,177
21,353
515,467
16,617
-
21,564
-
21,564
(335,940)
(81,069)
(517,018)
81,069)
(517,018)
61,438
(63,006)
16,722
(59,716)
20,012
-
(0)
(0)
(0)
(0)
Notes:  these  proforma  accounts  are  based  on  half  yearly  review  for  the  period  ended  31  Decemebr 
2012. 
 
1.
The issue and Shares of Options
Total ordinary trade creditors (subject to adjudication) and outstanding administration fees.
Cost of Recapitalisation and RTO Process and capital raising fees (6%).
Forgiveness of existing liabilities.
Unaudited  Dotz  Balance  Sheet  (Converted  from  USD  to  AUD  on  a  1.3742:1  rate)  as  at  31 
December 2015.
Acquisition of Dotz.
Conversion of NFE’s balance sheet (Converted from USD to AUD on a 1.2977:1 rate) as at 30 June 
2015.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Notice of Meeting
77
Northern 
Iron Ltd
Northern
Northern
Dotz Nano
Dotz Nano
Iron
Iron
Ltd
Ltd
Audited
as at
31.12.15
DOCA
Adjustment
Post DOCA  
Adjustment
Audited 
 31.12.15
Convertible
Note
Raising
Capital 
Raising
Minimum
Unaudited 
Proforma as 
at 31.12.15
Capital 
Raising
Maximum
Unaudited 
Proforma as 
at 31.12.15
Subscription
Minimum
Subscription
Maximum
(net of 
Costs)
Subscription
(net of 
Costs)
Subscription
Note 4
Note 3
Note 5
Note 6
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
AUD'000
Current Assets
Cash & cash 
equivalents
Trade and other 
receivables
Inventory
Prepayments
Marketable Securities
Other Current Assets
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets
Trade and other 
receivables
Mine properties
Property, plant and 
equipment
Deferred tax asset
Restricted Deposits
Notice of Meeting
86
489
575
736
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
53
123
-
-
-
-
-
86
489
575
913
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
33
34
350
350
4,098
5,759
5,038
6,699
53
-
-
123
-
-
53
-
-
123
-
4,098
5,936
5,038
6,876
-
-
33
-
34
-
-
33
-
34
78
Goodwill
Intangible Assets
Total Non-Current Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
Current Liabilities
-
86
-
-
-
489
1,138
577
1,783
2,696
-
-
-
575
Trade & other payables
(111,330)
111,330
-
(286)
Derivative financial 
liabilities
Provisions
Current tax liabilities
Convertible Notes
Interest bearing loans 
and borrowings
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(1,000)
(1,000)
-
-
-
Total Current Liabilities
(111,330)
110,330
(1,000)
(286)
Non-Current Liabilites
Provisions
Convertible loan, net to 
discount
Deferred tax liability
Derivative
Interest bearing loans 
and borrowings
Total Non-Current 
Liabilities
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(591)
(116)
(47)
-
350
(350)
(350)
-
4,098
1,350
1,138
577
1,783
7,719
(286)
-
-
-
-
-
-
5,038
1,350
1,138
577
1,783
8,659
(286)
-
-
-
-
-
1,350
(286)
1,350
(286)
-
(591)
(116)
(47)
-
-
(591)
(116)
(47)
-
Notice of Meeting
79
-
(754)
-
-
(754)
-
(754)
TOTAL LIABILITIES
(111,330)
110,330
(1,000)
(1,040)
(350)
1,350
(1,040)
1,350
(1,040)
NET ASSETS
(111,245)
EQUITY
110,820
(425)
1,656
Issued Capital
422,606
Reserves
-
-
-
422,606
3,135
-
Accumulated Losses
(533,851)
110,820
(423,031)
(1,479)
TOTAL EQUITY
(111,245)
110,820
(425)
1,656
Notes
-
-
5,448
6,679
6,388
7,619
6,350
14,048
7,350
15,048
-
(902)
5,448
(7,370)
6,679
(962)
6,388
-
(7,430)
7,619
1. Minimum Capital Raising of $5,000,000, with the ability to accept oversubscriptions of a further $1,000,000 to raise a maximum of $6,000,000, less costs of 6%.
2. Cost of Recapitalisation and RTO Process exclusive of capital raising fees.
3. Issue of $1,000,000 worth of convertible notes in NFE.
4. Disposal of assets and forgiveness of existing liabilities under the DOCA.
5. Dotz balance sheet converted from USD to AUD at 31 December 2015 (1USD : 1.3683AUD)
6. Dotz undertaking a convertible note capital raising of $350,000.
7. Under the terms of the Acquisition, NFE acquires all the issued share capital of Dotz by issuing a total of 66,000,000 Consideration Shares, to the Dotz Vendors 
(and facilitation shares), giving the Dotz Vendors a controlling interest in NFE and equating to a controlling interest in the combined entity following the 
Acquisition.  Dotz has thus been deemed the acquirer for accounting purposes as it will own approximately 92.33% (66,000,000 / 71,484,450) of the consolidated 
entity (prior to the shares issued in relation to the Offer). The acquisition of Dotz by NFE is not deemed to be a business combination, as NFE is not considered to be 
a business under AASB 3 Business Combinations.
As such the consolidation of these two companies is on the basis of the continuation of Dotz with no fair value adjustments, whereby Dotz is deemed to be the 
accounting parent.  Therefore the most appropriate treatment for the transaction is to account for it under AASB 2 Share Based Payments, whereby Dotz is 
deemed to have issued shares to NFE shareholders in exchange for the net assets held by NFE.
In this instance, the value of the NFE shares provided has been determined as the notional number of equity instruments that the shareholders of Dotz would have 
had to issue to NFE to give the owners of NFE the same percentage ownership in the combined entity. We have deemed this to be $4,563,233.
The pre-acquisition equity balances of NFE are eliminated against this increase in Share Capital upon consolidation and the balance is deemed to be the amount 
paid for the ASX listing status of NFE, being $4,988,423
Notice of Meeting
80
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Notice of Meeting
81
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Notice of Meeting
82
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Notice of Meeting
83
All registry communications to: 
Automic Registry Services 
PO Box 2226 
Strawberry Hills NSW 2012
Holder Number
NORTHERN IRON LIMITED 
(TO BE RENAMED DOTZ NANO LTD) 
ACN 125 264 575
Security Holder Appointment of Proxy – Annual General Meeting 
I/We being a Shareholder entitled to attend and vote at the Meeting, hereby appoint
(Name of Proxy)
OR
The Chair as my/our proxy
or failing the person so named or, if no person is named, the Chair, or the Chair’s nominee, to vote in accordance with the following directions, or, if 
no directions have been given, and subject to the relevant laws as the proxy sees fit, at the Meeting to be held at 10:00am (WST), on 2 September 
2016 at 108 Outram Street, West Perth, Western Australia 6005, and at any adjournment thereof. 
AUTHORITY FOR CHAIR TO VOTE UNDIRECTED PROXIES ON REMUNERATION RELATED RESOLUTIONS 
Where I/we have appointed the Chair as my/our proxy (or where the Chair becomes my/our proxy by default), I/we expressly authorise the Chair to 
exercise my/our proxy on Resolutions 1 and 24 (except where I/we have indicated a different voting intention below) even though Resolutions 1 and 
24 is connected directly or indirectly with the remuneration of a member of the Key Management Personnel, which includes the Chair. 
CHAIR’S VOTING INTENTION IN RELATION TO UNDIRECTED PROXIES 
The Chair intends to vote undirected proxies in favour of all Resolutions.  In exceptional circumstances the Chair may change his/her voting 
intention on any Resolution.  In the event this occurs an ASX announcement will be made immediately disclosing the reasons for the change. 
VOTING ON BUSINESS OF THE MEETING 
Resolutions 
1
For   Against  Abstain
Adoption of Remuneration Report
Resolutions 
13
For   Against  Abstain
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Re-election of Director –  
Mr Michael Davy 
Change to nature and scale of activities
Creation of a New Class of Securities – 
Performance Shares 
Issue of Consideration Securities
Issue of Lead Manager Securities and 
Transaction Options to Facilitators 
Issue of Lead Manager Securities to  
Otsana Pty Ltd 
Issue of Shares – Capital Raising
Issue of Shares upon Conversion under  
NFE Convertible Loan Agreements 
Issue of Shares to Benefico Pty Ltd upon 
Conversion under NFE Convertible Loan 
Agreement 
Issue of Shares upon Conversion under 
Dotz Convertible Loans 
Change of Company Name
Participation of Related Party in Capital 
Raising – Mr Faldi Ismail 
Participation of Related Party in Capital 
Raising – Dr Moti Gross 
Participation of Related Party in Capital 
Raising – Mr Menashe Baruch 
Participation of Related Party in Capital 
Raising – Mr Steve Bajic 
Participation of Related Party in Capital 
Raising – Mr Athan Lekkas 
Election of Director – Mr Faldi Ismail
14
15
16
17
18
19
Election of Director – Dr Moti Gross
20
21
Election of Director – Mr Menashe 
Baruch 
Election of Director – Mr Steve Bajic
22
Election of Director – Mr Athan Lekkas
23
Consolidation of Capital
24
Adoption of Employee Incentive Option 
Plan
Please note: If you mark the abstain box for a particular Resolution, you are directing your proxy not to vote on that Resolution on a show of hands or on a poll and 
your votes will not be counted in computing the required majority on a poll. 
SIGNATURE OF SHAREHOLDER(S): 
Individual or Shareholder 1 
 
 
Sole Director or  
Sole Director/ Company Secretary
Shareholder 3
Shareholder 2
Director / Company Secretary
Director
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING ‘APPOINTMENT OF PROXY’ FORM
1.
Appointing a proxy:
A Shareholder entitled to attend and cast a vote at the Meeting is entitled to appoint a proxy to attend and vote on their behalf at the 
Meeting.  If a Shareholder is entitled to cast 2 or more votes at the Meeting, the Shareholder may appoint a second proxy to attend and 
vote on their behalf at the Meeting.  However, where both proxies attend the Meeting, voting may only be exercised on a poll.
The appointment of a second proxy must be done on a separate copy of the Proxy Form and both forms must be lodged together.  A 
Shareholder who appoints 2 proxies may specify the proportion or number of votes each proxy is appointed to exercise.  If a Shareholder 
appoints 2 proxies and the appointments do not specify the proportion or number of the Shareholder’s votes each proxy is appointed to 
exercise, each proxy may exercise one-half of the votes.  Any fractions of votes resulting from the application of these principles will be 
disregarded.  A duly appointed proxy need not be a Shareholder.
2.
(Direction to vote):  A Shareholder may direct a proxy how to vote by marking one of the boxes opposite each item of business.  The 
direction may specify the proportion or number of votes that the proxy may exercise by writing the percentage or number of Shares next 
to the box marked for the relevant item of business.   Where a box  is not marked the proxy may vote as they choose subject to the 
relevant laws.  Where more than one box is marked on an item the vote will be invalid on that item.
3.
Signing instructions:




(Individual):  Where the holding is in one name, the Shareholder must sign.
(Joint holding):  Where the holding is in more than one name, all of the Shareholders should sign.
(Power of attorney):  If you have not already  provided the  power of attorney with the registry,  please attach a certified 
photocopy of the power of attorney to this Proxy Form when you return it.
(Companies):  Where the company has a sole director who is also the sole company secretary, that person must sign.  Where 
the company (pursuant to Section 204A of the Corporations Act) does not have a company secretary, a sole director can also 
sign alone.  Otherwise, a director jointly with either another director or a company secretary must sign.  Please sign in the 
appropriate place to indicate the office held.  In addition, if a representative of a company is appointed pursuant to Section 
250D of the Corporations Act to attend the Meeting, the documentation evidencing such appointment should be produced 
prior to admission to the Meeting.  A form of a certificate evidencing the appointment may be obtained from the Company.
4.
Attending the Meeting:
Completion  of  a  Proxy  Form  will  not  prevent  individual  Shareholders  from  attending  the  Meeting  in  person  if  they  wish.    Where  a 
Shareholder completes and lodges a valid Proxy Form and attends the Meeting in person, then the proxy’s authority to speak and vote 
for that Shareholder is suspended while the Shareholder is present at the Meeting.
5.
Return of Proxy Form:
To vote by proxy, please complete and sign the enclosed Proxy Form and return by:
(a)
(b)
(c)
post to Northern Iron Limited, 108 Outram Street, West Perth, WA, 6005; or
facsimile to the Company on facsimile number +61 8 9463 6373; or
email to the Company at peter.webse@pcscorporate.com.au
so that it is received not less than 48 hours prior to commencement of the Meeting.
Proxy Forms received later than this time will be invalid.