
8-K 1 lei-8k_081216.htm CURRENT REPORT
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 OR 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported): August 12, 2016
Lucas Energy, Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nevada
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation)
001-32508
(Commission
 
File Number)
20-2660243
(I.R.S. Employer Identification
 
No.)
450 Gears Road, Suite 860, Houston, Texas 77067
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (713) 528-1881
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously
satisfy the filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions:
☐Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
☒Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)
☐Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.14d-2(b))
☐Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.13e-4(c))
Item 2.02 Results of Operations and Financial Condition
On August 12, 2016, Lucas Energy, Inc. (the “Company”, “we” and “us”) issued a press
release which included results of operations for its quarter ended June 30, 2016. A copy of
the press release is furnished as Exhibit 99.1 hereto.
Item 7.01. Regulation FD Disclosure
The information set forth in Item 2.02 above is incorporated by reference in this Item 7.01 in
its entirety.
The information responsive to Item 2.02 and Item 7.01 of this Form 8-K and Exhibit 99.1
attached hereto, shall not be deemed “filed” for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) or otherwise subject to the
liabilities of that section, nor shall it be deemed incorporated by reference in any filing
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Exchange Act, except as expressly
set forth by specific reference in such a filing. The furnishing of this Report is not intended
to constitute a determination by the Company that the information is material or that the
dissemination of the information is required by Regulation FD.
Item 8.01 Other Events
Item 7.01 above is incorporated by reference in this Item 8.01.
Item 9.01. Financial Statements and Exhibits
(d)  Exhibits
Exhibit No. Description
 
99.1*
Press Release dated August 12, 2016
* Furnished herewith.
Important Information
In connection with the proposed acquisition of the assets described in greater detail in the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission on December 31, 2015, the Company has filed a proxy statement with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. This communication is not a substitute for any
proxy statement or other document the Company has or may file with the SEC in
connection with the proposed transaction. Prospective investors are urged to read the
proxy statement as it contains important information. Prospective investors may obtain
free copies of the proxy statement, as well as other filings containing information about
Lucas Energy, Inc., without charge, at the SEC’s website (www.sec.gov). Copies of Lucas
Energy, Inc.’s SEC filings may also be obtained from Lucas Energy, Inc. without charge at
Lucas Energy, Inc.’s website (www.lucasenergy.com) or by directing a request to Lucas
Energy, Inc. at (713) 528-1881. This document does not constitute an offer to sell or the
solicitation of an offer to buy any securities or a solicitation of any vote or approval nor
shall there be any sale of securities in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or
sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any
such jurisdiction.
INVESTORS SHOULD READ THE PROXY STATEMENT AND OTHER DOCUMENTS TO BE
FILED WITH THE SEC CAREFULLY BEFORE MAKING A DECISION CONCERNING THE
ACQUISITION.
Participants in Solicitation
Lucas Energy, Inc. and its directors and executive officers and other members of
management and employees are potential participants in the solicitation of proxies in
respect of the proposed acquisition. Information regarding Lucas Energy, Inc.’s directors
and executive officers is available in Lucas Energy, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended March 31, 2016 filed with the SEC on July 13, 2016 and Lucas Energy, Inc.’s
definitive proxy statement on Schedule 14A, filed with the SEC on February 18, 2016.
Additional information regarding the interests of such potential participants are included
in the proxy statement filed with the SEC by Lucas Energy, Inc. in connection with the
proposed acquisition. These documents can be obtained free of charge from the sources
indicated above. Additional information regarding the participants in the proxy
solicitations and a description of their direct and indirect interests, by security holdings or
otherwise, are contained in the proxy statement and other relevant materials to be filed
with the SEC.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain statements in this communication regarding the proposed acquisition are
“forward-looking” statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “ensure,” “expect,” “if,”
“intend,” “estimate,” “probable,” “project,” “forecasts,” “predict,” “outlook,” “aim,” “will,”
“could,” “should,” “would,” “potential,” “may,” “might,” “anticipate,” “likely” “plan,”
“positioned,” “strategy,” and similar expressions, and the negative thereof, are intended
to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements, which are
subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions about Lucas Energy, Inc. and the assets,
may include projections of their respective future financial performance, their respective
anticipated growth strategies and anticipated trends. These statements are only
predictions based on current expectations and projections about future events. There are
important factors that could cause actual results, level of activity, performance or
achievements to differ materially from the results, level of activity, performance or
achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements, including the risk
factors set forth in Lucas Energy, Inc.’s most recent reports on Form 10-K, Form 10-Q and
other documents on file with the SEC and the factors given below:
•
failure to obtain the approval of stockholders of Lucas Energy, Inc. in connection with the
proposed transaction;
•  the dilution associated with the shares issuable upon closing the acquisition;
 
•  risks associated with the debt to be assumed at closing;
the failure to consummate or delay in consummating the proposed transaction for other
reasons;
•  the timing to consummate the proposed transaction;
 
•  the risk that a condition to closing of the proposed transaction may not be satisfied;
•
•
•
the risk that a regulatory approval that may be required for the proposed transaction is delayed,
is not obtained, or is obtained subject to conditions that are not anticipated;
 
Lucas Energy, Inc.’s ability to achieve the synergies and value creation contemplated by the
proposed transaction;
•  the ability of Lucas Energy, Inc. to effectively integrate the assets acquired; and
 
•  the diversion of management time on transaction-related issues.
Lucas Energy, Inc.’s forward-looking statements are based on assumptions that Lucas
Energy, Inc. believes to be reasonable but that may not prove to be accurate. Lucas
Energy, Inc. cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or
achievements. Lucas Energy, Inc. assumes no obligation to update or revise any forward-
looking statements as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as
may be required by law.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements
that speak only as of the date hereof.
SIGNATURE
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has
duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly
authorized.
LUCAS ENERGY, INC.
 
 
   
 
   
  By: /s/ Anthony C. Schnur
 
  Name:Anthony C. Schnur
 
  Title: Chief Executive Officer
Date: August 12, 2016
EXHIBIT INDEX
Exhibit No. Description
 
99.1*
Press Release dated August 12, 2016
* Furnished herewith.