
NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL AND SPECIAL MEETING
and
MANAGEMENT PROXY CIRCULAR
WITH RESPECT TO THE
ANNUAL GENERAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS OF PAREX RESOURCES INC.
TO BE HELD ON MAY 12, 2015
INFORMATION CIRCULAR DATED APRIL 1, 2015

NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
PAREX RESOURCES INC.
TO BE HELD ON MAY 12, 2015
TO THE HOLDERS OF COMMON SHARES
Notice  is  hereby  given  that  the  Annual  General  and  Special  Meeting  of  holders  (the  "Meeting")  of  common  shares  ("Common 
Shares") of Parex Resources Inc. ("Parex" or the "Company") will be held at the Eighth Avenue Place Conference Centre, Eighth 
Avenue Place East Tower, 410, 525-8th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 1G1 on May 12, 2015 at 10:30 a.m. (Calgary time) for the 
following purposes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
to receive and consider the financial statements of the Company for the year ended December 31, 2014, the auditors' report 
thereon and the report of the Board of Directors;
to fix the number of directors to be elected at the Meeting at eight (8) members;
to elect eight (8) directors;
to consider and, if deemed advisable, to pass an ordinary resolution approving a deferred share unit plan for the Company, as 
more particularly described in the accompanying management information circular of the Company dated April 1, 2015 (the 
"Information Circular");
to  consider  and,  if  deemed  advisable,  to  pass,  an  ordinary  resolution  approving  the  amendment  and  restatement  of  the 
Company’s shareholder protection rights plan agreement, as more particularly described in the Information Circular;
to appoint auditors and to authorize the directors to fix their remuneration as such;  and
to transact such further and other business as may properly come before the Meeting or any adjournment or adjournments 
thereof.
The nature of the business to be transacted at the Meeting is described in further detail in the Information Circular.
The  record  date  for  the  determination  of  shareholders  entitled  to  receive  notice  of  and  to  vote  at  the  Meeting  is  April 1, 2015
(the "Record Date"). Shareholders of the Company whose names have been entered in the register of shareholders at the close of 
business on that date will be entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Meeting, provided that, to the extent a shareholder transfers 
the ownership of any of such shareholder's Common Shares after such date and the transferee of those Common Shares establishes 
that the transferee owns the  Common  Shares and requests, not later than 10 days before the Meeting, to be included in the list of 
shareholders eligible to vote at the Meeting, such transferee will be entitled to vote those Common Shares at the Meeting.
A shareholder may attend the Meeting in person or may be represented by proxy.  Shareholders who are unable to attend the 
Meeting or any adjournment thereof in person are requested to date, sign and return the accompanying form of proxy for use 
at the Meeting or any adjournment or adjournments thereof.  To be effective, the enclosed proxy must be mailed or faxed so as 
to reach or be deposited with Valiant Trust Company, 310, 606-4th Street S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 1T1, Fax (403) 233-2857
not later than forty-eight (48) hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and statutory holidays in the Province of Alberta) prior to 
the  time  set  for  the  Meeting  or  any  adjournment  or  adjournments  thereof. See  also  "Voting  by  Internet" in  the  Information 
Circular.
The instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing and shall be executed by the shareholder or the shareholder's attorney authorized 
in writing or, if the shareholder is a corporation, under its corporate seal by an officer or attorney thereof duly authorized.
The persons named in the enclosed form of proxy are directors and/or officers of the Company.  Each shareholder has the 
right  to  appoint  a  proxyholder  other  than  such  persons,  who  need  not  be  a  shareholder,  to  attend  and  to  act  for  such 
shareholder  and  on  such  shareholder's  behalf  at  the  Meeting.    To  exercise  such  right,  the  names  of  the  nominees  of 
management should be crossed out and the name of the shareholder's appointee should be legibly printed in the blank space 
provided.
In the event of a strike, lockout or other work stoppage involving postal employees, all documents required for delivery by the 
shareholder should be delivered by facsimile to Valiant Trust Company at (403) 233-2857.
DATED at Calgary, Alberta this 1st day of April, 2015.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(signed) "Wayne Foo"
President, Chief Executive Officer and a Director
PAREX RESOURCES INC.
Information Circular – Management Proxy Statement
For the Annual General and Special Meeting
of Shareholders to be Held on May 12, 2015
PROXIES
Solicitation of Proxies
This information circular – management proxy statement (the "Information Circular") is furnished in connection with 
the solicitation of proxies by or on behalf of the management of Parex Resources Inc. ("Parex" or the "Company") for use 
at the annual general and special meeting of the Company's shareholders ("shareholders" or "Shareholders") to be held at the 
Eighth Avenue Place Conference Centre, Eighth Avenue Place East Tower, 410, 525-8th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 1G1
on May 12, 2015 at 10:30 a.m. (Calgary time), and any adjournment or adjournments thereof for the purposes set forth in the 
accompanying Notice of Annual General and Special Meeting.  Only shareholders of record on April 1, 2015 are entitled to notice 
of,  and  to  attend  and  vote  at,  the  Meeting,  unless  a  shareholder  has  transferred  any  common  shares  ("Common  Shares")
subsequent to that date and the transferee shareholder, not later than 10 days before the  meeting, establishes ownership of the 
Common Shares and demands that the transferee's name be included on the list of shareholders eligible to vote at the Meeting.
Unless otherwise stated information contained in this Information Circular is given as at April 1, 2015. All amounts set forth in 
this Information Circular are stated in Canadian dollars.
The persons named in the accompanying instrument of proxy are directors and/or officers of the Company. As a shareholder 
submitting a proxy you have the right to appoint a person or company (who need not be a shareholder) to represent you at 
the Meeting other than the persons designated in the instrument of proxy furnished by Parex.  To exercise this right you 
should insert the name of the desired representative in the blank space provided in the instrument of proxy and strike out 
the other names. In order to be effective, the proxy must be mailed or faxed so as to be deposited with Valiant Trust Company, 
310, 606-4th Street S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 1T1, Fax (403) 233-2857, not later than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays 
and  statutory  holidays  in  the  Province  of  Alberta)  prior  to  the  time  set  for  the  Meeting  or  any  adjournment  or  adjournments 
thereof. See also "Voting by Internet" in this Information Circular.
Appointment of Proxies
Those shareholders who desire to be represented at the Meeting by proxy must mail or fax their proxy so as to be deposited with 
the Company's Transfer Agent and Registrar, Valiant Trust Company, 310, 606-4th Street S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 1T1, Fax 
(403) 233-2857, not later than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and statutory holidays in the Province of Alberta) prior to 
the  time  set  for  the  Meeting  or  any  adjournment  or  adjournments  thereof. See  also  "Voting  by  Internet" in  this  Information 
Circular.  A  proxy  must  be  executed  by  the  shareholder  or  his  or her  attorney  authorized  in  writing,  or  if  the  shareholder  is  a 
corporation, under its corporate seal by a duly authorized officer or attorney of the corporation.
The persons named in the accompanying instrument of proxy are directors and/or officers of Parex.  A shareholder has 
the right to appoint a person or company (who need not be a Shareholder) to attend and act on such shareholder's behalf 
at the Meeting other than the persons designated in the instrument of proxy furnished by Parex.  To exercise this right, 
the shareholder must strike out the name of the persons named in the proxy and insert the name of his or her nominee in 
the space provided and deposit the proxy with Parex at the place and within the time specified above for the deposit of 
proxies.
Persons Making the Solicitation
The  solicitation is  made on  behalf of the  management  of Parex.  The costs incurred in the preparation and  mailing of the 
instrument of proxy, Notice of Annual General and Special Meeting and this Information Circular will be borne by Parex.  In 
addition to solicitation by mail, proxies may be solicited by personal interviews, telephone or by other means of communication 
and by directors and officers of Parex, who will not be specifically remunerated therefor.  While no arrangements have been made
2
to date by Parex, Parex may contract for the distribution and solicitation of proxies for the Meeting.  The costs incurred by Parex 
in soliciting proxies will be paid by Parex.
Exercise of Discretion by Proxy
The  Common  Shares  represented  by  the  instrument  of  proxy  enclosed  with  the  accompanying Notice  of Annual  General  and 
Special Meeting and this Information Circular  will be voted for or against or  withheld from voting on any ballot that  may be 
called for in accordance with the instructions of the shareholder, but if no specification is made, they will be voted in favour of the 
matters set forth in the proxy.  If any amendments or variations are proposed at the Meeting or any adjournment thereof to matters 
set forth in the proxy and described in the accompanying Notice of Annual General and Special Meeting and this Information 
Circular, or if any other matters properly come before the Meeting or any adjournment or adjournments thereof, the proxy confers 
upon the shareholder's nominee discretionary authority to vote on such amendments or variations or such other matters according 
to the best judgement of the person voting the proxy at the Meeting.  At the date of this Information Circular, management of
Parex knows of no such amendments or variations or other matters to come before the Meeting.
Revocation of Proxies
A shareholder who has given a proxy has the power to revoke it.  If a person who has given a proxy attends personally at the 
Meeting at which the proxy is to be voted, such person may revoke the proxy and vote in person.  In addition to revocation in any 
other manner permitted by law, a proxy may be revoked by an instrument in writing signed by the shareholder or his attorney 
authorized in writing, or, if the shareholder is a corporation, under its corporate seal and signed by a duly authorized officer or 
attorney for the corporation, and deposited at the registered office of Parex at any time up to and including the last day (other than 
Saturdays, Sundays and statutory holidays in the Province of Alberta) preceding the day of the Meeting at which the proxy is to 
be used, or any adjournment or adjournments thereof, or with the chairman of the Meeting on the day of the Meeting, or on the
day of any adjournment thereof, prior to the commencement of the Meeting.
Voting by Internet
Shareholders may use the internet site at www.valianttrust.com to transmit their voting instructions.  Shareholders should have the 
form of proxy in hand when they access the web site and will be prompted to enter their Control Number, which is located on the 
form of proxy.  If Shareholders vote by internet, their vote must be received not later than 10:30 a.m. (Calgary time) on May 8,
2015 or 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and statutory holidays in the Province of Alberta) prior to the time set for the 
Meeting or any adjournment or adjournments thereof. The website may be used to appoint a proxy holder to attend and vote 
on  a  Shareholder's  behalf  at  the  Meeting  and  to  convey  a  Shareholder's  voting  instructions.    Please  note  that  if  a 
Shareholder  appoints  a  proxy  holder  and  submits  their  voting  instructions  and  subsequently  wishes  to  change  their 
appointment, a Shareholder may resubmit their proxy and/or voting direction, prior to the deadline noted above.  When 
resubmitting a proxy, the most recently submitted proxy will be recognized as the only valid one, and all previous proxies 
submitted will be disregarded and considered as revoked, provided that the last proxy is submitted by the deadline noted 
above.
Advice to Beneficial Holders of Securities
The information set forth in this section is of significant importance to many public shareholders of Parex, as a substantial number 
of the public shareholders of Parex do not hold Common Shares in their own name.  Shareholders who do not hold their Common 
Shares in their own name (referred to in this Information Circular as "Beneficial Shareholders") should note that only proxies 
deposited  by  shareholders  whose  names  appear  on  the  records  of  Parex  as  the  registered  holders  of  Common  Shares  can  be 
recognized and acted upon at the Meeting.  If Common Shares are listed in an account statement provided to a shareholder by a 
broker, then in almost all cases those Common Shares will not be registered in the shareholder's name on the records of Parex.  
Such Common Shares will more likely be registered under the name of the shareholder's broker or an agent of that broker.  In 
Canada, the vast majority of such Common Shares are registered under the name of CDS & Co. (the registration name for CDS 
Clearing and Depository Services, Inc., which acts as nominee for many Canadian brokerage firms).  Common Shares held by 
brokers  or  their  nominees  can  only  be  voted  (for  or  against  resolutions)  upon  the  instructions  of  the  Beneficial  Shareholder.
Without specific instructions, brokers/nominees are prohibited from voting shares for their clients.  The directors and officers of 
Parex do not know for whose benefit the Common Shares registered in the name of CDS & Co. are held.
3
Applicable regulatory policy requires intermediaries/brokers to seek voting instructions from Beneficial Shareholders in advance 
of shareholders' meetings.  Every intermediary/broker has its own mailing procedures and provides its own return instructions, 
which  should  be  carefully  followed  by  Beneficial  Shareholders  in  order to  ensure  that  their  Common  Shares  are  voted  at  the 
Meeting.  Often, the form of proxy supplied to a Beneficial Shareholder by its broker is identical to the form of proxy provided to 
registered shareholders.  However, its purpose is limited to instructing the registered shareholders how to vote on behalf of the 
Beneficial Shareholder.  The majority of brokers now delegate responsibility for obtaining instructions from clients to Broadridge 
Financial Solutions, Inc. ("Broadridge").  Broadridge typically applies a special sticker to the proxy forms, mails those forms to 
the Beneficial Shareholders and asks Beneficial Shareholders to return the proxy forms to Broadridge.  Broadridge then tabulates 
the results of all instructions received and provides appropriate instructions respecting the voting of shares to be represented at the 
Meeting.  A Beneficial Shareholder receiving a proxy with a Broadridge sticker on it cannot use that proxy to vote shares 
directly at the Meeting.  The proxy must be returned to Broadridge well in advance of the Meeting in order to have the 
Common Shares voted.
Although a Beneficial Shareholder may  not be recognized  directly at the Meeting for the purposes of voting  Common Shares 
registered  in  the  name  of  his  or  her  broker  (or  agent of  the  broker),  a  Beneficial  Shareholder  may  attend  at  the  Meeting  as 
proxyholder for the registered shareholder and vote Common Shares in that capacity.  Beneficial Shareholders who wish to attend 
the Meeting and indirectly vote their Common Shares as proxyholder for the registered shareholder should enter their own names 
in the blank space on the form of proxy provided to them and return the same to their broker (or the broker's agent) in accordance 
with the instructions provided by such broker (or agent), well in advance of the Meeting.
These securityholder materials are being sent to both registered and non-registered owners of Common Shares. If you are a non-
registered owner, and the Company or its agent has sent these materials directly to you, your name and address and information 
about  your  holdings of  Common  Shares,  have  been  obtained  in  accordance  with  applicable  securities  regulatory  requirements 
from the intermediary holding on your behalf.
The  Company  is  not  using  "notice-and-access" to  send  its proxy-related  materials  to  Shareholders,  and  paper  copies  of  such 
materials will be sent to all Shareholders. The Company will not send proxy-related materials directly to non-objecting Beneficial 
Shareholders and such materials will be delivered to non-objecting Beneficial Shareholders by Broadridge or through the non-
objecting Beneficial Shareholder's intermediary. The Company intends to pay for the costs of an intermediary to deliver proxy-
related materials to objecting Beneficial Shareholders.
VOTING SHARES AND PRINCIPAL HOLDERS THEREOF
The Company is authorized to issue an unlimited number of Common Shares without nominal or par value.  As at April 1, 2015,
there  were  134,779,403 Common  Shares  issued  and  outstanding,  stock  options  ("Options")  to  purchase  7,571,844 Common 
Shares and restricted share units ("RSUs") representing the right to receive 1,646,586 Common Shares outstanding, which have 
been granted to certain directors, officers and employees of the Company or of its foreign subsidiaries.
The holders of Common Shares are entitled to one vote per Common Share at meetings of shareholders, to receive any dividend 
as and when declared by the Board of Directors of the Company (the "Parex Board of Directors" or the "Board") and to receive 
pro rata upon liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Company, the remaining property of the Company upon dissolution.
The Company has not declared or paid dividends on the Common Shares since incorporation and any decision made by the Parex 
Board of Directors to pay dividends from time to time will be based upon, among other things, the level of cash flow, results of 
operations and financial condition, the need for funds to finance ongoing operations and other business and legal considerations as 
the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  considers  relevant,  including  the  satisfaction  of  the  liquidity  and  solvency  tests  imposed  by  the
Business Corporations Act (Alberta) ("ABCA") for the declaration and payment of dividends.
The record date for the determination of shareholders entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Meeting is April 1, 2015.
To the best of the knowledge of the directors and executive officers of the Company, no person or company, beneficially owns or 
controls or directs, directly or indirectly, Common Shares carrying more than ten percent (10%) of the votes attached to all of the 
issued and outstanding Common Shares.
4
OTHER MATTERS RELATED TO THE MEETING
Majority Voting for Directors
The Parex  Board of  Directors  has  adopted  a policy  stipulating that  if  the  "WITHHOLD" votes  in  respect  of  the  election  of  a 
director nominee at the Meeting represent more than the "FOR" votes, the nominee will immediately submit his resignation for 
the Parex Board of Directors' consideration.  The Parex Board of Directors will consider such resignation and after reviewing the 
matter will determine, having regard to all matters it deems relevant, whether to accept such resignation or not. The Board will 
accept such resignation absent exceptional circumstances and the resignation will be effective upon acceptance by the Board. The 
Parex Board of Directors' decision to accept or reject the resignation will be disclosed to the public through the issuance of a news 
release within 90 days of the Meeting. If the Board determines not to accept the nominees resignation, such news release will 
disclose the reasons for the Board's decision. The nominee will not participate in any Parex Board of Director deliberations on the 
resignation. The policy does not apply in circumstances involving contested director elections.
Director Retirement Policy
The Company's director retirement policy requires that each director, upon reaching the age of 70 years old, will offer his or her 
resignation as a director of the Company to the Chairman of the Board on an annual basis, which resignation will be effective
immediately  prior  to  the  next  annual  meeting  of  shareholders.  The  Board  will  consider  such  resignation  and  will  determine 
whether to accept such resignation or whether to waive such resignation for a period of one year, having regard to all matters the
Board deems relevant. In accordance with the director retirement policy, Mr. W.A. (Alf) Peneycad has offered his resignation as a 
director of the Company to the Chairman of the Board and will not seek re-election to the Board at the Meeting. The Board thanks 
Mr. Peneycad for his significant contributions to the Board since becoming a director of the Company in 2009, including in his 
role as Chairman of the Corporate Governance, Compensation and Human Resources Committee.
Advance Notice By-law
Amended  and  Restated  By-law  No.  1  of  the  Company  (the  "By-law"),  which  was  ratified  by  shareholders  at  the  Company's 
annual general and special meeting of shareholders held in 2014, contains advance notice provisions, which provide shareholders, 
the Board and management of the Company with a clear framework for nominating directors to help ensure orderly business at 
shareholder  meetings  by  effectively  preventing  a  shareholder  from  putting  forth  director  nominations  from  the  floor  of  a 
shareholder meeting without prior notice. Among other things, the By-law fixes a deadline by which shareholders must submit 
notice  of  director  nominations  to  the  Company  prior  to  any  annual  or  special  meeting  of  shareholders.  It  also  specifies  the 
information that a nominating shareholder must include in the notice to the Company regarding each director nominee and the 
nominating shareholder for the notice to be in proper written form in order for any director nominee to be eligible for nomination 
and election at any annual or special meeting of shareholders of the Company. These requirements are intended to provide all 
shareholders with the opportunity to evaluate and review the proposed candidates and vote on an informed and timely manner 
regarding such nominees. The By-law does not affect nominations made pursuant to a "proposal" made in accordance with the 
ABCA or a requisition of a meeting of shareholders made pursuant to the ABCA. As of the date of this Information Circular, the 
Company has not received any nominations pursuant to the advance notice provisions contained in the By-law.
MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON AT THE MEETING
Receipt of the Financial Statements and Auditors' Report
At the Meeting, shareholders will receive and consider the financial statements of the Company for the year ended December 31, 
2014 and the Auditors' Report thereon, but no vote by the shareholders with respect thereto is required or proposed to be taken.
Fixing the Number of Directors and Election of Directors
At the Meeting, it is proposed that the number of directors to be elected at the Meeting be fixed at eight (8) members and that 
eight  (8)  directors  be  elected  to  hold  office  until  the  next  annual  general  meeting,  or  until  their  successors  are  elected  or
appointed.  There are presently eight (8) directors of the Company, each of whom will retire from office at the Meeting.
5
Unless otherwise directed, it is the intention of management to vote proxies in the accompanying form in favour of an ordinary
resolution in favour of  fixing the number of directors to be elected at the Meeting at eight (8)  members, and in favour of the 
election as directors of the eight (8) nominees hereinafter set forth:
Curtis Bartlett
John Bechtold
Lisa Colnett
Robert Engbloom
Wayne Foo
Norman McIntyre
Ron Miller
Paul Wright
The names, province and country of residence of the persons nominated for election as directors, the number of voting securities 
of the Company beneficially owned or controlled or directed, directly or indirectly, the period served as director and the principal 
occupation of each are set forth below.
Name, Province and 
Country of Residence
Norman McIntyre(3)
California, USA
Offices Held and Time
as Director or
Officer(8)
Number of
Common Shares
Beneficially 
Owned or
Controlled or
Directed
Chairman and a 
Director since 
September 29, 2009
569,020(4)
Curtis Bartlett (1)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 
September 29, 2009
2,300,008(5)
John Bechtold(2)(3)
Quebec, Canada
Director since 
September 29, 2009
73,000
Robert  Engbloom,  Q.C. 
(2)(3)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 
September 29, 2009
110,039
Wayne Foo
Alberta, Canada
Director since August 
28, 2009
2,158,749(6)
Principal Occupation (for last 5 years)
Independent Businessman since 2004.  President of Petro-Canada 
from  2002  to  2004.    Executive  Vice  President  of  Petro-Canada 
from  1995  to  2002.    Member  of  the  Institute  of  Corporate 
Directors having completed the Directors Education Program.
Co-founder  and  Partner  at  Lorem  Partners,  a  private  equity 
investment firm. Over 25 years  of experience  as an entrepreneur 
and private equity investor. Director of several private companies.
Currently a Director of Parkland Fuel Corporation, an independent 
marketer  of  fuels  across  Canada,  Mr.  Bechtold  brings  over  40 
years of broad oil, gas and energy related experience. He served at 
Petro-Canada from 1977 until retirement in a number of leadership 
roles.  Following  retirement  he  has  also  served  on  the  Board  of
Directors of the British Columbia Oil & Gas Commission which 
regulates oil and natural gas activity in that Province.
Senior Partner of Norton Rose Fulbright Canada LLP, a national 
law  firm  in  Canada  and  a  member  of  the  global  Norton  Rose
Fulbright Group.  Mr.  Engbloom  has  more  than  30  years  of 
experience  in  the  areas  of  mergers  and  acquisitions,  governance, 
corporate and securities law.  His broad experience spans a range 
of  businesses  both  public  and  private,  operating  nationally  and 
internationally, primarily in the energy industry.
Currently  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Parex.  
President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Dominion  Energy 
Canada Ltd. from 1998 to October 2002, and then Consultant until
March 2003.  Director of Pengrowth Energy Corporation.
6
Number of
Common Shares
Beneficially 
Owned or
Controlled or
Directed
Name, Province and 
Country of Residence
Offices Held and Time
as Director or
Officer(8)
Ron Miller(1)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 
September 29, 2009
1,341,020(7)
Paul Wright(1)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 
September 29, 2009
125,839
Lisa Colnett(9)
Ontario, Canada
Nominee
4,000
Principal Occupation (for last 5 years)
Co-founder  and  Partner  of  Lorem  Partners,  a  private  equity 
investment  firm.  Director  of  several  private  companies and  one 
non-profit  organization.  Member  of  the  Institute  of  Corporate 
Directors having completed the Directors Education Program.
Currently works as a financial consultant and sits on the Board of 
Directors  of  one  non-profit  organization.  Mr.  Wright  is  a 
Chartered Accountant with over 30 years of industry experience.
He  has  worked  in  senior  financial  roles  in  both  domestic  and 
international  oil  and  natural  gas  companies.  Member  of  the 
Institute  of  Corporate  Directors  having  completed  the  Directors 
Education Program.
Currently a Director of Parkland Fuel Corporation, an independent 
marketer  of  fuels  across  Canada, and  Detour  Gold Corporation,
Ms. Colnett brings  over  20 years  of  experience  in  Human 
Resources  for  a  variety  of  industries  ranging  from  mining  to 
information technology. Since 1991, Ms. Colnett has held senior 
roles  in  human  resources,  information  technology  and  strategy 
including Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer of 
Celestica  Inc.,  Senior  Vice  President,  Human  Resources,  also  of 
Celestica  Inc.  and  Senior  Vice  President,  Human  Resources  and 
Corporate Services, of Kinross Gold Corporation. Member of the 
Institute  of  Corporate  Directors  having  completed  the  Directors 
Education Program.
Notes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Member of the Finance and Audit Committee.
Member of the Corporate Governance, Compensation and Human Resources Committee.
Member of the Operations and Reserves Committee.
Includes 530,520 Common Shares held in a joint account with Mr. McIntyre's spouse.
Includes 2,161,653 Common Shares which are held pursuant to trust arrangements by Auxilium Group Inc. ("Auxilium"). Mr. 
Bartlett is the President of Auxilium and in that capacity controls and directs the Common Shares held by Auxilium.
Includes 886,742 Common Shares held by Mr. Foo's spouse’s estate.
Includes  (i)  1,292,415 Common  Shares  held  by  AREAH  Investments  Limited  ("AREAH"),  which  company  is  controlled  by
Mr. Miller's spouse and a trust, the beneficiaries of which are Mr. Miller's spouse and children and which trust is not controlled 
by Mr. Miller; and (ii) 48,605 Common Shares held by Mr. Miller personally. Mr. Miller is the President of AREAH and in that
capacity controls and directs the Common Shares held by AREAH. Does not include 165,000 Common Shares held by a trust, 
the beneficiaries of which are Mr. Miller's spouse and children and which trust is not controlled by Mr. Miller.
Parex' directors  will hold  office  until  the  next  annual  general  meeting  of  the  Company's  shareholders  or  until  each  director's
successor is appointed or elected pursuant to the ABCA.
If  successfully  elected  by  shareholders,  it  is  expected  that  Ms.  Colnett  will  be  appointed  to  the  Corporate  Governance, 
Compensation and Human Resources Committee.
The  information  as  to  Common  Shares  beneficially  owned  or  controlled  or  directed,  directly  or  indirectly,  is  based  upon 
information furnished to the Company by the respective nominees.
As at April 1, 2015, the directors and executive officers of the Company, as a group, beneficially owned or controlled or directed, 
directly or indirectly, 8,804,506 Common Shares constituting approximately 6.53 percent of the issued and outstanding Common
Shares. The number of Common Shares beneficially owned or controlled or directed, directly or indirectly, by each director and 
executive  officer  of  the  Company  significantly  exceeds  the share  ownership  policy  for  directors  and  officers  that  was 
implemented  by  the  Company  in  2010.  Under  this  policy,  and  using fair  market  value  at  the  time  of  purchase  to  value  the
7
Common Shares, the mandatory minimum ownership of Common Shares by directors is required to be equal to four times the 
annual director’s retainer, the mandatory minimum ownership by the Chief Executive Officer is required to be equal to four times 
the Chief Executive Officer’s annual base salary, and the mandatory minimum ownership by other officers is required to be equal 
to three times the officer’s annual base salary.
Cease Trade Orders, Bankruptcies, Penalties or Sanctions
To  the  knowledge  of  the  directors,  no  proposed  director  of  the  Company  (nor  any  personal  holding  company  of  any  such 
persons):
(a)
is, as at the date of this Information Circular, or has been, within ten years before the date of this Information 
Circular, a director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer of any company (including Parex), that:
(i)
(ii)
was subject to a cease trade order (including a management cease trade order), an order similar to a 
cease  trade  order  or  an  order  that  denied  the  relevant  company  access  to  any  exemption  under 
securities  legislation,  in  each  case  that  was  in  effect  for  a  period  of  more  than  30  consecutive  days 
(collectively, an "Order") that was issued while the proposed director was acting in the capacity as 
director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer; or
was  subject  to  an  Order  that  was  issued  after  the  proposed  director  ceased  to  be  a  director,  chief 
executive officer or chief financial officer and which resulted from an event that occurred while that 
person was acting in the capacity as director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer;
(b)
(c)
is, as at the date of this Information Circular, or has been, within ten years before the date of this Information 
Circular, a director or executive officer of any company that, while that person was acting in that capacity, or 
within  a  year  of  that  person  ceasing  to  act  in  that  capacity,  became  bankrupt, made  a  proposal  under  any 
legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency or was subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or 
compromise with creditors or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold its assets; or
has, within the ten years before the date of this Information Circular, become bankrupt, made a proposal under 
any  legislation  relating  to  bankruptcy  or  insolvency,  or  become  subject  to  or  instituted  any  proceedings, 
arrangement or compromise with creditors, or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold the 
assets of the proposed director.
In addition, no proposed director of the Company has been subject to: (i) any penalties or sanctions imposed by a court relating to 
securities legislation or by a securities regulatory authority or has entered into a settlement agreement with a securities regulatory 
authority; or (ii) any other penalties or sanctions imposed by a court or regulatory body that would likely be considered important 
to a reasonable shareholder in deciding whether to vote for a proposed director.
Approval of Deferred Share Unit Plan
On April 1, 2015, the Parex Board of Directors approved the adoption by Parex of a deferred share unit plan (the "DSU Plan").  
The  DSU  Plan  allows  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  or  the  Corporate  Governance,  Compensation  and  Human  Resources 
Committee  of  the  Board  (the  "CG&HR Committee") to  grant  deferred  share  units  ("DSUs"),  each  of  which  is  a  unit  that  is 
equivalent in value to a Common Share. DSUs will be fully vested upon grant and a Participant (as defined below) will have the 
right to receive, at the election of the Company, either a cash payment or Common Shares on the Separation Date (as defined 
below) or such later date as the Participant may elect by written notice delivered to the Chief Financial Officer of the Company 
prior to the Separation Date. See "Election by Participant and Payment" below.
As  the  DSU  Plan  is  a  security  based  compensation  arrangement (as  defined  in  the  TSX  Company  Manual),  approval  from 
Shareholders will be sought at the Meeting to ratify the approval of the DSU Plan and the granting of DSUs in accordance with
the DSU Plan. If Shareholder approval of the DSU Plan is not obtained at the Meeting, the DSU Plan will be of no effect.
A copy of the DSU Plan is attached as Appendix B to this Information Circular. The following description of the DSU Plan is 
qualified, in its entirety by the terms of the attached DSU Plan.
8
Purpose of the DSU Plan and Eligibility
The purpose of the DSU Plan is to provide non-employee directors of the Company with the opportunity to acquire DSUs in order 
to allow them to participate in the long-term success of the Company and to promote a greater alignment of their interests with the 
interests of shareholders. Any individual who is a member of the Board (an "Eligible Director") but who is not also an employee 
of the Company or any entity that is a subsidiary of the Company from time to time, any entity that is related to the Company for 
purposes of the Income Tax Act (Canada), and any other entity designated by the Board from time to time as a member of the 
"Parex Group" for  the  purposes  of  the  DSU  Plan  (and,  for  greater  certainty,  including  any  successor  entity  of  any  of  the 
aforementioned entities) (the "Parex Group") is eligible to participate in the DSU Plan.
Grants of DSUs
The DSU Plan will be administered by the CG&HR Committee, which, from time to time in its sole discretion, will grant DSUs 
to Eligible Directors ("Participants"). In respect of each grant of DSUs, the CG&HR Committee will determine, among other 
things, the number of DSUs allocated to the Participant and such other terms and conditions of the DSUs applicable to each grant.
Vesting and Term
Deferred Share Units will be fully vested upon being granted and credited to an account maintained by the Company for each 
Participant by means of a book-keeping entry ("Account").
The term during which a DSU may be outstanding will, subject to the provisions of the DSU Plan which require or permit the 
acceleration or the extension of the term, be such period as may be determined from time to time by the Board or the CG&HR
Committee, but subject to the rules of any stock exchange or other regulatory body having jurisdiction.
Limits on Issuances
Notwithstanding any other provision of the DSU Plan, the maximum number of Common Shares issuable pursuant to outstanding 
DSUs at any time shall be limited to 0.5% of the aggregate number of issued and outstanding Common Shares, provided that the 
maximum  number  of  Common  Shares  issuable  pursuant  to  outstanding  DSUs  and  all  other  security  based  compensation 
arrangements, may not exceed 10.0% of the Common Shares outstanding from time to time.
In addition: (i) the number of Common Shares reserved for issuance to any one Participant under all security based compensation 
arrangements may not exceed 5.0% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares; (ii) the number of Common Shares issuable to 
Insiders (as defined in the TSX Company Manual), at any time, under all security based compensation arrangements, may not 
exceed 10.0% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares; (iii) the number of Common Shares issued to Insiders (as defined in 
the TSX Company Manual), within any one year period, under all security based compensation arrangements, may not exceed 
10.0% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares; and (iv) the aggregate value of all DSUs (calculated as of the date of grant) 
granted pursuant to the DSU Plan to any non-management director cannot exceed $150,000 in any 12 month period (excluding 
any DSU's granted in a one time initial grant to a non-management director upon appointment to the Board provided the value of 
the DSU's granted in any such initial grant is not in excess of $150,000).
DSUs that are cancelled, terminated or expire shall result in the Common Shares that were reserved for issuance thereunder being 
available for a subsequent grant of DSUs pursuant to the DSU Plan to the extent of any Common Shares issuable thereunder that 
are not issued under such cancelled, terminated or expired DSUs.
Any increase in the issued and outstanding Common Shares (whether as a result of the issue of Common Shares pursuant to DSUs 
or otherwise) will result in an increase in the number of Common Shares that may be issued pursuant to DSUs outstanding at any 
time and any increase in the number of DSUs granted will, upon the issue of Common Shares pursuant thereto, make new grants 
available under the DSU Plan.  Further, if the acquisition of Common Shares by the Company for cancellation should result in the 
foregoing tests no longer being met, this will not constitute non-compliance with the above limitations for any awards outstanding 
prior to such purchase of Common Shares for cancellation.
9
Election by Participant and Payment
A Participant will have the right to receive, at the election of the Company, either a Cash Payment (as defined below) or Payment 
Shares  (as  defined  below)  in  respect  of  DSUs  recorded  in  the  Participant's  Account,  on  one  of  the  following  dates  (the 
"Distribution Date"): (i) the date on which the Participant ceases to be a director of any member of, and is not at that time an 
employee or officer of any member of, the Parex Group (the "Separation Date"); or (ii) such later date as the Participant may 
elect by written notice delivered to the Chief Financial Officer of the Company prior to the Separation Date, provided that in no 
event will a Participant be permitted to elect a date which is later than December 1 of the calendar year following the calendar 
year in which the Separation Date occurs.
In the event the Company elects to pay and distribute a Cash Payment, a Participant (or in the event of the Participant's death, his 
beneficiary or legal representative) will receive a payment (the "Cash Payment") equal in value to the number of DSUs recorded 
in the Participant's Account on the Distribution Date multiplied by the Fair Market Value (as defined below) per Common Share
(the "Distribution Value") on the Distribution Date, less any applicable withholding taxes, within ten (10) business days after the 
Distribution Date. Upon payment in  full of the  Cash Payment less any  withholding taxes, the DSUs  will be cancelled and no 
further payments will be made to the Participant under the DSU Plan.
For the purposes of the DSU Plan, "Fair Market Value" with respect to a Common Share, as at any date, means the weighted 
average of the prices at which the Common Shares traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange ("TSX") (or, if the Common Shares are 
not then listed and posted for trading on the TSX or are then listed and posted for trading on more than one stock exchange, on 
such stock exchange on which the majority of the trading volume and value of the Common Shares occurs) for the five (5) trading 
days on which the Common Shares traded on the said exchange immediately preceding such date.  In the event that the Common 
Shares are not listed and posted for trading on any stock exchange, the Fair Market Value shall be the fair market value of the 
Common Shares as determined by the Board in its sole discretion, acting reasonably and in good faith.
In  the  event  the  Company elects  to  pay  and  issue  Payment  Shares,  the  Company will  within  10  business  days  after  the 
Distribution Date: (i) issue to the Participant a number of Common Shares from treasury equal to the number of DSUs in the 
Participant's Account that became payable on the Distribution Date; or (ii) pay to a broker designated by the CG&HR Committee 
the Cash Payment less withholding taxes, and the broker will, as soon as practicable thereafter use all of the cash to purchase 
Common Shares on a securities exchange on which the Common Shares are listed and traded (the "Payment Shares").
Black Out Periods
If  any  Common  Shares  may  not  issued  pursuant  to  any  DSUs  during  a  period  of  time,  when  pursuant  to  any  policies  of  the 
Company, any securities of the Company  may  not be traded by certain persons as designated by the Company, including any 
Participant that holds a DSU (a "Black Out Period"), such Common Shares will be issued seven business days following the end 
of the Black-Out Period (or such longer period as permitted by applicable regulatory authorities and approved by the CG&HR
Committee).
Death of Participant
Upon the death of a Participant prior to the distribution of the DSUs credited to the Account of such Participant under the DSU 
Plan, a Cash Payment shall be made to the estate of such Participant on or about the thirtieth (30th) day after the Company is 
notified of the death of the Participant or on a later date elected by the Participant's estate in the form prescribed for such purposes 
by the Company and delivered to the Chief Financial Officer of the Company not later than twenty (20) days after the Company is 
notified of the death of the Participant, provided that such elected date is no later than the last business day of the calendar year 
following the calendar year in which the Participant dies so that payment can be made on or before such last business day. Such 
Cash  Payment  shall  be  equivalent  to  the  amount  which  would  have  been  paid  to  the  Participant  pursuant  to  and  subject  to 
applicable withholding taxes, calculated on the basis that the day on which the Participant dies, or the date elected by the estate, as 
applicable, is the Distribution Date.
Adjustments to DSUs
In the event: (a) of any change in the Common Shares through subdivision, consolidation, reclassification, amalgamation, merger 
or  otherwise;  or  (b)  that  any  rights  are  granted  to  all  or  substantially  all  shareholders  to  purchase  Common  Shares  at  prices
10
substantially below Fair Market Value as of the date of grant (other than the payment of dividends in respect of the Common 
Shares  as  contemplated  by  the  DSU  Plan);  or  (c)  that,  as  a  result  of  any  recapitalization,  merger,  consolidation  or  other 
transaction, the Shares are converted into or exchangeable for any other securities or property, then the Board may make such
adjustments to the DSU Plan, the Account of each Participant, the agreements in respect of the DSUs ("DSU Agreements") and 
the DSUs outstanding under the DSU Plan as the Board may, in its sole discretion, consider appropriate in the circumstances to 
prevent dilution or enlargement of the rights granted to Participants hereunder and\or to provide for the Participants to receive and 
accept such other securities or property in lieu of Common Shares, and the Participants shall be bound by any such determination.
Amendment of the DSU Plan
The Board may amend, suspend or discontinue the DSU Plan or amend any DSU or DSU Agreement at any time without the 
consent of a Participant, provided that such amendment shall not adversely alter or impair the rights of any Participant in respect 
of  any  DSU  previously  granted  to  such  Participant  under  the  Plan,  except  as  otherwise  permitted  under  the  DSU  Plan.    In 
addition,  the  Board  may,  by  resolution,  amend  the  DSU Plan  and  any  DSU  granted  under  it  (together  with  any  related  DSU 
Agreement) without shareholder approval, provided however, that at any time while the Common Shares are listed for trading on 
the TSX, the Board will not be entitled to amend the DSU Plan or any DSU granted under it (together with any related DSU 
Agreement)  without  shareholder  and,  if  applicable,  TSX  approval:  (i)  to  increase  the  maximum  number  of  Common  Shares 
issuable pursuant to the DSU Plan; (ii) to extend the term of a DSU; (iii) to permit the assignment or transfer of a DSU other than 
as provided for in the DSU Plan; (iv) to add to the categories of persons eligible to participate in the DSU Plan; (v) to remove or 
amend  the  limits  on  issuances  to  Insiders or  non-management  directors under  the  DSU  Plan;  (vii)  to  remove  or  amend  the 
amendment provisions in the DSU Plan; or (vii) in any other circumstances where TSX and shareholder approval is required by 
the TSX.
Without limitation of the above, the Board may correct any defect or supply any omission or reconcile any inconsistency in the 
DSU Plan  in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent  deemed  necessary  or  desirable,  may  establish,  amend,  and  rescind  any  rules  and 
regulations relating to the DSU Plan, and may make such determinations as it deems necessary or desirable for the administration 
of the DSU Plan.
Termination or Suspension of the DSU Plan
If  the  Board  terminates  or  suspends  the  DSU  Plan,  previously  credited  DSUs  may,  at  the  CG&HR Committee's  election,  be 
distributed to Participants or may remain outstanding and in effect in accordance with the terms of the DSU Plan. The Board will 
not require the consent of any affected Participant in connection with a termination of the DSU Plan in which Payment Shares are 
issued  to  the  Participant  in  respect  of  all  such  DSUs.  The  DSU  Plan  will  terminate  on  the  date  upon  which  no  further  DSUs 
remain outstanding.
Transferability
Except as required by law, the rights of a Participant under the DSU Plan are not capable of being assigned, transferred, alienated, 
sold,  encumbered,  pledged,  mortgaged  or  charged  and  are  not  capable  of  being  subject  to  attachment  or  legal  process  for  the 
payment of any debts or obligations of the Participant.
Approval of the DSU Plan
As at April 1, 2015, the maximum number of Common Shares that may be issued under the DSU Plan and all other security based 
compensation arrangements, including the Option Plan and the RSU Plan (each as defined herein), was 13,477,940, representing 
10% of the number of issued and outstanding Common Shares on that date. As at April 1, 2015, the Company had Options and 
RSUs  to  potentially  acquire  9,218,430 Common  Shares  outstanding  under  the  Option  Plan  and  the  RSU  Plan  (representing 
approximately 6.8% of the outstanding Common Shares), leaving up to 673,897 Common Shares available for future grants under 
the  DSU  Plan  and  3,585,613 Common  Shares  available  for  future  grants  under all  other  security  based  compensation 
arrangements,  including  the  Option  Plan  and  RSU  Plan,  based  on  the  number  of  outstanding  Common  Shares  as  at  that  date
(representing an aggregate of approximately 3.2% of the outstanding Common Shares).
11
At the Meeting, shareholders will be asked to consider and, if deemed advisable, to approve the following ordinary resolution:
"BE IT RESOLVED, as an ordinary resolution of the shareholders of the Company, that:
1.
2.
3.
4.
the  DSU  Plan,  substantially  in  the  form  attached  as  Appendix  B to  this  Information  Circular  and  described 
under the heading "Matters to be Acted Upon at the Meeting – Approval of Deferred Share Unit Plan" in this 
Information Circular is hereby authorized and approved;
all unallocated DSUs issuable under the DSU Plan are approved and authorized until May 12, 2018;
any  one  officer  or  director  of  the  Company  be  and  is  hereby  authorized  to  execute  and  deliver  all  such 
agreements and documents, whether under the corporate seal or otherwise, and to take all action, as such officer 
or director shall deem necessary or appropriate to give effect to the foregoing resolutions; and
notwithstanding that this resolution has been duly passed by the shareholders of the Company, the directors of 
the Company are hereby authorized and empowered to revoke this resolution, without any further approval of 
the shareholders of the  Company, at any  time if such revocation is considered necessary or desirable by the 
directors."
In order for the foregoing resolution to be passed, it must be approved by a simple majority of the votes cast by shareholders in 
person or by proxy at the Meeting on such resolution.
It is the intention of the management to vote proxies in favour of the ordinary resolution above, unless otherwise directed.
Approval of Shareholder Rights Plan
General
On September 29, 2009, Parex adopted a shareholder protection rights plan (the "Existing Rights Plan"), which was confirmed 
by  shareholders  on  October  30,  2009  and  subsequently  reconfirmed  by  shareholders  on  May  23,  2012.  At  the  Meeting, 
shareholders will be asked to consider and, if deemed advisable, approve an ordinary resolution approving certain amendments to 
the Existing Rights Plan described below under "Proposed Amendments" and to confirm and approve the amended and restated 
shareholder protection rights plan of the Company (the "Amended Rights Plan"), a blacklined copy of which is attached to this 
Information Circular as Appendix C. If the Amended Rights Plan is approved at the Meeting, such Amended Rights Plan will be 
effective until the close of business of the annual general meeting of shareholders of Parex held in 2018, unless it is reconfirmed 
at such meeting or it is otherwise terminated in accordance with its terms.  If the Amended Rights Plan is not approved at the 
Meeting, the Existing Rights Plan will expire at the close of business on the date of the Meeting (unless it is earlier terminated in 
accordance with its terms).
Proposed Amendments
The  proposed  amendments  to  the  Existing  Rights  Plan  are  intended  to  conform  the  plan  to  the  governance  practices  and 
recommendations provided by organizations such as Institutional Shareholder Services Inc. for "new generation" rights plans. The 
Amended Rights Plan includes, but is not limited to, the following proposed amendments:
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
the definition of "beneficial owner" has been amended to specifically exclude a mutual fund or a manager or trustee of a 
mutual fund that holds securities in the ordinary course of business, such that if such persons acquire greater than 20% of 
the Common Shares, they would not trigger a Flip-in Event (as defined below), provided that they are not making, or are 
not part of a group making, a take-over bid;
the definition of "Permitted Lock-up Agreement" was revised to remove the requirement that a competing bid must be 
for at least the same number of Common Shares as the Lock-up Bid (as defined in the Amended Rights Plan) in order for 
a Locked-up Person (as defined in the Amended Rights Plan) to be able to withdraw from the Lock-up Bid to support the 
competing  bid.  Under  the  Amended  Rights  Plan,  a  Locked-Up  Person  may  withdraw  shares  from  a  Lock-up  Bid  to 
support another bid or transaction that provides for greater consideration than the Lock-up Bid, regardless of the number 
of Common Shares that are involved in the competing bid;
12
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
the  requirement  that  a  Grandfathered  Person  (as  defined  in  the  Amended  Rights  Plan)  must  comply  with  all  legal 
disclosure requirements in order for such person to be deemed not to be an Acquiring Person (as defined in the Amended 
Rights Plan) was removed;
Section 1.7, which describes when a person may be considered to be acting "jointly or in concert" with another person, 
has  been  revised  to  remove  the  words  "for  the  purpose  of",  which  could  be  considered  to  be  discretionary  language 
which could be left open to interpretation; 
the  redemption  and  waiver  provisions  contained  in  Section  5.1  were  amended  such  that  the  Board  would  only  have 
authority to  waive the application of the rights plan to a Flip-in Event  without shareholder approval if the applicable 
takeover bid was made by means of a takeover bid circular to all of the holders of record of the Common Shares; 
the amendment provisions in Section 5.4 were revised to: (i) remove the reference to "whether or not such action would 
materially adversely affect the interests of the holders of Rights generally" in the provision which allows the Company,
with the prior consent of the holders of Common Shares, to amend, vary, rescind, supplement any of the provisions of 
Amended Rights Plan; and (ii) provide that any approval of the  holders of Rights (as  defined below) pursuant to the 
Amended Rights Plan requires the approval of the "Independent Shareholders" (as defined in the Amended Rights Plan);
and
certain other conforming amendments, amendments to reflect that the Existing Rights Plan was previously confirmed by 
shareholders,  amendments of an administrative nature, and amendments to correct clerical or typographical errors.
A  blacklined copy  of  the  Amended  Rights  Plan  showing  each  of  above proposed  amendments  is  attached  to  this  Information 
Circular as Appendix C.
Summary of Amended Rights Plan
The following is a summary of the principal terms of the Amended Rights Plan, which summary is qualified by and is subject to
the full terms and conditions of the Amended Rights Plan, a blacklined copy of which is attached to this Information Circular as 
Appendix  C. Except  as  otherwise  defined  herein,  capitalized  terms  used  herein  have  the  meanings  ascribed  thereto  in  the 
Amended Rights Plan.
Objectives of the Amended Rights Plan
The fundamental objectives of the Amended Rights Plan are to provide adequate time for Parex' directors and shareholders to 
assess an unsolicited take-over bid for Parex, to provide the directors with sufficient time to explore and develop alternatives for 
maximizing shareholder value if a take-over bid is made, and to provide shareholders with an equal opportunity to participate in a 
take-over bid.
The Amended Rights Plan encourages a potential acquirer who makes a take-over bid to proceed either by way of a "Permitted 
Bid" (described  below),  which  generally  requires  a  take-over  bid  to  satisfy  certain  minimum  standards  designed  to  promote 
fairness, or  with the concurrence of the directors of Parex.  If a take-over bid fails to  meet these  minimum standards and the 
Amended Rights Plan is not waived by the directors, the Amended Rights Plan provides that holders of Common Shares, other 
than the acquiror, will be able to purchase additional Common Shares at a significant discount to market, thus exposing the person 
acquiring Common Shares to substantial dilution of its holdings.
It is not the intention of the directors in recommending the confirmation and ratification of the Amended Rights Plan to either 
secure the continuance of the directors or management of Parex or to preclude a take-over bid for control of Parex.  The Amended 
Rights  Plan provides  that  shareholders  could  tender  to  take-over  bids  as  long  as  they  meet  the  Permitted  Bid  criteria.  
Furthermore, even in the context of a take-over bid that does not meet the Permitted Bid criteria, the directors are always bound 
by their fiduciary duty to consider any take-over bid for Parex and consider whether or not they should waive the application of 
the Amended Rights Plan in respect of such bid.  In discharging such responsibility, the directors will be obligated to act honestly 
and in good faith and in the best interests of Parex and the shareholders.
The continuation of the existing outstanding Rights and the issuance of additional Rights in the future will not in any way alter the 
financial condition of Parex, impede its business plans, or alter its financial statements.  In addition, the Amended Rights Plan is 
initially not dilutive.  However, if a "Flip-in Event" (described below) occurs and the Rights separate from the Common Shares as 
described  below,  reported  earnings  per  Common  Share  and  reported  cash  flow  per  Common  Share  on  a  fully-diluted  or  non-
13
diluted basis may be affected. In addition, holders of Rights not exercising their Rights after a Flip-in Event may suffer substantial 
dilution.
Issue of Rights
Pursuant to the Amended Rights Plan, one right ("Right") is  issued and attached to each outstanding Common Share of Parex, 
any  other  securities  or  voting  interests  of  Parex  entitled  to  vote  generally  in  the  election  of directors,  and  any  securities 
convertible, exercisable or exchangeable into Common Shares.  One Right will also be issued and attach to each Common Share 
issued hereafter, subject to the limitations set forth in the Amended Rights Plan.
Acquiring Person
Transactions  that  are  exempt  from  the  operation  of  the  Amended  Rights  Plan include  those  whereby  any  person  becomes  the 
beneficial owner of 20% or more of the Common Shares as a result of, among other things: (i) an acquisition or redemption by 
Parex or a subsidiary of Parex of Common Shares which, by reducing the number of Common Shares outstanding or which may 
be voted, increases the proportionate number of Common Shares beneficially owned by any person; (ii) acquisitions pursuant to a
Permitted Bid or Competing Permitted Bid (as described below); (iii) a share acquisition to which the application of the Amended 
Rights Plan has been waived by the Board; (iv) a share acquisition pursuant to an amalgamation, merger, plan of arrangement or 
other  statutory  procedure  having  similar  effect  which  has  been  approved  by  the  holders  of  Common  Shares  by  the  requisite 
majority or majorities of the holders of Common Shares at a meeting of such holders duly called and held for such purpose; and 
(v) an acquisition of Common Shares as a result of: an acquisition pursuant to a dividend reinvestment plan; a stock dividend, a 
stock split or other event pursuant to which a person becomes beneficial owner of Common Shares on the same pro rata basis as
all other holders of Common Shares; the acquisition or exercise by such person of rights to purchase Common Shares distributed 
to  such  person  in  the  course  of  a  distribution  to  all  holders  of  Common  Shares  pursuant  to  a  rights  offering  or  pursuant  to  a
prospectus;  or  a  distribution  of Common  Shares  or  securities  convertible  into  or  exchangeable  for  Common  Shares  (and  the 
conversion or exchange of such convertible or exchangeable securities), made pursuant to a prospectus or a distribution by way of 
a private placement.
Also excluded from the definition of Acquiring Person is a person (a "Grandfathered Person") who is the Beneficial Owner of 
20% or more of the outstanding Common Shares on the date of implementation of the Existing Rights Plan; provided further, 
however,  that  this  exemption  shall  not  be,  and  shall  cease  to  be,  applicable  to  a  Grandfathered  Person  in  the  event  that  such 
Grandfathered Person shall, after the date of implementation of the Amended Rights Plan, become the Beneficial Owner of more 
than 1.0% of the number of Common Shares then outstanding in addition to those Common Shares already held by such person, 
other than through: (i) specified acquisitions of securities of Parex (including the issuance or exercise of securities convertible, 
exercisable or exchangeable into Common Shares); (ii) acquisitions pursuant to a Permitted Bid or Competing Permitted Bid (as 
described below); (iii) specified distributions of securities of Parex; (iv) certain other specified exempt acquisitions (including for 
portfolio managers, mutual funds, companies and other similar entities with no present intention to take control of Parex); and (v) 
transactions to which the application of the Amended Rights Plan has been waived by the Board.
Lock-Up Agreements
An offeror may enter into lock-up agreements with one or more shareholders of the Company whereby such shareholders agree to 
deposit or tender their Common Shares to the take-over bid that is a Permitted Bid (the "Subject Bid") without a Flip-in Event 
occurring. Any such agreement must either: (i) permit the shareholder to withdraw the Common Shares from the lock-up to tender 
to another take-over bid or to support another transaction that in either case will provide greater value to the shareholder than the
Subject Bid; or (ii) permit the shareholder to withdraw from the agreement in order to tender or deposit the Common Shares to
another transaction or to support another transaction that contains an offering price that exceeds the value of the Subject Bid by as 
much or more than a specified amount as long as the agreement does not provide for a specified amount that exceeds 7% of the 
value of the Subject Bid.
Rights Exercise Privilege
The Rights will separate from the Common Shares to which they are attached and will become exercisable at the close of business 
(the "Separation Time") on the tenth business day after the earliest of: (a) the first date of public announcement that a person 
and/or others associated, affiliated or otherwise connected to such person, or acting in concert with such person, have become an
14
Acquiring Person; (b) the date of commencement of, or first public announcement of the intent of any person to commence, a 
take-over bid, other than a Permitted Bid or a Competing Permitted Bid; or (c) such later date as the directors may determine in 
good faith.  Subject to adjustment as provided in the Amended Rights Plan, each Right will entitle the holder to purchase one 
Common Share at a price (the "Exercise Price") equal to Cdn$50.00.  At any time prior to the Rights becoming exercisable, the 
Parex Board of Directors may waive the operation of the Amended Rights Plan with respect to certain events before they occur.
A  transaction  in  which  a  person  becomes  an  Acquiring  Person  is  referred  to  as  a  "Flip-in  Event".    Any  Rights  held  by  an 
Acquiring Person on or after the earlier of the Separation Time or the first date of public announcement by Parex or an Acquiring 
Person that an Acquiring Person has become such, will become void upon the occurrence of a Flip-in Event.  After the close of 
business on the tenth business day after the first public announcement of the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, each Right (other than 
those held by the Acquiring Person) will entitle the holder to purchase, for the exercise price, that number of Common Shares 
having an aggregate market price (based on the prevailing market price at the time of the consummation or occurrence of the Flip-
in Event) equal to four times the Exercise Price.
Impact Once Amended Rights Plan is Triggered
Upon a Flip-in Event occurring and the Rights separating from the attached Common Shares, reported earnings per common share 
on a fully diluted or non-diluted basis may be affected.  Holders of Rights who do not exercise their Rights upon the occurrence 
of a Flip-in Event may suffer substantial dilution.
By permitting holders of Rights other than an Acquiring Person to acquire Common Shares at a discount to market value, the 
Rights may cause substantial dilution to a person or group that acquires 20% or more of the voting securities of Parex other than 
by way of a Permitted Bid or other than in circumstances where the Rights are redeemed or the Board waives the application of 
the Amended Rights Plan.
Certificates and Transferability
Before the Separation Time, certificates for Common Shares will also evidence one Right for each Common Share represented by 
the certificate.
Prior to the Separation Time, Rights will not be transferable separately from the attached Common Shares.  From and after the
Separation Time, the Rights will be evidenced by Rights certificates, which will be transferable and traded separately from the
Common Shares.  Shareholders will receive no other proof of or document of ownership of the Right.
Permitted Bids
The Amended Rights Plan is not triggered if an offer to acquire Common Shares would allow sufficient time for the shareholders 
to consider and react to the offer and would allow shareholders to decide to tender or not tender without the concern that they will 
be left with illiquid Common Shares should they not tender.
A "Permitted Bid" is a take-over bid where the bid is made by way of a take-over bid circular and: (i) is made to all holders of 
Common Shares, other than the offeror, for all or a portion of the Common Shares held by those holders; (ii) the bid must not 
permit Common Shares tendered pursuant to the bid to be taken up until not less than 60 days following the bid and only if, at
such time, more than 50% of the Common Shares held by shareholders other than the bidder, its affiliates and Persons acting 
jointly or in concert with the bidder have been tendered pursuant to the take-over bid and not withdrawn; and (iii) if the condition 
set forth in subparagraph (ii) is satisfied, the offeror must make a public announcement of that fact and the take-over bid will 
remain  open  for  deposits  and  tenders  of  Common  Shares  for  not  less  than  ten  business  days  from  the  date  of  such  public 
announcement.
A Permitted Bid is not required to be approved by the Board and such bids may be made directly to shareholders. Acquisitions of 
Common Shares made pursuant to a Permitted Bid or a Competing Permitted Bid do not give rise to a Flip-in Event.
15
Waiver and Redemption
The Board may, before the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, waive the application of the Amended Rights Plan to a particular Flip-in 
Event that would occur as a result of a take-over bid made under a circular prepared in accordance with applicable securities laws 
to all holders of Common Shares.  In such event, the Board shall be deemed to also have waived the application of the Amended 
Rights  Plan to  any  other  Flip  in  Event  occurring  as  a  result  of  any  other  takeover  bid  made  under  a  circular  prepared  in 
accordance with applicable securities laws to all holders of Common Shares prior to the expiry of any take-over bid for which the 
Amended Rights Plan has been waived or deemed to have been waived.
The Board may also waive the application of the Amended Rights Plan to an inadvertent Flip-in Event, on the condition that the 
person who became an Acquiring Person in the Flip-in Event reduces its Beneficial Ownership of Common Shares such that it is 
not an Acquiring Person within 10 days of the determination of the Board (or any earlier or later time specified by the Board).
Subject to the prior consent of the holders of Common Shares or Rights, until the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, the directors may, 
elect to redeem all but  not less than all of the then outstanding  Rights at Cdn$0.00001 per Right.  In the event that a person 
acquires Common Shares pursuant to a Permitted Bid or a Competing Permitted Bid, then the directors shall, immediately upon 
the  consummation  of  such  acquisition,  without  further  formality,  be  deemed  to  have  elected  to  redeem  the  Rights  at  the 
redemption price.
Supplement and Amendments
Parex  may,  without  the  approval  of  the  holders  of  Common  Shares  or  Rights,  make  amendments:  (i)  to  correct  clerical  or 
typographical errors; (ii) which are required to maintain the validity of the Amended Rights Plans as a result of any change in 
applicable legislation, regulations or rules thereunder; and (ii) as otherwise specifically contemplated therein.  Any amendment 
referred to in (ii) must, if made before the Separation Time, be submitted for approval to the holders of Common Shares at the 
next meeting of shareholders and, if made after the Separation Time, must be submitted to the holders of Rights for approval.
At  any  time  before  the  Separation  Date,  Parex  may,  with  prior  consent  of  the  Independent  Shareholders  received  at  a  special 
meeting called and held for such purpose, amend, vary or rescind any of the provisions of the Amended Rights Plan or the Rights.
At any time after the Separation Date, Parex may, with prior consent of the holders of Rights (other than Rights which are void 
pursuant  to  the  provisions  hereof  or  those  Rights  which,  prior  to  the  Separation  Time,  are  held  by  Shareholders  other  than 
Independent Shareholders) received at a meeting called and held for such purpose, amend, vary or rescind any of the provisions of 
the Amended Rights Plan or the Rights, whether or not such action would materially adversely affect the interests of the Rights 
generally.
Approval Required
Shareholders  will  be  asked  at  the  Meeting  to  consider  and,  if  thought advisable,  to  re-approve  the  Amended  Rights  Plan.
Accordingly, at the Meeting, Shareholders will be asked to consider and, if deemed advisable, to approve the following ordinary 
resolution:
"BE IT RESOLVED, as an ordinary resolution of the shareholders of the Company, that:
1.
2.
3.
the Amended Rights Plan, on the terms described in the accompanying Information Circular be and the same is 
hereby ratified, confirmed and approved until the termination of the annual general meeting of the shareholders 
of the Company held in 2018, unless at such meeting shareholders have reconfirmed the Amended Rights Plan 
for an additional period of time, and the Company is authorized to continue to issue Rights pursuant thereto;
any one director or officer of the  Company be and is  hereby authorized and directed to do all things and to 
execute and deliver all documents and instruments as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the terms of 
this resolution; and
notwithstanding that this resolution has been passed by the shareholders of the Company, the directors of the 
Company are hereby authorized and empowered to revoke this resolution, without any further approval of the
16
shareholders  of  the  Company,  at  any  time  if  such  revocation  is  considered  necessary  or  desirable  by  the 
directors."
In order for the foregoing resolution to be passed, it must be approved by a simple majority of the votes cast by Shareholders in 
person or by proxy at the Meeting on such resolution.
It is the intention of the management to vote proxies in favour of the ordinary resolution above, unless otherwise directed.
Appointment of Auditors
Unless otherwise directed, it is management's intention to vote the proxies in favour of an ordinary resolution to appoint the firm 
of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Chartered Accountants,  Calgary, Alberta, to serve as auditors of the Company  until the next 
annual general meeting of shareholders and to authorize the directors to fix their remuneration as such.  PricewaterhouseCoopers
LLP have been the auditors of the Company since September 29, 2009.
Certain information regarding the Company's Audit Committee, including the fees paid to the Company's auditors in the last two
fiscal years, that is required to be disclosed in accordance with National Instrument 52-110 – Audit Committees of the Canadian 
Securities  Administrators  is  contained  in  the  Company's  annual  information  form  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2014,  an 
electronic copy of which is available on the internet on the Company's SEDAR profile at www.sedar.com.
Other Matters
Management knows of no amendment, variation or other matter to come before the Meeting other than the matters referred to in 
the  Notice  of  Annual  General  and  Special  Meeting.    However,  if  any  other  matter  properly  comes  before  the  Meeting,  the 
accompanying proxy  will be  voted on such  matter in accordance  with the best judgement of the person or persons  voting the 
proxy.
Matters Considered at the Company's 2014 Annual Meeting
At the Company's annual general and special meeting of shareholders held on May 13, 2014 (the "2014 Shareholders Meeting"), 
in  addition  to  appointing  the  directors  and  auditors  of  the  Company,  shareholders  also  approved:  (i)  an  ordinary  resolution 
confirming the By-law (the "By-law Resolution"); (ii) an ordinary resolution approving all unallocated Options under the Option 
Plan  (the  "Option  Allocation  Resolution");  and  (iii)  an  ordinary  resolution  approving  certain  changes  to  the  amendment 
provisions contained in the Option Plan (the "Option Plan Amendment Resolution"). The vote on the appointment of directors 
of the Company was conducted by ballot in accordance with the Company's majority voting policy and the policies of the TSX 
and over 97% of the Common Shares represented at the 2014 Shareholders Meeting were voted in favour of the appointment of 
each of  the  directors.  Each  of  the  By-law  Resolution,  the  Option  Allocation  Resolution  and  the  Option  Plan  Amendment 
Resolution were passed by shareholders and the voting on such matters was conducted by way of a show of hands vote, as proxies 
representing less than 5.0% of the Common Shares entitled to be voted at the 2014 Shareholders Meeting were voted against each 
of such matters.
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
STATEMENT OF EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The  Company  was  incorporated  in  August  2009  and  in  September  2009  the  Corporate  Governance  and  Human  Resources 
Committee of the Parex Board of Directors (the "CG&HR Committee") reviewed all aspects of compensation to be provided to 
the Company's executive officers, including the Chief Executive Officer ("CEO"), Chief Financial Officer ("CFO") and the three 
most  highly  compensated  executive  officers  of  the  Company  (including  the  Company's  subsidiaries),  other  than  the  CEO  and 
CFO,  earning  over  $150,000  (collectively,  the  "NEOs" and  in  this  Information  Circular  collectively  referred  to  as  the 
"Executives").
17
At  the  recommendation  of  the  CG&HR  Committee,  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  (the  "Board") approved  an  executive 
compensation program, based on the following guiding principles and key objectives:
Guiding Principles
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
executive compensation must be directly linked to the Company's business model, strategy and goals;
executive compensation aligns the CEO and executive incentives with the interests of shareholders; and 
the  executive  compensation  program  is  founded  on  sound  governance  practices  for  the  development  and 
administration of executive compensation.
Key Objectives
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
rewarding  of  performance  according  to  the  achievement  of  business  and  personal  objectives  and  overall  job 
performance;
competitiveness with an external comparator group representative of the market in which the Company competes for 
talent; and
attraction,  engagement  and  retention  of  leadership  focused  on  managing  the  Company's  operations,  finances  and 
assets.
The  executive  compensation  program  is  designed  to  focus  Executives' efforts  and  to  reward  the  attainment  of  individual  and 
Company  performance  goals  and  sustained  performance,  as  measured  by  overall  job  performance  and  long  term  growth  and 
profitability.
Key Components
The key components of the executive compensation program are base salary, incentive bonus, Options and RSUs. Fixed annual 
base salary compensates Executives for the roles they perform and provides a competitive foundation for each Executive's total 
compensation. Annual  variable  compensation  in  the  form  of  a  cash  incentive  bonus  is  intended  to  motivate  and  reward  the 
accomplishment of specific business and operating objectives within a one-year time period. Long-term at-risk compensation, 
which  is  provided  in  the  form  of  Options and  RSUs,  focuses  Executives' performance  on  long-term  strategic  priorities,  the 
creation  of  shareholder  value  and  acts  to  link  Executive  and  shareholder  interests.
In  addition  to  these  key  components,  the 
Company  provides  group  benefits  on  a  competitive  level  with  peer  comparator  companies.    Perquisites  are  also  provided  to 
Executives in the form of taxable paid monthly parking. All Calgary based Executives and employees are eligible for a foreign 
travel premium for extensive business travel outside of Canada and the United States each year.
The  value  of  Executive  compensation  is  assessed  as  a  total  compensation  package,  based  on  the  competitiveness  of  each  key 
component,  individually  and  in  the  aggregate.    Total  compensation  levels  are  targeted  at  the  median  of  the  Company's  peer 
comparator group when actual overall Executive and corporate performance is satisfactory.  In 2014, the Company used the 2014
Mercer  Total  Compensation  Survey,  a  third-party  compensation  survey  used  to  compare  pay  levels  and  practices  across  the 
Canadian  energy  industry  to  assess  compensation  against  similar  benchmark  positions  for  each  Executive,  supplemented  by 
executive  compensation  data  from  individual  companies  that  met  parameters  typical  of  a  junior  exploration  and  production 
company  with  international  operations  similar  to  Parex.  Due  to  the  Company’s  transition  from  a  junior  company  to  an 
intermediate exploration and production company, as reflected in the significant production and reserves growth from 2013 to 
2014 and in the Company’s long term business plan as approved by the Board in 2014, the Board also approved in October 2014 
an expanded peer comparator group of companies that were good comparisons to Parex’ current and growth plan metrics. Results 
of a competitive compensation study initiated by the CG&HR Committee and conducted by Lane Caputo Compensation Inc. in 
October  2014,  to  compare  executive  and  other  compensation  in  Parex  against  the  new  peer  comparator  group,  were  used in 
planning for the annual long-term incentive compensation grants in 2014 to executives and for compensation planning for 2015 
for executives, including base salaries.  See "Statement of Executive Compensation – Changes to Executive Compensation". Total
compensation  is  targeted  to  be  comparable  to  above-median compensation  when  actual  overall  executive  and  corporate 
performance is exceptional and/or exceeds objectives.  When overall executive and corporate performance is below satisfactory or 
falls short of threshold objectives, total compensation is targeted to be below the median of the peer comparator group.
18
Comparator Group
The Company's comparator group is comprised of oil and natural gas exploration, development and production companies based 
principally in Calgary, Canada and with several of the companies having a significant operational focus outside of Canada.  The 
companies  in  the  comparator  group  are  approved  by  the  CG&HR  Committee,  upon  management's  recommendation.    The 
composition of the group is reviewed annually by the CG&HR Committee for its ongoing business relevance to Parex. For 2014,
the peer comparator group was expanded to eighteen companies that were good comparisons to Parex’ current and growth plan 
metrics. The individual companies were Bankers Petroleum Ltd., Bellatrix Exploration Ltd., Birchcliff Energy Ltd., Bonavista 
Energy Corp., Canacol Energy Ltd., Crew Energy Inc., Enerplus Corp., Gran Tierra Energy Inc., Legacy Oil & Gas Inc., Niko 
Resources Ltd., NuVista Energy Ltd., Paramount Resources Ltd., Pengrowth Energy Corp.,  Raging River Exploration Inc., RMP 
Energy  Inc.,  TransGlobe  Energy  Corporation, Trilogy  Energy  Corp., Vermilion  Energy  Inc. and  Whitecap  Resources  Inc. 
Compensation data from the comparator group was  used as the main  factor in the review and consideration of appropriate levels 
and  composition  of  compensation  for  the  Company’s  executives,  supplemented  by  data  from  the  2014  Mercer  Total 
Compensation Survey for the Canadian energy industry for companies that met parameters typical of a mid-size exploration and 
production company with international operations similar to Parex.
Compensation Risk
The CG&HR Committee reviews the Executive compensation program to be satisfied that it is structured to encourage decision 
making  and  outcomes  that  are  in  the  best  interest  of  Parex  and  its  shareholders while  accepting  an  appropriate  level  of  risk 
consistent  with  the  Company’s  business  plan  as  determined  by  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors.
The  compensation  structure 
rewards actions that result in a balance of the achievement of short-term goals and long-term strategies, and does not encourage 
sub-optimization or reward actions that could produce short term success at the cost of long term shareholder results. As well, 
annual  budgets  and  quarterly  and  annual  financial  results are  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors. The 
compensation framework is structured to align with Parex's short and long term strategic plans, such that corporate objectives are 
a  key  factor  in  assessing  executive  and  employee  performance.  The  CG&HR  Committee's  risk  oversight  of  the  Company's 
executive compensation program is accomplished in the following ways:
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
a significant portion of executive compensation is at risk (it is not guaranteed) and is variable year over year. For 
example, annual bonuses are at the discretion of the Parex Board of Directors from year to year;
bonus plan payouts are capped based on a percentage of salary and subject to overall maximum thresholds;
the Stock Option Plan and the RSU Plan are designed to motivate long term performance, as the  Options and RSUs
have  a  life  of  at  least  a  five  year  period and  vest  over  a  three  year  period.  These  factors encourage  long  term 
sustainable share price appreciation;a balanced set of corporate performance goals is used to assess overall corporate 
results  and  to  determine  the  corporate  portion  of  the  annual  bonus  program. These  are also  a  major  driver  in 
determining the individual portions of the annual bonuses for executives and employees;
third  party  verifications, such  as  independent  engineering  evaluations, of  appropriate  elements  of  the  corporate 
performance goals are incorporated before the results are finalized;
threshold corporate performance goals must be met for each element of the analysis.  If a minimum threshold for 
performance is not met, there will be a zero bonus payout for that element;
recommendations for annual bonus payments are reviewed by the CG&HR Committee for recommendation to the 
Parex  Board  of  Directors  for  approval,  against  corporate  performance  goal results  and  performance  assessments 
completed with executives;
special awards may be paid to employees  with outstanding performance and high potential and where significant 
contributions are made to the organization.  Projects, key contributors and awards are recommended and ranked by 
the CG&HR Committee and approved by the Parex Board of Directors;
compensation policies and practices in Parex's subsidiaries are substantially similar to those in Parex;
compensation policies and practices are substantially similar for all executives and employees; and
the compensation expense for NEO's is not a significant percentage of Parex's revenue.
19
The CG&HR Committee did not identify any risks associated with Parex's compensation policies and practices for the year ended 
December 31, 2014 that were reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on Parex.  The CG&HR Committee intends to 
monitor compensation governance and risk assessment practices, as these continue to evolve.
Executive Compensation Components
Target Compensation Mix
The target mix of key compensation elements is designed to place a significant portion of the Executive's annual compensation at-
risk, where the value received is contingent on meeting defined performance requirements.  At-risk compensation consists of the 
annual incentive bonus and long-term incentives (Options and RSUs).
Position
Executives
Base Salary
Fixed Compensation
Base Salary
(% of Total Compensation)
At-Risk Compensation
Incentive Bonus/Long-Term Incentives
(% of Total Compensation)
22 % - 36 %
64 % - 78 %
The base salary amounts for each Executive are targeted at the median of the Company's peer comparator group and are reviewed 
annually.    Variance  from  the  median  could  occur  on  the  basis  of  an  Executive's  current  and  sustained  performance,  skills  or 
potential, or based on material differences in the executive's responsibilities as compared to the peer comparator group. The base 
salary for the CEO is approved by the Parex Board of Directors, upon the recommendation of the CG&HR Committee.  The base 
salary level  for all other Executives is recommended by the CEO  for consideration and approval by the  CG&HR  Committee.  
Decisions  for  all  positions  are  based  upon  comprehensive  analyses  of  market  data  for  similar  positions,  including  the  peer 
comparator group and the noted industry compensation survey.
Incentive Bonus
The target annual incentive bonus varies by executive position level and is set as 60 percent of base salary for the CEO and 50
percent of base salary for the Company's other Executives, other than for the President Parex Colombia, which is set at 40 percent 
of base salary.
Payment levels are weighted based on individual and corporate performance goals.  The incentive bonus is paid within a range of 
between 50 percent and 150 percent of the target incentive bonus, provided minimum (threshold) performance is achieved, and 
subject to Parex Board of Directors approval for a payment of greater than 150 percent for outstanding results against individual 
and corporate goals,  as follows:
Position
CEO
CFO
COO
EVP Exploration & Business 
Development
President Parex Colombia
Performance 
Weighting
Corporate/Individual
Target
Incentive Bonus
(% Base Salary)
60% / 40%
50% / 50%
50% / 50%
50% / 50%
50% / 50%
60%
50%
50%
50%
40%
Incentive Bonus Range
(Payment as % of Target Incentive Bonus)
Threshold
Exceptional
50%
50%
50%
50%
50%
150%
150%
150%
150%
150%
The  CEO  evaluates  the  performance  of  each  Executive  (other  than  the  CEO).    Based  on  the  Executive's achievement  of 
performance goals, the CEO recommends the incentive bonus for each Executive to the CG&HR Committee for approval. The 
CG&HR Committee evaluates the performance of the CEO and recommends the incentive bonus level for all Executives to the 
Parex Board of Directors for approval.
20
The  incentive  bonus  is  paid  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  year  following  the  performance  year,  so  that  performance  goal 
achievements relating to full year performance results can be verified.
Incentive Bonus Performance Goals
The Parex Board of Directors approves corporate performance goals, based on business and performance measures commonly 
used in the oil and natural gas industry.  Corporate goals for 2014 were approved in early 2014 for each of the performance areas.  
These  goals  were  subjective,  based  on  the  view  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  of  key  performance  requirements  for  the 
Company, and included reserve additions, exit oil production rate, safety record, pre-tax cash flow and the achievement of certain 
key progress milestones. The  reserve additions goal had the highest single weighting of the 2014 corporate goals.
Long-Term Incentives
Long-term  incentives  are  granted  by  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  in  order  to  attract  and  retain  high  quality  Executives  in  a 
competitive market environment, using criteria of retention requirements, past performance, individual potential, annual strategic 
planning by the Company and total Executive compensation These incentives are provided in the form of Options and RSUs. The 
annual long-term incentive grants of Options and RSUs is calculated to target the Executive’s total compensation at the median of 
similar positions in the Company’s peer comparator group and are based on the expected value of the Option and RSU awards 
with reference to the Executive's base salary and incentive bonus.
Options
The Stock Option Plan is administered by the Parex Board of Directors.  For a summary of the Stock Option Plan see "Statement 
of Executive Compensation - Stock Option Plan" in this Information Circular.  Under the Stock Option Plan, grants to Executives 
other than the CEO are recommended by the CEO, reviewed by the CG&HR Committee and approved by the Parex Board of 
Directors.    The  Parex  Board  of  Directors  approves  Option  grants  for  the  CEO,  upon  the  recommendation  of  the  CG&HR 
Committee.  As of the date hereof, Options to purchase an aggregate of 7,571,844 Common Shares are issued and outstanding.
The number of Options granted to Executives takes into consideration Company and individual performance as well as the mix of
all elements of the Executive's compensation.  When setting grant levels, the Company considers competitive market information
on Options and other forms of long-term incentives.  In addition, the Stock Option Plan's dilutive impact on shareholders and 
number of Common Shares available for issuance are factored into the determination of Option grant levels.  The Stock Option 
Plan provides for the issuance of Options to a maximum of 10% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares of the Company, 
provided that the  maximum  number of Common Shares  issuable pursuant to outstanding Options and all other  security based 
compensation arrangements (as defined in the TSX Company Manual), shall not exceed 10% of the Common Shares outstanding 
from time to time. Grant values are determined using the Black-Scholes methodology.
Under  the  Stock  Option  Plan,  the  exercise  price  of  each  Option  is  to  be  determined  at  the  discretion  of  the  Parex  Board  of 
Directors at the time of the granting of the Option, as are the term and vesting policies, provided that the exercise price shall not 
be less than the closing trading price per Common Share on the TSX (or if the Common Shares are not listed on the TSX, on such 
stock  exchange  as  the  Common  Shares  are  then  traded)  on  the  last  trading  day  preceding:  (i)  the  issuance  of  news  release  in 
respect  of  the  Option  grant; or  (ii)  if  a  news  release  is  not  issued  announcing  the  Option  grant,  the  date  of  grant,  or,  if  the 
Common Shares are not listed on any stock exchange, a price determined by the Parex Board of Directors, and provided that no 
Option shall have a term exceeding five years.
Options are normally granted to each Executive at the time of hire and are also granted annually.  Replacement grants are not 
awarded, but previous grants can be taken into consideration when considering new grants of Options.  Any grant of Options is
subject to the restrictions of the Stock Option Plan.
With respect to annual Option grant awards, the intent is for the timing of such awards to coincide with the Company's long-term 
planning cycle and approval of strategic goals for the near and longer term.  Awarding long-term incentives at the same time that 
the Company's goals are set is intended to reinforce Executives' focus on the long-term goals of the Company.  In 2014, updated 
strategic goals for the Company were approved in September and in early November,, 2014 and Options were awarded to the 
Executives, directors and all qualifying employees on November 10, 2014.
RSUs
21
The  RSU  Plan  is  administered  by  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  or a  committee  thereof.  For  a  summary  of  the  RSU  Plan  see 
"Statement of Executive Compensation - RSU Plan" in this Information Circular.  Under the RSU Plan, grants to Executives other 
than the CEO are recommended by the CEO, reviewed by the CG&HR Committee and approved by the Parex Board of Directors.  
The Parex Board of Directors approves RSU grants for the CEO, upon the recommendation of the CG&HR Committee.  As of the 
date hereof, 1,646,586 RSUs exercisable for an aggregate of 1,646,586 Common Shares are issued and outstanding.  Any grant of 
RSUs is subject to the restrictions of the RSU Plan.
The number of RSUs granted to Executives takes into consideration Company and individual performance as well as the mix of 
all elements of the Executive's compensation.  When setting grant levels, the Company considers competitive market information
on RSUs and other forms of long-term incentives.  In addition, the RSU Plan's dilutive impact on shareholders and numbers of 
Common Shares available for issuance are factored into the determination of RSU grant levels.    The RSU Plan provides for the
issuance  of  RSUs  to  a  maximum  of  10%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  Common  Shares  of  the  Company,  provided  that  the 
maximum  number  of  Common  Shares  issuable  pursuant  to  outstanding  RSUs  and  all  other  security  based  compensation 
arrangements (as defined in the TSX Company Manual), shall not exceed 10% of the Common Shares outstanding from time to 
time.  Grant values are determined using the Black-Scholes methodology.
The intent is for the timing of annual RSU grant awards to coincide with the Company's long-term planning cycle and approval of 
strategic  goals  for  the  near  and  longer  term.  Awarding  long-term  incentives  at  the  same  time  that  the  Company's  upcoming 
strategic  goals  are  set  is  intended  to  reinforce  Executives'  focus  on  the  long-term  goals  of  the  Company.    In 2014,  updated 
strategic  goals  for  the  Company  were  approved  in  September  and  early  November,  2014 and  RSUs  were  awarded  to  the 
Executives and all qualifying employees on November 10, 2014.
Compensation Governance
CG&HR Committee
The CG&HR Committee of the Parex Board of Directors is responsible for reviewing all aspects of compensation to be provided 
to the Company's executive officers. The members of the CG&HR Committee are John Bechtold, Robert Engbloom and W.A. 
(Alf)  Peneycad. The  skills  and  experience  that  enable  the  members  of  the  CG&HR  Committee  to  make  decisions  on  the 
suitability of the  Company's  compensation policies and practices and the independence of each  member is summarized in the 
table below:
CG&HR Committee
Member
John Bechtold
Quebec, Canada
Robert Engbloom, Q.C.
Alberta, Canada
Independent
Skills and Experience Relevant to CG&HR Committee
Yes
Yes
Currently  a  director  of  Parkland  Fuel  Corporation,  an  independent  marketer  of 
fuels  across  Canada,  Mr.  Bechtold  brings  over  40  years  of  broad  oil,  gas  and 
energy related experience. He served at Petro-Canada from 1977 until retirement 
in a number of leadership roles. Following retirement he has also served on the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  British  Columbia  Oil  &  Gas  Commission  which 
regulates oil and natural gas activity in that province.
Senior  Partner of  Norton  Rose  Fulbright  Canada  LLP,  a  national  law  firm  in 
Canada and a member of the global Norton Rose Fulbright Group. Mr. Engbloom 
has  more  than  30  years  of  experience  in  the  areas  of  mergers  and  acquisitions, 
governance, corporate and securities law.  His broad experience spans a range of 
businesses  both  public  and  private,  operating  nationally  and  internationally, 
primarily in the energy industry.
22
CG&HR Committee
Member
W.A. (Alf) Peneycad
Alberta, Canada
CG&HR Committee Chair(1)
Independent
Skills and Experience Relevant to CG&HR Committee
Yes
Independent Businessman since 2006. Previously Vice President, General Counsel 
and  Chief  Compliance  Officer  for  Petro-Canada  from  2003  to  2006.  Vice 
President,  General  Counsel  and  Corporate  Secretary  of  Petro-Canada  prior  to 
2003.  Director  for  several  other  Canadian  public  companies  including  NiMin 
Energy  Corp.,  Canadian  Wireless  Trust,  and  R  Split  III  Corp.  where  he  holds 
positions on the Audit and Finance, Corporate Governance and Human Resource 
Committees. Member of the Institute of Corporate Directors having completed the 
Directors Education Program.
Note:
(1)
Pursuant to the Company’s director retirement policy, Mr. Peneycad will not be seeking re-election to the Company’s Board at 
the Meeting. Following the Meeting, if elected, it is expected that Lisa Colnett will be appointed to the CG&HR Committee.
Mandate of the CG&HR Committee
The CG&HR Committee of the Parex Board of Directors is responsible for oversight of the Company's corporate governance, 
board  development,  executive  appointments  and  compensation,  human  resources,  Stock  Option  Plan,  RSU  Plan, DSU  Plan
disclosures and performance assessment functions.
In particular, the CG&HR Committee's responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
(cid:120) monitoring the Company's corporate governance system so it is effective and meets regulatory requirements;
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120) monitoring, assessing and making recommendations regarding compensation, benefits, short and long term incentive
assessing and making recommendations regarding board and Committee mandates and performance;
providing ongoing training and development for directors as required;
establishing a process for identifying, recruiting, appointing, and electing directors and officers of the Company;
programs and employee retention programs;
ensuring alignment between the tactical performance of the officers and the Company and the strategic objectives 
and goals of the Company;
assessing the adequacy of the Company's corporate governance, code of conduct, anti-bribery and corruption and all 
significant policies and procedures which govern the Company's operations;
periodically  reviewing  and  evaluating the  size,  composition,  compensation  and  charter  of  the  Parex  Board  of 
Directors and Committees, the structure and mandates of the Committees, and position descriptions for the Chairs 
thereof and overall direct qualifications;
reviewing and recommending to the Parex Board of Directors: 
o
o
o
approval of officers' annual compensation and benefits package and related terms of employment based on the 
officers' annual performance evaluations;
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
appointments of the officers of the Company;
the approval of terminations, and severance arrangements for officers;
o
o
approval  of  annual  compensation  and  benefits  packages  for  the  employees  of  the  Company,  employment 
contracts and other related terms of employment, including the forms of incentive compensation payable; and
overall budget salary increases for the Company's employees, including cash compensation consisting of salary 
and bonuses, and the number of new Options, RSUs and DSUs;
23
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
reviewing annually the adequacy and form of directors' compensation to ensure it reflects the responsibilities and 
risks of membership on the Parex Board of Directors and its Committees and make recommendations relating to the 
directors' compensation;
reviewing  overall  human  resource  policies  and  procedures  including  recruitment,  performance  management, 
compensation,  benefit  programs,  resignations/terminations,  training  and  development,  succession  planning  and 
organizational planning and design; and
recommending to the Parex Board of Directors approval of the terms of the Stock Option Plan, RSU Plan and DSU 
Plan of the Company and any amendments thereto and approval of corporate performance measures and targets used 
to calculate Stock Option Plan, RSU Plan and DSU Plan annual grants and other compensation plans.
Compensation Consultants
Consultant
Date Retained
October 8, 2014
Lane Caputo Compensation Inc.
("Lane Caputo")
Mandate
Review of and recommendations for Executive,          
Vice President and Independent Director  
compensation in Parex against the Company’s new 
peer group of companies
Executive
Compensation-
Related Fees
(includes GST)
$37,800
Frances Behan Human Resources 
Consulting Inc. ("Frances Behan")
January 9, 2013
Review Parex Board of Directors compensation 
against the Company's peer companies.
$5,250
In 2014, the CG&HR Committee  retained Lane Caputo to review and recommend Executive, Vice President and Independent 
Director    compensation  against  the  Company’s  new  peer  group  of  companies.  Lane  Caputo  was  not  retained  in  2013.  See 
"Statement  of  Executive  Compensation  – Changes  to  Executive  Compensation" and  "Statement  of  Executive  Compensation  –
Director Compensation".
In 2013, the CG&HR Committee directed Management to retain Frances Behan to review of Board compensation. Frances Behan 
was not retained in 2014 or 2012. See "Statement of Executive Compensation – Director Compensation".
Other Information Concerning Executive Compensation
Pursuant to the Company's Disclosure, Confidentiality, Insider Trading and Blackout Period Policy and Procedures, no employee, 
insider, associate or affiliate of the Company shall, at any time, enter into a sale of Common Shares, Options, RSUs or DSUs
where such person does not own or has not fully paid for the securities being sold (i.e. a "short sale"). This prohibition is also 
included in the Company’s Securities Hedging Policy, pertaining to directors and officers.
Pursuant to the Company’s Securities Hedging Policy,  directors and officers of the Company shall not, directly or indirectly, buy 
or sell a call or put in respect of a security of the Company,
including, for greater certainty, a director or officer of the Company 
shall not purchase financial instruments, such as  prepaid variable forward contracts, equity swaps, collars, or units of exchange 
funds,  that  are  designed  to  hedge  or  offset  a  decrease  in  market  value  of  equity  securities  granted  as  compensation  or  held, 
directly or indirectly, by such director or officer
Notwithstanding these prohibitions, directors and officers of the Company may sell a security which such person does not own if 
such person owns another security convertible into such security or an option or right to acquire such security sold and, within 10 
days after the sale, such person: (i) exercises the conversion privilege, option or right and delivers the securities so associated to 
the purchaser; or (ii) transfers the convertible security, option or right, if transferable to the purchaser.
24
Changes to Executive Compensation
Following the approval of an expanded peer company comparator group in 2014, the CG&HR Committee retained Lane Caputo 
in October 2014 to conduct a review of and to make recommendations for Executive, Vice President and  Independent Director 
compensation against the new peer group of companies.  Lane Caputo made several recommendations regarding increases to base 
salaries  and  annual  performance  bonus  targets  for  Executive  and  Vice  President  positions  in  Parex,  as  well  as  recommended 
levels of annual grants of long term incentives for these positions, to help ensure that the Company’s compensation practices were 
competitive  against  the  new  peer  group  of  companies.  Lane  Caputo’s  study  also  referred  to  revised  corporate  and  individual 
weightings for the annual performance bonus program for Executive positions that would be consistent with such weightings in 
the new peer group.
The CG&HR Committee reviewed Lane Caputo’s recommendations in early November 2014 and directed Management to use 
these recommendations in the planning for the annual long term incentive grants to be made in November that year, as well as in 
salary and other compensation planning for 2015 that would be prepared for CG&HR Committee and Board approval in February 
2015. Because of the significant challenges facing the oil and gas  industry in early 2015 due to the low oil price environment,  in 
February  2015  the  Board  directed  that  base  salaries  should  be  frozen  at  2014  levels.  Recognizing  the  Company’s  excellent 
performance  in  2014,  the  Board  instead  approved  special one  - time  payments  that  reflected  competitive  salary  increases  that 
would have been made in a less challenging economic environment. These special payments were made in February 2015 and 
met  the  Company’s  dual  objectives  of  rewarding  excellent  performance  while  taking  the  prudent  approach  of  not  escalating 
Parex’ long term cost structure. The average special payment for the Named Executive Officers was 11.6% of 2014 base salaries,
and represented approximately two-thirds of the base salary increase recommendations made by Lane Caputo in October 2014. 
The special payments  for the Named Executive Officers are included in "All other cash compensation and perquisites" in the 
"NEO Summary Compensation Table".
The Board also approved the increase of annual performance bonus targets as a percentage of annual base salary and changes to 
the  corporate  and  individual  weightings  in  the  bonus  program  for  certain  positions,  consistent  with  Lane  Caputo’s 
recommendations and to be effective January 1, 2015. The target for the President and Chief Executive Officer increased from 60 
to 70% of annual base salary with a weighting of 75% Corporate / 25% Individual, the targets for the Chief Financial Officer &
Corporate Secretary, Chief Operating Officer and Executive Vice President Exploration & Business Development increased from 
50 to 60% with weightings of 75% Corporate / 25% Individual and the target for President Parex Colombia increased from 40 to 
50%, with the weighting unchanged at 25% Corporate / 25% Colombia Branch / 50% Individual.
In  recognition  of  the  challenging  economic  environment  and  cost  pressures  in  the  industry,  the  Company’s  policy  for  foreign 
travel premium, which had been put in place to help reduce the need for more costly expatriate assignments, is based on the actual 
amount  of  international  business  trips  conducted  each  year  by  an  officer  or  employee  and  is  only  paid  if  a  certain  minimum 
threshold of number of days is reached each year, was reduced effective January 1, 2015. The formula used for calculating the 
foreign travel premium was reduced by 50% and business trips to the United States are no longer eligible for this premium.
At this time, the Company is not considering any further potential changes to its compensation policies and practices for 2015.
Performance Graph
The following graph shows the total cumulative shareholder return for $100 invested in the Common Shares of the Company, 
from  the  closing  price  on  November  12,  2009,  the  date  on  which  the  Common  Shares  began  trading  on  the  TSX  Venture 
Exchange,  to  December  31,  2014. The  Company's  Common  Shares  began  trading  on  the  TSX  on  October  3,  2011. The 
Company's total shareholder return is compared with the cumulative total return of the S&P/TSX Capped Energy Index and of the 
S&P/TSX Composite Index.
25
Parex
11/12/2009
100
12/31/2009
101
12/31/2010
214
12/31/2011
172
12/31/2012
143
12/31/2013
162
12/31/2014
187
S&P/TSX Capped Energy Index
S&P/TSX Composite Index
100
100
104
103
113
118
94
105
87
109
95
120
77
129
If $100 was invested in the Common Shares on November 12, 2009, it would have resulted in a cumulative shareholder return of 
87%  on  December  31,  2014.    In  comparison,  the  same  amount  invested  in  the  S&P/TSX  Capped  Energy  Index  for  the  same 
period would have resulted in a cumulative shareholder return of  minus 23%, and the same amount invested in the S&P/TSX 
Composite Index would have resulted in a cumulative shareholder return of 29%.
From November 12, 2009 to December 31, 2014, the total compensation paid to the four Parex NEO's who joined Parex in 2009, 
as reported in the NEO Summary Compensation Table in this document, increased by 67 %.  This analysis assumes a full year of 
total  compensation  for  2009 instead  of  the  actual  partial  year  which  commenced  on  November  1,  2009  when  the  four  NEO's 
joined the Parex payroll in order to accurately compare total compensation for 2009 against 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014. 
The fifth NEO included in the NEO Summary Compensation Table in this Information Circular joined Parex in 2011.
The increase in NEO total compensation has been largely due to the significant increase from 2009  to 2014 of the grant date fair 
value of the Company's option-based awards and to the significant increase from 2012 to 2014 of the grant date fair value of 
share-based awards (RSUs). The option and share-based awards in the NEO Summary Compensation Table are based on the 
grant  date  fair  value,  which  has  been  calculated  using  the  Black-Scholes  methodology,  a  commonly  accepted  practice  for 
compensation  setting  among  the  Company's  peer  comparator  group.    It  is  the  same  methodology  used  by  the  Company  to 
determine the accounting fair value of the options and of the RSUs, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standard 
2 – Share  Based  Payments.    The  grant  date  fair  values  per  option  and  per  RSU  awarded  in  2014  as  compared  to  2009  have 
increased  consistent with the increase in Parex' Common Share price, as Black-Scholes methodology will calculate a higher value 
per  option  or  RSU  for  a  higher  Common  Share  price,  all  other  assumptions  remaining  equal.  Thus  the  increase  in  NEO  total 
compensation is aligned with the increase in shareholder value. The increase in NEO total compensation has also been due to a 
lesser extent to the performance bonuses paid to the NEOs for 2014 that reflect outstanding corporate performance against Parex 
goals that were established at the start of the year, as compared to the target bonuses that were included in the assumed full year 
of total compensation for 2009 for this analysis.
NEO Summary Compensation Table(1)
Name and principal
position
Wayne Foo
President and Chief 
Executive Officer
Kenneth Pinsky
Chief Financial 
Officer and Corporate 
Secretary
Barry Larson       
Chief Operating 
Officer
David Taylor
Executive Vice 
President  Exploration 
& Business 
Development
Lee DiStefano (7)
President Parex
Colombia
Share-
based 
awards
(RSUs)
($)(2)
236,000
397,800
486,000
56,640
217,260
340,200
56,640
217,260
340,200
56,640
217,260
340,200
28,320
173,196
194,400
Year
2012
2013
2014
2012
2013
2014
2012
2013
2014
2012
2013
2014
2012
2013
2014
Salary
($)
325,000
345,000
370,000
245,000
270,000
290,000
295,000
310,000
325,000
255,000
275,000
295,000
261,140
266,540
316,992
26
Option-
based 
awards
($)(3)(8)
140,400
568,400
427,500
140,400
568,400
285,000
140,400
568,400
285,000
140,400
568,400
285,000
156,000
450,660
171,000
Non-equity 
incentive plan 
compensation
($)
Annual incentive
plans(4)
All other cash
compensation and
perquisites(5)
($)
Total
compensation(6)
($)
227,760
281,520
348,984
142,713
202,500
200,825
171,838
232,500
212,875
148,538
206,250
230,100
127,697
143,931
182,003
92,891
59,373
192,464
56,933
58,230
101,380
84,008
75,306
126,772
70,475
76,597
117,752
130,570
133,270
168,540
1,022,051
1,652,093
1,824,948
641,686
1,316,390
1,217,405
747,886
1,403,466
1,289,847
671,053
1,343,507
1,263,052
703,727
1,167,597
1,032,935
Notes:
(1)
(2)
The Company does not provide long-term non-equity incentive plan or pension plan compensation.
The grant date fair value of share-based awards (RSUs) has been calculated using the Black-Scholes methodology, a commonly 
accepted practice for compensation-setting among the Company's peer comparator group. It is the same methodology used by the 
Company to determine the accounting fair value of the RSUs, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standard 2 –
Share Based Payments.  The  following assumptions were used for calculating the grant date fair  value of Share-based awards 
granted to the NEOs:
Assumption
Expected life of RSUs
Risk-free interest rate
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
Grant date fair value per RSU
August 16, 2012
3.0 years
1.20%
50%
0%
$4.72
RSU Grant Date
October 16, 2013
3.0 years
1.22%
48%
0%
$6.12
November 10, 2014
3.0 years
1.23%
39%
0%
$9.72
(3)
The  grant  date  fair  value  of  option-based  awards  (Options)  has  been  calculated  using  the  Black-Scholes  methodology,  a 
commonly accepted practice for compensation-setting among the Company's peer comparator group. It is the same methodology 
used by the Company to determine the accounting fair value of the Options, in accordance with International Financial Reporting 
Standard 2 – Share Based Payments. The following assumptions were used for calculating the grant date fair value of Option-
based awards granted to the NEOs:
Assumption
Expected life of Options
Risk-free interest rate
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
Grant date fair value per 
Option
Option Grant Date
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
3.0 years
1.16%
51%
0%
$1.56
3.0 years
1.22%
48%
0%
$2.03
3.0 years
1.23%
39%
0%
$2.85
27
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Incentive  plan  bonuses  for  2012  were  paid  in  February 2013.  Incentive  plan  bonuses  for  2013  were  paid  in  February  2014. 
Incentive plan bonuses for 2014 were paid in February 2015.
All  other  cash  compensation  and  perquisites  for  Mr.  Foo,  Mr.  Pinsky,  Mr.  Larson  and  Mr.  Taylor  include  the  value  of  paid 
parking  and  benefits  payments  equal  to  15%  of  the  officer's  base  salary  and  foreign  travel  premium,  as  well  as  the  special 
payment in lieu of a salary increase in 2015, paid in February 2015. See “Statement of Executive Compensation - Changes to 
Executive Compensation”. The foreign travel premium is based on the actual amount of international business trips conducted 
each year by the NEO and is only paid if a certain minimum threshold of number of days is reached each year. All other cash 
compensation and perquisites for Mr. DiStefano include benefits payments equal to 20% of his base salary and a foreign service 
premium and location allowance related to his expatriate assignment in Colombia, as well as the special payment in lieu of a 
salary  increase  in  2015,  paid  in  February  2015.  See  “Statement  of  Executive  Compensation  - Changes  to  Executive 
Compensation”.
Total compensation equals salary plus all other cash compensation and perquisites and the grant date fair value of option and 
share based awards. 
Mr. DiStefano commenced employment with Parex on April 8, 2011. Mr. DiStefano's salary, annual incentive plan and all other 
cash  compensation  and  perquisites  are  paid  in  $US  but  for  purposes  of  this  table,  they  have  been  converted  to  $CAN  using 
average foreign exchange rates for each year or partial year of employment of  0.99958 for 2012, 0.9710 for 2013 and 1.1045 for 
2014.
In the second quarter of 2013, an aggregate of 1,550,000 Options held by NEOs which were significantly "out of the money"
were acquired by the Company for nominal consideration and cancelled. An aggregate of 1,342,000 Options were granted to the 
NEOs  on  October  16,  2013  under  the  annual  Option  grant  award  as  described  in  the  Long-Term  Incentives  section  of  this 
Information Circular. The incremental fair value of the Options granted on October 16, 2013 was $0.78 less per Option than the 
per  Option  value  of  the  cancelled  Options,  and  the  three  year  vesting  and  five  year  term  provisions of  the  October  16, 2013 
annual Option grant, as per the terms of the Stock Option Plan, are aligned with the long term strategic goals approved by the 
Parex Board of Directors in early October, 2013. The opportunity to have the Company acquire "out-of-the-money" Options in 
Q2 2013 was made available to all employees, officers and directors of the Company.
NEO Incentive Plan Awards
Outstanding Option-based and Share-based awards
(as at December 31, 2014)
Number of securities
underlying
unexercised Options
(#)
90,000
280,000
150,000
90,000
280,000
100,000
90,000
280,000
100,000
90,000
280,000
100,000
100,000
222,000
60,000
Option-Based Awards
Option exercise 
price ($/Common
Share)
4.45
6.07
10.23
Option expiration
date
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
November 10, 2019
4.45
6.07
10.23
4.45
6.07
10.23
4.45
6.07
10.23
4.45
6.07
10.23
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
November 10, 2019
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
November 10, 2019
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
November 10, 2019
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
November 10, 2019
Value of unexercised
in-the-money
Options
($)(1)
281,700
422,800
Nil
281,700
422,800
Nil
281,700
422,800
Nil
281,700
422,800
Nil
313,000
335,220
Nil
Based on the difference between the market price of the Common Shares at December 31, 2014 of $7.58 and the exercise price of 
the Options.
Name
Wayne Foo
Grant Date
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10,2014
Kenneth Pinsky August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
Barry Larson
David Taylor
Lee DiStefano
Note:
(1)
28
16,668
43,334
50,000
4,000
23,667
35,000
4,000
23,667
35,000
4,000
23,667
35,000
2,000
18,867
20,000
Share-Based Awards (RSUs)
Number of shares or units
of shares that have not
vested
(#)
Market or payout value of 
share-based awards that
have not vested
Market or payout value of 
vested share-based awards 
not paid out or distributed
($) (1)
126,343
328,472
379,000
($)
252,657
164,228
Nil
30,320
179,396
265,300
30,320
179,396
265,300
30,320
179,396
265,300
15,160
143,012
151,600
60,640
89,694
Nil
60,640
89,694
Nil
60,640
89,694
Nil
30,320
71,502
Nil
Grant Date
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014
Name
Wayne Foo
Kenneth Pinsky
Barry Larson
David Taylor
Lee DiStefano
Note:
(1)
Based on the market price of the Common Shares at December 31, 2014 of $7.58.
The following table sets forth for each NEO, the value of option-based awards and share-based awards which vested during the 
year  ended  December  31,  2014 and  the  value  of  non-equity  incentive  plan  compensation  earned  during  the  year  ended 
December 31, 2014.
Name
Wayne Foo
Kenneth Pinsky
Barry Larson
David Taylor
Lee DiStefano
Option-based awards –
Value vested during the
year(1)
($)
734,232
734,232
734,232
734,232
670,264
Share-based awards (RSUs)
– Value vested during the
year
($) (2)
417,335
170,798
170,798
170,798
125,040
Non-equity incentive plan
compensation – Value 
earned during the year(3)
($)
348,984
200,825
212,875
230,100
182,003 (4)
Notes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Based on the difference between the market price of the Common Shares on the vesting date and the exercise price of the Options
on the vesting date.
Based on the market price of the Common Shares on the vesting date.
Incentive Plan bonuses for 2014 were paid in February 2015.
Mr.  DiStefano's  non-equity  incentive  plan  compensation  is  paid  in  $US but  for  purposes  of  this  table  has  been  converted  to 
$CAN using the average foreign exchange rate for 2014 of 1.1045.
Stock Option Plan
The  Company  has  a  "rolling" stock  option  plan  (the  "Stock  Option  Plan")  reserving  a  maximum  of  10%  of  the  issued  and 
outstanding Common Shares for issuance pursuant to Options, provided that the maximum number of Common Shares issuable 
pursuant  to  outstanding  Options  and  all  other  security  based  compensation  arrangements  (as  defined  in  the  TSX  Company 
Manual), shall not exceed 10% of the Common Shares outstanding from time to time.
The  purpose  of  the  Stock  Option  Plan  is to  provide  directors,  officers  and employees  of  Parex  an  incentive  to  achieve  the 
longer-term objectives of Parex; to give suitable recognition to the ability and industry of such persons who contribute materially 
to the success of Parex; and to attract and retain in the employ of Parex or any of its subsidiaries, persons of experience and ability 
by providing them with the opportunity to acquire an increased proprietary interest in Parex.
29
On March 14, 2014, the Parex Board of Directors approved certain "housekeeping" amendments to the Stock Option Plan, which 
amendments did not require shareholder approval, including to: (i) remove the ability of consultants to receive Options under the 
Stock Option Plan; and (ii) include the following limitations on grants of Options to non-management directors: (A) the aggregate 
number  of  Common  Shares  reserved  for  issuance  to  all  non-management  directors  pursuant  to  the  Stock  Option  Plan  cannot 
exceed 1.0% of the outstanding issue of Common Shares; and (B) and the aggregate value of all Options (as of the date of grant) 
granted to any non-management director, after March 14, 2014, cannot exceed $100,000 in any 12 month period.
Description of the Plan
Eligibility
The Stock Option Plan provides for the granting of Options to purchase Common Shares of Parex to directors, officers and key 
employees of Parex and its subsidiaries.
Administration
The  Stock  Option  Plan  is  administered  by  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  and  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  may,  subject  to 
applicable law, delegate its powers to administer the Stock Option Plan to a committee of the Parex Board of Directors.  Options 
may be granted at the discretion of the Parex Board of Directors, in such number that may be determined at the time of grant,
subject to the limits set out in the Stock Option Plan.
Exercise Price
The exercise price of Options granted under the Stock Option Plan will be fixed by the Parex Board of Directors at the time of
grant, provided that the exercise price shall be not less than the closing trading price per Common Share on the TSX (or if the 
Common Shares are not listed on the TSX, on such stock exchange as the Common Shares are then traded) on the last trading day
preceding: (i) the issuance of news release in respect of the Option grant, or (ii) if a news release is not issued announcing the 
Option grant, the date of grant, or, if the Common Shares are not listed on any stock exchange, a price determined by the Parex 
Board of Directors.
Maximum Percentage of Common Shares Reserved
The aggregate maximum number of Common Shares that may be issued pursuant to the exercise of Options awarded under the 
Stock Option Plan and all other share compensation arrangements of Parex is 10% of the Common Shares outstanding from time 
to time, subject to the following limitations:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
the aggregate number of Common Shares reserved for issuance to any one person under the Stock Option Plan, together 
with  all  other  share  compensation  arrangements  of  Parex,  within  a  12-month  period,  must  not  exceed 5%  of  the 
outstanding issue of Common Shares (on a non diluted basis);
the aggregate number of Common Shares reserved for issuance to any one insider (as defined in the Stock Option Plan) 
pursuant to the Stock Option Plan, together with all other share compensation arrangements of Parex, must not exceed 
5% of the outstanding issue of Common Shares;
the aggregate number of Common Shares issued to insiders pursuant to the Stock Option Plan, together with all other 
share compensation arrangements of Parex, within a 12-month period, must not exceed 10% of the outstanding issue of 
Common Shares;
the aggregate number of Common Shares reserved for issuance to Insiders pursuant to the Stock Option Plan, together 
with all other share compensation arrangements, at any time, must not exceed 10% of the issue of Common Shares;
the aggregate number of Common Shares reserved for issuance pursuant to the Stock Option Plan to any one participant 
employed to provide investor relations activities (as defined in the Stock Option Plan) within a 12-month period, must 
not exceed 2% of the outstanding issue of Common Shares;
30
6.
7.
the aggregate number of Common Shares reserved for issuance to all non-management directors pursuant to the Stock 
Option Plan cannot exceed 1.0% of the outstanding issue of Common Shares; and
the aggregate value of all Options (calculated as of the date of grant) granted pursuant to the Stock Option Plan to any 
non-management director, after March 14, 2014, cannot exceed $100,000 in any 12 month period.
Transferability
The Options are not assignable or transferable by an optionee, except for a limited right of assignment in the event of the death of 
the optionee.
Term and Vesting
The term of Options granted shall be determined by the Parex Board of Directors in its discretion, to a maximum of five years 
from the date of the grant of the Option.  The vesting period or periods within this period during which an Option or a portion
thereof may be exercised shall be determined by the Parex Board of Directors.  In the absence of any determination by the Parex 
Board of Directors as to vesting, vesting shall be as to one-third on each of the first, second and third anniversaries of the date of 
grant.  Further, the Parex Board of Directors may, in exceptional circumstances and in its sole discretion at any time or in the 
Option agreement in respect of any Options granted, accelerate or provide for the acceleration of vesting of Options previously 
granted.
Early Expiration
Unless otherwise provided in an agreement evidencing the grant of Options, Options shall terminate at the earlier of: (i) the close 
of business 90 days after the optionee ceasing (other than by reason of death but including termination with or without cause) to 
be at least one of an officer, director or employee (in active employment carrying out regular and normal duties) of Parex or a 
subsidiary of Parex, as the case may be, (ii) the close of business 90 days after the optionee has been provided with written notice 
of dismissal related to (i) above; and (iii) the original expiry date of the Option.  If before the expiry of an Option in accordance 
with the terms thereof a participant ceases to be an employee, officer or director by reason of the death of the participant, any 
unvested portion of such Option shall immediately vest.  In addition, such Option may, subject to the terms thereof and any other 
terms  of  the  Stock  Option  Plan,  be  exercised  by  the  legal  personal  representative(s)  of  the  participant's  estate  or  at  any  time 
before 5:00 p.m. (Calgary time) up to one year after the date of death of the participant, or until the original expiry date of the 
Option, if earlier.
Change of Control and Take-Over Acceleration Right
In the event of a Change of Control (as defined in the Stock Option Plan) occurring, all Options which have not otherwise vested 
in accordance with their terms shall immediately vest and be exercisable, notwithstanding the other terms of the Options for a
period of time ending on the earlier of the expiry time of the Option and the thirtieth (30th) day following the Change of Control.
If approved by the Parex Board of Directors, Options may provide that, whenever the Company's shareholders receive a Take-
over Proposal (as defined in the Stock Option Plan), such Option may be exercised as to all or any of the Common Shares in 
respect of  which such Option has not previously been exercised (including in respect of Options not otherwise  vested at such 
time) by the holder of such Option (the "Take-over Acceleration Right"), but any such Option not otherwise vested and deemed 
only to have  vested in accordance  with the foregoing  may  only be exercised for the purposes of tendering to such Take-Over 
Proposal.  If for any reason any such Common Shares are not so tendered or, if tendered, are not, for any reason taken up and paid 
for by the offeree pursuant to the Take-Over Proposal, any such Common Shares so purchased by the participant shall be and 
shall be deemed to be cancelled and returned to the treasury of the Company, and shall be added back to the number of Common 
Shares, if any, remaining unexercised under the Option (and shall thus be available for exercise of the Option in accordance with 
the  terms  thereof)  and  upon  presentation  to the  Company of  share  certificates  representing  such  Common  Shares  properly 
endorsed for transfer back to the Company, the Company shall refund to the participant all consideration paid by him or her in the 
initial purchase thereof.  The Take-over Acceleration Right shall commence at such time as is determined by the Parex Board of 
Directors,  provided  that,  if  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors approves  the  Take-over  Acceleration  Right  but  does  not  determine 
commencement and termination dates regarding same, the Take-over Acceleration Right shall commence on the date of the Take-
over Proposal and end on the earlier of the expiry time of the Option and the tenth (10th) day following the expiry date of the
31
Take-over Proposal.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Take-over Acceleration Right may be extended for such longer period as
the Parex Board of Directors may resolve.
Voluntary Black-Out Periods
Pursuant to the Stock Option Plan, the expiration of the term of any Options that would fall during a voluntary black-out period or 
within 10 business days following the termination of a voluntary black-out period will be extended for a period of 10 business 
days  following  the  expiry  of  such  black-out  period  such  that  all  optionees  will  always  have  a  maximum  of  10  business  days 
following a voluntary black-out period to exercise Options. This provision applies to all optionees.
Adjustments in Shares
Appropriate adjustments in the number of Common Shares subject to the Stock Option Plan and, as regards Options granted or to
be granted, in the number of Common Shares optioned and in the exercise price, shall be made by the Parex Board of Directors to 
give effect to adjustments in the number of Common Shares resulting from subdivisions, consolidations or reclassifications of the 
Common Shares, the payment of stock dividends by the Company (other than dividends in the ordinary course) or other relevant 
changes in the authorized or issued capital of the Company, which changes occur subsequent to the approval of the Stock Option
Plan by the Parex Board of Directors.
Amendments to Options
The Stock Option Plan provides that the Stock Option Plan and any Options granted pursuant to the Stock Option Plan may be 
amended, modified or terminated by the Board without approval of the shareholders subject to any required approval of the TSX.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Stock Option Plan or any Options may not be amended without shareholder approval to:  (a) 
increase the number of Common Shares reserved for issuance under the Stock Option Plan or the Stock Option Plan maximum;
(b) reduce the exercise price of any Option granted pursuant to the Stock Option Plan; (c) extend the term of any outstanding 
Options beyond the original expiry date of the Option, other than as permitted pursuant to the Stock Option Plan; (d) amend the 
Stock Option Plan to increase the entitlements of non-management directors under the Stock Option Plan; (e) permit an optionee
to transfer or assign Options to a new beneficial holder, other than for estate settlement purposes; (f) any amendment to increase 
the number of Common Shares that may be issued to insiders above the restrictions contained in the Stock Option Plan; or (g) 
amend the amendment provisions in the Stock Option Plan.
In  addition,  no  amendment  to  the  Plan  or  Options  granted  pursuant  to  the  Plan  may  be  made  without  the  consent  of  the 
Participant,  if  it  adversely  alters  or  impairs  the  rights  of  any  Participant  in  respect  of  any  Option  previously  granted  to  such 
Participant under the Plan.
RSU Plan
On  October  16,  2012,  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  approved  the  adoption  by  Parex  of  the  RSU  Plan,  which  RSU  Plan  was 
approved by shareholders on May 22, 2013.  The RSU Plan allows the Parex Board of Directors to grant RSUs, each of which is a
unit that is equivalent in value to a Common Share and that upon vesting and exercise results in the holder thereof being issued a 
Common Share for a nominal exercise price.
On  April  2,  2014,  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  approved  certain  "housekeeping" amendments  to  the  RSU  Plan,  which 
amendments did not require shareholder approval, to remove the ability of consultants to receive RSUs under the RSU Plan.
Description of the Plan
Purpose of the Plan
The purpose of the RSU Plan is to aid in attracting, retaining and motivating the directors, officers, and employees (collectively, 
"Service Providers") of the Company and any entity that is a subsidiary of the Company from time to time, and any other entity 
designated by the Parex Board of Directors from time to time (and, for greater certainty, including any successor entity of any of 
the aforementioned entities) (collectively, the "Parex Group") in the growth and development of the Parex Group by providing 
them with the opportunity through RSUs to acquire Common Shares.
32
The  Parex  Board  of  Directors  believes  that  RSUs  align  the  interests  of  Service  Providers  with  the  interests  of  Shareholders, 
thereby  creating  a  strong  link  between  compensation  and  the  long  term  corporate  performance  of  Parex  and  the  creation  of 
Shareholder value.  The Parex Board of Directors will not grant RSUs according to a prescribed formula or target.  Instead, the 
Parex  Board  of  Directors  will  take  into  account  the  individual's  position,  scope  of  responsibility,  ability  to  affect  Shareholder 
value, the individual's historic and recent performance, and the value of the proposed RSU grant in relation to other elements of 
the  Services  Provider's  total  compensation.    When  considering  the  grant  of  RSUs  under  the  RSU  Plan,  the  Parex  Board  of
Directors will take into consideration the number of RSUs that were previously granted to the Service Provider and the number of 
Options held by the Service Provider.
Administration of the Plan
The Parex Board of Directors administers the RSU Plan.  Among other things, the Parex Board of Directors has the authority to: 
(a) determine the individuals to whom RSUs may be granted; and (b) grant RSUs on such terms and conditions as it determines 
including, without limitation: the time or times at which RSUs may be granted; the time or times when each RSU shall vest and 
the term of each RSU; whether restrictions or limitations are to be imposed on the Common Shares issued pursuant to an RSU 
and the  nature of such restrictions or limitations, if any; any acceleration or  waiver of  termination or forfeiture regarding any 
RSU; in each case, based on such factors as the Parex Board of Directors may determine appropriate, in its sole discretion.  In 
addition, the Parex Board of Directors has the discretion to determine which Service Providers will be eligible to participate in the 
RSU  Plan  (each  such  Service  Provider  a  "Participant").    The  Parex  Board  of  Directors  may  delegate  to  a  committee  (the 
"Committee") of the Parex Board of Directors all or any of the powers conferred on the Parex Board of Directors under the RSU 
Plan.  The Parex Board of Directors or the Committee may also delegate or sub-delegate to any director or officer of the Company 
the whole or any part of the administration of the RSU Plan. Since the RSU Plan was approved and  implemented in 2012, RSU 
grants have been significantly smaller components of long-term incentive compensation than have Option grants.
Limits on Issuances
The RSU Plan provides that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the maximum number of Common Shares issuable pursuant to outstanding RSUs at any time shall be limited to 
10% of the aggregate number of issued and outstanding Common Shares, provided that the maximum number 
of  Common  Shares  issuable  pursuant  to  outstanding  RSUs  and  all  other  security  based  compensation
arrangements  (as  defined  in  the  TSX  Company  Manual),  shall  not  exceed  10%  of  the  Common  Shares 
outstanding from time to time;
the  number  of  Common  Shares  reserved  for  issuance  to  any  one  Participant  under  all  security  based 
compensation arrangements will not exceed 5.0% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares;
the  number  of  Common  Shares  issuable  to  insiders,  at  any  time,  under  all  security  based  compensation 
arrangements, shall not exceed 10.0% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares;
the  number  of  Common  Shares  issued  to  insiders,  within  any  one  year  period,  under  all  security  based 
compensation arrangements, shall not exceed 10.0% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares; and
the number of Common Shares issued to non-management directors is limited to the lesser of:
(i)
(ii)
1.0% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares, in aggregate, for all non-management directors; 
and
(A) an annual equity award value for each non-management director other than the Chairman of the 
Parex Board of Directors of $100,000; and (B) an annual equity award value for the Chairman of the 
Parex Board of Directors of $150,000, with the value of each RSU calculated at the Grant Date (as 
defined below).
33
A grant of RSUs is made, and the number of such RSUs granted is credited to each Service Provider's account (the "Participant's 
Account"), effective as of a  particular date determined by the Parex Board of Directors (the  "Grant Date").  The number of 
RSUs to be offered to each Participant is determined by the Parex Board of Directors, or the Committee delegated by the Parex
Board of Directors to do so.  The Parex Board of Directors or the Committee may, in its sole discretion, determine: (a) the time 
during which RSUs shall vest and whether there shall be any other conditions or performance criteria to vesting; (b) the method of 
vesting; or (c) that no vesting restriction shall exist.  In the absence of any determination by the Parex Board of Directors or the 
Committee to the contrary, RSUs will vest and be exercisable as to one-third of the total number of RSUs granted on each of the 
first,  second  and  third anniversaries  of  the  Grant  Date  (computed  in  each  case  to  the  nearest  whole  Common  Share).  
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Parex Board of Directors or the Committee may, at its sole discretion at any time or in the
agreement  in  respect  of  any  RSUs  granted,  accelerate  or  provide  for  the  acceleration  of  vesting  of  RSUs  previously  granted.  
Except as required by law and the terms of the RSU Plan, the rights of a Participant under the RSU Plan are not capable of being 
assigned,  transferred,  alienated,  sold,  encumbered,  pledged,  mortgaged  or  charged  and  are  not  capable  of  being  subject to 
attachment or legal process for the payment of any debts or obligations of the Participant.
Term of RSUs
The  term  during  which  an  RSU  may  be  outstanding  is,  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  RSU  Plan  requiring  or  permitting  the 
acceleration or the extension of the term, such period, not in excess of five years, as is determined from time to time by the Parex 
Board of Directors or the Committee, but subject to the rules of any stock exchange or other regulatory body having jurisdiction, 
and in the absence of any determination to the contrary will be the date that is five years from the Grant Date.  In addition, unless 
otherwise determined by the Parex Board of Directors or the Committee, or unless the Company and a Participant agree otherwise
in an RSU agreement or other written agreement (including an employment or consulting agreement), each RSU shall provide 
that if a Participant shall cease to be a director or officer of or be in the employ of any of the entities comprising the Parex Group 
for any reason whatsoever including, without limitation, retirement, resignation, involuntary termination (with or without cause) 
or death, as determined by the Parex Board of Directors in its sole discretion, before all of the grants respecting RSUs credited to 
the Participant's Account have vested or are forfeited pursuant to any other provision of the RSU Plan: (a) such Participant shall
cease to be a participant in the RSU Plan as of the Forfeiture Date (as defined in the RSU Plan); (b) the former Participant shall
forfeit  all  unvested  grants  respecting  RSUs  in  the  Participant's  Account  effective  as  at  the  Forfeiture  Date;  (c)  any  Common 
Shares corresponding to any remaining vested grant of RSUs shall be delivered to the former Participant in accordance with the
RSU Plan as soon as practicable after the Forfeiture Date (or, in the case of death, to the legal representative of the deceased
former  Participant's  estate  as  soon  as  practicable  after  receipt  of  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  Participant's  death  from  the
authorized legal representative of the deceased Participant) and upon payment of the exercise price of $0.01 per RSU; and (d) the
former Participant shall not be entitled to any further issuance of Common Shares or any payment in respect of the RSU Plan.
Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, if a Participant ceases to be a director or officer of or be in the employ of, or other 
Service  Provider  to,  any  of  the  entities  comprising  the  Parex  Group  due  to  the  death  of  the  Participant,  any  unvested  grants 
respecting RSUs in the deceased Participant's Account effective as at the time of the Participant's death are deemed to have vested
immediately  prior  to  the  Forfeiture  Date  with  the  result  that  the  deceased  Participant  shall  not  forfeit  any  unvested  grants 
respecting RSUs.
If Common Shares may not be issued pursuant to any RSUs due to any Black-Out Period (as defined below) at any time within 
the  three  business  day  period  prior  to  the  normal  expiry  date  of  such  RSUs  (the  "Restricted  RSUs"),  the  expiry  date  of  the
Restricted RSUs is extended for a period of seven business days following the end of the Black-Out Period (or such longer period 
as permitted by the TSX and approved by the Parex Board of Directors or the Committee).  For the purposes of the RSU Plan, 
"Black-Out Period" means the period of time when, pursuant to any policies of the Company, any securities of the Company 
may not be traded by certain persons as designated by the Company, including any Participant that holds an RSU.
Exercise of RSUs
The Company will, as soon as practicable after the vesting and exercise of any RSUs, issue from treasury to the Participant the 
number of Common Shares required to be delivered upon the vesting of such Participant's RSUs.  The Participant may exercise 
any  vested  RSU  by  delivering  to  the  Company  a  notice  of  exercise  in  writing  stating  the  Participant's  intention  to  exercise  a 
particular RSU together with payment of the exercise price of $0.01 per RSU so exercised.  Upon receipt of the exercise notice
and aggregate exercise price from the Participant, the Company will cause the Common Shares in respect of which the RSU has 
been exercised to be issued to the Participant.
34
Adjustments in Connection with an Alteration of the Common Shares
In the event: (a) of any change in the Common Shares through subdivision, consolidation, reclassification, amalgamation, merger 
or  otherwise;  or  (b)  that  any  rights  are  granted  to  all  or  substantially  all  shareholders  to  purchase  Common  Shares  at  prices
substantially below Fair Market Value as the Grant Date; or (c) that, as a result of any recapitalization, merger, consolidation or 
other transaction, the  Common Shares are converted into or exchangeable for any other securities or property; then the Parex 
Board of Directors may make such adjustments to the RSU Plan, to any RSUs and to any RSU agreements outstanding under the 
RSU Plan as the Parex Board of Directors may, in its sole discretion, consider appropriate in the circumstances to prevent dilution 
or enlargement of the rights granted to Participants thereunder and/or to provide for the Participants to receive and accept such 
other securities or property in lieu of Common Shares, and the Participants shall be bound by any such determination.
Adjustment in Connection with Certain Corporate Events
Except in the case of a transaction that is a Change of Control (as defined below), in the event of the sale by the Company of all 
or substantially all of the property and assets of the Company as an entirety (an "Asset Sale") prior to the expiry date of an RSU, 
such  RSU  may  be  exercised,  as  to  all  or  any  of  the  Common  Shares  in  respect  of  which  such  RSU  has  not  previously  been 
exercised (including in respect of the right to purchase Common Shares not otherwise vested at such time) by the Participant (the 
"Sale Acceleration Right").  The Sale Acceleration Right shall commence at such time as determined by the Parex Board of 
Directors,  provided  that  if  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  approves  the  Sale  Acceleration  Right  but  does  not  determine 
commencement  and  termination  dates  regarding  same,  the  Sale  Acceleration  Right  shall  commence  on  the  day  following  the 
closing of the Asset Sale and end on the earlier of the expiry time of the RSU and the thirtieth day following the closing of the 
Asset Sale.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Sale Acceleration Right  may be extended for such longer period as the Parex 
Board of Directors may resolve.
In addition, if approved by the Parex Board of Directors, whenever the Company's shareholders receive a Take-over Proposal, (as 
defined below) RSUs may be exercised as to all or any of the Common Shares in respect of which an RSU has not previously 
been exercised (including in respect of Common Shares not otherwise vested at such time) by the Participant (the "Take-over 
Acceleration Right"), but any such RSU not otherwise vested and deemed only to have vested in accordance with the foregoing 
may only be exercised for the purposes of tendering to such Take-Over Proposal.  If for any reason any such Common Shares are 
not so tendered or, if tendered, are not, for any reason taken up and paid for by the offeree pursuant to the Take-Over Proposal, 
any  such  Common  Shares  so  purchased  by  the  Participant  shall  be  and  shall  be  deemed  to  be  cancelled  and  returned  to  the 
treasury of the Company, and shall be added back to the number of Common Shares, if any, remaining unexercised under the 
RSU (and shall  thus be available for exercise of the RSU in accordance  with the terms thereof) and  upon presentation of  the 
Company  of  share  certificates  representing  such  Common  Shares  properly  endorsed  for  transfer  back  to  the  Company,  the 
Company  shall  refund  to  the  Participant  all  consideration  paid  by  him  or  her  in  the  initial  purchase  thereof.    The  Take-over 
Acceleration Right shall commence at such time as is determined by the Parex Board of Directors, provided that, if the Parex 
Board  of  Directors  approves  the  Take-over  Acceleration  Right  but  does  not  determine  commencement  and  termination  dates 
regarding same, the Take-over Acceleration Right shall commence on the date of the Take-over Proposal and end on the earlier of 
the expiry time of the RSU and the tenth day following the expiry date of the Take-over Proposal.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, 
the Take-over Acceleration Right may be extended for such longer period as the Parex Board of Directors may resolve.
A "Take-over Proposal" is defined in the RSU Plan as: (i) any proposal or offer by a third party, whether or not subject to a due 
diligence condition and  whether or not in  writing, to acquire in any  manner, directly or indirectly, beneficial ownership of or 
control  or  direction  over  more  than  50%  of  the  Company's  outstanding  Common  Shares  whether  by  way  of  arrangement, 
amalgamation, merger, consolidation or other business combination, including any single or multi-step transaction or series of 
related transactions that is structured to permit such third party to acquire in any manner, directly or indirectly, more than 50% of 
its outstanding Common Shares; or (ii) any proposal, offer or agreement for a merger, consolidation, amalgamation, arrangement, 
recapitalization,  liquidation,  dissolution,  reorganization  or  similar  transaction  or  other  business  combination  involving  the
Company.
Change of Control
Notwithstanding any other provision in the RSU Plan or the terms of any RSU agreement, in the event of a Change of Control 
occurring,  if  so  approved  by  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  or  the  Committee,  all  RSUs  which  have  not  otherwise  vested  in 
accordance with their terms shall immediately vest and be exercisable, notwithstanding the other terms of the RSUs for a period 
of time ending on the earlier of the expiry time of the RSU and the thirtieth day following the change of control.
35
A "Change of Control" is defined in the RSU Plan as: (i) the purchase or acquisition of any Common Shares or any securities 
convertible or exchangeable into Common Shares or carrying the right or obligation to acquire Common Shares ("Convertible 
Securities") by a Holder (as defined in the RSU Plan) which results in the Holder beneficially owning, or exercising control or 
direction  over,  Common  Shares  or  Convertible  Securities  such  that,  assuming  only  the  conversion  of  Convertible  Securities 
beneficially owned or over which control or direction is exercised by the Holder, the Holder would beneficially own, or exercise 
control or direction over, Common Shares carrying the right to cast more than 50% of the votes attaching to all Common Shares,
but excluding any issue or sale of Common Shares of the Company to an investment dealer or group of investment dealers as 
underwriters  or  agents  for  distribution  to  the  public  either  by  way  of  prospectus  or  private  placement;  or  (ii)  the  Company 
completes an amalgamation, arrangement, merger or other consolidation or combination of the Company with another corporation 
which requires approval of the shareholders of the Company pursuant to its statute of incorporation and pursuant to which the
shareholders of the Company immediately thereafter do not own shares of the successor or continuing corporation, which would 
entitle them to cast more than 50% of the votes attaching to all shares in the capital of the successor or continuing corporation, 
which may be cast to elect directors of that corporation; or (iii) the election at a meeting of the Company's shareholders of that 
number of persons which would represent a majority of the Parex Board of Directors, as directors of the Company who are not 
included in the slate for election as directors proposed to the Company's shareholders by the Company; or (iv) the liquidation, 
dissolution or winding-up of the Company; or (v) the sale, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of the 
Company; or (vi) the completion of any transaction or the first of a series of transactions which would have the same or similar 
effect as any transaction or series of transactions referred to in subsections (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) referred to above; or (vii) a 
determination by the Parex Board of Directors that there has been a change, whether by way of a change in the holding of the 
Common Shares of the Company, in the ownership of  the Company's assets or by any other  means, as a result of  which any 
person or group of persons acting jointly or in concert is in a position to exercise effective control of the Company.
Amendment or Discontinuance of the RSU Plan
The Parex Board of Directors may amend or discontinue the RSU Plan or amend any RSU or RSU agreement at any time without 
the consent of a Participant, provided that such amendment shall not adversely alter or impair any RSU previously granted under 
the Plan or any related RSU agreement, except as otherwise permitted by the RSU Plan.  In addition, the Parex Board of Directors 
may,  by  resolution,  amend  the  RSU  Plan  and  any  RSU  granted  under  it  (together  with  any  related  RSU  agreement)  without 
shareholder approval, provided however, that at any time while the Common Shares are listed for trading on the TSX, the Parex 
Board of Directors will not be entitled to amend the RSU Plan or any RSU granted under it without shareholder and, if applicable, 
TSX approval: (a) to increase the maximum number of Common Shares issuable pursuant to the RSU Plan (see "Matters to be 
Acted Upon at the Meeting – Approval of Restricted Share Unit Plan – Limits on Issuances"); (b) to reduce the exercise price of 
an RSU or cancel an RSU and subsequently issue the holder of such RSU a new RSU in replacement thereof; (c) to extend the 
term of an RSU; (d) to permit the assignment or transfer of an RSU other than as provided for in the RSU Plan; (e) to add to the 
categories of persons eligible to participate in the RSU Plan; (f) to remove or amend the restrictions on RSUs held by insiders; (g) 
to  remove  or  amend  the  matters  described  in  this  paragraph;  or  (h)  in  any  other  circumstances  where  TSX  and  shareholder 
approval is required by the TSX. Without limitation of the foregoing, the Parex Board of Directors may correct any defect or 
supply  any  omission  or  reconcile  any  inconsistency  in  the  RSU  Plan  in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent  deemed  necessary  or 
desirable,  may  establish,  amend,  and  rescind  any  rules  and  regulations  relating  to  the  RSU  Plan,  and  may  make  such 
determinations as it deems necessary or desirable for the administration of the RSU Plan.
On  termination  of  the  RSU  Plan,  any  outstanding  grants  of  RSUs  will  immediately  vest  and  the  number  of  Common  Shares 
corresponding to the RSUs that have been granted will be delivered to the Participant in accordance with and upon compliance 
with  the  terms  of  the  RSU  Plan.    The  RSU  Plan  will  finally  cease  to  operate  for  all  purposes  when:  (a)  the  last  remaining 
Participant  receives  delivery  of  all  Common  Shares  corresponding  to  RSUs  credited  to  the  Participant's  Account;  or  (b)  all 
unexercised RSUs expire in accordance with the terms of the RSU Plan and the relevant RSU agreements.
Termination and Change of Control Benefits and Payments
The Company recognizes that its Executives are critical to Parex's ongoing business.  It is therefore vital for the  Company to 
retain the services of each Executive, protect them from employment interruption caused by a change in control of the Company 
and  to  treat  them  in  a  fair  and  equitable  manner.    In  prior  years,  the  Company  has  accordingly  entered  into  an  employment 
agreement (the "Employment Agreements") with each of Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr. Larson and Mr. Taylor, and an employment 
contract (the "Employment Contract") with Mr. DiStefano.
36
The Employment Agreements for Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr. Larson and Mr. Taylor provide for payment of compensation in the 
event  of  termination  of  the  Executive's  employment  by  the Company  without  cause,  upon  resignation  of  employment  by  the 
Executive  for  good  reason,  or  upon  resignation  of  employment  by  the  Executive  for  good reason  in  the  event  of  a  change  of 
control of the Company, as shown in the chart below. The Employment Contract for Mr. DiStefano provides for payment of 
compensation in the event of termination of the Executive's employment by the Company without cause or upon resignation of 
employment by the Executive in the event of a change of control of the Company
Termination without cause refers to termination of the Executive's employment by the Company for reasons other than for just 
cause, mutual agreement or the death of the Executive.
For Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr. Larson, Mr. Taylor and Mr. DiStefano a change of control includes any acquisition of Common 
Shares or other securities of the Company that carry the right to cast more than 50% of the votes attaching to all Common Shares 
in the capital of the Company. For Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr. Larson and Mr. Taylor, a triggering change of control is such a 
change of control as described above that results from an unsolicited offer in response to  which the Parex Board of Directors
publishes a circular recommending rejection of the offer and continues to recommend rejection of the offer up to the closing date 
of such transaction.
Resignation  for  good  reason  refers  to  the  resignation  of  employment  by  the  Executive  due  to  circumstances  constituting 
constructive dismissal at common law, any material reduction in benefits or remuneration paid by the Company to the Executive, 
a  material  change  in  the  Executive's  position,  duties,  responsibilities,  title  or  office,  or  a  material  breach  of  the  applicable 
Employment Agreement and Employment Contract, as applicable, by the Company.
Termination 
Event
Name
Termination 
Without Cause
Mr. Foo
Mr. Pinsky
Mr. Larson
Mr. Taylor
Change of 
Control
Mr.DiStefano
Mr. Foo
Mr. Pinsky
Mr. Larson
Mr. Taylor
Mr. DiStefano
Incremental Compensation
Retiring allowance equal to the sum of: (i) the Executive's annual base salary; plus (ii) the average 
of  any  cash  bonuses  paid  in  the  two  years  preceding  the  termination date;  plus  (iii)  an  amount 
equal  to  the  lesser  of  fifteen  percent  of  the  Executive's  annual  base  salary  or  $50,000  to 
compensate  for  loss  of  benefits  times  a  multiplier  of  one  (1)  times  should  the  Executive's
employment be terminated prior to the second anniversary of the effective date of the Employment 
Agreement, or two (2) times should the Executive's employment be terminated on or following the 
second  anniversary  of  the  effective  date. The  second  anniversary  of  the  effective  date  of  the 
Employment Agreements for Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr. Larson and Mr. Taylor was November 2, 
2011.
Severance payment of twelve (12) months of annual base salary plus an incentive compensation 
payment as determined by the Company, pro-rated for actual Company service in that calendar 
year.
All  applicable  incremental  payments  for  Mr.  Foo,  Mr.  Pinsky,  Mr.  Larson  and  Mr.  Taylor  are 
calculated as specified above for termination without cause.
Retiring allowance equal to two (2) times the Executive's annual base salary plus a payment in lieu 
of cash incentive compensation for the portion of the calendar year worked up to the termination 
date, calculated by averaging the cash incentive compensation paid to the Executive in the two (2) 
years prior to the termination date and prorating it for the number of days worked in the calendar 
year in which termination of employment occurs.
Triggering
Change of
Control
Mr. Foo
Mr. Pinsky
Mr. Larson
Mr. Taylor
All  applicable  incremental  payments  for  Mr.  Foo,  Mr.  Pinsky,  Mr.  Larson  and  Mr.  Taylor  are 
calculated as specified above for termination without cause, with the additional provision that the 
multiplier will be two (2) times regardless of the date of termination of employment.
37
Termination 
Event
Name
Incremental Compensation
Resignation For 
Good Reason
Mr. Foo
Mr. Pinsky
Mr. Larson
Mr. Taylor
Mr. DiStefano
All  applicable  incremental  payments  for  Mr.  Foo,  Mr.  Pinsky,  Mr.  Larson  and  Mr.  Taylor  are 
calculated as specified above for termination without cause.
All  applicable  incremental  payments  for  Mr.  DiStefano  are  calculated  as  specified  above  for 
change of control.
Under the Employment Agreements for Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr. Larson and Mr. Taylor, in the event of a change of control or a 
triggering change of control, the Executive, at the Company's request, agrees to remain employed by the Company for up to one 
month following the change of control to assist with the orderly transition of management.
The Company has attempted to remain abreast of trends in employment law, such that changes in the Employment Agreements
and Employment Contracts, which are made from time to time, reflect what the Company believes to be competitive terms, as at 
the time of each Executive's hiring.
In exchange for payments received upon termination of employment, the Executive agrees to sign and provide to the Company a 
full and final release (releasing the Company and its affiliates) in a form that is satisfactory to the Company.
Termination Without Cause, Resignation For Good Reason, or Upon a Change of Control
(based on hypothetical termination as at December 31, 2014)
Estimated Incremental Compensation on
Name
Wayne Foo
Kenneth Pinsky
Barry Larson
David Taylor
Lee DiStefano (4)
Severance
Period 
(months)
24
24
24
24
24
2X Annual Base
Salary
($)
740,000
580,000
650,000
590,000
633,984(5)
Compensation Components
2X Average of Last 2
Incentive Bonus
Payments (1)
($)
2X Annual Benefits
($)
Options
($)(2)
RSUs (3)
630,504
403,226
445,375
436,350
162,967 (6)
100,000
87,000
97,500
88,500
N/A
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
TOTAL
($)
1,470,504
1,070,226
1,192,875
1,114,850
796,951
Notes:
(1)
(2)
The  annual  incentive  plan  bonuses  for  2014  were  not  paid  until  February  2015,  as  previously  disclosed  in  Note  (4)  to  the  NEO 
Summary Compensation Table.  However, the 2014 bonus amounts are included in the incentive bonus calculations for the above 
table based on the assumption that they would have been included in the NEO's incremental compensation should there have been a 
termination  on  December  31,  2014  due  to  termination  without  cause,  resignation  for  good  reason  or  a  change  of  control.    Mr. 
DiStefano's incentive  bonus,  should  there  have  been  a  termination  on  December  31,  2014  due  to  termination  without  cause  or 
resignation for good reason due to a change of control, would have been the average of the cash incentive compensation paid to the 
Executive in the two (2) years prior to the Termination Date. Mr DiStefano's incentive bonus, should there have been a termination on 
December  31,  2014  due  to  termination  without  cause  not  related  to  a  change  of  control,  would  have  been  as  determined  by  the 
Company for the year 2014. 
Pursuant to the Employment  Agreements  for Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr.  Larson, and Mr. Taylor, if the Executive's employment is 
terminated by the Company with or without cause, or the Executive elects to terminate his employment for good reason, the Executive 
may exercise any Options that were vested by the date of termination of employment for up to ninety (90) days following that date or 
the  expiration  date  of  the  Options,  whichever  occurs  first.    All  other  Options  would  be  terminated.    Pursuant  to  the  Employment 
Contract for Mr. DiStefano, if the Executive's employment is terminated by the Company with or without cause, the Executive may 
exercise any Options that were vested by the date of termination of employment for up to ninety (90) days following that date or the 
expiration date of the Options, whichever occurs first.  In accordance with the Stock Option Plan, in the event of a change in control of 
the  Company,  all  unvested  Options  for  each  Executive  shall  vest  and  all  issued  and  outstanding  Options  will  immediately  be 
exercisable for up to 30 days after the occurrence of such change of control, or at such earlier time as may be established by the Parex 
Board of Directors.  Based on a hypothetical termination as at December 31, 2014 due to a change of control and based on the market 
value of Common Shares at that date of $7.58, the incremental compensation from Options for each of Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr. 
Larson and Mr. Taylor would have been $375,767 and for Mr. DiStefano would have been $327,815.
38
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Pursuant to the Employment  Agreements  for Mr. Foo, Mr. Pinsky, Mr.  Larson, and Mr. Taylor, if the Executive's employment is 
terminated by the Company with or without cause, or the Executive elects to terminate his employment for good reason, any Common 
Shares  corresponding  to  any  remaining  vested  grant  of  RSUs  shall  be  delivered  to  the  Executive  as  soon  as  practicable  and upon
payment by the Executive of the exercise price of $0.01 per RSU.  All other RSUs would be terminated.  Pursuant to the Employment 
Contract for Mr. DiStefano, if the Executive's employment is terminated by the Company with or without cause, any Common Shares 
corresponding to any remaining vested grant of RSUs shall be delivered to the Executive as soon as practicable and upon payment by 
the Executive of the exercise price of $0.01 per RSU. In accordance with the RSU Plan, in the event of a change in control of the 
Company,  all  RSUs  which  have  not  otherwise  vested  in  accordance  with  their  terms  shall  immediately  vest  and be  exercisable, 
notwithstanding the other terms of the RSUs for a period of time ending on the earlier of the expiry date of the RSU and the thirtieth 
day following the change of control.  Based on a hypothetical termination as at December 31, 2014 due to a change of control and 
based on the market value of Common Shares at that date of $7.58, the incremental compensation from RSUs for Mr. Foo would have 
been $833,815, for each of Mr. Pinsky, Mr. Larson and Mr. Taylor would have been $475,016 and for Mr. DiStefano would have been 
$309,772.
Compensation  for  Mr.  DiStefano  is  paid  is  USD$  except  for  long-term  incentive  compensation  which  is  paid  in  CAN$.  For  the  
purposes of this table, the compensation to be paid in USD$ has been converted to CAN$ using the average foreign exchange rate of  
1.1045 for 2014.
In the event of termination without cause, the amount for Mr. DiStefano would have been USD$ 287,000, which for purposes of this 
document is converted to CAN$ 316,992 using the average foreign exchange rate of 1.1045 for 2014.
Represents average of last two incentive bonus payments to Mr. DiStefano.
Estimated Incremental Compensation 
Upon a Triggering Change of Control
(based on hypothetical termination as at December 31, 2014)
Compensation Components
2X Average of Last 
2 Incentive Bonus
Payments (1)
Name
Wayne Foo
Kenneth Pinsky
Barry Larson
David Taylor
Lee DiStefano (4)
Severance Period
(months)
24
24
24
24
24
2X Annual
Base Salary
($)
740,000
580,000
650,000
590,000
633,984
($)
630,504
403,226
445,375
436,350
162,967
2X Annual
Benefits
($)
100,000
87,000
97,500
88,500
N/A
Options
($)(2)
375,767
375,767
375,767
375,767
327,815
RSUs (3)
833,815
475,016
475,016
475,016
309,772
TOTAL
($)
2,680,086
1,921,009
2,043,658
1,965,633
1,434,538
Notes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
The annual incentive plan bonuses for 2014 were not paid until February 2015, as previously disclosed in Note (3) to the NEO 
Summary Compensation Table. However, the 2014 bonus amounts are included in the incentive bonus calculations for the above 
table, based on the assumption that they would have been included in the NEO's incremental compensation should there have 
been termination on December 31, 2014 due to a triggering change of control. Mr. DiStefano's incentive bonus, should there 
have been a termination on December 31, 2014 due to a triggering change of control, would have been the average of the cash 
incentive compensation paid to the Executive in the two (2) years prior to the Termination Date. 
In accordance with the Stock Option Plan, in the event of a change in control of the Company, all unvested Options for each 
Executive shall vest and all issued and outstanding Options will immediately be exercisable for up to 30 days after the occurrence 
of such change of control, or at such earlier time as may be established by the Parex Board of Directors. Options calculations are 
based on the market value of Common Shares at December 31, 2014 of $7.58.
In accordance with the RSU Plan, in the event of a change in control of the Company, all RSUs which have not otherwise vested 
in  accordance  with  their  terms  shall  immediately  vest  and  be  exercisable,  notwithstanding  the other  terms  of  the  RSUs  for  a 
period of time ending on the earlier of the expiry date of the RSU and the thirtieth day following the change of control. RSU 
calculations are based on the market value of Common Shares at December 31, 2014 of $7.58.
Compensation for Mr. DiStefano is paid in USD$ except for long term incentive compensation which is paid in CAN$. For the 
purpose of this table, the salary and bonus USD$ amounts used in the calculation of estimated incremental compensation have 
been converted to CAN$ using an average foreign exchange rate for 2014 of 1.1045, to result in a total estimated incremental 
compensation in CAN$.
39
Director Compensation
The Parex Board of Directors put in place a compensation program effective September 29, 2009 and updated the program in 
2011 following  a  review  of  the  Directors  Compensation  Program  by  an  independent  compensation  consulting  firm,  Frances 
Behan.  Frances  Behan  was  also  retained  in  January  2013  to  review  Parex  Board  of  Directors  compensation  against  the 
Company’s  peer  companies.  This  review  indicated  that  significantly  higher  equity  compensation  was  awarded  by  the  peer 
companies to the board chairman and to directors as compared to the Company’s practices. This competitive market factor was 
taken into account when incentive plan awards in the form of Options and RSUs were recommended by the CG&HR Committee 
for being awarded to the Chairman of the Parex Board of Directors and to directors in October 2013.
Due to the Company’s transition from a junior company to an intermediate exploration and production company, as reflected in 
the significant production and reserves growth from 2013 to 2014 and in the Company’s long term business plan as approved by 
the Board in 2014, the Board also approved in October 2014 an expanded peer comparator group of companies that were good 
comparisons to Parex’ current and growth plan metrics. Following the approval of the new peer comparator group, the CG&HR 
Committee  retained  Lane  Caputo  in  October  2014  to  conduct  a  review  of  and  to  make  recommendations  for  Executive,  Vice 
President  and  Independent  Director  compensation  against  the  new  peer  group  of  companies.  For  Independent  Director 
compensation,  Lane  Caputo  recommended  implementing  a  cash-settled  deferred  share  unit  program  to  deliver  equity-based 
incentives to independent directors and increasing the annual base retainer for Board membership from $25,000 to 30,000.
The Board reviewed Lane Caputo’s recommendations in November 2014 and directed Management to prepare a DSU Plan for 
independent directors, to be brought forward for Board and shareholder approval in 2015. Because of the intent to begin using 
DSUs as the sole incentive compensation for independent directors effective in 2015, the Board decided that the annual incentive 
grant for independent directors in 2014 would consist only of RSUs, in amounts consistent with Lane Caputo’s recommendations, 
and not Options and RSUs as in the 2012 and 2013 incentive grants. Furthermore, because DSU plans are designed to include 
immediate vesting upon grant date, the Board approved that as a transition measure between RSU and DSU grants, the November 
10, 2014 RSU grants to independent directors would include full vesting three months from the grant date.
In light of the significant challenges facing the oil and gas industry due to the low oil price environment, the Board reviewed Lane 
Caputo’s recommendations regarding the base retainer again in February 2015. The Board decided, based on the need for taking a 
prudent approach of not escalating the Company’s long term cost structure at this time, to not increase the amount of the base
retainer from the current $25,000 annually.
Directors who are also NEOs are not eligible to receive the following payments with respect to their services as directors. The 
current Directors Compensation Program is as follows:
1.
Directors are entitled to the following annual retainers to be paid in cash in quarterly instalments:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
$25,000 with respect to serving as a director;
additional $60,000 with respect to serving as the Chairman of the Parex Board of Directors;
additional $5,000 with respect to serving as the Vice-Chairman of the Parex Board of Directors (there was no 
director serving in this position during 2014);
$5,000  with  respect  to  each  standing  committee  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  on  which  they  serve  as  a 
member;
$7,500 with respect to serving as Chair of the Finance and Audit Committee; and
$2,500 with respect to serving as chair of a standing committee of the Parex Board of Directors other than the 
Finance and Audit Committee.
40
2.
3.
Directors are entitled to a payment of $1,500 for attendance in person or by telephone at each Parex Board of Directors 
meeting or committee meeting of which they are a member.  Where a director is not a committee member, the director 
will receive a payment of $1,500 for attending a meeting of such committee, when requested to do so by the committee's 
chair.
Directors are also eligible to receive long-term incentive compensation in the form of participation in the Stock Option 
Plan and the RSU Plan.  The number of Options and RSUs granted, if any, is to be reviewed each year by the CG&HR 
Committee. Directors did not receive Stock Option grants in 2014.
Directors are reimbursed for miscellaneous out-of-pocket expenses, if any, incurred in carrying out their duties as directors.
2014 Independent Director Compensation Table(1)
Name
Norman McIntyre
Curtis Bartlett
John Bechtold
Robert Engbloom
W.A.(Alf) Peneycad
Ron Miller
Paul Wright
Fees earned
($)
106,500
46,500
63,000
56,000
52,000
46,500
54,000
Share-based
awards (RSUs)(2)
($)
145,800
97,200
97,200
97,200
97,200
97,200
97,200
Option-based
awards(3)
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
All other
compensation
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Total
($)
252,300
143,700
160,200
153,200
149,200
143,700
151,200
Notes:
(1)
(2)
The Company does not provide non-equity incentive plan or pension plan compensation.
The grant date fair value of share-based awards (RSUs) has been calculated using the Black-Scholes methodology, a commonly 
accepted practice for compensation-setting among the Company's peer comparator group. It is the same methodology used by the 
Company to determine the accounting fair value of the RSUs, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standard 2 –
Share Based Payments.  The following assumptions were used for calculating the grant date fair value of share-based awards 
granted to the directors:
Assumption
Expected life of RSUs
Risk-free interest rate
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
Grant date fair value per RSU
RSU Grant Date
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
3.0 years
1.20%
50%
0%
$4.72
3.0 years
1.22%
48%
0%
$6.12
November 10,
2014
3.0 years
1.23%
39%
0%
$9.72
(3)
Directors were not granted option-based awards (Options) in 2014.
Director Fees
Fees were paid to directors in 2014 in accordance with the schedule of annual retainers and meeting fees outlined under "Director 
Compensation" above.  The number of meetings attended by each director is outlined under the "Corporate Governance" section 
of this Information Circular.
Incentive Plan Awards – Directors
In accordance with the directors' compensation program, incentive plan awards in the form of  RSUs were provided to directors in 
2014.  No non-equity incentive bonus compensation was provided.
The intent is for the timing of annual incentive plan awards to coincide with the Company's long-term planning cycle and the 
setting of strategic goals for the near and longer term.   On November 10, 2014, 15,000 RSUs were awarded to the Chairman of 
the Parex Board of Directors and 10,000 RSUs were awarded to each director then serving on the Parex Board of Directors.
41
Outstanding Option-based and Share-based Awards – Independent Directors
(as at December 31, 2014)
Number of securities
underlying
unexercised Options
(#)
15,000
86,000
10,000
50,500
10,000
50,500
10,000
50,500
10,000
50,500
10,000
50,500
10,000
50,500
Option-Based Awards
Option exercise price 
($/Common Share)
Option expiration
date
Value of unexercised 
in-the-money Options
($)(1)
4.45
6.07
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
46,950
129,860
4.45
6.07
4.45
6.07
4.45
6.07
4.45
6.07
4.45
6.07
4.45
6.07
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
August 16,2017
October 16, 2018
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
August 16, 2017
October 16, 2018
31,300
76,255
31,300
76,255
31,300
76,255
31,300
76,255
31,300
76,255
31,300
76,255
Name
Grant Date
Norman McIntyre
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
Curtis Bartlett
John Bechtold
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
Robert Engbloom
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
August 16, 2012
October 16, 2013
Ron Miller
W.A.(Alf) 
Peneycad
Paul Wright
Note:
(1)
Based on the difference between the market price of the Common Shares at December 31, 2014 of $7.58 and the exercise price of 
the Options.
Share-Based Awards (RSUs)
Market or payout value of
share-based awards that have
not vested (1)
($)
Name
Grant Date
Number of shares or units of 
shares that have not vested
(#)
Norman McIntyre
Curtis Bartlett
John Bechtold
Robert Engbloom
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014 (2)
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014(2)
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014(2)
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014(2)
2,500
7,334   
15,000
1,668
4,400
10,000
1,668
4,400
10,000
1,668
4,400
10,000
18,950
55,592
113,700
12,643
33,352
75,800
12,643
33,352
75,800
12,643
33,352
75,800
Market or payout value of 
vested share-based awards 
not paid out or distributed
($)
37,900
27,788
Nil
25,257
16,676
Nil
25,257
16,676
Nil
25,257
16,676
Nil
42
Share-Based Awards (RSUs)
Market or payout value of
share-based awards that have
not vested (1)
Grant Date
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014(2)
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014(2)
October 19, 2012
October 16, 2013
November 10, 2014(2)
Number of shares or units of 
shares that have not vested
(#)
1,668
4,400
10,000
1,668
4,400
10,000
1,668
4,400
10,000
($)
12,643
33,352
75,800
12,643
33,352
75,800
12,643
33,352
75,800
Market or payout value of 
vested share-based awards 
not paid out or distributed
($)
25,257
16,676
Nil
25,257
16,676
Nil
25,257
16,676
Nil
Based on the market value of the Common Shares at December 31, 2014 of $7.58.
In October 2014, Lane Caputo recommended that a DSU Plan be put in place for grants to independent directors of the Company. 
A DSU Plan is included in this Information Circular for approval by shareholders at the Meeting. See "Matters to be Acted upon 
at the Meeting – Approval of Deferred Share Unit Plan". As a transition from the RSUs granted to directors in 2012 and 2013 
with three year vesting, to the planned DSU grants to directors commencing in late 2015 with immediate vesting upon grant date, 
the RSUs granted to directors on November 10, 2014 provided for full vesting three months from the date of grant. Such RSUs 
were unvested as at December 31, 2014 and became fully vested on February 10, 2015.
Name
Ron Miller
W.A.(Alf) 
Peneycad
Paul Wright
Note:
(1)
(2)
The  following  table  sets  forth  for  each  independent  director,  the  value  of  option-based  awards  and  share-based  awards  which 
vested during the year ended December 31, 2014 and the value of non-equity incentive plan compensation earned during the year 
ended December 31, 2014.
Name
Norman McIntyre
Curtis Bartlett
John Bechtold
Robert Engbloom
W.A.(Alf) Peneycad
Ron Miller
Paul Wright
Option-based awards –
Value vested during the
year(1)
($)
186,613
113,246
113,246
113,246
113,246
113,246
113,246
Share-based awards (RSUs)
– Value vested during the
year(2)
($)
67,166
42,093
42,093
42,093
42,093
42,093
42,093
Non-equity incentive plan
compensation – Value 
earned during the year(3)
($)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Notes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Based on the difference between the market price of the Common Shares on the vesting date and the exercise price of the Options
on the vesting date.
Based on the market price of the Common Shares on the vesting date. In October 2014, Lane Caputo recommended that a DSU 
Plan  be  put  in  place  for  grants  to  independent,  non-employee directors  of  the  Company.    A  DSU  Plan  is  included  in  this 
Information Circular for approval by shareholders at the Meeting. See "Matters to be Acted upon at the Meeting – Approval of 
Deferred Share Unit Plan". As a transition from the RSUs granted to directors in 2012 and 2013 with three year vesting, to the 
planned DSU grants to directors commencing in late 2015 with immediate vesting upon grant date, the RSUs granted to directors
on November 10, 2014 provided for full vesting three months from the date of grant. Such RSUs were unvested as at December 
31, 2014 and became fully vested on February 10, 2015.
The Company does not provide non-equity incentive plan compensation to independent directors.
43
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
The following sets forth information in respect of securities authorized for issuance under the Company's equity compensation 
plans as at December 31, 2014. The only equity compensation plans as at December 31, 2014 were  the Stock Option Plan and 
the RSU Plan.
Number of securities to 
be issued upon exercise 
of outstanding Options,
RSUs, warrants and
rights
(a)
approved  by
Weighted average 
exercise price of
outstanding 
Options, RSUs,
warrants and rights
Number of securities remaining
available for future issuance
under equity compensation plans 
(excluding securities reflected in
column (a))(1) (2)
Plan Category
Equity  compensation  plans
security holders
Stock Option Plan 
RSU Plan
Equity  compensation  plans    not  approved  by 
security holders 
Total
7,577,010 (3)
1,625,885
-
9,202,895
6.78
0.01
-
5.58
See Note 4
See Note 4
-
4,266,099 (4)
Notes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
The Stock Option Plan provides for the issuance of Options to a maximum of 10 percent of the issued and outstanding Common 
Shares of the Company, provided that the maximum number of Common Shares issuable pursuant to outstanding Options and all 
other security based compensation arrangements (as defined in the TSX Company Manual) shall not exceed 10% of the Common 
Shares outstanding from time to time.
The RSU Plan provides for the issuance of RSU to a maximum of 10 percent of the issued and outstanding Common Shares of 
the  Company,  provided  that  the  maximum  number  of  Common  Shares  issuable  pursuant  to  outstanding  RSUs  and  all  other 
security  based  compensation  arrangements  (as  defined  in  the  TSX  Company  Manual)  shall  not  exceed  10%  of  the  Common 
Shares outstanding from time to time. Pursuant to the RSU Plan, the holder is required to pay $0.01 upon exercise of each RSU.
Of the 7,577,010 outstanding Options as of December 31, 2014, 5,775,135 were in-the-money  as of that date, based on the 
market value of the Common Shares at December 31, 2014 of $7.58.
The total number of securities remaining available for future issuance under equity compensation plans as at December 31, 2014
is equal to 10% of the number of Common Shares outstanding as at December 31, 2014 less the number of Options outstanding 
under  the  Stock  Option  Plan  as  at  December  31,  2014 and  less  the  number  of  RSUs  outstanding under  the  RSU  Plan  as  at 
December  31,  2014.  As  at  December  31,  2014,  there  were  7,577,010 Options  outstanding  and 1,625,885 RSUs  outstanding, 
leaving 4,266,099 Common Shares available for issuance under the Stock Option Plan and/or the RSU Plan.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
National Instrument 58-101 Disclosure of Corporate Governance Practices ("NI 58-101") requires reporting issuers to disclose 
their corporate governance practices with reference to a series of guidelines for effective corporate governance (the "Corporate 
Governance Guidelines") set forth in National Policy 58-201 Corporate Governance Guidelines.
Set  out  below  is  a  description  of  the  corporate  governance  practices  of  the  Company,  in  accordance  with  the  Corporate 
Governance Guidelines.
GUIDELINES
1. Board of Directors
COMMENTARY
(a) Disclose  the  identity  of  directors  who
are independent.
John  Bechtold,  Curtis  Bartlett,  Lisa  Colnett  (Nominee),  Robert  Engbloom,  Norman 
McIntyre, Ron Miller, W.A. (Alf) Peneycad and Paul Wright are all independent within 
the meaning of NI 58-101.
(b) Disclose  the  identity  of  directors  who 
are  not  independent,  and describe  the 
basis for that determination.
Wayne Foo is not independent as he is the President and Chief Executive Officer of the 
Company.
GUIDELINES
COMMENTARY
44
(c) Disclose  whether  or  not  a  majority  of 
directors are independent.  If a majority 
of  directors  are  not 
independent,
describe  what  the  Board  of  Directors 
does 
its  exercise  of 
independent  judgement  in  carrying  out 
its responsibilities.
facilitate
to
(d)
If  a  director  is  presently  a  director  of 
any  other  issuer  that  is  a  reporting 
issuer 
a 
jurisdiction  or  a  foreign  jurisdiction, 
identify both the director and the other 
issuer.
equivalent)
the
(or
in
If
hold
directors
regularly
in  attendance.
(e) Disclose whether or not the independent 
scheduled 
directors  hold 
meetings  at  which  non-independent 
directors  and  members  of  management 
the 
are  not 
independent 
such 
the  number  of 
meetings,  disclose 
meetings held since the beginning of the 
recently 
issuer's  most 
completed 
financial  year. 
  If  the  independent 
directors  do  not  hold  such  meetings, 
describe  what  the  Board  of  Directors 
does  to  facilitate  open  and  candid 
discussion 
independent 
directors.
among
its
lead  director  who
(f) Disclose whether or not the chair of the 
Board  of  Directors  is  an  independent 
director.  If the Board of Directors has a 
is  an 
chair  or 
independent  director,  disclose 
the 
identity of the independent chair or lead 
director, and describe his or her role and 
responsibilities. 
the  Board  of 
Directors  has  neither  a  chair  that  is 
independent  nor  a  lead  director  that  is 
independent, describe what the Board of 
Directors does to provide leadership for
If
A majority of the members of the Parex Board of Directors are independent.  On at least 
an  annual  basis,  the  Parex  Board  of Directors  conducts  an  analysis  and  makes  a 
determination as to the "independence" of each member of the Parex Board of Directors.
Name of Director
Curtis Bartlett
John Bechtold
Lisa Colnett (Nominee)
Wayne Foo
Norman McIntyre
Ron Miller
Paul Wright
Robert Engbloom
W.A.  (Alf)  Peneycad (not  seeking  re-
election)
Name of Other Reporting Issuer
none
Parkland Fuel Corporation
Detour Gold Corporation
Parkland Fuel Corporation
Pengrowth Energy Corporation
none
none
none
Superior Plus Corp.
Nimin Energy
Canadian Wireless Trust
R Split III Corp.
In  accordance  with  the  written  mandates  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  and  the 
Committees,  each  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  and  Committee  meetings  have 
scheduled  in-camera  sessions  during  which  non-independent  directors  and  members  of 
management  are  not  in  attendance. The  independent  directors  also  hold  meetings  as 
required  at  which  non-independent  directors  and  members  of  management  are  not  in 
attendance. From January 1, 2014 to January 1, 2015, seven such meetings have been 
held. The Finance and Audit Committee and CG&HR Committee and Operations and 
Reserves  Committee  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  are  all  comprised  entirely  of 
independent directors.
The  chair  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  is  an  independent  director,  Mr.  Norman 
McIntyre. The Company has adopted a written description for the Chairman of the Parex 
Board of Directors detailing the roles and responsibilities of the position which include
the following:
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
Determining the schedules and agendas of the meetings of the Parex Board of 
Directors and the shareholders;
Enabling the design and implementation of effective committees of the Parex 
Board of Directors including the selection of members;
Enhancing  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  effectiveness  through  guiding  the 
Parex Board of Directors composition and its succession planning, orientation 
of new directors and annual assessments of the Parex Board of Directors and
45
GUIDELINES
COMMENTARY
its independent directors.
Committee effectiveness;
(cid:120) Working  with  management  to  provide  counsel  and  guidance  regarding  the 
strategic management process and definition of significant business challenges;
(cid:120) Monitoring and evaluating the performance of the Chief Executive Officer and
senior officers of the Company; and
Facilitating communication between the Parex Board of Directors, management 
and shareholders.
(cid:120)
(g) Disclose  the  attendance  record  of  each 
director  for  all  Board  of  Directors 
meetings held since the beginning of the 
issuer's  most 
completed 
financial  year (meeting  dates  are  from 
January 1, 2014 to January 1, 20115).
recently
2. Board of Directors Mandate – Disclose the 
text  of  the  Board  of  Directors' written 
mandate.  If the Board of Directors does not 
have  a  written  mandate,  describe  how  the 
Board  of  Directors  delineates  its  role  and 
responsibilities.
3.
Position Descriptions
has
(a) Disclose  whether  or  not  the  Board  of 
Directors 
developed  written 
position  descriptions  for  the  chair  and 
the  chair  of  each  Board  of  Directors 
committee.    If  the  Board  of  Directors 
has  not  developed  written  position 
descriptions  for  the  chair  and/or  the 
chair  of  each  Board  of  Directors 
committee,  briefly  describe  how  the 
Board  of  Directors  delineates  the  role 
and 
such 
position.
responsibilities  of  each
Finance 
and Audit 
Committee 
Meetings 
Attended / 
Held
4/4
CG&HR 
Committee 
Meetings 
Attended / 
Held
n/a
Operations 
and Reserves 
Committee
Meetings 
Attended/ 
Held
n/a
Board 
Meetings 
Attended 
/ Held
7/7
7/7
7/7
6/7
7/7
7/7
7/7
7/7
n/a
n/a
n/a
4/4
n/a
4/4
n/a
n/a
6/6
5/6
n/a
n/a
n/a
6/6
n/a
4/4
3/4
n/a
4/4
n/a
n/a
Name
Curtis Bartlett(1)
Wayne Foo
John Bechtold(2)(3)
Robert Engbloom(2)(3)
Paul Wright(1)
Norman McIntyre(3)
Ron Miller(1)
W.A. (Alf) Peneycad(2)
Notes:
(1) Members of the Finance and Audit Committee.
(2) Members of the CG&HR Committee.
(3) Members of the Operations and Reserves Committee
The mandate of the Parex Board of Directors is attached as Appendix A hereto.
The Parex Board of Directors has developed a written position description for the Chair
of the Parex Board of Directors and the Chairman of each Board Committee. The Parex 
Board of Directors has also developed mandates for each of the Committees of the Parex 
Board  of  Directors  which  detail  the  composition,  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the 
Committees.  Each of the written mandates provide that the Committee shall appoint one 
member  as  Committee  Chair  who  will  lead  the  Committee  meetings  including 
determining agendas and schedules of the meetings, meeting with independent external 
consultants, and reporting Committee activity and recommendations to the Parex Board 
of Directors as a whole.
GUIDELINES
COMMENTARY
46
(b) Disclose  whether  or  not  the  Board  of 
Directors  and  CEO  have  developed  a 
written  position  description  for 
the 
CEO.    If the  Board  of  Directors  and 
CEO  have  not  developed  such  a 
position  description,  briefly  describe 
how  the  Board  of  Directors  delineates 
the role and responsibilities of the CEO.
4. Orientation and Continuing Education
(a) Briefly  describe  what  measures  the 
Board  of  Directors  takes  to  orient  new 
directors  regarding  (i)  the  role  of  the 
Board  of  Directors,  its  committees  and 
its  directors,  and  (ii)  the  nature  and 
operation of the issuer's business.
(b) Briefly describe what measures, if any, 
the Board of Directors takes to provide 
continuing  education  for  its  directors.  
If  the  Board  of  Directors  does  not 
provide  continuing  education,  describe 
how the Board of Directors ensures that 
its  directors  maintain  the  skill  and 
knowledge  necessary 
their 
obligations as directors.
to  meet
The Parex Board of Directors has also developed a mandate for the CEO which details 
the duties and responsibilities of the CEO such as the following:
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
Leading and managing the Company within the parameters established by the 
Parex Board of Directors;
Developing  and  recommending  the  strategic  plan  to  the  Parex  Board of 
Directors and  successfully  implementing  the  corresponding  annual  operation 
plans, capital plans and other supporting initiatives;
Directing  and  monitoring  the  activities  of  the  Company in  an  manner  that 
safeguards and optimizes the assets of the Company in the best interest of the 
Shareholders;
Developing  and  implementing  operational  policies  to  guide  the  Company
within the limits prescribed by the Company's By-laws and the framework of 
the strategic plan adopted by the Parex Board of Directors;
(cid:120) Maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  Company's  internal  control  and  management
information systems;
(cid:120)
Identifying  the  principal  risks  of  the  Company's  business  and  ensure  the 
implementation of systems to manage these risks;
(cid:120) Meeting  all  reporting  requirements  to  the  relevant  authorities  and  to  the
Company's shareholders; and
(cid:120)
Fostering  a  corporate  culture  that  promotes  ethical  practices  and  encourages 
individual integrity and social responsibility.
The  Chairman  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  in  conjunction  with  the  CG&HR 
Committee is mandated to facilitate the recruitment of new directors and ensure adequate 
orientation  in  order  for  new  directors  to  fully  understand  the  role  the  Parex  Board  of 
Directors and its Committees play in the organization.  All new directors are provided 
with  comprehensive  background  information  about  the  Company  and  its  operations  to 
allow  for  informed  decision  making. The  Company  has  an  online  secure  site  that 
provides  the  directors  with regular  information  about  the  Company.    The  Company 
coordinates an annual offsite strategic planning session for all directors and management 
to  review  the  strategic  planning,  operations,  and  organizational  development  of  the 
Company.
All members of the Parex Board of Directors are members of the Institute of Corporate 
Directors. Four directors, namely Norman McIntyre, Ron Miller, W.A. (Alf) Peneycad, 
and Paul Wright, and the director nominee, Lisa Colnett, have completed the Directors 
Education program. The Parex Board of Directors has agreed to pay the tuition for any 
director of the Company who enrols in one of the continuing education programs of the 
Institute of Corporate Directors.
All  directors  have significant  experience  in  the  oil  and  natural  gas  industry  and  the 
majority  are  members  of  professional  organizations  such  as  the  Association  of 
Professional Engineers, Geologists and Geophysicists of Alberta, the Canadian Institute 
of  Chartered  Accountants,  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  Alberta,  the  Law 
Society of Upper Canada, the Law Society of Alberta and the Canadian Bar Association.
Each  of  those  organizations  have  continuing  education  standards  that  apply  to  their 
members.
GUIDELINES
COMMENTARY
47
Mr. Bartlett attended the Company's office in Bogota, Colombia in January 2015 in his 
role as member of the Finance and Audit Committee of the Parex Board of Directors.  He 
was accompanied by the Company’s PricewaterhouseCoopers audit partner for meetings 
with management of the finance department and other key personnel of the Bogota office.
They also toured the Company's field operations in Colombia.
As  members  of  the  Institute  of  Corporate  Directors,  the  directors  of  the  Company 
subscribe to the statement of ethics of that organization.
The Company has had a code of conduct since the inception of the Company in 2009.
The code of conduct was most recently reviewed and amended in March 2014.
A copy of the code of conduct can be obtained:
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
on the Company's SEDAR profile at www.sedar.com; or
upon written request to the Company.
The  Parex  Board  of  Directors  conducts  an  annual  assessment  process, a  part  of  which 
focuses  on  the  ethical  business  conduct  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  and  the 
organization  as  a  whole. The  Company  has  implemented  a  Whistleblower  program 
throughout the organization.
The Company has not filed any material change reports since its inception that pertains to 
any conduct of a director or executive officer that constitutes a departure from the code of 
conduct.
The  members  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  and  executive  officers  are  required  to 
declare the nature and extent of any material interest in any transactions or agreements 
and  may  not  vote  in  relation  to  any  such  matter.    In  certain  cases  an  independent 
committee may be formed to deliberate on such matters in the absence of the interested 
party.
5. Ethical Business Conduct
(a) Disclose  whether  or  not  the  Board  of 
Directors has adopted a written code for 
the  directors,  officers  and  employees.
(i)  disclose  how  a  person  or  company 
may  obtain  a  copy  of  the  code;  (ii) 
describe  how  the  Board  of  Directors 
monitors compliance with its code, or if 
the Board of Directors does not monitor 
compliance,  explain  whether  and  how 
the  Board  of  Directors  satisfies  itself 
regarding compliance with its code; and 
(iii)  provide  a  cross-reference  to  any 
material  change  report  filed  since  the 
beginning  of  the  issuer's  most  recently 
completed financial year that pertains to 
any  conduct  of  a  director  or  executive 
officer that constitutes a departure from 
the code.
(b) Describe  any steps
takes 
independent
the  Board  of 
Directors 
to  ensure  directors 
exercise 
in 
considering 
and 
agreements 
in  respect  of  which  a 
director  or  executive  officer  has  a 
material interest.
judgement
transactions
(c) Describe  any  other  steps  the  Board  of 
Directors 
to  encourage  and 
promote  a  culture  of  ethical  business 
conduct.
takes
The majority of the Parex Board of Directors is comprised of independent directors. In 
any situation where a potential conflict may arise, a director must disclose such conflict 
and absent him or herself from consideration of the particular transaction or agreement 
and voting as a result.
6. Nomination of Directors
(a) Describe  the  process  by  which  the
identifies  new 
for  Board  of  Directors
Board  of  Directors 
candidates 
nomination.
All members of the Parex Board of Directors are encouraged to:
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
identify  skill  sets  that  they  deem  most  important  in  filling  any  director 
vacancies; and
become  actively  involved  in  identifying  suitable  candidates  to  fill  such 
vacancies.
When  deemed  appropriate  to  ensure  that  a  reasonable  number  of  suitably  qualified 
candidates are identified and considered for any director vacancies, the Board will retain 
an experienced third party search firm for this purpose.
GUIDELINES
COMMENTARY
48
(b) Disclose  whether  or  not  the  Board  of 
Directors  has  a  nominating  committee 
composed  entirely  of 
independent 
directors.    If  the  Board  of  Directors 
does  not  have  a  nominating  committee 
composed  entirely  of 
independent 
directors, describe what steps the Board 
of  Directors  takes  to  encourage  an 
objective nomination process.
(c)
the  Board  of  Directors  has  a 
If 
nominating  committee,  describe 
the 
responsibilities,  powers  and  operation 
of the nominating committee.
7. Compensation
(a) Describe  the  process  by  which  the 
Board  of  Directors  determines 
the 
compensation  for  the  issuer's  directors 
and officers.
a
has 
composed
(b) Disclose  whether  or  not  the  Board  of 
compensation 
Directors 
committee 
entirely 
of 
independent  directors.    If  the  Board  of 
Directors does not have a compensation 
committee 
of 
independent  directors,  describe  what 
steps  the  Board  of  Directors  takes  to 
ensure 
for 
determining such compensation.
an  objective  process
composed
entirely
The  CG&HR  Committee  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  is  comprised  entirely  of 
independent directors and is responsible for the functions of a nominating committee.
The  CG&HR  Committee  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  is  comprised  entirely  of 
independent  directors  and  is  responsible  for  oversight  of  the  Company's  Corporate 
Governance,  Board  Development,  Executive  Appointments  and  Compensation,  Human 
Resources,  Stock  Option  Plan,  RSU  Plan,  DSU  Plan, Disclosures  and  Performance 
Assessment  functions. See  "Statement  of  Executive  Compensation  – Compensation 
Governance" in this Information Circular.
The  CG&HR  Committee  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  reviews  competitive  market 
data from third-party sources for compensation for directors and officers of the Company 
and makes recommendations regarding the format and quantum of such compensation to 
the Parex Board of Directors for approval. As part of this process, external consultants 
may be engaged by the CG&HR Committee from time to time to conduct a competitive 
review  of  and  to  make  specific  recommendations  on  compensation  for  directors  and 
officers  of  the  Company. See  "Statement of  Executive  Compensation  – Compensation 
Governance" in this Information Circular.
The  CG&HR  Committee  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  is  comprised  entirely of 
independent directors and is responsible for the functions of a compensation committee.
See  "Statement  of  Executive  Compensation  – Compensation  Governance" in  this 
Information Circular.
(c)
If 
the  Board  of  Directors  has  a 
compensation  committee,  describe the 
responsibilities,  powers  and  operation 
of the compensation committee.
The  CG&HR  Committee  of  the  Parex  Board  of  Directors  is  comprised  entirely  of 
independent  directors  and  is  responsible  for  oversight  of  the  Company's  Corporate 
Governance,  Board  Development,  Executive  Appointments  and  Compensation,  Human 
Resources,  Stock  Option  Plan,  RSU  Plan,  Disclosures  and  Performance  Assessment 
functions. See "Statement of Executive Compensation – Compensation Governance" in 
this Information Circular.
8. Other Board of Directors Committees – If 
standing 
the  Board  of  Directors  has 
committees 
audit, 
the 
compensation  and  nominating  committees, 
identify  the  committees  and  describe  their 
function.
other
than
The Company has established an Operations and Reserves Committee comprised entirely 
of  independent  directors,  in  accordance  with  National  Instrument  51-101  Standards  of 
Disclosure  for  Oil  and  Gas  Activities ("NI  51-101")  guidelines. This  Committee  is 
responsible for:
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
assisting  Management  in  fulfilling  its  responsibilities  under  NI  51-101  with 
respect to the oil and natural gas reserves evaluation process;
reviewing  any  public  disclosure  and  regulatory  filings  with  respect  to  any 
reserves evaluation and related oil and natural gas activities;
GUIDELINES
COMMENTARY
49
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
acting as the steward of the Company's operational performance;
reviewing  the  Company's  operating,  development  and  portfolio  management 
strategies,  capital  allocation,  budgeting  and  forecasting  and  ensuring  that  the 
Company  has  in  place  an  adequate  process  to  review  all  material  capital 
investments; and
reviewing  and  monitoring the  adequacy  of  the  Company's  Health,  Safety  and 
Environmental emergency response policies, plans, reporting and resources.
The  CG&HR  Committee,  in  conjunction  with  the  Chairman  of  the  Parex  Board  of 
Directors, has responsibility for assessing the performance of the  Board  as a whole, the 
Committees of the  Board and the individual directors.  The small size of the Parex Board 
of Directors allows  for significant and consistent communication amongst the directors 
and management with respect to matters of effectiveness. As well, the Directors Annual 
Evaluation Form, completed by each director, includes assessments of the performance of 
the  Board  as a  whole, the committees of the  Board  and the individual directors. In 
addition, in 2014 each director completed a Board of Directors Skills Matrix Form that 
was  prepared  by  an  independent  consultant  retained  by  the  CG&HR  Committee, 
indicating their level of experience and/or expertise in several key skills required by the  
Board.  The  results  were  reviewed  and  considered  by  the  Board  in  determining  the 
required skills and qualifications needed from a new director to be appointed to the Board 
in  2015 to  fill the  vacancy  that  would  be  left  by  Mr.  Peneycad's retirement from  the 
Board under the Company's Director Retirement Policy.
Parex  does  not  currently  have  a  policy  regarding  term  limits  for  directors.    Board 
composition is assessed by the CG&HR Committee  as required to ensure that the Board 
has the right mix of skills and experience that  will enable the Board to provide strong 
stewardship  for  the  Company. Board  renewal  is  facilitated  by  the  Director  Retirement 
Policy. See "Matters to be Acted upon at the Meeting – Director Retirement Policy" in 
this Information Circular.
Parex Board appointments are determined by finding the best-suited individual based on 
merit and the requirements of the Board at that time.  Parex does not differentiate by race, 
colour, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual orientation or any other aspect. Although Parex
has  not  adopted  a  policy  with  specific  targets  regarding  the  number  or  percentage  of 
women  on  the  Board,  Parex  did  consider  the  level  of  representation  of  women  on  the 
Board in the recruitment for a new director for nomination to the Board in 2015.
to
9. Assessments – Disclose  whether  or  not  the 
Board  of  Directors,  its  committees  and 
individual  directors  are  regularly  assessed 
with  respect 
their  effectiveness  and 
contribution.    If  assessments  are  regularly 
conducted, describe the process used for the 
assessments. 
If  assessments  are  not 
regularly conducted, describe how the Board 
of Directors satisfies itself that the Board of 
Directors,  its  committees,  and  its  individual 
directors are performing effectively.
10. Disclose  whether  or  not  the  issuer  has 
adopted  term  limits  for  the  directors  on  its 
board or other mechanisms of board renewal 
and,  if  so,  include  a  description  of  those 
director  term  limits  or  other  mechanisms  of 
board renewal. If the issuer has not adopted 
director  term  limits  or  other  mechanisms  of 
board renewal, disclose why it has not done 
so.
11.
(a) Disclose whether the issuer has adopted a 
written  policy  relating  to  the  identification 
and  nomination  of  women  directors.  If  the 
issuer has not adopted such a policy, disclose 
why it has not done so.
(b) If an issuer has adopted a policy referred 
to in (a), disclose the following in respect of 
the  policy:  (i)  a  short  summary  of  its 
objectives  and  key  provisions;  (ii) 
the 
measures taken to ensure that the policy has 
been  effectively  implemented;  (iii)  annual 
and  cumulative  progress  by  the  issuer  in 
achieving  the  objectives  of  the  policy;  and 
(iv) whether and, if so, how the board or its 
nominating 
the 
effectiveness of the policy.
committee  measures
50
COMMENTARY
Board  nominations  and  appointments  are  assessed  based  upon  the  merits  of  the 
candidates,  in  the  context  of  the  skills,  experience  and  independence  which  the  Board 
requires in order to be effective and, which the Board considers to be in the best interest 
of the Company. In 2015, the Board has nominated one female director for consideration 
by the Company’s shareholders at the Meeting. This candidate has been nominated based 
upon her broad range of experience and expertise as well as the Board’s consideration of 
the level of representation of women on the Board.
When  considering  candidates  for  senior  management  positions,  Parex  focuses  on 
attracting and retaining experienced and highly skilled individuals that can add value to 
its business. Rather than considering the level of representation of women in  executive 
officer  positions  when  making  executive  officer  appointments,  Parex  considers  all 
candidates based on their merit and qualifications relevant to the specific role.
GUIDELINES
12. Disclose whether and, if so, how the board or 
nominating committee considers the level of 
representation  of  women  on  the  board  in 
identifying  and  nominating  candidates  for 
election  or  reelection to  the  board.  If  the 
issuer  does  not  consider 
level  of 
representation  of  women  on  the  board  in
identifying  and  nominating  candidates  for 
election or re-election to the board, disclose 
the issuer’s reasons for not doing so.
the
13. Disclose  whether  and,  if  so,  how  the  issuer 
considers  the  level  of
representation  of
women  in  executive  officer  positions  when 
making  executive  officer  appointments.  If 
the  issuer  does  not consider  the  level  of 
representation of women in executive officer 
positions  when  making  executive  officer
appointments,  disclose  the issuer’s  reasons 
for not doing so.
14.
(a)  For  purposes  of  this  Item,  a  "target"
means a number or percentage, or a range of 
numbers  or percentages,  adopted  by  the 
issuer of women on the issuer’s board or in 
executive officer positions of the issuer by a 
specific date.
While  Parex  recognizes  the  benefits  of  diversity  at  all  levels  within  its  organization, 
Parex does not currently have any targets, rules or formal policies that specifically require 
the identification, consideration, nomination or appointment of female board nominees or 
candidates  for  executive  management  positions  or  that  would  otherwise  force  the 
composition of the Board or the Company’s executive management team.
(b) Disclose whether the issuer has adopted a 
target  regarding  women  on  the  issuer’s 
board. If the issuer has not adopted a target, 
disclose why it has not done so.
(c) Disclose whether the issuer has adopted a 
target regarding women in executive officer 
positions of the  issuer.  If  the  issuer  has  not 
adopted  a  target,  disclose  why  it  has  not 
done so.
(d) If the issuer has adopted a target referred 
to in either (b) or (c), disclose: (i) the target, 
and (ii)  the  annual  and  cumulative  progress 
of the issuer in achieving the target.
15.
(a)  Disclose  the  number  and  proportion  (in 
percentage terms) of directors on the issuer’s 
board who are women.
Should Company shareholders support the Board’s nomination for its new director,  1/8
or 12.5% of the Company’s directors would be women.  Currently, Parex does not have 
any women on its executive management team.
(b)  Disclose  the  number  and  proportion  (in 
percentage terms) of executive officers of the 
issuer, including all major subsidiaries of the 
issuer, who are women.
51
INDEBTEDNESS OF DIRECTORS AND SENIOR OFFICERS
As  at  the  date  hereof  there  is  no  indebtedness  outstanding  by  directors,  executive  officers  or  former  directors  and  executive 
officers  of  the  Company  to  the  Company  or  its  subsidiaries  and  there  has  been  no  such  indebtedness  at  any  time  since 
incorporation.
INTEREST OF CERTAIN PERSONS AND COMPANIES IN MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON
Management  of  the  Company  is  not  aware  of  any  material  interest,  direct  or  indirect,  by  way  of  beneficial  ownership  or 
otherwise, of any director or executive officer or anyone who has held office as such since the beginning of the Company's last 
financial  year,  any  proposed  nominee  for  election  as  a  director  of  the  Company  or  of  any  associate  or  affiliate  of  any  of  the
foregoing in any matter to be acted on at the Meeting, other than the election of directors or the appointment of auditors.
INTEREST OF INFORMED PERSONS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
There are no material interests, direct or indirect, of any informed person of the Company (as such term is defined in National 
Instrument 51-102 – Continuous Disclosure Obligations), any proposed director of the Company or any associate or affiliate of 
any informed person or proposed director of the Company in any transaction since the commencement of the Company's most 
recently  completed  financial  year  or  in  any  proposed  transaction  which  has  materially  affected  or  would  materially  affect  the 
Company or any of its subsidiaries, other than as disclosed herein.
The Prior Bid
NORMAL COURSE ISSUER BID
From March 17, 2014 to March 16, 2015, the Company had a normal course issuer bid (the "Prior Bid") in place to purchase for 
cancellation, from time to time, up to a maximum of 8,818,165 Common Shares on the open market through the facilities of the 
TSX. The  number  of  Common  Shares  that  could be  purchased  pursuant  to  the  Prior  Bid  was  subject  to  a  daily  maximum  of 
46,095 Common Shares (which is equal to 25% of the average daily trading volume from September 1, 2013 to February 28, 
2014). The price that Parex paid for any Common Shares under the Prior Bid was the prevailing market price on the TSX at the
time  of  such  purchase.  Any  Common  Shares  acquired  under  the  Prior Bid  are cancelled. The  Company did  not  purchase  any 
Common Shares under the prior bid
The Bid
On March 27, 2015, the Company announced the renewal of the normal course issuer bid (the "Bid") to purchase for cancellation, 
from time to time, as it considers advisable, up to a maximum of 12,595,889 Common Shares on the open market through the 
facilities of the TSX and/or alternative trading systems. The number of Common Shares that can be purchased pursuant to the Bid 
is subject to a daily  maximum of 161,955 Common Shares (which is equal to 25% of the average daily trading  volume from 
September  1,  2014 to  February  28,  2015).  The  price  that  Parex  will  pay  for  any  Common  Shares  under  the  Bid  will  be  the 
prevailing market price on the TSX at the time of such purchase. Common Shares acquired under the Bid will be cancelled. The
Bid  commenced  on  March  31, 2015 and  will  terminate  on  March  30, 2016 or  such  earlier  time  as  the  Bid  is  completed  or 
terminated at the option of Parex. A copy of the Form 12 Notice of Intention to Make a Normal Course Issuer Bid filed by the 
Company  with  the  TSX  can  be  obtained  from  the  Company  upon  request  without  charge.  As  at  the  date  of  this  Information 
Circular, the Company has not purchased any Common Shares pursuant to the Bid.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Additional information respecting the Company is available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.  Financial information respecting the 
Company is provided in the Company's comparative annual financial statements and management's discussion and analysis for its 
most  recently  completed  financial  year.    Shareholders  can  access  this  information  on  the  Company's  profile  on  SEDAR at 
www.sedar.com or by request to the Chief Financial Officer of the Company at 2700 Eighth Avenue Place, West Tower, 585 - 8
Avenue S.W., Calgary AB T2P 1G1 or Fax (403) 265-8216.
APPENDIX A
MANDATE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
1. Purpose of the Mandate of the Board of Directors
a) The purpose of this Mandate is to assist the Board in the exercise of its duties.  By virtue of approving this Mandate, the
Board affirms its ongoing responsibility for the stewardship of Parex Resources Inc. (the "Corporation").
2. Purpose of the Board of Directors
a) The primary responsibility of the Board of Directors (the "Board") is to foster the long-term success of the Corporation
consistent with the Board's responsibilities to the shareholders.
b) The Board has the responsibility to oversee the conduct of the business of the Corporation and to oversee Management 
which is responsible for the day-to-day conduct of business. In performing its functions, the Board also considers the 
legitimate interests which other stakeholders such as employees, regulators, surface rights owners, aboriginals, industry 
associations,  suppliers,  customers  and  communities  may  have  in  the  Corporation.
In  overseeing  the  conduct  of  the 
business, the Board, through the Chief Executive Officer, shall set the standards of conduct for the Corporation.
c) The  Board  has  the  statutory  authority  and  obligation  to  protect  and  enhance  the  assets  of  the  Corporation,  and  the
Directors are charged with protecting the interests of all shareholders, both present and future, of the Corporation.
3. General Legal Obligations of the Board
a) Alberta law identifies the following as legal requirements for the Board:
i) To oversee the management of the business and affairs of the Corporation.
ii) To act honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of the Corporation.
iii) To  exercise  the  care,  diligence  and  skill  that  a  reasonably  prudent  person  would  exercise  in  comparable
circumstances.
b) The Board is responsible for directing Management to ensure that legal requirements have been met, and that documents
and records have been properly prepared, approved and maintained.
4. Procedures and Organization
The Board operates by delegating certain of its authorities, including spending authorizations, to management and by reserving
certain powers to itself. The current spending authorizations have been put in place by the Board through passage of a resolution
delegating authority to the Chief Executive Officer.
a) The Board retains the responsibility for managing its own affairs including:
i)
Selecting the Chair, or an acting Chair, if the Chair is absent from the meeting.
ii) Nominating candidates for election to the Board.
iii) Constituting committees to the Board.
iv) Recommending director compensation.
b) Subject to the Articles of the Corporation and the Business Corporations Act (Alberta), the Board may constitute, seek
the advice of and delegate powers, duties and responsibilities to committees of the Board.
5. Expectations of Management
2
a) The Board expects management to work diligently towards enhancing the Corporation's performance by ensuring that
existing operations are managed prudently and that new business development opportunities are sought.
b) The  Board  expects  management  to  provide  the  Board  with  all  pertinent  information  regarding  the  operations  and 
corporate development activities of the Corporation in order for the Board to properly assess whether the Corporation's 
goals are being met.  Management is expected to provide as much information as is required or requested so that the 
Board can participate actively in important discussions on the Corporation's future, strategic planning and performance 
assessments.    The  Board  expects  management  to  be  completely  forthcoming  with  respect  to  its  assessment  of 
opportunities and performance to allow the Board to make reasoned decisions.
6. Board Size
a) The  Board  shall  consist  of  such  number  of  directors  within  the  range  set  forth  in  the  Corporation's  articles  of 
incorporation as the Board deems appropriate in order to facilitate effective decision-making.  The Board delegates to the 
Corporate Governance, Compensation and Human Resources Committee the responsibility of considering and making 
recommendations to the Board with respect to the appropriate Board size.
7.
Independence
a)
In  that  the  Board  must  develop  and  voice  objective  judgment  on  corporate  affairs,  independently  of  Management, 
practices  promoting  Board  independence  will  be  pursued. This  includes  constituting  the  Board  with  a  majority  of 
independent  directors  (as  defined  in  National  Instrument  52-110 – Audit  Committees). Certain  tasks  suited  to 
independent  judgments  will  be  delegated  to  specialized  Board  Committees  that  are  comprised  mainly  of  independent 
Directors wherever possible.  The Board will develop broad standards to determine whether Directors are independent.
The Board will disclose both the standards and the annual determinations as required by law.
b) The  Board  will  be  responsible  for  having  the  independent  directors  conduct  a  session  without  the  presence  of
Management at all regularly scheduled Board meetings.
The Board will evaluate its own performance in a continuing effort to improve. For this purpose, the Board will establish criteria 
for Board and Board member performance, and pursue a self-evaluation process for evaluating overall Board performance.
8. Nomination
a) The Board shall, prior to nominating any directors on behalf of the Corporation:
i) Consider what competencies and skills the Board, as a whole, should possess; and
ii) Assess what competencies and skills each existing director possesses.
In carrying out these functions, the Board shall consider the advice and input of the Corporate Governance, Compensation 
and Human Resources Committee.
9. Duties and Responsibilities
In keeping with generally accepted corporate governance practices and, as part of the overall stewardship responsibility, the 
Board explicitly assumes responsibility for the following:
a) Selection of Management & Succession Planning
The Board has the responsibility to:
3
(1) Appoint  and  replace  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  ("CEO"),  to  monitor  CEO  performance,  to  approve  CEO
compensation and to provide advice and counsel to the CEO in the execution of the CEO's duties.
(2) Be responsible for plans being made for management succession and development.
b) Oversight of Management
i) Assess  each  Officer's  contribution  to  the  implementation  and  achievement  of  the  Corporation's  strategic  plan
measured by performance against objectives established by the Board.
ii) Establish  a  formal  process  for  determining  the  Officers' compensation,  in  part,  by  using  established  criteria  and
objectives for measuring performance.
iii) Acting  upon  the  advice  of  the  CEO,  and  the  recommendation  of  the  Corporate  Governance,  Compensation  and 
Human Resources Committee, the Board has the responsibility to approve the appointment and remuneration of all 
corporate officers.
c) Strategic Operating and Capital Plans
While the leadership for the strategic planning process comes from the Management of the Corporation, the Board shall 
bring objectivity and a breadth of judgment to the strategic planning process and will ultimately approve the strategy 
developed by Management as it evolves.
The Board has the responsibility to:
(1) Oversee the development and approval of the mission of the Corporation.
(2) Review, with Management, and approve the strategic plan for the Corporation.
(3) Approve the annual operating and capital plans and budgets.
(4) Approve material or significant acquisitions.
(5) Review progress in respect to the achievement of the goals and objectives established in the strategic, operating
and capital plans.
(6) Be responsible for Management ensuring it has identified the principal risks of the Corporation's business and 
has  taken  reasonable  steps  to  ensure  that  Management  has  implemented  appropriate  systems  to  effectively 
monitor and manage these risks with a view to the long-term viability of the Corporation and its assets, and that 
it conduct an annual review of the associated risks.
(7) Be  responsible  for  congruence  between  the  strategic  plan,  stakeholder  expectations  and  Management's
performance.
d) Policies and Procedures
The Board has the responsibility to:
(1) Approve and monitor compliance with all significant policies and procedures which govern the Corporation's
operations.
(2) Direct  Management  to  implement  systems  which  are  designed  to  ensure  that  the  Corporation  operates  at  all
times within applicable laws and regulations, and to the highest ethical, social and moral standards.
4
e) Monitoring and Acting
The Board has the responsibility to:
(1) Monitor the Corporation's progress towards its goals and objectives, and to revise and alter its direction through
Management in light of changing circumstances.
(2) Approve any payment of dividends and new financings.
(3) Direct Management to ensure systems are in place for  the implementation and integrity of  the Corporation's
internal control and management information systems.
(4) Be  responsible  for  having  an  audit  process  in  place  for  the  Corporation,  which  can  inform  the  Board  of  the 
integrity of the financial data and compliance of the financial information with generally accepted accounting 
principles.
(5) Implement adequate measures for receiving feedback from the Corporation's stakeholders.
f) Compliance Reporting and Corporate Communications
The Board has the responsibility to:
(1) Oversee that the financial performance of the Corporation is adequately reported to shareholders, other security
holders and regulators on a timely and regular basis.
(2) Oversee that the Corporation's financial results are reported fairly and in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles.
(3) Oversee  that  procedures  are  in  place  to effect  the  timely  reporting  of  any  other  developments  that  have  a
significant and material impact on the value of the Corporation.
(4) Oversee  that  the  corporate  oil  and  gas  reserve  report  fairly  represents  the  quantity  and  value  of  corporate
reserves in accordance with generally accepted engineering principles.
(5) Report annually to shareholders on the Board's stewardship for the preceding year (the Annual Report).
(6) Oversee that the Corporation has in place a policy to enable the Corporation to communicate effectively with its
shareholders and the public generally.
10. Meetings
a) The Board shall meet at least once in each fiscal quarter, either in person or by round robin.  Additional meetings can be 
scheduled as required, at the discretion of the Board.  Each director has a responsibility to attend and participate in Board 
meetings.  Telephonic attendance is permissible with approval from the Chairman.
b) At each Board meeting, there shall be a private session of the independent directors from which the non-independent
directors will be excused.
11. Legal Requirements
The Board is responsible for overseeing adherence to routine legal requirements and that documents and records have 
been properly prepared, approved and maintained by the Corporation.
12.
Mandate Review
5
The Board will review this Mandate every other year, or more frequently as may be determined necessary by the Board, 
to ensure that it is achieving its purpose.
APPENDIX B
DSU PLAN
PAREX RESOURCES INC.
DEFERRED SHARE UNIT PLAN
ARTICLE 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Purpose
The purpose of this Deferred Share Unit Plan is to provide non-employee directors of Parex Resources 
Inc. (the "Corporation") with the opportunity to acquire Deferred Share Units (as defined herein) of the 
Corporation in  order  to  allow  them  to  participate  in  the  long-term  success  of  the  Corporation and  to 
promote a greater alignment of their interests with the interests of the Corporation's shareholders.
ARTICLE 2
INTERPRETATION
2.1
Definitions
For purposes of the Plan:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
"Account" means an account maintained by the Corporation for each Participant and which will 
be credited by means of a book-keeping entry with DSUs that are granted in accordance with the 
terms of this Plan and the DSU Agreements;
"Applicable Withholding Amounts" is defined in Section 4.7(a) of the Plan;
"Black Out Period" means the period of time when, pursuant to any policies of the Corporation, 
any  securities  of  the  Corporation  may  not  be  traded  by  certain  persons  as  designated  by  the 
Corporation, including any Participant that holds a DSU;
"Board" means the Board of Directors of the Corporation as may be constituted from time to 
time;
"Cash Payment" is defined in Section 4.7(a) of the Plan;
"Committee"  means 
the  Corporate  Governance,  Compensation  and  Human  Resources 
Committee of the Board or such other committee of the Board as may be appointed by the Board 
to  administer  the  Plan, provided,  however,  that  if  no  such  committee  is  in  existence  at  any 
particular time and the Board has not appointed another committee of the Board to administer the 
Plan, all references in the Plan to "Committee" shall at such time be in reference to the Board;
"Corporation" means Parex Resources Inc. and includes any successor corporation;
"Deferred Share Unit" or "DSU" means a unit equivalent in value to a Share, credited by means 
of a bookkeeping entry in the books of the Corporation in accordance with Article 4;
"Distribution Date" is defined in Section 4.6 of the Plan;
"Distribution Value" means, with respect to each Deferred Share Unit credited to a Participant's 
Account, the Fair Market Value per Share;
2
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
(w)
"Dividend  Equivalents"  means  a  bookkeeping  entry  whereby  each  Deferred  Share  Unit  is 
credited with the equivalent amount of the dividend paid on a Share in accordance with Section 
4.3;
"Dividend Market Value" means the Fair Market Value per Share on the dividend record date;
"DSU Agreement" is defined in Section 5.11 of the Plan;
"Eligible Director" means an individual who is, at the relevant time, a member of the Board but 
who is not also an employee of the Parex Group;
"Exchange" means the TSX or, if the Shares are not then listed and posted for trading on the 
TSX, such stock exchange on which such Shares are listed and posted for trading and on which 
the majority of the trading volume and value of such Shares occurs;
"Fair Market Value" with respect to a Share, as at any date, means the weighted average of the 
prices at which the Shares traded on the TSX (or, if the Shares are not then listed and posted for
trading on the TSX or are then listed and posted for trading on more than one stock exchange, on 
such stock exchange on which the majority of the trading volume and value of the Shares occurs) 
for  the  five  (5)  trading  days  on  which  the  Shares  traded  on  the  said  exchange  immediately 
preceding such date.  In the event that the Shares are not listed and posted for trading on any 
stock exchange, the Fair Market Value shall be the fair market value of the Shares as determined 
by the Board in its sole discretion, acting reasonably and in good faith;
"Insider" has the meaning ascribed thereto in Part I of the TSX Company Manual, as amended 
from time to time;
"Parex Group"  means collectively,  the  Corporation and  any  entity  that is  a  Subsidiary  of  the 
Corporation from time to time, any entity that is related to the Corporation for purposes of the 
Income Tax Act (Canada), and any other entity designated by the Board from time to time as a 
member of the Parex Group for the purposes of this Plan (and, for greater certainty, including any 
successor entity of any of the aforementioned entities);
"Participant" means an Eligible Director who is granted DSU's in accordance with Section 4.1 
hereof;
"Payment Shares" is defined in Section 4.8 of the Plan;
"Person"  means  any  individual,  sole  proprietorship,  partnership,  firm,  entity, unincorporated 
association, unincorporated syndicate, unincorporated organization, trust, body corporate, fund, 
organization or other group of organized persons, government, government regulatory authority, 
governmental department, agency, commission, board, tribunal, dispute settlement panel or body, 
bureau, court, and where the context requires any of the foregoing when they are acting as trustee, 
executor, administrator or other legal representative;
"Plan"  means  this  Deferred  Share  Unit  Plan  as  amended,  restated,  supplemented or  otherwise 
modified from time to time;
"Security Based Compensation Arrangement" has the meaning ascribed thereto in Part VI of 
the TSX Company Manual, as amended from time to time;
3
(x)
(y)
(z)
(aa)
(bb)
2.2
(a)
(b)
"Separation  Date"  means  the  date  on  which  the  Participant  ceases  to  be  a  director  of  any 
member of, and is not at that time an employee or officer of any member of, the Parex Group;
"Share"  means  a  common  share  of  the  Corporation or,  in  the  event  of  an  adjustment 
contemplated  by  Section  4.10,  such  other  number  or  type  of  securities  as  the Committee  may 
determine;
"Subsidiary" has the meaning ascribed thereto in the Securities Act (Alberta);
"TSX" means the Toronto Stock Exchange; and
"TSX Company Manual" means the Toronto Stock Exchange Company Manual, as amended 
from time to time.
Interpretation
Words  in  the  singular  include  the  plural  and  words  in  the  plural  include  the  singular.  Words 
importing male persons include female persons, corporations or other entities, as applicable. The 
headings in this document are for convenience and reference only and shall not be deemed to alter 
or affect any provision hereof. The words "hereto", "herein", "hereby", "hereunder", "hereof" and 
similar expressions mean or refer to this document as a whole and not to any particular Article, 
Section, paragraph or other part hereof.
Whenever the Board or, where applicable, the Committee or any sub-delegate of the Committee 
is to exercise discretion in the administration of the terms and conditions of this Plan, the term 
"discretion" means the sole and absolute discretion of the Board or the Committee or the sub-
delegate of the Committee, as the case may be.
(c)
Unless otherwise specified, all references to money amounts are to Canadian currency.
3.1
(a)
ARTICLE 3
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLAN
Administration of the Plan
Except for matters that are under the jurisdiction of the Board as specified under the Plan or as 
required by law and subject to Section 3.1(b), this Plan will be administered by the Committee 
and the Committee has sole and complete authority, in its discretion, to:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
interpret and construe any provision hereof and decide all questions of fact arising in their 
interpretation;
adopt, amend, suspend and rescind such rules and regulations for administration of this 
Plan as the Board may deem necessary in order to comply with the requirements of this 
Plan, or in order to conform to any law or regulation or to any change in any laws or 
regulations applicable thereto;
exercise rights reserved to the Corporation under the Plan;
take any and all actions permitted by this Plan;
prescribe forms for notices to be prescribed by the Corporation under the Plan; and
4
(vi)
make  any  other  determinations  and  take  such  other  action  in  connection  with  the 
administration of this Plan that it deems necessary or advisable.
The Committee's determinations and actions under this Plan are final, conclusive and binding on 
the Corporation, the Participants and all other Persons.
(b)
To the extent permitted by applicable law, the Committee may, from time to time, delegate to any 
specified officer of the Corporation all or any of the powers of the Committee. In such event, the 
specified officer will exercise the powers delegated to it by the Committee in the manner and on 
the  terms  authorized  by  the  Committee.  Any  decision  made  or  action  taken  by  the  specified 
officer arising out of or in connection with the administration or interpretation of this Plan in this 
context is final, binding and conclusive on the Corporation, the Participants and all other Persons.
3.2
Determination of Value if Shares Not Publicly Traded
If the Shares are not publicly traded on the Exchange at the relevant time such that the Distribution Value 
and/or  the  Dividend  Market  Value  cannot  be  determined  in  accordance  with  the  definitions  of  those 
terms, such values shall be determined by the Committee acting in good faith, or in the absence of the 
Committee, by the Board acting in good faith.
3.3
Eligibility
Any  individual  who  at  the  relevant  time  is  an  Eligible  Director  is  eligible  to  participate  in  the  Plan. 
Eligibility to participate does not confer upon any individual a right to receive an award of Deferred Share 
Units pursuant to the Plan.
3.4
Exemption from Plan Participation
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan, if a Participant is resident in a jurisdiction in which an 
award  of  Deferred  Share  Units  under  the  Plan  might  be  considered  to  be  income  which  is  subject  to 
taxation at the time of such award, the Participant may elect not to participate in the Plan by providing a 
written notice to the Chief Financial Officer of the Corporation.
3.5
Discretionary Relief
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, the Board may, in its sole discretion, waive any condition set 
out herein if it determines that specific individual circumstances warrant such waiver.
4.1
(a)
ARTICLE 4
DEFERRED SHARE UNITS
Grant of Deferred Share Units
The Committee may, from time to time in its sole discretion, grant DSUs to Eligible Directors 
and upon such grant, such Eligible Directors shall become Participants in this Plan. In respect of 
each grant of DSUs, the Committee shall determine:
(i)
(ii)
the number of DSUs allocated to the Participant; and
such other terms and conditions of the DSUs applicable to each grant.
5
(b)
(c)
(d)
4.2
The Corporation shall not make any grant of DSU's pursuant to the Plan unless and until such 
grant or issuance and delivery can be completed in compliance with all applicable laws, including 
tax regulations, and all other regulations, rules, orders of governmental or regulatory authorities 
and  the  requirements  of  all  applicable  stock  exchanges  upon  which  Shares  are listed.  The 
Corporation shall  be  obligated  to  take  all  reasonable  action  to  comply  with  any  such  laws,
regulations, rules, orders or requirements.
Certificates  will  not  be  issued  to  evidence  DSUs.  Book  entry  accounts,  to  be  known  as  the 
"Deferred Share Unit Account" shall be maintained by the Corporation for each Participant and 
will be credited with DSUs granted to a Participant from time to time.
The term during which a DSU may be outstanding shall, subject to the provisions of this Plan 
requiring or permitting the acceleration or the extension of the term, be such period as may be 
determined from time to time by the Board or the Committee, but subject to the rules of any stock 
exchange or other regulatory body having jurisdiction.
Vesting
Deferred Share Units will be fully vested upon being granted and credited to a Participant's Account.
4.3
Credits for Dividends
A Participant's Account shall be credited with Dividend Equivalents in the form of additional Deferred 
Share Units as of each dividend payment date in respect of which normal cash dividends are paid on the 
Shares.  Such  Dividend  Equivalents  shall  be  computed  by  dividing:  (a)  the  amount  obtained  by 
multiplying the amount of the dividend declared and paid per Share by the number of Deferred Share 
Units recorded in the Participant's Account on the record date for the payment of such dividend, by (b) the 
Dividend Market Value, with fractions computed to three decimal places. The foregoing does not obligate 
the Corporation to declare or pay dividends on Shares and nothing in this Plan shall be interpreted as 
creating such an obligation.
4.4
Limits on Issuances
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Plan:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the  maximum  number  of  Shares  issuable  pursuant  to  outstanding  DSUs  at  any  time  shall  be 
limited  to  0.5%  of  the  aggregate  number  of  issued  and  outstanding  Shares,  provided  that  the 
maximum number of Shares issuable pursuant to outstanding DSUs and all other Security Based 
Compensation  Arrangements,  shall  not  exceed  10.0%  of  the  Shares  outstanding  from  time  to 
time;
the  number  of  Shares  reserved  for  issuance  to  any  one  Participant  under  all  Security  Based 
Compensation Arrangements will not exceed 5.0% of the issued and outstanding Shares;
the number of Shares issuable to Insiders, at any time, under all Security Based Compensation 
Arrangements, shall not exceed 10.0% of the issued and outstanding Shares;
the number of Shares issued to Insiders, within any one year period, under all Security Based 
Compensation Arrangements, shall not exceed 10.0% of the issued and outstanding Shares; and
6
(e)
the aggregate value of all DSUs (calculated as of the date of grant) granted pursuant to this Plan 
to any non-management director cannot exceed $150,000 in any 12 month period (excluding any 
DSU's granted in a one time initial grant to a non-management director upon appointment to the 
Board provided  the  value  of  the  DSU's  granted  in  any  such  initial  grant  is  not  in  excess  of 
$150,000).
For the purposes of this Section 4.4, any increase in the issued and outstanding Shares (whether as a result 
of the issue of Shares pursuant to DSUs or otherwise) will result in an increase in the number of Shares 
that may be issued pursuant to DSUs outstanding at any time and any increase in the number of DSUs
granted  will,  upon  the  issue  of  Shares  pursuant  thereto,  make  new  grants  available  under  this  Plan.
Further, if the acquisition of Shares by the Corporation for cancellation should result in the foregoing tests 
no  longer  being  met,  this  shall  not  constitute  non-compliance  with  this  Section  4.4  for  any  awards 
outstanding prior to such purchase of Shares for cancellation.
DSUs that are cancelled, terminated or expire shall result in the Shares that were reserved for issuance 
thereunder  being  available  for  a  subsequent  grant  of  DSUs  pursuant  to  this  Plan  to  the  extent  of  any 
Shares issuable thereunder that are not issued under such cancelled, terminated or expired DSUs.
4.5
Reporting of Deferred Share Units
Statements of the Deferred Share Unit Accounts will be provided to Participants on an annual basis.
4.6
Distribution Date Election
A Participant shall have the right to receive, at the election of the Corporation, either a Cash Payment or 
Payment Shares in respect of Deferred Share Units recorded in the Participant's Account in accordance 
with Sections 4.7 or 4.8, on one of the following dates (the "Distribution Date"):
(a)
(b)
4.7
the Separation Date; or
such  later  date  as  the  Participant  may  elect  by  written  notice  delivered  to  the  Chief  Financial 
Officer  of  the  Corporation prior  to  the  Separation  Date,  provided  that  in  no  event  shall  a 
Participant  be  permitted  to  elect  a  date  which  is  later  than  December  1  of  the  calendar  year 
following the calendar year in which the Separation Date occurs.
Distribution of Deferred Share Units as Cash Payment
In the event the Corporation elects to pay and distribute a Cash Payment:
(a)
subject to and in accordance with Section 4.7(b), a Participant shall receive a payment equal in 
value  to  the  number  of  Deferred  Share  Units recorded  in  the  Participant's  Account  on  the 
Distribution Date multiplied by the Distribution Value of a Share on the Distribution Date (the 
"Cash Payment"). The Corporation is authorized to deduct from the Cash Payment an amount 
equivalent to the minimum amount of taxes and other minimum amounts as the Corporation may 
be  required  by  law  to  withhold,  as  the  Corporation determines  (the "Applicable  Withholding 
Amounts"). Upon payment in full of the value of the Deferred Share Units, less the Applicable 
Withholding Amounts, the Deferred Share Units shall be cancelled and no further payments shall 
be made to the Participant under the Plan; and
7
(b)
4.8
the Cash Payment less any Applicable Withholding Amounts, will be paid to the Participant in 
cash within ten (10) business days after the Distribution Date, or in the event of the Participant's 
death, his beneficiary or legal representative in accordance with Section 4.9 herein.
Distribution of Deferred Share Units in Payment Shares
In the event the Corporation elects to pay and issue Payment Shares:
(a)
The Corporation shall within 10 business days after the Distribution Date:
(i)
(ii)
issue  to  the  Participant  a  number  of  treasury  Shares  equal  to  the  number  of  Deferred 
Share Units in the Participant's Account that became payable on the Distribution Date; or
pay  to  a  broker  designated  by  the  Committee  the  Cash  Payment  less  Applicable 
Withholding Amounts, and the broker shall, as soon as practicable thereafter use all of 
the cash to purchase Shares on a securities exchange on which the Shares are listed and 
traded  (the  "Payment  Shares").  The  broker  shall  deliver  to  the  Participant  the  Shares 
purchased as soon as practicable.
Subject to Section 4.12 of this Plan, as a condition to the issue of treasury Shares in settlement of 
any  Deferred Share Units,  the  Corporation may  require  the  Participant  to  first  pay  to  the 
Corporation, or the Corporation may deduct, an amount equivalent to the Applicable Withholding 
Amounts  or  the  Corporation may  take  such  other  steps  as  it  considers  to  be  necessary  or 
appropriate, including the sale of Payment Shares on behalf of the Participant, in order to provide 
to  the  Corporation the  Applicable  Withholding  Amounts.  The  Corporation  shall  advise  the 
Participant in writing of any Applicable Withholding Amounts required in connection with the 
issue of Shares in settlement of Deferred Share Units.
The Corporation shall not be required to issue or cause to be delivered treasury Shares or issue or 
cause to be delivered certificates evidencing Shares to be delivered in settlement of any DSUs, 
nor shall it be required to pay any cash to a broker as described in Section 4.8(a)(ii) above unless 
and until such issuance and delivery can be completed in compliance with the applicable laws, 
regulations, rules,  orders of  governmental  or  regulatory  authorities and the requirements  of  all 
applicable stock exchanges upon which Shares are listed. The Corporation shall be obligated to 
take all reasonable action, on a timely basis, to comply with any such laws, regulations, rules, 
orders, or requirements.
If  Shares  may  not  be  issued  pursuant  to  any  DSUs  due  to  any  Black  Out  Period,  such  Share 
issuance  shall  occur  seven  business  days  following  the  end  of  the  Black-Out  Period  (or  such 
longer period as permitted by applicable regulatory authorities and approved by the Committee).
Death of Participant Prior to Distribution
(b)
(c)
(d)
4.9
Upon  the  death  of  a  Participant  prior  to  the  distribution  of  the  Deferred  Share  Units  credited  to  the 
Account of  such  Participant  under  the  Plan,  a  Cash  Payment  shall  be  made  to  the  estate  of  such 
Participant  on  or  about  the  thirtieth  (30th)  day  after  the  Corporation is  notified  of  the  death  of  the 
Participant or on a later date elected by the Participant's estate in the form prescribed for such purposes by 
the Corporation and delivered to the Chief Financial Officer of the Corporation not later than twenty (20) 
days after the Corporation is notified of the death of the Participant, provided that such elected date is no 
later than the last business day of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the Participant 
dies  so  that  payment  can  be  made  on  or  before  such  last  business  day.  Such  Cash  Payment  shall  be
8
equivalent to the amount which would have been paid to the Participant pursuant to and subject to Section 
4.7, calculated on the basis that the day on which the Participant dies, or the date elected by the estate, as 
applicable, is the Distribution Date. Upon payment in full of the value of all of the Deferred Share Units 
that  become payable  under  this  Section 4.9,  less  any  Applicable  Withholding  Amounts,  the  Deferred 
Share  Units  shall  be  cancelled  and  no  further  payments  will  be  made  from  the  Plan in  relation  to  the 
Participant.
4.10
Adjustments to Deferred Share Units
In  the  event:  (a)  of  any  change  in  the  Shares  through  subdivision,  consolidation,  reclassification, 
amalgamation,  merger  or  otherwise;  or  (b)  that  any  rights  are  granted  to  all  or  substantially  all 
shareholders to purchase Shares at prices substantially below Fair Market Value as of the date of grant 
(other than the payment of dividends in respect of the Shares as contemplated by Section 4.3); or (c) that, 
as a result of any recapitalization, merger, consolidation or other transaction, the Shares are converted into 
or exchangeable for any other securities or property, then the Board may make such adjustments to this 
Plan, the Account of each Participant, the DSU Agreements and the Deferred Share Units outstanding 
under  this  Plan  as  the  Board  may,  in  its  sole  discretion,  consider  appropriate  in  the  circumstances  to 
prevent dilution or enlargement of the rights granted to Participants hereunder and\or to provide for the 
Participants to receive and accept such other securities or property in lieu of Shares, and the Participants 
shall be bound by any such determination.
4.11
U.S. Taxpayers
The rules set forth in Schedule A to this Plan apply to any Participant who is a U.S. Taxpayer (as defined 
therein) and form a part of this Plan.
4.12
(a)
(b)
Taxes
A Participant shall be solely responsible for reporting and paying income tax payable in respect 
of  the  Shares  received  by  the  Participant  under  this  Plan.  The  Corporation  will  provide  each 
Participant who is resident in Canada with (or cause each Participant to be provided with) a T4 
slip or such information return as may be required by applicable law to report income, if any, 
arising  upon the grant or exercise of rights under this Plan by a Participant who is resident in 
Canada for income tax purposes.
Further to Section 4.8(b) of this Plan, the Corporation shall have the power and the right to deduct 
or withhold, or require (as a condition of exercise) a Participant to remit to the Corporation, the
Applicable  Withholding  Amounts  to  satisfy,  in  whole  or  in  part,  federal,  provincial,  and  local 
taxes,  domestic  or  foreign,  required  by  law  to  be  withheld  with  respect  to  any  taxable  event 
arising as a result of this Plan, including the grant or exercise of Deferred Share Units granted 
under this Plan.  With respect to Applicable Withholding Amounts, the Corporation shall have the 
irrevocable  right  to  (and  the  Participant  consents  to  the  Corporation)  setting  off  any  amounts 
required to be withheld, in whole or in part, against amounts otherwise owing by the Corporation 
to  such  Participant  (whether  arising  pursuant  to  the  Participant  relationship  as  an  officer  or 
employee of the Corporation or as a result of the Participant providing services on an ongoing 
basis to the Corporation or otherwise), or may make such other arrangements as are satisfactory 
to  the  Participant  and  the  Corporation.
In  addition,  the  Corporation  may  elect,  in  its  sole 
discretion, to satisfy the Applicable Withholding Amounts, in whole or in part, by withholding 
such number of Payment Shares as it determines are required to be sold by the Corporation, as 
trustee, to satisfy the Applicable Withholding Amounts net of selling costs (which costs shall be 
the responsibility of the Participant and which shall be and are authorized to be deducted from the
9
proceeds  of  sale).  The  Participant  consents  to  such  sale  and  grants  to  the  Corporation  an 
irrevocable power of attorney to effect the sale of such Payment Shares and acknowledges and 
agrees that the Corporation does not accept responsibility for the price obtained on the sale of 
such Payment Shares.  Any reference in this Plan to the issuance of Payment Shares or a payment 
of cash is expressly subject to this paragraph 4.12(b).
ARTICLE 5
GENERAL
Amendment, Suspension, or Termination of Plan
The Board may amend, suspend or discontinue this Plan or amend any DSU or DSU Agreement 
at  any  time  without  the  consent  of  a  Participant,  provided  that  such  amendment  shall  not 
adversely alter or impair the rights of any Participant in respect of any DSU previously granted to 
such Participant under the Plan, except as otherwise permitted hereunder.  In addition, the Board 
may,  by  resolution,  amend  this  Plan  and  any  DSU  granted  under it (together with  any  related 
DSU  Agreement)  without  shareholder  approval,  provided  however,  that  at  any  time  while  the 
Shares are listed for trading on the TSX, the Board will not be entitled to amend this Plan or any 
DSU  granted  under it (together  with  any  related  DSU  Agreement)  without shareholder  and,  if 
applicable, TSX approval: (i) to increase the maximum number of Shares issuable pursuant to this 
Plan; (ii) to extend the term of a DSU; (iii) to permit the assignment or transfer of a DSU other 
than as provided for in this Plan; (iv) to add to the categories of persons eligible to participate in 
this Plan; (v) to remove or amend Section 4.4(c), Section 4.4(d) or Section 4.4(e); (vii) to remove 
or  amend  this  Section  5.1(a);  or  (vii)  in  any  other  circumstances  where  TSX  and  shareholder 
approval is required by the TSX.
Without limitation of Section 5.1(a), the Board may correct any defect or supply any omission or 
reconcile any  inconsistency  in  this  Plan  in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent  deemed  necessary  or 
desirable, may establish, amend, and rescind any rules and regulations relating to this Plan, and 
may make such determinations as it deems necessary or desirable for the administration of this 
Plan.
If the Board terminates or suspends the Plan, previously credited DSUs may, at the Committee's 
election, be distributed to Participants or may remain outstanding and in effect in accordance with 
the  terms  of  the  Plan.  If  DSUs  remain  outstanding  after  Plan  termination  or  suspension,  such 
DSUs  shall  not  be  entitled  to  Dividend  Equivalents  unless  at  the  time  of  termination  or 
suspension  the  Committee  determines  that  the  entitlement  to  Dividend  Equivalents  after 
termination  or  during  suspension,  as  applicable,  should  be continued.  Subject to  the foregoing 
sentence,  if  the  Board  terminates  or  suspends  the  Plan,  no  new  Deferred  Share  Units  will  be 
credited to the Account of a Participant.
The  Board  shall  not  require  the  consent  of  any  affected  Participant  in  connection  with  a 
termination of the Plan in which Payment Shares are issued to the Participant in respect of all 
such Deferred Share Units.
The Plan will terminate on the date upon which no further DSUs remain outstanding.
Compliance with Laws
5.1
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
5.2
The administration of the Plan shall be subject to and made in conformity with all applicable laws and any 
applicable  regulations  of  a  duly  constituted  regulatory  authority.  Should  the  Committee,  in  its  sole
10
discretion, determine that it is not feasible or desirable to carry out a distribution of Deferred Share Units 
due to such laws or regulations, its obligation shall be satisfied by means of an equivalent cash payment 
(equivalence  being  determined  on  a  before-tax  basis).  If  the  Committee  determines  that  the  listing, 
registration or qualification of the Shares subject to this Plan upon any securities exchange or under any 
provincial, state, federal or other applicable law, or the consent or approval of any governmental body or 
stock exchange is necessary or desirable, as a condition of, or in connection with, the crediting of DSUs 
or the issue of Payment Shares hereunder, the Corporation shall be under no obligation to credit DSUs or 
issue  Payment  Shares  hereunder  unless  and  until  such  listing,  registration,  qualification,  consent  or 
approval shall have been effected or obtained free of any conditions not acceptable to the Committee.
5.3
Reorganization of the Corporation
The  existence  of  any  Deferred  Share  Units  shall  not  affect  in  any  way  the  right  or  power  of  the 
Corporation or its shareholders to make or authorize any adjustment, recapitalization, reorganization or 
other  change  in  the  Corporation's  capital  structure  or  its  business,  or  to  create  or  issue  any  bonds, 
debentures, shares or other securities of the Corporation or to amend or modify the rights and conditions 
attaching  thereto  or  to  effect  the  dissolution  or  liquidation  of  the  Corporation,  or  any  amalgamation, 
combination, merger or consolidation involving the Corporation or any sale or transfer of all or any part 
of  its  assets  or  business,  or  any  other  corporate  act  or  proceeding,  whether  of  a  similar  nature  or 
otherwise.
5.4
Assignment
Rights and obligations under the Plan may be assigned by the Corporation to a successor in the business 
of the Corporation, any company resulting from any amalgamation, reorganization, combination, merger 
or  arrangement  of  the  Corporation,  or  any  company  acquiring  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  assets  or 
business of the Corporation.
5.5
DSUs Non-Transferable
Except  as  required  by  law,  the  rights  of  a  Participant  hereunder  are  not  capable  of  being  assigned, 
transferred,  alienated,  sold,  encumbered,  pledged,  mortgaged  or  charged  and  are  not  capable  of  being 
subject to attachment or legal process for the payment of any debts or obligations of the Participant.
5.6
Participation is Voluntary; No Additional Rights
The participation of any Participant in the Plan is entirely voluntary and not obligatory and shall not be 
interpreted  as  conferring  upon  such  Participant  any  rights  or  privileges  other  than  those  rights  and 
privileges  expressly  provided  in  the  Plan.  In  particular,  participation  in  the  Plan  does  not  constitute  a 
condition  of  employment  or  service  nor  a  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  Corporation to  ensure  the 
continued employment or service of such Participant. Nothing in this Plan shall be construed to provide 
the  Participant  with  any  rights  whatsoever  to  participate  or  continue  participation  in  this  Plan  or  to 
compensation  or  damages  in  lieu  of  participation,  whether  upon  termination  of  service  as  an  Eligible 
Director or otherwise. The Corporation does not assume responsibility for the personal income or other 
tax consequences for the Participants and they are advised to consult with their own tax advisors.
5.7
No Shareholder Rights
Under  no  circumstances  shall  Deferred  Share  Units  be  considered  Shares  or  other  securities  of  the 
Corporation, nor shall they entitle any Participant to exercise voting rights or any other rights attaching to
11
the ownership of Shares or other securities of the Corporation, nor shall any Participant be considered the 
owner of Shares by virtue of the award of Deferred Share Units.
5.8
Unfunded and Unsecured Plan
Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Plan shall be unfunded and the Corporation will not secure 
its obligations under the Plan. To the extent any Participant or his or her estate holds any rights by virtue 
of a grant of Deferred Share Units under the Plan, such rights (unless otherwise determined by the Board) 
shall be no greater than the rights of an unsecured creditor of the Corporation.
5.9
Market Fluctuations
No amount will be paid to, or in respect of, a Participant under the Plan to compensate for a downward 
fluctuation in the price of Shares, nor will any other form of benefit be conferred upon, or in respect of, a 
Participant for such purpose. The Corporation makes no representations or warranties to Participants with 
respect to the Plan or the Shares whatsoever. In seeking the benefits of participation a Participant agrees 
to accept all risks associated with a decline in the market price of Shares.
5.10
Participant Information
Each  Participant  shall  provide  the  Corporation with  all  information  (including  personal  information) 
required  by  the  Corporation in  order  to  administer  the  Plan.  Each  Participant  acknowledges  that 
information required by the Corporation in order to administer the Plan may be disclosed to the Board and 
other third parties in connection with the administration of the Plan. Each Participant consents to such 
disclosure and authorizes the Corporation to make such disclosure on the Participant's behalf.
5.11
DSU Agreement
To  acquire  DSUs,  a  Participant  shall  enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  Corporation  in  such  form  as 
determined by the Board from time to time (the "DSU Agreement"), within such time period and in such 
manner as specified by the Board. If a DSU Agreement is not entered into within the time and manner 
specified, the Corporation reserves the right to revoke the crediting of DSUs to the Participant's Account.
5.12
Indemnification
Every director of the Corporation will at all times be indemnified and saved harmless by the Corporation
from and against all costs, charges and expenses whatsoever including any income tax liability arising 
from any such indemnification, that such director may sustain or incur by reason of any action, suit or 
proceeding, taken or threatened against the director, otherwise than by the Corporation, for or in respect 
of any act done or omitted by the director in respect of this Plan, such costs, charges and expenses to 
include  any  amount  paid  to  settle  such  action,  suit  or  proceeding  or  in  satisfaction  of  any  judgment 
rendered therein.
5.13
Currency
All amounts paid or values to be determined under this Plan shall be in Canadian dollars.
5.14
Effective Date of the Plan
This Plan becomes effective on a date to be determined by the Board.
12
5.15
Governing Law
The Plan shall be governed by, and interpreted in accordance with, the laws of the Province of Alberta 
and the laws of Canada applicable therein, without regard to principles of conflict of laws.
APPROVED by the Board this 1st day of April, 2015.
SCHEDULE A
PLAN PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO U.S. TAXPAYERS
The provisions of this Schedule "A" apply to Deferred Share Units held by a U.S. Taxpayer to the extent 
such Deferred Share Units are subject to U.S. Taxation. The following provisions apply, notwithstanding 
anything  to  the  contrary  in  the  Plan.  All  capitalized  terms  used  in  this  Schedule  "A"  and  not  defined 
herein, shall have the meaning attributed to them in the Plan.
"Section 409A" means Section 409A of the United States Internal Revenue Code and the regulations and 
authority promulgated thereunder.
"Separation Date" shall mean the date on which the Participant incurs a "separation from service" within 
the meaning of Section 409A.
"U.S. Taxpayer" shall mean any person who is a U.S. citizen, U.S. permanent resident, or other person 
who has been granted or is eligible to be granted a Deferred Share Unit under the Plan that is otherwise 
subject to U.S. taxation.
1.
2.
3.
Notwithstanding Section 3.4 of the Plan, each election by a U.S. Taxpayer not to participate in the 
Plan or to decline participation for a particular year, must be irrevocably made not later than the 
end  of  the  calendar  year  prior  to  the  year  for  which  the  Deferred  Share  Units  are  granted.
Notwithstanding the prior sentence, for U.S. Taxpayers who become Eligible Directors for the 
first  time  in  any  calendar  year,  an election  pursuant  to  Section  3.4 may  be  made  at  any  time 
within 30 days after an initial grant of DSUs is made to such Eligible Director. Such election shall 
only be effective with respect to DSU grants made after the written notice described in Section 
3.4 has been received by the Corporate Secretary or of the Corporation.
Notwithstanding Section 4.6 of the Plan, the following procedure shall be used to determine a 
Distribution Date for Deferred Share Units that are subject to this Schedule A.
(a)
(b)
An Eligible Director who is a U.S. Taxpayer shall have the right to elect, at his or her 
option, to receive the distribution of all amounts credited to his or her Deferred Share 
Unit Account on any date (the "Distribution Date") within the period commencing on 
his  or  her  Separation  Date,  and  ending  on  December  1,  of  the  first  calendar  year 
following the year in which the Separation Date occurs. Such election shall be made by 
written notice delivered to the general counsel of the Corporation within 30 days of the  
grant of DSUs under Section 4.1 of the Plan. If no election is made, the Distribution Date 
shall be the first business day following January 1 of the calendar year that follows the 
year in which the Separation Date occurs, subject to clause (b) below.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  if  any  U.S.  Taxpayer  is  determined  to  be  a 
"specified  employee"  (as  determined  under  Section  409A,  in  accordance  with  the 
Corporation's  policies)  at  the  Separation  Date,  then  the  Distribution  Date  shall  not  be 
earlier than the date that is six (6) months following his or her Separation Date.
Notwithstanding Section 4.9 of the Plan or any election by the Participant of a Distribution Date,
upon the death of a Participant prior to the distribution of his or her Deferred Share Unit Account,
a cash payment shall be made to the estate of such Participant on the first business day that occurs
following 90 days after the Participant’s date of death. No election of an alternative payment date 
by the estate or beneficiary shall be permitted.
4.
Miscellaneous.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan, no consent to an amendment, suspension or 
termination that adversely affects the Deferred Share Units previously granted to a U.S. Taxpayer 
under Section 409A shall be required if such amendments are considered by the Committee, on 
the  advice  of  counsel,  to  be  necessary  or  desirable  in  order to  avoid  adverse  U.S.  tax 
consequences to the U.S. Taxpayer.
No  provision  of  the  Plan  or  amendment  to  the  Plan  may  permit  the  acceleration  of  payments 
under the Plan to U.S. Taxpayers contrary to the provisions of Section 409A.
In the event of a termination of the Plan, no payments to U.S. Taxpayers shall be made, except on 
the schedule permitted by Section 409A.
All provisions of the Plan shall continue to apply to the U.S. Taxpayer to the extent they have not 
been specifically modified by this Schedule "A".
In regard to a U.S. Taxpayer, the Committee 
shall interpret all Plan provisions in a manner that does not cause a violation of Section 409A.
5.
Restrictions on Deferred Share Units of Certain Dual Taxpayers. This Section 6 shall only apply 
in respect of Deferred Share Units of a U.S. Taxpayer if, at the time a payment in respect of the 
DSUs is required to be made under the Plan, the U.S. Taxpayer would be liable to tax in respect 
of such payment, if made as otherwise provided, under the Income Tax Act (Canada) and the 
Income Tax Regulations made thereunder (including Regulation Section 6801(d))(in this Section 
6 referred to as the "Canadian Tax Rules").
(a)
If a payment in respect of DSUs of a U.S. Taxpayer is otherwise required to be made at 
any time, but for this Section 6 and such payment would, if made, comply with Section 
409A  but  would  violate  the  Canadian  Tax  Rules,  then,  notwithstanding  any  other 
provision of the Plan and this Schedule A, unless the Committee determines that payment 
in  respect  of  the  DSUs  can  be  made  in  some  other  manner  and  at  such  other  time  in
compliance with Section 409A without violating the Canadian Tax Rules, such payment 
shall be made to a trustee to be held in trust for the benefit of the U.S. Taxpayer in a 
manner that causes the payment to be included in the U.S. Taxpayer's income under the 
Code and does not violate the Canadian Tax Rules, and amounts shall thereafter be paid 
out of the trust for the benefit of the U.S. Taxpayer at such time and in such manner as 
complies with the requirements of the Canadian Tax Rules.
APPENDIX C
BLACKLINED AMENDED RIGHTS PLAN
SHAREHOLDER PROTECTION RIGHTS PLAN AGREEMENT
MADE AS OF
September 29, 2009
AND AMENDED AND RESTATED AS OF
MAY 12, 2015
,,
BETWEEN
PAREX RESOURCES INC.
AND
VALIANT TRUST COMPANY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 INTERPRETATION
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
ARTICLE 2 THE RIGHTS
Persons Deemed Owners
Delivery and Cancellation of Certificates
12
12
Certain Definitions
1213
Currencyy
1213
Headings
1213
References to Agreementt
Grandfathered Person
13
Calculation of Number and Percentage of Beneficial Ownership of Outstanding Voting Shares
1314
Acting Jointly or in Concertt
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
Legend on Common Share Certificates
Initial Exercise Price; Exercise of Rights; Detachment of Rights
Adjustments to Exercise Price; Number of Rights
Date on Which Exercise is Effective
Execution, Authentication, Delivery and Dating of Rights Certificates
Registration, Registration of Transfer and Exchange
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7 Mutilated, Destroyed, Lost and Stolen Rights Certificates
2.8
2.9
2.10 Agreement of Rights Holders
2.11 Rights Certificate Holder not Deemed a Shareholderr
14
14
1415
1415
15
1718
2122
22
22
23
2324
2324
24
2425
ARTICLE 3 ADJUSTMENTS TO THE RIGHTS IN THE EVENT OF CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS 25
25
26
2627
2627
27
28
29
30
30
31
3132
3132
33
33
3334
3334
34
35
35
3536
3536
3536
3536
36
4.1
4.2 Merger or Amalgamation or Change of Name of Rights Agentt
4.3
4.4
Duties of Rights Agentt
Change of Rights Agentt
ARTICLE 5 MISCELLANEOUS
Redemption and Waiverr
Expirationn
Issuance of New Rights Certificates
Supplements and Amendments
Fractional Rights and Fractional Shares
Rights of Actionn
Regulatory Approvals
Unlawful Distributions
Notices
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5.10 Costs of Enforcementt
5.11
5.12 Benefits of this Agreementt
5.13 Governing Laww
Severabilityy
5.14
5.15
Effective Date
5.16 Reconfirmationn
Successors
3.1
3.2
Flip-in Eventt
Fiduciary Duties of the Board of Directors of the Corporation
ARTICLE 4 THE RIGHTS AGENT
General
- ii -
5.17 Determinations and Actions by the Board of Directors
5.18
5.19
5.20
Time of the Essence
Execution in Counterparts
Language
36
3637
3637
37
EXHIBIT A
Form of Rights Certificate
THIS SHAREHOLDER PROTECTION RIGHTS AGREEMENT made as of September 29, 2009.2009
and amended and restated as of May 12, 2015.
y
y
,
,
BETWEEN:
AND
PAREX  RESOURCES  INC.,  a  corporation 
incorporated  under
Business  Corporation  Act  (Alberta)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
"Corporation")
OF THE FIRST PART
VALIANT TRUST COMPANY, a trust company continued under the
laws  of  Canada  and  registered  to  carry on business in the Province of
Alberta (hereinafter referred to as the "Rights Agent")
OF THE SECOND PART
WHEREAS  the Board  of  Directors  has  determined  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the
 Agentgg
 entered into a shareholder protection
 29,,, 2009 respecting
 planpp
g
p
p
g agg  shareholder protection
 the shareholders
gg
 "Original
 Plan"))) that was effective until the termination of the annual meetinggg ofgg
Corporation and all of its shareholders to adoptthe Rightsgg
rights plan; agreement
(the((
of the Corporation to be held in 2012.
made as of September
rightsgg
gg
pp
pp
pp
AND WHEREAS the Original
gg
Plan was reconfirmed byyy the
yyyy
the  annual  meetinggg  ofgg
termination of the annual meeting of the Shareholders of the Corporation to be held in 2015.
the  shareholders  of  the  Corporation
g
g
pp
p
p
shareholders of the Corporation
at
  held  in  2012  and  was  effective  until  the
pp
p
p
AND WHEREAS the Board of Directors (as((
hereinafter defined),),), in the exercise of its fiduciaryyyyyyy
, has determined that it is advisable and in the best interests of the Corporation
duties to the Corporation,
,
 byyy adopting
to continue to have a shareholder protection
yy
g
yy
 amended and
g angg
 Plan"))) to take effect on the
 planpp
restated shareholder protection
approval
pppp
  hereinafter  defined)))  at  the  Shareholders'  Meetinggg  (as
  Independent
hereinafter defined),),), to ensure,,, to the extent possible,
,
, that all Shareholders of the Corporation
 are treated
equally
y
q
q
yyyy
y and
,
 offer or bid for the Corporation,
, and to ensure that the
 with sufficient time to evaluate unsolicited take-over bids and to explore
Board of Directors is provided
and develop alternatives to maximize Shareholder value.
for the Corporation
pp
 "Rightsgg
 herein (the((
pp
 rightsgg
  Shareholders  (as((
connection with anyyy take-over
rightsgg
 planpp
 as provided
fairlyyy inyyyy
byyy  the
pp
pp
g (g (
yyyy
yyyy
p
p
pp
pp
pp
pp
pp
p
p
p
p
pp
AND  WHEREAS  in  order  to implement  the  adoption  of  a  shareholder  protection  rights
,
plancontinue the Rights Plan, as amended and restated herein,
, the Board of Directors has:
g
g
,
,
(a)
(b)
authorized(a)( )( )
effective  at  the  Record  Time  (as((
hereinafter defined))) outstanding at the Record Time; and
confirmed  the  issuance and  distribution of  one  Right (as((
hereinafter  defined)))
  hereinafter  defined))) in  respect  of  each  Common  Share  (as((
authorized(b)( )( )
after the Record Time and prior to the earlier of the Separation Time (as((
the Expiration Time; (as hereinafter defined); and
confirmed  the  issuance of one Right in respect of each Common Share issued
 hereinafter defined))) and
);
);
(
(
-  2 -
(c)( )( )
confirmed  the  issuance  of  Rightsgg
pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth herein.
p
p
Certificates  (as((
j
j
hereinafter  defined)))  to  holders  of  Rightsgg
AND WHEREAS each Right entitles the holder thereof, after the Separation Time, to purchase
securities or other assets of the Corporation pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth
herein;.
AND  WHEREAS  the  Corporation  desires  to appointconfirm  the  appointment
of  the  Rights
Agent to continue to act on behalf of the Corporation and the holders of Rights, and the Rights Agent is
willing  to  so  act,  in  connection  with  the  issuance,  transfer,  exchange  and  replacement  of  Rights
Certificates, the exercise of Rights and other matters referred to herein;.
pppp
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing
g
g premises and the respective covenants
g
g
and agreements set forth herein, the parties hereby agree as follows:
ARTICLE 1
INTERPRETATION
1.1
Certain Definitions
In this agreement, as amended or supplemented from time to time (the "Agreement"):
(a)
"Acquiring Person" means, subject to Section 1.5, any Person who is the Beneficial Owner of
20%  or  more  of  the  outstanding  Voting  Shares;  provided,  however,  that  the  term  "Acquiring
Person" shall not include:
(i)
(ii)
the Corporation or any Subsidiary of the Corporation;
any Person who becomes the Beneficial Owner of 20% or more of the outstanding
Voting  Shares  as  a  result  of  any  one  or  any  combination  of:  (A)  Voting  Share
Reductions; (B) Permitted Bid Acquisitions; (C) Exempt Acquisitions; or (D) Pro Rata
Acquisitions;  provided  that  if  a  Person  shall  become  the  Beneficial  Owner  of 20% or
more  of  the  outstanding  Voting  Shares  by  reason  of  any  one  or  any  combination  of
Voting Share Reductions, Permitted Bid Acquisitions, Exempt Acquisitions or Pro Rata
Acquisitions,  if  thereafter,  such  Person,  while such Person is the Beneficial Owner of
20%  or  more  of  the  outstanding  Voting  Shares,  becomes  the  Beneficial  Owner  of
additional  Voting  Shares  which  result  in  an  increase  of  such  Person's  Beneficial
Ownership  of  Voting  Shares  by  more  than  1%  of  the  number  of  such  Voting  Shares
outstanding as at the time of acquisition (other than pursuant to one or any combination
of  Voting  Share  Reduction,  Permitted  Bid  Acquisitions,  Exempt  Acquisitions  or  Pro
Rata Acquisitions), then, as of the date such Person becomes the Beneficial Owner of
such additional outstanding Voting Shares, such Person shall be an "Acquiring Person";
or
(iii)
an underwriter or members of a banking or selling group that becomes the Beneficial
Owner  of  20%  or  more  of  the  outstanding  Voting  Shares  in  connection  with  a
distribution of securities pursuant to a prospectus or by way of private placement;
(b)
"Affiliate", when used to indicate a relationship with a specified Person, means a Person that,
directly or indirectly (including through one or more intermediaries), controls, is controlled by or
is under common control with, such specified Person;
-  3 -
(c)
"Associate", when used to indicate a relationship with a specified Person, means:
(i)
(ii)
a spouse of such specified Person or any Person of the same or opposite sex with whom
such specified Person is living in a conjugal relationship outside marriage or a child of
such specified Person; and
any relative of such specified Person or of a spouse or other Person mentioned in
subparagraph 1.1(c)(i), if that relative has the same residence as such specified Person;
(d)
A Person shall be deemed the "Beneficial Owner" of, and to have "Beneficial Ownership" of,
and to "Beneficially Own":
(i)
(ii)
any securities as to which such Person, or any of such Person's Affiliates or Associates is
the direct or indirect owner at law or in equity;
any securities as to which such Person or any of such Person's Affiliates or Associates
has  the  right  to  become  the  owner  at  law  or  equity  (where  such  rightgg   is  exerciseable
within 60 days of the date of determination of Beneficial Ownership and whether or not
on  condition  or  the  occurrence  of  any  contingency)  pursuant  to  any  agreement,
arrangement, pledge or understanding (whether or not in writing) (other than customary
agreements with and between underwriters and banking group or selling group members
with respect to a distribution of securities pursuant to a prospectus or by way of private
placement and other than pledges of securities in the ordinary course of business); and
(iii)
any securities which are Beneficially Owned within the meaning of subparagraphs (i) or
(ii)  of  this  definition  by  any  other  Person  with  which  such  Person,,,  or  anyyy  ofyyyy
  such
Person's Affiliates,,, is acting jointly or in concert;
provided,  however,  that  a  Person  shall  not  be  deemed  the  "Beneficial  Owner"  or  to  have
"Beneficial Ownership" of, or to "Beneficially Own", any security:
(iv)
because either: (A) the holder of such security has agreed pursuant to a Permitted
Lock-up Agreement to deposit or tender such security to a Take-over Bid made by such
Person, any of such Person's Affiliates or Associates or any other Person referred to in
subparagraph (iii) of this definition;;; or (B) such security has been deposited or tendered
pursuant to any Take-over Bid made by such Person or by any of such Person's Affiliates
or Associates or any other Person referred to in subparagraph (iii) of this definition, in
either case until such deposited or tendered security has been unconditionally accepted
for payment or exchange or taken up and paid for, whichever shall first occur;
(v)
because such Person, any of such Person's Affiliates or Associates or any other Person
referred to in subparagraph (iii) of this definition holds such security provided that:
(A)
the ordinary business of such Person (the "Investment Manager") includes the
management of investment funds for others (which others, for greater certainty,
may include and be limited to one or more employee benefit plans or pension
plans) and such security is held in the ordinary course of such business in the
performance  of  the  duties  of  the  Investment  Manager  for  the  account  of  any
other Person (the "Client") includinggg non
 discretionaryyy accounts
 held on behalf
of a Client by a broker or dealer appropriately registered under applicable law;
pp
pp
;
;
gg
pp p
pp p
yyyy
y
y
y
y
g
g
-  4 -
(B)
(B)
(
)
(C)
(C)
(
)
(D)
(D)
(
)
(E)(E)( )
(F)(F)( )
( )
( )
g
g
gg
Fund Managergg ") of a mutual 
such Person is: (1) the manager or trustee (the "
(
(
fund (a((  "Mutual Fund"))) that is registered
qq
investors under the securities laws of anyyy province
y pyyy pyy
laws  of  the  United  States  and  such  securityyy  isyyyy
business  in  the  performance
Mutual Fund; or (2) a Mutual Fund
;
to issue its securities to
 of Canada or the securities
  of
  to  the
of  the  Fund  Manager'sgg
or qualified
held  in  the  ordinaryyy  course
yyyy
duties  with  respectpp
pp
( )
( )
;
;
))
(B) such Person (the "Trust Company") is licensed to carry on the business of a
trust company under applicable law and, as such, acts as trustee or administrator
or  in  a  similar  capacity  in  relation  to  the  estates  of  deceased  or  incompetent
Persons  (each  an  "Estate  Account")  or  in  relation  to  other  accounts  (each  an
"Other Account") and holds such security in the ordinary course of such duties
for  the  estate  of  any  such  deceased  or  incompetent  Person  or  for  such  other
accounts;
(C) such Person is a Crown agent or agency (in this definition, the "Crown
Agency");
(D) the Person is established by statute for purposes that include, and the
ordinary  business  or  activity  of  such  Person  (in  this  definition,  a  "Statutory
Body")  includes,  the  management  of  investment  funds  for  employee  benefit
plans, pension plans, insurance plans of various public bodies and the Statutory
Body holds such security for the purposes of its activities as such; or
(E) the person (in this definition, an "Administrator") is the administrator or
trustee of one or more pension funds or plans (each, in this definition, a "Plan")
registered under the laws of Canada or any province thereof or the corresponding
laws of the jurisdiction by which such Plan is governed or is such a Plan and the
Administrator  or  Plan  holds  such  security  for  the  purposes  of  its  activities  as
such;
g
g
but  only  if  the  Investment  Manager, the  Fund  Manager,g ,g ,  the  Mutual  Fund,,, the  Trust
y, the Statutory Body, the Administrator of thea Plan,
Company, the Crown AgentAgency
y
as the case may be, is not then making and has not announced a current intention to make
a  Take-over  Bid,  other  than  an  Offer  to  Acquire  Common  Shares  or  other  securities
pursuant to a distribution by the Corporation or by means of ordinary market transactions
(including  prearranged  trades  entered  into  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  of  such
Person)  executed  through  the  facilities  of  a  stock  exchange  or  an  organized
over-the-counter market, alone or by acting jointly or in concert with any other Person;
(vi)
because such Person:
(A)
(B)
(C)
is a Client of the same Investment Manager as another Person on whose account
the Investment Manager holds such security;
has an Estate Account or an Other Account with the same Trust Company as
another Person on whose account the Trust Company holds such security; or
is a Plan with the same Administrator as another Plan on whose account the
Administrator holds such security,
-  5 -
(vii)
because such Person:
(A)
(B)
(C)
is a Client of an Investment Manager and such security is owned at law or in
equity by the Investment Manager;
has an Estate Account or an Other Account with a Trust Company and such
security is owned at law or in equity by the Trust Company; or
is a Plan and such security is owned at law or in equity by the Administrator of
the Plan,
(viii)
because such Person is the registered holder of securities as a result of carrying on the
business of, or acting as nominee for, a securities depositary.
"Board of Directors" means the board of directors of the Corporation or any duly constituted
and empowered committee thereof;
p
p
(
(
pp
"Business Corporations Act 
)
(Alberta)
(
(
)" means Business Corporations Act (Alberta), as amended 
 made thereunder,,, as in effect on the date of this Agreement
from time to time,,, and the regulations
gg
or as the same mayyy beyyyy
 or successor laws or
regulations thereto;
;
;
amended,,, re enacted or replaced
),
),
gg
pp
byyy any
y
yy
y comparable
yy
yy
yy
p
p
g
g
(f) "Business Day" means any day other than a Saturday, Sunday or a day on which banking
institutions in Calgary, Alberta
are authorized or obligated by law to close;
y,y,
(g) "Canadian Dollar Equivalent" of any amount which is expressed in United States dollars
means, on any date, the Canadian dollar equivalent of such amount determined by multiplying
such amount by the U.S. - Canadian Exchange Rate on such date;
(h) "close of business" on any given date means the time on such date (or, if such date is not a
Business Day, the time on the next succeeding Business Day) at which the Calgary office of the
principal transfer agent for the Common Shares (or, after the Separation Time, the Calgary office
of the Rights Agent) is closed to the public;
(i) "Common Shares" means the common shares without nominal or par value in the capital of
the Corporation and any other shares in the capital of the Corporation into which such shares
may  be  subdivided,  consolidated,  reclassified  or  changed;  provided,  however,  that  "common
shares", when used with reference to any Person other than the Corporation, shall mean the class
or classes of shares (or similar equity interest) with the greatest per share voting power entitled to
vote generally in the election of all directors of such other Person;
(j) "Competing Permitted Bid" means a Take-over Bid made while another Permitted Bid is in
existence and that satisfies all of the provisions of a Permitted Bid except that the condition set
forth in subparagraph 1.1(eeff)(ii)(A)(I) may provide that the Voting Shares may be taken up or
paid for on a date which is not earlier than the later of 35 days after the date of the Take-over Bid
or  the  earliest  date  on  which  Voting  Shares  may  be  taken  up  or  paid  for  under  any  other
Permitted Bid that is then in existence for the Voting Shares;
(e)
(f)(f)( )
(g)(g)(g)
(h)(h)( )
(i)(i)( )
(j)(j)(j)
(k)(k)( )
(l)(l)( )
(k) "controlled" a corporation is "controlled" by another Person if:
-  6 -
(i)
(ii)
securities entitled to vote in the election of directors carrying more than 50 percent of the
votes for the election of directors are held, directly or indirectly, by or on behalf of the
other Person; and
the votes carried by such securities are entitled, if exercised, to elect a majority of the
board of directors of such corporation,
and "control", "controls" and "controlling" shall be interpreted accordingly;
(l) "Co-Rights Agent" has the meaning ascribed thereto in subparagraph 4.1(a);
(m) "Dividend Reinvestment Acquisition" means an acquisition of Voting Shares pursuant to a
Dividend Reinvestment Plan;
(n) "Dividend Reinvestment Plan" means a regular dividend reinvestment or other plan of the
Corporation  made  available  by  the  Corporation  to  holders  of  its  securities  where  such  plan
permits the holder to direct that some or all of:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
dividends paid in respect of shares of any class of the Corporation;
proceeds of redemption of shares of the Corporation;
interest paid on evidences of indebtedness of the Corporation; or
optional cash payments;
be applied to the purchase from the Corporation of Voting Shares;
(o) "Election to Exercise" has the meaning ascribed thereto in subparagraph 2.2(d);
(p) "Exempt Acquisition" means a share acquisition: (i) in respect of which the Board of
Directors has waived the application of Section 3.1 pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph
5.1(d) or 5.1(e),;;; (ii) which was made on or prior to the date of this Agreement,;;; or (iii) pursuant
to  an  amalgamation,  merger,  plan  of  arrangement  or  other  statutory  procedure  having  similar
effect  which  has  been  approved  by  the  holders  of  Voting  Shares  by  the  requisite  majority  or
majorities of the holders of Voting Shares at a meeting of such holders duly called and held for
such  purpose  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of Business  Corporations  Act  (Alberta),  the
by-laws of the Corporation and any other applicable legal requirements;
(q) "Exercise Price" means the price at which a holder may purchase the securities issuable upon
exercise of one whole Right and, until adjustment thereof in accordance with the terms hereof,
the Exercise Price shall be equal to Fifty ($50.00) dollars;
(r) "Expansion Factor" has the meaning ascribed thereto in subparagraph 2.3(a);
(s) "Expiration Time" means the earlier of:
(i)
(ii)
the Termination Time; or
the close of business on the first Business Day following the annual general meeting of
the shareholdersShareholders  of  the  Corporation  held  in 2009,2018,,,  unless  at  such
meeting shareholdersShareholders  have  reconfirmed  this  Agreement  for  an  additional
(m)
(m)
(
)
(n)(n)( )
(o)(o)( )
(p)(p)(p)
(q)(q)(q)
(r)(r)( )
(s)(s)( )
(t)(t)( )
-  7 -
period of time in which case "Expiration Time" shall mean the end of such additional
 Time" shall
period of time, and so on from time to time; provided
  Event  which  has  been
not  occur  if  a  Flip-inpp
waived  pursuant
  which  the  "Expiration
Time" would otherwise have occurred;;;
than  a  Flip-inpp
  to  the  date  uponpp
to  Section  5.1  hereof),),),  prior
Event  has  occurred  (other
pp
that the "Expiration
pp
pp
pp
((
pp
(u)(u)( )
(v)(v)( )
(w)
(w)
(
)
(x)(x)( )
(t) "Flip-in Event" means a transaction in or pursuant to which any Person becomes an
Acquiring Person;
(u) "holder" has the meaning ascribed thereto in Section 2.8;
(v) "Independent Shareholders" means holders of Voting Shares other than:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
any Acquiring Person;
any Offeror;
any Associate or Affiliate of any Acquiring Person or Offeror;
any Person acting jointly or in concert with any Acquiring Person or any Offeror; and
yyyy
similar plans
any employee benefit plan, deferred profit sharing plan, stock participation plan or trust, ,,
and anyyy other
 or trusts for the benefit of employees of the Corporation or
any Subsidiary of the Corporation but excluding in any event a plan or trust in respect of
which the employee directs the manner in which the Voting Shares are to be voted and
directs whether the Voting Shares be tendered to a Take-over Bid;
pp
(w) "Market Price" per share of any securities on any date of determination shall mean the
average of the daily closing prices per share of such securities (determined as described below)
on each of the 20 consecutive Trading Days through and including the Trading Day immediately
preceding such date; provided, however, that if an event of a type analogous to any of the events
described in Section 2.3 shall have caused the closing price in respect of any Trading Day used to
determine  the  Market  Price not to be fully comparable with the closing price on such date of
determination or, if the date of determination is not a Trading Day, on the immediately preceding
Trading  Day,  each  such  closing  price  so  used  shall  be  appropriately  adjusted  in  a  manner
analogous  to  the  applicable  adjustment  provided  for  in  Section  2.3  in  order  to  make  it  fully
comparable with the closing price on such date of determination or, if the date of determination
is not a Trading Day, on the immediately preceding Trading Day.  The closing price per share of
any securities on any date shall be:
(i)
(ii)
the closing board lot sale price or, if no such sale takes place on such date, the average of
the  closing  bid  and askedask  prices,  as  reported  by  the  principal  Canadian  stock
exchange on which such securities are listed or admitted to trading; or
if for any reason none of such prices is available on such day or the securities are not
listed  or admitted to trading on a Canadian stock exchange, the closing board lot sale
price  or,  if  no  such  sale  takes  place  on  such  date,  the  average  of  the  closing  bid  and
askedask prices, as reported by the principal national United States securities exchange
on which such securities are listed or admitted to trading; or
-  8 -
(iii)
(iv)
if for any reason none of such prices is available on such day or the securities are not
listed or admitted to trading on a Canadian stock exchange or a national United States
securities exchange, the last quoted price, or if not so quoted, the average of the high bid
and low askedask prices for each share of such securities in the over-the-counter market,
as reported by any reporting system then in use; or
if for any reason none of such prices is available on such day or the securities are not
listed or admitted to trading on a Canadian stock exchange or a national United States
securities exchange or quoted by any such reporting system, the average of the closing
bid and askedask prices as furnished by a professional market maker making a market in
the securities;
provided, however, that if for any reason none of such prices is available on any such date, the
closing price per share of such securities on such date shall mean the fair value per share of such
securities  on  such  date  as  determined  by  a  nationally  or  internationally  recognized  Canadian
investment dealer or investment banker with respect to the fair value per share of such securities.
The Market Price shall be expressed in Canadian dollars and, if initially determined in respect of
any day forming part of the 20 consecutive Trading Day period in United States dollars, such
amount shall be translated into Canadian dollars at the Canadian Dollar Equivalent thereof on the
relevant Trading Day;
(x) "1933 Securities Act" means the Securities Act of 1933 of the United States, as amended, and
the rules and regulations thereunder, as in effect on the date of this Agreement or as the same
may  be  amended,  re-enacted  or  replaced  by  any  comparable  or  successor  laws  or  regulations
thereto;
(y) "1934 Exchange Act" means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 of the United States, as
amended, and the rules and regulations thereunder, as in effect on the date of this Agreement or
as the same may be amended, re-enacted or replaced by any comparable or successor laws or
regulations thereto;
(z) "Nominee" has the meaning ascribed thereto in subparagraph 2.2(c);
(aa) "Offer to Acquire" shall include:
(i)
(ii)
an offer to purchase, or a solicitation of an offer to sell, Voting Shares, and
an acceptance of an offer to sell Voting Shares, whether or not such offer to sell has been
solicited,
or  any  combination  thereof,  and  the  Person  accepting  an  offer  to  sell  shall  be  deemed  to  be
making an Offer to Acquire to the Person that made the offer to sell;
(bb) "Offeror" means a Person who has announced an intention to make or who has made a
Take-over Bid (including a Permitted Bid or Competing Permitted Bid, but excluding an Offer to
Acquire  made  by  an  Investment  Manager, Fund  Manager,g ,g , Trust  Company,  Crown  Agency,
Statutory  Body,  Administrator  or  Plan  referred  to clausein  subparagraph
g p   1.1(d)(v)  of  the
g p
definition  of  Beneficial  Owner  pursuant  to  a  distribution  by  the  Corporation  or  by  means  of
ordinary market transactions (including pre-arranged trades entered into in the ordinary course of
business of such Person) in the circumstances contemplated in clausesubparagraph
g p
g p  1.1(d)(v)), but
p
p
p
p
(y)(y)(y)
(z)(z)( )
(aa)
(aa)
(
)
(bb)
(bb)
(
)
(cc)
(cc)
(
)
-  9 -
(dd)
(dd)
(
)
(ee)
(ee)
(
)
only so long as the Take-over Bid so announced or made has not been withdrawn or terminated
or has not expired;
(cc) "Offeror's Securities" means the Voting Shares Beneficially Owned by an Offeror on the
date of an Offer to Acquire;
(dd) "ordinary course dividends" means cash dividends paid in any fiscal year of the
Corporation to the extent that such cash dividends, in the aggregate, do not exceed the greatest
of:
(i)
(ii)
200% of the aggregate amount of cash dividends declared payable by the Corporation on
its Common Shares in its immediately preceding fiscal year;
300% of the arithmetic mean of the aggregate amounts of cash dividends declared
payable  by  the  Corporation  on  its  Common  Shares  in  its  three  immediately  preceding
fiscal years; and
(iii)
100% of the aggregate consolidated net income of the Corporation, before extraordinary
items, for its immediately preceding fiscal year;
(ff)
(ff)
(
)
(ee) "Permitted Bid" means a Take-over Bid made by an Offeror by way of a Take-over bid 
circularBid Circular which also complies with the following additional provisions:
(i)
(ii)
the Take-over Bid is made to all holders of record of Voting Shares wherever resident as
registered on the books of the Corporation, other than the Offeror;
the Take-over Bid contains, and the take up and payment for securities tendered or
deposited thereunder shall be subject to, an irrevocable and unqualified provision that:
(A)
no Voting Shares will be taken up or paid for pursuant to the Take-over Bid:
(I)
(II)
prior to the close of business on the 60th day following the date of the
Take-over Bid; and
if less than 50% of the Voting Shares held by Independent Shareholders
have been deposited pursuant to the Take-over Bid and not withdrawn;
(B)
(C)
Voting Shares may be deposited pursuant to such Take-over Bid at any time
during the period described in subparagraph (ii)(A)(I) of this definition and that
any Voting Shares deposited pursuant to the Take-over Bid may be withdrawn
until taken up and paid for; and
if the condition set forth in subparagraph (ii)(A)(II) of this definition is satisfied,
the Offeror will make a public announcement of that fact and the Take-over Bid
will remain open for deposits and tenders of Voting Shares for not less than ten
Business Days from the date of such public announcement;
provided  that  if  a  Take-over  Bid  constitutes  a  Competing  Permitted  Bid,  the  term  "Permitted
Bid" shall also mean the Competing Permitted Bid;
(gg)
(gg)
(gg)
(ff) "Permitted Bid Acquisition" means an acquisition made pursuant to a Permitted Bid or a
Competing Permitted Bid;
- 10 -
(hh)
(hh)
(
)
(gg) "Permitted Lock-up Agreement" means an agreement between an Offeror and another
Person (the "Locked-up Person") whereby the Locked-up Person agrees to deposit or tender the
Voting Shares held by the Locked-up Person to the Offeror's Take-over Bid that is a Permitted
Bid (the "Lock-up Bid") and the agreement:
(i)
(ii)
permits the Locked-up Person to withdraw the Voting Shares from the agreement in
order  to  tender  or  deposit  the  Voting  Shares  to  another  Take-over  Bid,  or  to  support
another transaction, that provides for a consideration for each Voting Share that is higher
than the consideration contained in or proposed to be contained in the Lock-up Bid and
is made for at least the same number of Voting Shares as the Lock-up Bid; or
(A) permits the Locked-up Person to withdraw the Voting Shares from the agreement in
order  to  tender  or  deposit  the  Voting  Shares  to  another  Take-over  Bid,  or  to  support
another transaction, that provides for a consideration for each Voting Share that exceeds
by  as  much  as  or  more  than  a  specified  amount  (the  "Specified  Amount")  the
consideration  for  each  Voting  Share  contained  in  or  proposed  to  be  contained  in  the
Lock-up Bid and is made for at least the same number of Voting Shares as the Lock-up
Bid;;; and (B) does not by its terms provide for a Specified Amount that is greater than 7%
of the consideration for each Voting Share contained in or proposed to be contained in
the Lock-up Bid;
and,  for  greater  certainty,  the Permitted Lock-up  Agreement  may:yy   (1)  contain  a  right  of  first
refusal  in  favour  of  the  Offeror;;;  or  (2)  require  a  period  of  delay  to  give  the  Offeror  an
opportunity  to  match  or  exceed  the  consideration  offered  in  another  Take-over  Bid  or
transaction;;; or (3) contain other similar limitations on a Locked-up Person's right to withdraw
Voting Shares from the Permitted Lock-up Agreement and not tender such Voting Shares to the
Lock-up Bid, so long as the limitation does not preclude the exercise by the Locked-up Person of
the right to withdraw Voting Shares in sufficient time to tender to the other Take-over Bid or
participate in the other transaction; and
(iii)
does not provide for the payment by the Locked-up Person, in the event that the
Locked-up  Person  fails  to  deposit  or  tender  Voting  Shares  to  the  Lock-up  Bid  or
withdraws the Voting Shares in order to tender to another Take-over Bid or participate in
another 
transaction,  of  any  "break-up"  fees,  "top-up"  fees,  penalties,  expense
reimbursement or other amounts that exceed in the aggregate the greater of:
(A)
(B)
the cash equivalent of 2.5% of the consideration that the Locked-up Person
would have received under the Lock-up Bid; and
50% of the amount by which the consideration payable to the Locked-up Person
under  another  Take-over  Bid  or  transaction  exceeds  the  consideration  such
Locked-up Person would have received under the Lock-up Bid; and
(iv)
is disclosed to the public, including the Corporation, by making copies thereof available
not later than the date on which the Lock-up Bid has been publicly announced (or, if the
Lock-up  Bid  has  been  publicly  announced  prior  to  the  date  on  which  the Permitted
Lock-up Agreement is entered into, not later than such date);
(ii)(ii)( )
(hh) "Person" shall include any individual, firm, partnership, association, trust, trustee, executor,
administrator,  legal  personal  representative,  body  corporate,  corporation,  unincorporated
organization, syndicate or other entity;
- 11 -
(jj)(jj)(jj)
(kk)
(kk)
(
)
(ll)(ll)( )
(mm)
(mm)
(
)
(nn)
(nn)
(
)
(oo)
(oo)
(
)
(pp)
(pp)
(pp)
(qq)
(qq)
(qq)
(rr)
(rr)
(
)
(ii) "Pro Rata Acquisition" means an acquisition by a Person of Beneficial Ownership of Voting
Shares as a result of:  a Dividend Reinvestment Acquisition; a stock dividend, a stock split or
other event pursuant to which a Person becomes Beneficial Owner of Voting Shares on the same
pro rata basis as all other holders of Voting Shares; the acquisition or exercise by such Person of
rights to purchase Voting Shares distributed to such Person in the course of a distribution to all
holders  of  Voting  Shares  pursuant  to  a  rights  offering  or  pursuant  to  a  prospectus;  or  a
distribution of Voting Shares or securities convertible into or exchangeable for Voting Shares
(and the conversion or exchange of such convertible or exchangeable securities), made pursuant
to a prospectus or a distribution by way of a private placement; provided that the Person does not
thereby  acquire  a  greater  percentage  of  such  Voting  Shares,  or  securities  convertible  into  or
exchangeable  for  Voting  Shares,  so  offered  than  the  Person's  percentage  of  Voting  Shares
Beneficially Owned immediately prior to such acquisition;
(jj) "Record Time" means 5:00 p.m. (Calgary time) on September 29, 2009;
(kk) "Redemption Price" has the meaning ascribed thereto in subparagraph 5.1(a);
(ll) "Right" means a right to purchase one Common Share, upon the terms and subject to the
conditions set forth in this Agreement;
(mm) "Rights Certificate" has the meaning ascribed thereto in subparagraph 2.2(c) and shall be
in substantially the form of Exhibit A to this Agreement;
(nn) "Rights Register" has the meaning ascribed thereto in subparagraph 2.6(a);
(oo) "Securities Act (Alberta)" shall mean the Securities Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. S-4, as amended,
and the regulations thereunder, as in effect on the date of this Agreement or as the same may be
amended, re-enacted or replaced by any comparable or successor laws or regulations thereto;
(pp) "Securities Act (Ontario)" shall mean the Securities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.5, as amended,
and the regulations thereunder, as in effect on the date of this Agreement or as the same may be
amended, re-enacted or replaced by any comparable or successor laws or regulations thereto;
(qq) "Separation Time" means the close of business on the tenth Trading Day after the earlier
of:
(i)
(ii)
the Stock Acquisition Date; and
the date of the commencement of or first public announcement of the intent of any
Person (other than the Corporation or any Subsidiary of the Corporation) to commence a
Take-over Bid (other than a Permitted Bid or Competing Permitted Bid);
or such later time as may be determined by the Board of Directors, provided that:
(A)
if any Take-over Bid referred to in subparagraph (ii) of this definition expires, or
is  cancelled,  terminated  or  otherwise  withdrawn  prior  to  the  Separation  Time,
such Take-over Bid shall be deemed, for the purposes of this definition, never to
have been made; and
- 12 -
(B)
if the Board of Directors determines pursuant to subparagraph 5.1(d) or (e) to
waive the application of Section 3.1 to a Flip-in Event, the Separation Time in
respect of such Flip-in Event shall be deemed never to have occurred;
"Shareholder" means a holder of Voting Shares;
;
;
g
g
"Shareholders' Meetinggg" means the annual and special meeting of Shareholders to be held on or 
g
g
about May 12, 2015, or any adjournment or adjournments thereof;
;
;
g
g
y
y
y
y
j
j
,
,
,
,
p
p
j
j
(rr) "Stock Acquisition Date" means the first date of public announcement (which, for purposes
of this definition, shall include, without limitation, a report filed pursuant to the provisions of
Section 5.2 of Multi-lateralMultilateral Instrument 62-104,104 – Take-Over Bids and Issuer Bids,,,
Section 102 of the Securities Act (Ontario) or Section 13(d) of the 1934 Exchange Act) by the
Corporation or an Acquiring Person indicating that a Person has become an Acquiring Person;
(ss)
(ss)
(
)
(tt)(tt)( )
(uu)
(uu)
(
)
(vv)
(vv)
(
)
(ss) "Subsidiary": a corporationPerson shall be deemed to be a Subsidiary of another
corporationPerson if:
(i)
it is controlled by:
(A)
(B)
(C)
that other Person; or
that other Person and one or more corporationsPersons each of which is
controlled by that other Person; or
two or more corporationsPersons each of which is controlled by that other
Person; or
(ii)
it is a Subsidiary of a corporationPerson that is that other's Subsidiary;
(ww)
(ww)
(
)
(xx)
(xx)
(
)
(yy)
(yy)
(yy)
(vv)
(tt) "Take-over Bid" means an Offer to Acquire Voting Shares or other securities if, assuming
the  Voting  Shares  or  other  securities  subject  to  the  Offer  to  Acquire  are  acquired  and  are
Beneficially  Owned  at  the  date  of  the  Offer  to  Acquire  by  the  Person  making  the  Offer  to
Acquire, such Voting Shares (including all Voting Shares that may be acquired upon exercise of
all rights of conversion, exchange or purchase attaching to the other securities) together with the
Offeror's  Securities  would  constitute  in  the  aggregate  20%  or  more  of  the outstanding Voting
Shares at the date of the Offer to Acquire;
"Take-over Bid Circular" means a circular for a Take-over Bid prepared in accordance with 
applicable securities laws;
pp
pp
;
;
p pp p
(uu) "Termination Time" means the time at which the right to exercise Rights shall terminate
pursuant to Section 5.1;
"Business Corporations Act (Alberta)" means Business Corporations Act (Alberta), as amended
from time to time, and the regulations made thereunder, as in effect on the date of this Agreement
or as the same may be amended, re-enacted or replaced by any comparable or successor laws or
regulations thereto;
(zz)
(zz)
(
)
(ww) "Trading Day", when used with respect to any securities, means a day on which the
principal Canadian stock exchange on which such securities are listed or admitted to trading is
- 13 -
open for the transaction of business or, if the securities are not listed or admitted to trading on
any Canadian stock exchange, a Business Day;
(aaa)
(aaa)
(
)
(xx) "U.S. - Canadian Exchange Rate" means, on any date:
(i)
(ii)
if on such date the Bank of Canada sets an average noon spot rate of exchange for the
conversion of one United States dollar into Canadian dollars, such rate, and
in any other case, the rate for such date for the conversion of one United States dollar
into Canadian dollars which is calculated in the manner which shall be determined by the
Board of Directors from time to time acting in good faith;
"U.S. Dollar Equivalent" of any amount which is expressed in Canadian dollars means, on any
date, the United States dollar equivalent of such amount determined by multiplying such amount
by the Canadian-U.S. Exchange Rate in effect on such date;
(zz) "Voting Shares" means the Common Shares and any other shares of capital stock or voting
interests of the Corporation entitled to vote generally in the election of all directors; and
(aaa) "Voting Share Reduction" means an acquisition or redemption by the Corporation or a
Subsidiary of the Corporation of Voting Shares which, by reducing the number of Voting Shares
outstanding  or  which  may  be  voted,  increases  the  proportionate  number  of  Voting  Shares
Beneficially Owned by any Person.
(yy)
(bbb)
(bbb)
(
)
(ccc)
(ccc)
(
)
1.2
Currency
All sums of money which are referred to in this Agreement are expressed in lawful money of Canada,
unless otherwise specified.
1.3
Headings
The division of this Agreement into Articles, Sections, subparagraphs, paragraphs and subparagraphs and
the insertion of headings, subheadings and a table of contents are for convenience of reference only and
shall not affect the construction or interpretation of this Agreement.
1.4
References to Agreement
References  to  "this  Agreement",  "hereto",  "herein",  "hereby",  "hereunder",  "hereof"  and  similar
expressions  refer  to  this  Agreement,  as  amended  or  supplemented  from  time  to  time,  and  not  to  any
particular Article, Section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph or other provision hereof and include any
and every instrument supplemental or ancillary hereto.  Unless the context otherwise requires, references
in  this  Agreement  to  an  Article,  Section,  subsection,  paragraph,  subparagraph  or  Exhibit  by  number,
letter  or  otherwise  refer  to  the  Article,  Section,  subsection,  paragraph,  subparagraph  or  Exhibit,
respectively, bearing that designation in this Agreement.
1.5
Grandfathered Person
For the purposes of determining whether a Person is an Acquiring Person and interpreting the definition
of "Acquiring Person", a Person shall not be and shall not be deemed to be an Acquiring Person if such
Person (a "Grandfathered Person"):
- 14 -
(a)
(b)
is the Beneficial Owner of more than 20% of the outstanding Voting Shares determined as at the
Record Time; or
becomes the Beneficial Owner of more than 20% of the outstanding Voting Shares after the
Record  Time  and  such  Person's  Beneficial  Ownership  of  Voting  Shares  does  not  exceed  the
number of Voting Shares Beneficially Owned by such Person immediately prior to the Record
Time by more than 1% of the issued and outstanding Voting Shares as at the Record Time,
provided:
(c)
(c)(c)( )
(d)(d)( )
(e)(e)( )
1.6
the Grandfathered Person has complied with all legal disclosure requirements;
(d) that this exception shall not be, and shall cease to be, applicable to a Grandfathered Person in
the  event  that  such  Grandfathered  Person  shall  after  the  Record  Time  become  the  Beneficial
Owner  of  additional  Voting  Shares  constituting more than 1% of the then outstanding Voting
Shares otherwise than pursuant to one or more Permitted Bid Acquisitions, Exempt Acquisitions,
Pro Rata Acquisitions or the issuance or exercise of stock options granted by the Corporation, if
applicable to such Person,
(e) that such Grandfathered Person shall not become an Acquiring Person as a result of one or
more Voting Share Reductions; and
(f) that, if this exception shall cease to be applicable to a Grandfathered Person as aforesaid, such
a Grandfathered Person shall be and shall be deemed to be an Acquiring Person as at and from
the time that this exception shall not be so applicable.
Calculation of Number and Percentage of Beneficial Ownership of Outstanding
Voting Shares
For purposes of this Agreement:
(a)
(b)
in determining the percentage of outstanding Voting Shares Beneficially Owned by any Person,
all  unissued  Voting  Shares  as  to  which  such  Person  is  deemed  the Beneficial Owner shall be
deemed to be outstanding; and
the percentage of outstanding Voting Shares Beneficially Owned by any Person shall be and be
deemed to be the product (expressed as a percentage) determined by the formula:
100 x A
B
where:
A =
B =
the  number  of  votes  for  the  election  of  all directors generally attaching to the
outstanding Voting Shares Beneficially Owned by such Person; and
the  number  of  votes  for  the  election  of  all  directors  generally  attaching  to  all
outstanding Voting Shares.
- 15 -
1.7
Acting Jointly or in Concert
For purposes of this Agreement, a Person is acting jointly or in concert with every other Person who is a
party to any agreement, commitment or understanding, whether formal or informal and whether or not in
writing, with the first mentioned Person for the purpose of acquiring or offeringtogg  acquire
 or offer to
acquire  Voting  Shares  (other  than  pursuant  to  an  agreement  contemplated  by  subparagraph  1.1(d)(iv)
hereof,  or  customary  agreements  with  and  between  underwriters  and/or  banking  group  and/or  selling
group members with respect to a distribution of securities pursuant to a prospectus or by way of private
placement and other than pursuant to pledges of securities in the ordinary course of business).
qq
1.8
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
Wherever  in  this  Agreement  reference  is  made  to  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  such
reference shall be deemed to be the recommendations at the relevant time of the Canadian Institute of
Chartered Accountants, or any successor institute, applicable on a consolidated basis (unless otherwise
specifically  provided  herein  to  be  applicable  on  an  unconsolidated  basis)  as  at  the  date  on  which  a
calculation is made or required to be made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Where the character or amount of any asset or liability or item of revenue or expense is required to be
determined, or any consolidation or other accounting computation is required to be made for the purpose
of this Agreement or any document, such determination or calculation shall, to the extent applicable and
except  as  otherwise  specified  herein  or  as  otherwise  agreed  in  writing  by  the  parties,  be  made  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis.
ARTICLE 2
THE RIGHTS
2.1
Legend on Common Share Certificates
Certificates  representing  Common  Shares  issued  after  the  Record  Time  but  prior  to  the  earlier  of  the
Separation Time and the Expiration Time shall evidence, in addition to the Common Shares, one Right
for  each  Common  Share  evidenced  thereby  and  shall  have  impressed  on,  printed  on,  written  on  or
otherwise affixed to them the following legend:
yy
yy
Until the Separation Time (as defined in the Rights Agreement referred to below), this
certificate also evidences and entitles the holder hereof to certain Rights as set forth in a
Shareholder Protection Rights Plan Agreement made as of September 29, 20092009,,, as
,  2015  (the  "Rights  Agreement"),  between  Parex
amended  and  restated  as  of  Mayyy  12,
,
Resources  Inc.  (the  "Corporation")  and  Valiant  Trust  Company,  as  rights  agent,  as
amended  from  time  to  time,  the  terms  of  which  are  hereby  incorporated  herein  by
reference  and  a  copy  of  which  may  be  inspected  during  normal  business  hours  at  the
principal office of the Corporation.  Under certain circumstances, as set out in the Rights
Agreement, the Rights may be amended, redeemed, may expire, may become null and
void  or  may  be  evidenced  by  separate  certificates  and  no  longer  evidenced  by  this
certificate.
Certificates representing Common Shares that are issued and outstanding at the Record Time shall also
evidence  one  Right  for  each  Common  Share  evidenced  thereby,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the
foregoing legend, until the earlier of the Separation Time and the Expiration Time.
- 16 -
2.2
(a)
Initial Exercise Price; Exercise of Rights; Detachment of Rights
Subject to adjustment as herein set forth, each Right will entitle the holder thereof, from and
after the Separation Time and prior to the Expiration Time, to purchase, for the Exercise Price,
one Common Share.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, any Rights held by
the Corporation or any of its Subsidiaries shall be void.
(b)
Until the Separation Time:
(i)
(ii)
the Rights shall not be exercisable and no Right may be exercised; and
each Right will be evidenced by the certificate for the associated Common Share and
will  be  transferable  only  together  with,  and  will  be  transferred  by  a  transfer  of,  such
associated Common Share.
(c)
From and after the Separation Time and prior to the Expiration Time:
(i)
(ii)
the Rights shall be exercisable; and
the registration and transfer of the Rights shall be separate from and independent of
Common Shares.
Promptly following the Separation Time, the Corporation will prepare and the Rights Agent will
mail or arrange to be mailed to each holder of record of Rights as of the Separation Time (other
than an Acquiring Person and, in respect of any Rights Beneficially Owned by such Acquiring
Person  which  are  not  held  of  record  by  such  Acquiring  Person,  the  holder  of  record  of  such
Rights (a "Nominee")), at such holder's address as shown by the records of the Corporation (the
Corporation  hereby  agreeing  to  furnish  copies  of  such  records  to  the  Rights  Agent  for  this
purpose):
(A)
a rights certificate ("Rights Certificate") representing the number of Rights held
by such holder at the Separation Time and having such markers of identification
or designation and such legends, summaries or endorsements printed thereon as
the  Corporation  may  deem  appropriate  and  as  are  not  inconsistent  with  the
provisions  of  this  Agreement,  or  as  may  be  required  to  comply  with  any  law,
rule, regulation or judicial or administrative order or with any rule or regulation
of  any  self-regulatory  organization,  stock  exchange  or  quotation  system  on
which  the  Rights  may  from  time  to  time  be  listed  or  traded,  or  to  conform to
usage; and
(B)
a disclosure statement describing the Rights;
provided that a Nominee shall be sent the materials provided for in subparagraphs (A) and (B)
above in respect of all Common Shares held of record by it which are not Beneficially Owned by
an Acquiring Person.  In order for the Corporation to determine whether any Person is holding
Voting  Shares  which  are  Beneficially  Owned by another Person, the Corporation may require
such first-mentioned Person to furnish such information and documentation as the Corporation
deems necessary or appropriate to make such determination.
- 17 -
(d)
Rights may be exercised in whole or in part on any Business Day after the Separation Time and
prior to the Expiration Time by submitting to the Rights Agent at its principal office in the city of
Calgary the Rights Certificate evidencing such Rights together with:
(i)
(ii)
an election to exercise such Rights (an "Election to Exercise") substantially in the form
attached  to  the  Rights  Certificate  duly  completed  and  executed  by  the  holder  or  his
executors or administrators or other personal representatives or his or their legal attorney
duly appointed by an instrument in writing in form and executed in a manner satisfactory
to the Rights Agent; and
payment by certified cheque, banker's draft or money order payable to the order of the
Rights Agent, of a sum equal to the Exercise Price multiplied by the number of Rights
being exercised and a sum sufficient to cover any transfer tax or charge which may be
payable  in  respect  of  any  transfer  involved  in  the  transfer  or  delivery  of  Rights
Certificates  or  the  issuance  or  delivery  of  certificates  for  Common  Shares  in  a  name
other than that of the holder of the Rights being exercised.
(e)
Upon receipt of a Rights Certificate, which is accompanied by a completed Election to Exercise
that does not indicate that such Right is null and void as provided by subparagraph 3.1(b) and
payment as set forth in subparagraph 2.2(d), the Rights Agent (unless otherwise instructed by the
Corporation  if  the  Corporation  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Rights  cannot  be  exercised  in
accordance with this Agreement) will thereupon promptly:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
requisition from the transfer agent for the Common Shares certificates representing the
number  of  such  Common  Shares  to  be  purchased  (the  Corporation  hereby  irrevocably
authorizing its transfer agent to comply with all such requisitions),
after receipt of such certificate, deliver the same to or upon the order of the registered
holder of such Rights Certificate, registered in such name or names as may be designated
by such holder,
when appropriate, requisition from the Corporation the amount of cash to be paid in lieu
of issuing fractional Common Shares,
when appropriate, after receipt of such cash, deliver the same to or to the order of the
registered holder of the Rights Certificate, and
(v)
tender to the Corporation all payments received on exercise of the Rights.
(f)
If the holder of any Rights shall exercise less than all the Rights evidenced by such holder's
Rights Certificate, a new Rights Certificate evidencing the Rights remaining unexercised (subject
to  Section  5.5)  will  be  issued  by  the  Rights  Agent  to  such  holder  or  to  such  holder's  duly
authorized assigns.
(g)
The Corporation covenants and agrees that it will:
(i)
take all such action as may be necessary and within its power to ensure that all securities
delivered upon exercise of Rights shall, at the time of delivery of the certificates for such
securities  (subject  to  payment  of  the  Exercise  Price),  be  duly  and  validly  authorized,
executed, issued and delivered as fully paid and non-assessable;
- 18 -
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
take all such action as may be necessary and within its power to comply with any
applicable  requirements  of Business  Corporations  Act (Alberta),  the Securities  Act
(Alberta), the Securities Act (Ontario) and any other applicable laws in connection with
the issuance and delivery of the Rights, the Rights Certificates and the issuance of any
securities upon exercise of Rights;
use reasonable efforts to cause all securities issued upon exercise of Rights to be listed
on the stock exchanges on which the Common Shares were traded immediately prior to
the Stock Acquisition Date;
cause to be reserved and kept available out of its authorized and unissued classes of
securities, the number of securities that, as provided in this Agreement, will from time to
time be sufficient to permit the exercise in full of all outstanding Rights;
pay when due and payable any and all Canadian and, if applicable, United States,
federal,  provincial  and  state  transfer  taxes  and  charges  (not  including  any  income  or
capital  taxes  of  the  holder  or  exercising  holder  or  any  liability  of  the  Corporation  to
withhold tax) which may be payable in respect of the original issuance or delivery of the
Rights  Certificates  or  certificates  for  Common  Shares  issued  uponpp
  exercise  of  anyyyyyyy
Rightsgg
,  provided  that  the  Corporation  shall  not  be  required  to  pay  any  transfer  tax  or
charge  which  may  be  payable  in  respect  of  any  transfer  involved  in  the  transfer  or
delivery of Rights Certificates or the issuance or delivery of certificates for securities in
a name other than that of the holder of the Rights being transferred or exercised; and
(vi)
after the Separation Time, except as permitted under Section 5.1, not take (or permit any
Subsidiary  to  take)  any  action  if  at  the  time  such  action  is  taken  it  is  reasonably
foreseeable  that  such  action  will  diminish  substantially  or  otherwise  eliminate  the
benefits intended to be afforded by the Rights.
2.3
Adjustments to Exercise Price; Number of Rights
The Exercise Price, the number and kind of securities subject to purchase upon exercise of each Right
and the number of Rights outstanding are subject to  adjustment from time to time as provided in this
Section 2.3.
(a)
If the Corporation shall at any time after the Record Time and prior to the Expiration Time:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
declare or pay a dividend on its Common Shares payable in Common Shares (or other
securities  exchangeable  for  or  convertible  into  or  giving  a  right  to  acquire  Common
Shares) other than pursuant to any optional stock dividend program;
subdivide or change the outstanding Common Shares into a greater number of Common
Shares;
combine or change the outstanding Common Shares into a smaller number of Common
Shares; or
issue any Common Shares (or other securities exchangeable for or convertible into or
giving  a  right  to  acquire  Common  Shares) in respect of, in lieu of or in exchange for
existing Common Shares;
- 19 -
except as otherwise provided in this Section 2.3, the Exercise Price and the number of Rights
outstanding, or, if the payment or effective date therefor shall occur after the Separation Time,
the  securities  purchasable  upon  exercise  of  Rights  shall  be  adjusted  as  of  the  payment  or
effective date such that:
(A)
if the Exercise Price and number of Rights outstanding are to be adjusted;
(I)
the Exercise Price in effect after such adjustment will be equal to the
Exercise Price in effect immediately prior to such adjustment divided by
the number of Common Shares (or other capital stock) (the "Expansion
Factor") that a holder of one Common Share immediately prior to such
dividend,  subdivision,  change,  combination  or  issuance  would  hold
thereafter as a result thereof; and
(II)
each Right held prior to such adjustment will become that number of
Rights equal to the Expansion Factor;
and the adjusted number of Rights will be deemed to be distributed among the
Common  Shares  with  respect  to  which  the  original  Rights  were  associated  (if
they  remain  outstanding)  and  the  shares  issued  in  respect  of  such  dividend,
subdivision, change, combination or issuance, so that each such Common Share
(or other capital stock) will have exactly one Right associated with it; and
(b)
(B)
if the securities purchasable upon exercise of Rights are to be adjusted, the
securities purchasable upon exercise of each Right after such adjustment will be
the  securities  that  a  holder  of  the  securities  purchasable  upon  exercise  of  one
Right immediately prior to such dividend, subdivision, change, combination or
issuance would hold thereafter as a result thereof.
If  after  the  Record  Time  and  prior  to  the  Expiration  Time  the  Corporation  shall  issue  any
securities  other  than  Common  Shares  in  a  transaction  of  a  type  described  in  subparagraphs
2.3(a)(i)  or (iv), such securities shall be treated herein as nearly equivalent to Common Shares as
may be practicable and appropriate under the circumstances and the Corporation and the Rights
Agent agree to amend this Agreement in order to effect such treatment.
If the Corporation shall at any time after the Record Time and prior to the Separation Time fix a
record  date  for  the  issuance  of  rights,  options  or  warrants  to  all  holders  of  Common  Shares
entitling them (for a period expiring within 45 calendar days after such record date) to subscribe
for or purchase Common Shares (or securities convertible into or exchangeable for or carrying a
right to purchase Common Shares) at a price per Common Share (or, if a security convertible into
or exchangeable for or carrying a right to purchase or subscribe for Common Shares having a
conversion, exchange or exercise price, including the price required to be paid to purchase such
convertible or exchangeable security or right per share) less than the Market Price per Common
Share  on  such  record  date,  the  Exercise  Price  to  be  in  effect  after  such  record  date  shall  be
adjusted to that price determined by multiplying the Exercise Price in effect immediately prior to
such record date by a fraction:
(i)
the numerator of which shall be the number of Common Shares outstanding on such
record date, plus the number of Common Shares that the aggregate offering price of the
total number of Common Shares so to be offered (and/or the aggregate initial conversion,
exchange or exercise price of the convertible or exchangeable securities or rights so to be
- 20 -
offered,  including  the  price  required  to  be  paid  to  purchase  such  convertible  or
exchangeable  securities  or  rights)  would  purchase  at  such  Market  Price  per  Common
Share; and
(ii)
the denominator of which shall be the number of Common Shares outstanding on such
record date, plus the number of additional Common Shares to be offered for subscription
or purchase (or into which the convertible or exchangeable securities or rights so to be
offered are initially convertible, exchangeable or exercisable).
If such subscription price may be paid by delivery of consideration, part or all of which may be
in a form other than cash, the value of such consideration shall be as determined in good faith by
the  Board  of  Directors,  whose  determination  shall  be  described  in  a  statement  filed  with  the
Rights  Agent  and  shall  be  binding  on  the  Rights  Agent  and  the  holders  of  the  Rights.   Such
adjustment shall be made successively whenever such a record date is fixed, and in the event that
such rights or warrants are not so issued, the Exercise Price shall be adjusted to be the Exercise
Price which would then be in effect if such record date had not been fixed.
For purposes of this Agreement, the granting of the right to purchase Common Shares (whether
from treasury shares or otherwise) pursuant to any dividend or interest reinvestment plan and/or
any Common Share purchase plan providing for the reinvestment of dividends or interest payable
on  securities  of  the  Corporation  and/or  the  investment  of  periodic  optional  payments  and/or
employee benefit, stock option or similar plans (so long as such right to purchase is in no case
evidenced  by  the  delivery of rights or warrants) shall not be deemed to constitute an issue of
rights  or  warrants  by  the  Corporation;  provided,  however,  that,  in  the  case  of  any  Dividend
Reinvestment Plan, the right to purchase Common Shares is at a price per share of not less than
90 percent of the Market Price of the Common Shares.
(c)
If the Corporation shall at any time after the Record Time and prior to the Separation Time fix a
record date for a distribution to all holders of Common Shares (including any such distribution
made in connection with a merger or amalgamation in which the Corporation is the continuing
corporation)  of  evidences  of  indebtedness,  cash  (other  than  an  ordinary  course  dividend  or  a
dividend  referred  to  in  subparagraph  2.3(a)(i)),  assets  or  rights  or  warrants  (excluding  those
referred to in subparagraph 2.3(b)), the Exercise Price to be in effect after such record date shall
be determined by multiplying the Exercise Price in effect immediately prior to such record date
by a fraction:
(i)
the numerator of which shall be the Market Price per Common Share on such record
date, less the fair market value (as determined in good faith by the Board of Directors,
whose determination shall be described in a statement filed with the Rights Agent and
shall be binding on the Rights Agent and the holders of Rights), on a per share basis, of
the portion of the cash, assets, evidences of indebtedness, rights, options or warrants so
to be distributed; and
(ii)
the denominator of which shall be such Market Price per Common Share.
Such adjustments shall be made successively whenever such a record date is fixed, and in the
event  that  such  a  distribution  is  not  so  made,  the  Exercise  Price  shall  be  adjusted  to  be  the
Exercise Price which would have been in effect if such record date had not been fixed.
(d)
Each adjustment made pursuant to this Section 2.3 shall be made as of
- 21 -
(i)
(ii)
the payment or effective date for the applicable dividend, subdivision, change,
combination or issuance, in the case of an adjustment made pursuant to subparagraph (a)
above; and
the record date for the applicable distribution, in the case of an adjustment made
pursuant to subparagraph (b) or (c) above, subject to readjustment to reverse the same if
such distribution shall not be made.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no adjustment in the Exercise Price shall be
required unless such adjustment would require an increase or decrease of at least one percent in
the  Exercise  Price;  provided,  however,  that  any  adjustments  which  by  reason  of  this
subparagraph 2.3(e) are not required to be made shall be carried forward and taken into account
in  any  subsequent  adjustment.   All  calculations  under  this  Section  2.3  shall  be  made  to  the
nearest cent or to the nearest hundredth of a share.  Notwithstanding the first sentence of this
subparagraph 2.3(e), any adjustment required by this Section 2.3 shall be made no later than the
earlier of (i) three years from the date of the transaction which mandates such adjustment and (ii)
the Termination Date.  Whenever an adjustment to the Exercise Price is made pursuant to this
Section 2.3, the Corporation shall:
(i)
(ii)
promptly prepare a certificate setting forth such adjustment and a brief statement of the
facts accounting for such adjustment,
promptly file with the Rights Agent and with each transfer agent for the Common Shares
a copy of such certificate, mail a brief summary thereof to each holder of Rights, and
issue a press release advising of the relevant adjustment.
If the Corporation shall at any time after the Record Time and prior to the Separation Time issue
any shares of capital stock (other than Common Shares), or rights or warrants to subscribe for or
purchase  any  such  capital  stock,  or  securities  convertible  into  or  exchangeable  for  any  such
capital stock, in a transaction referred to in subparagraph (a)(i) or (a)(iv) above, if the Board of
Directors  acting  in  good  faith  determines that the adjustments contemplated by subparagraphs
(a),  (b)  and  (c)  above  in  connection  with  such  transaction  will  not  appropriately  protect  the
interests of the holders of Rights, the Board of Directors may determine what other adjustments
to  the Exercise Price, number of Rights and/or securities purchasable upon exercise of Rights
would be appropriate and, notwithstanding subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) above, but subject to
the prior consent of the holders of Common Shares or Rights obtained in accordance with section
5.4, such adjustments, rather than the adjustments contemplated by subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c)
above,  shall  be  made.   The  Corporation  and  the  Rights  Agent  shall  amend  this Agreement as
appropriate to provide for such adjustments.
Each Right originally issued by the Corporation subsequent to any adjustment made to the
Exercise Price hereunder shall evidence the right to purchase, at the adjusted Exercise Price, the
number of Common Shares purchasable from time to time hereunder upon exercise of a Right, all
subject to further adjustment as provided herein.
Irrespective of any adjustment or change in the Exercise Price or the number of Common Shares
issuable upon the exercise of the Rights, the Rights Certificates theretofore and thereafter issued
may  continue  to  express  the  Exercise  Price  per  Common  Share  and  the  number  of  Common
Shares which were expressed in the initial Rights Certificates issued hereunder.
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
- 22 -
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
In any case in which this Section 2.3 shall require that an adjustment in the Exercise Price be
made effective as of a record date for a specified event, the Corporation may elect to defer until
the occurrence of such event the issuance to the holder of any Right exercised after such record
date the number of Common Shares and other securities of the Corporation, if any, issuable upon
such  exercise  over  and  above  the  number  of  Common  Shares  and  other  securities  of  the
Corporation, if any, issuable upon such exercise on the basis of the Exercise Price in effect prior
to  such  adjustment;  provided,  however,  that  the  Corporation  shall  deliver  to  such  holder  an
appropriate instrument evidencing such holder's right to receive such additional shares (fractional
or otherwise) or securities upon the occurrence of the event requiring such adjustment.
Notwithstanding anything in this Section 2.3 to the contrary, the Corporation shall be entitled to
make such reductions in the Exercise Price, in addition to those adjustments expressly required
by this Section 2.3, as and to the extent that the Board of Directors shall in good faith determine
to  be  advisable  in  order  that  any  (i)  consolidation  or  subdivision  of  the  Common  Shares,  (ii)
issuance  wholly  or  in  part  for  cash  or  Common  Shares  or  securities  that  by  their  terms  are
convertible into or exchangeable for Common Shares, (iii) stock dividends or (iv) issuance of
rights, options or warrants referred to in this Section 2.3, hereafter made by the Corporation to
holders of its Common Shares shall not be taxable to such shareholdersShareholders.
The Corporation covenants and agrees that, after the Separation Time, it will not, except as
permitted  by  Section  5.1  or  Section  5.4,  take  (or  permit  any  Subsidiary  of the Corporation to
take) any action if at the time such action is taken it is reasonably foreseeable that such action
will  diminish  substantially  or  otherwise  eliminate  the  benefits  intended  to  be  afforded  by  the
Rights.
If an event occurs which would require an adjustment under both this Section 2.3 and Section
3.1, the adjustment provided for in this Section 2.3 shall be in addition to and shall be made prior
to, any adjustment required pursuant to Section 3.1.
If the Corporation shall at any time after the Record Time and prior to the earlier of the
Separation  Time  and  the  Expiration  Time  issue  any  Common  Shares  otherwise  than  in  a
transaction  referred  to  in  subparagraph  2.3(a)  each  such  Common  Share  so  issued  shall
automatically  have  one  new  Right  associated  with  it,  which  Right  shall  be  evidenced  by  the
certificate representing such share.
2.4
Date on Which Exercise is Effective
Each Person in whose name any certificate for Common Shares or other securities, property or assets, if
applicable, is issued upon the exercise of Rights shall for all purposes be deemed to have become the
holder of record of the Common Shares or other securities, property or assets, if applicable, represented
thereby  on,  and  such certificate shall be dated, the date upon which the Rights Certificate evidencing
such Rights was duly surrendered (together with a duly completed Election to Exercise) and payment of
the  Exercise  Price  for  such  Rights  (and  any  applicable  transfer  taxes  and  other  governmental  charges
payable  by  the  exercising  holder  hereunder)  was  made;  provided,  however,  that  if  the  date  of  such
surrender and payment is a date upon which the Common Share transfer books of the Corporation are
closed, such Person shall be deemed to have become the record holder of such Common Shares or other
securities, property or assets on, and such certificate shall be dated, the next succeeding Business Day on
which the Common Share transfer books of the Corporation are open.
- 23 -
2.5
(a)
(b)
(c)
2.6
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Execution, Authentication, Delivery and Dating of Rights Certificates
The Rights Certificates shall be executed on behalf of the Corporation by any two of its
Chairman,  President,  Vice  Presidents  or  Corporate  Secretary.   The  signature  of  any  of  these
officers on the Rights Certificates may be manual or facsimile.  Rights Certificates bearing the
manual  or  facsimile  signatures of individuals who were at any time the proper officers of the
Corporation shall bind the Corporation notwithstanding that such individuals or any of them have
ceased to hold such offices prior to the countersignature and delivery of such Rights Certificates.
Promptly after the Corporation learns of the Separation Time, the Corporation will notify the
Rights Agent in writing of such Separation Time and will deliver Rights Certificates executed by
the Corporation to the Rights Agent for countersignature, and disclosure statements describing
the  Rights,  and  the  Rights  Agent  shall  countersign  (manually  or  by  facsimile  signature  in  a
manner satisfactory to the Corporation) and send such Rights Certificates to the holders of the
Rights  pursuant  to  subparagraph  2.2(c).   No  Rights  Certificate  shall  be  valid  for  any  purpose
until countersigned by the Rights Agent as aforesaid.
Each Rights Certificate shall be dated the date of countersignature thereof.
Registration, Registration of Transfer and Exchange
After the Separation Time, the Corporation will cause to be kept a register (the "Rights
Register") in which, subject to such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, the Corporation
will provide for the registration and transfer of Rights.  The Rights Agent is hereby appointed
registrar  for  the  Rights  (the  "Rights  Registrar")  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  Rights
Register for the Corporation and registering Rights and transfers of Rights as herein provided and
the  Rights  Agent  hereby  accepts  such appointment.  If the Rights Agent shall cease to be the
Rights  Registrar,  the  Rights  Agent  will  have  the  right  to  examine  the  Rights  Register  at  all
reasonable times.
After the Separation Time and prior to the Expiration Time, upon surrender for registration of
transfer  or exchange of any Rights Certificate, and subject to the provisions of subparagraphs
2.6(d)  and  3.1(b),  the  Corporation  will  execute,  and  the  Rights  Agent  will  countersign  and
deliver, in the name of the holder or the designated transferee or transferees, as required pursuant
to the holder's instructions, one or more new Rights Certificates evidencing the same aggregate
number of Rights as did the Rights Certificates so surrendered.
All Rights issued upon any registration of transfer or exchange of Rights Certificates shall be the
valid obligations of the Corporation, and such Rights shall be entitled to the same benefits under
this Agreement as the Rights surrendered upon such registration of transfer or exchange.
Every Rights Certificate surrendered for registration of transfer or exchange shall be duly
endorsed,  or  be  accompanied  by  a  written  instrument  of  transfer  in  form  satisfactory  to  the
Corporation or the Rights Agent, as the case may be, duly executed by the holder thereof or such
holder's attorney duly authorized in writing.  As a condition to the issuance of any new Rights
Certificate under this Section 2.6, the Corporation may require the payment of a sum sufficient to
cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed in relation thereto and any other
expenses (including the fees and expenses of the Rights Agent) connected therewith.
(e)
The Corporation shall not be required to register the transfer of Rights after the Rights have been
terminated pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement.
- 24 -
2.7
(a)
Mutilated, Destroyed, Lost and Stolen Rights Certificates
If any mutilated Rights Certificate is surrendered to the Rights Agent prior to the Expiration
Time,  the  Corporation  shall  execute  and  the  Rights  Agent  shall  countersign  and  deliver  in
exchange  therefor  a  new  Rights  Certificate  evidencing  the  same  number  of  Rights  as  did  the
Rights Certificate so surrendered.
(b)
If there shall be delivered to the Corporation and the Rights Agent prior to the Expiration Time:
(i)
(ii)
evidence to their reasonable satisfaction of the destruction, loss or theft of any Rights
Certificate; and
such security or indemnity as may be reasonably required by each of them in their sole
discretion to save each of them and any of their agents harmless,
then, in the absence of notice to the Corporation or the Rights Agent that such Rights Certificate
has  been  acquired  by  a bona  fide  purchaser,  the  Corporation  shall  execute  and  upon  the
Corporation's  request  the  Rights  Agent  shall  countersign  and  deliver,  in  lieu  of  any  such
destroyed, lost or stolen Rights Certificate, a new Rights Certificate evidencing the same number
of Rights as did the Rights Certificate so destroyed, lost or stolen.
As a condition to the issuance of any new Rights Certificate under this Section 2.7, the
Corporation may require the payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental
charge that may be imposed in relation thereto and any other expenses (including the fees and
expenses of the Rights Agent) connected therewith.
Every new Rights Certificate issued pursuant to this Section 2.7 in lieu of any destroyed, lost or
stolen Rights Certificate shall evidence the contractual obligation of the Corporation, whether or
not the destroyed, lost or stolen Rights Certificate shall be at any time enforceable by anyone,
and shall be entitled to all the benefits of this Agreement equally and proportionately with any
and all other Rights duly issued by the Corporation.
(c)
(d)
2.8
Persons Deemed Owners
The Corporation, the Rights Agent and any agent of the Corporation or the Rights Agent may deem and
treat  the  Person  in  whose  name  a  Rights  Certificate  (or,  prior  to  the  Separation  Time,  the  associated
Common Share certificate) is registered as the absolute owner thereof and the Rights evidenced thereby
for all purposes whatsoever.  As used in this Agreement, unless the context otherwise requires, the term
"holder" of any Rights shall mean the registered holder of such Rights (or, prior to the Separation Time,
the associated Common Shares).
2.9
Delivery and Cancellation of Certificates
All Rights Certificates surrendered upon exercise or for redemption, registration of transfer or exchange
shall, if surrendered to any Person other than the Rights Agent, be delivered to the Rights Agent and, in
any case, shall be promptly cancelled by the Rights Agent.  The Corporation may at any time deliver to
the  Rights  Agent  for  cancellation  any  Rights  Certificates  previously  countersigned  and  delivered
hereunder  which  the  Corporation  may  have  acquired  in  any  manner  whatsoever,  and  all  Rights
Certificates so delivered shall be promptly cancelled by the Rights Agent.  No Rights Certificate shall be
countersigned in lieu of or in exchange for any Rights Certificates cancelled as provided in this Section
- 25 -
2.9,  except  as  expressly  permitted  by  this  Agreement.   The  Rights  Agent  shall  destroy  all  cancelled
Rights Certificates and deliver a certificate of destruction to the Corporation on request.
2.10
Agreement of Rights Holders
Every holder of Rights, by accepting the same, consents and agrees with the Corporation and the Rights
Agent and with every other holder of Rights:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
to be bound by and subject to the provisions of this Agreement, as amended from time to time in
accordance with the terms hereof, in respect of all Rights held;
that, prior to the Separation Time, each Right will be transferable only together with, and will be
transferred by a transfer of, the associated Common Share;
that after the Separation Time, the Rights Certificate will be transferable only upon registration
of the transfer on the Rights Register as provided herein;
that, prior to due presentment of a Rights Certificate (or, prior to the Separation Time, the
associated  Common  Share  certificate)  for  registration  of  transfer,  the  Corporation,  the  Rights
Agent and any agent of the Corporation or the Rights Agent may deem and treat the person in
whose  name  the  Rights  Certificate  (or,  prior  to  the  Separation  Time,  the  associated  Common
Share certificate) is registered as the absolute owner thereof and of the Rights evidenced thereby
(notwithstanding  any  notations  of  ownership  or  writing  on  such  Rights  Certificate  or  the
associated Common Share certificate made by anyone other than the Corporation or the Rights
Agent) for all purposes whatsoever, and neither the Corporation nor the Rights Agent shall be
affected by any notice to the contrary;
that such holder of Rights has waived his right to receive any fractional Rights or any fractional
shares upon exercise of a Right (except as provided herein);
that, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.4, without the approval of any holder of
Rights or Voting Shares and upon the sole authority of the Board of Directors acting in good
faith,  this  Agreement  may be supplemented or amended from time to time pursuant to and as
provided herein; and
that notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, neither the Corporation nor the
Rights Agent shall have any liability to any holder of a Right or any other Person as a result of its
inability to perform any of its obligations under this Agreement by reasons of any preliminary or
permanent injunction or other order, decree or ruling issued by a court of competent jurisdiction
or by a governmental, regulatory or administrative agency or commission, or any statute, rule,
regulation or executive order promulgated or enacted by any governmental authority, prohibiting
or otherwise restraining performance of such obligation.
2.11
Rights Certificate Holder not Deemed a Shareholder
No holder, as such, of any Rights or Rights Certificate shall be entitled to vote, receive dividends or be
deemed for any purpose whatsoever the holder of any Common Share or any other share or security of
the Corporation which may at any time be issuable on the exercise of the Rights represented thereby, nor
shall anything contained herein or in any Rights Certificate be construed or deemed or confer upon the
holder  of  any  Right  or  Rights  Certificate,  as  such,  any  of  the rights, titles, benefits or privileges of a
holder of Common Shares or any other shares or securities of the Corporation or any right to vote at any
- 26 -
meeting  of shareholdersShareholders  of  the  Corporation  whether  for  the  election  of  directors  or
otherwise or upon any matter submitted to holders of shares of the Corporation at any meeting thereof, or
to give or withhold consent to any action of the Corporation, or to receive notice of any meeting or other
action affecting any holder of Common Shares or any other shares or securities of the Corporation except
as expressly provided herein, or to receive dividends, distributions or subscription rights, or otherwise,
until the Right or Rights evidenced by Rights Certificates shall have been duly exercised in accordance
with the terms and provisions hereof.
ADJUSTMENTS TO THE RIGHTS IN THE EVENT OF CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS
ARTICLE 3
3.1
(a)
Flip-in Event
Subject to subparagraphs 3.1(b), 5.1(d) and 5.1(e), if prior to the Expiration Time a Flip-in Event
occurs, each Right shall constitute, effective at the close of business on the tenth Trading Day
after the Stock Acquisition Date, the right to purchase from the Corporation, upon payment of
the Exercise Price and otherwise exercising such Right in accordance with the terms hereof, that
number of Common Shares having an aggregate Market Price on the date of consummation or
occurrence of such Flip-in Event equal to four times the Exercise Price for an amount in cash
equal to the Exercise Price (such Right to be appropriately adjusted in a manner analogous to the
applicable adjustment provided for in Section 2.3 in event that after the Stock Acquisition Date
an event of a type analogous to any of the events described in Section 2.3 has occurred).
(b)
Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, upon the occurrence of any Flip-in
Event, any Rights that are or were Beneficially Owned on or after the earlier of the Separation
Time and the Stock Acquisition Date by:
(i)
(ii)
an Acquiring Person (or any Affiliate or Associate of an Acquiring Person or any Person
acting jointly or in concert with an Acquiring Person or any Associate or Affiliate of an
Acquiring Person); or
a transferee of Rights, direct or indirect, of an Acquiring Person (or of any Affiliate or
Associate of an Acquiring Person or of any Person acting jointly or in concert with an
Acquiring Person or any Associate or Affiliate of an Acquiring Person) who becomes a
transferee  in  a  transfer  that  the  Board  of  Directors  has  determined  is  part  of  a  plan,
arrangement  or  scheme  of  an  Acquiring  Person  (or  any  Affiliate  or  Associate  of  an
Acquiring Person or any Person acting jointly or in concert with an Acquiring Person or
any  Associate  or  Affiliate  of  an  Acquiring  Person),  that  has  the  purpose  or  effect  of
avoiding subparagraph 3.1(b)(i);
shall become null and void without any further action, and any holder of such Rights (including
any transferee of, or other successor to, such Rights, whether directly or indirectly) shall not have
any right whatsoever to exercise such Rights under any provision of this Agreement and shall not
have thereafter any right whatsoever with respect to such Rights, whether under any provision of
this Agreement or otherwise.  The holder of any Rights represented by a Rights Certificate which
is submitted to the Rights Agent upon exercise or for registration of transfer or exchange which
does not contain the necessary certifications set forth in the Rights Certificate establishing that
such  Rights  are  not  void  under  this  subparagraph  3.1(b)  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  Acquiring
Person for the purposes of this subparagraph 3.1(b) and such Rights shall become null and void.
- 27 -
(c)
Any Rights Certificate that represents Rights Beneficially Owned by a Person described in either
subparagraph 3.1(b)(i) or (ii) or transferred to any Nominee of any such Person, and any Rights
Certificate  issued  upon  transfer,  exchange,  replacement  or  adjustment  of  any  other  Rights
Certificate referred to in this sentence, shall contain the following legend:
The Rights represented by this Rights Certificate were Beneficially Owned by a
Person  who  was  an  Acquiring  Person  or  an  Affiliate  or  an  Associate  of  an
Acquiring  Person  (as  such  terms  are  defined  in  the  Rights  Agreement)  or  a
Person acting jointly or in concert with any of them.  This Rights Certificate and
the  Rights  represented  hereby  are  void  in  the  circumstances  specified  in
subparagraph 3.1(b) of the Rights Agreement.
provided that the Rights Agent shall not be under any responsibility to ascertain the existence of
facts  that  would  require  the  imposition  of  such  legend  but  shall  be  required  to  impose  such
legend only if instructed to do so in writing by the Corporation or if a holder fails to certify upon
transfer  or  exchange  in  the  space  provided  on  the  Rights  Certificate  that  such  holder  is  not a
Person described in either subparagraph 3.1(b)(i) or (ii).
(d)
From and after the Separation Time, the Corporation shall do all such acts and things as shall be
necessary  and  within  its  power  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  this  Section  3.1,
including  without  limitation,  all  such  acts  and  things  as  may  be  required  to  satisfy  the
requirements of the Business Corporations Act (Alberta) and the Securities Act (Alberta) and any
other applicable laws in respect of the issue of Common Shares upon the exercise of Rights in
accordance with this Agreement.
3.2
Fiduciary Duties of the Board of Directors of the Corporation
For clarification it is understood that nothing contained in this Article 3 shall be considered to affect the
obligations of the Board of Directors to exercise its fiduciary duties.  Without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall be construed to suggest or imply that the Board of Directors
shall not be entitled to recommend that holders of the Voting Shares reject or accept any Take-over Bid
or  take  any  other  action  (including,  without  limitation,  the  commencement,  prosecution,  defence  or
settlement  of  any  litigation  and  the  submission  of  additional  or  alternative  Take-over  Bids  or  other
proposals  to  the shareholdersShareholders  of  the  Corporation  with  respect  to  any  Take-over  Bid  or
otherwise that the Board of Directors believes is necessary or appropriate in the exercise of its fiduciary
duties).
4.1
(a)
ARTICLE 4
THE RIGHTS AGENT
General
The Corporation hereby appoints the Rights Agent to act as agent for the Corporation in
accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  hereof,  and  the  Rights  Agent  hereby  accepts  such
appointment.
  The  Corporation  may  from  time  to  time  appoint  such  co-Rights  Agents
("Co-Rights  Agents")  as  it  may  deem  necessary  or  desirable,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the
Rights  Agent.
  In  the  event  the  Corporation  appoints  one  or  more  Co-Rights  Agents,  the
respective duties of the Rights Agents and the Co-Rights Agents shall be as the Corporation may
determine  with  the  approval  of  the  Rights  Agent  and  the  Co-Rights  Agent.   The  Corporation
agrees  to  pay  to  the  Rights  Agent  reasonable  compensation  for  all  services  rendered  by  it
hereunder and, from time to time, on demand of the Rights Agent, its reasonable expenses and
(b)
(c)
4.2
(a)
- 28 -
counsel  fees  and  other  disbursements  incurred  in  the  administration  and  execution  of  this
Agreement and the exercise and performance of its duties hereunder, including the reasonable
fees and disbursements of any expert retained by the Rights Agent.  The Corporation also agrees
to indemnify the Rights Agent, its officers, directors, employees and agents for, and to hold them
harmless against, any loss, liability, costs, claims, actions, damages or expenses, incurred without
negligence,  bad  faith  or  wilful  default  on  the  part  of  the  Rights  Agent,  for  anything  done  or
suffered  or  omitted  by  the  Rights  Agent  in  connection  with  the  acceptance,  execution  and
administration of this Agreement and the performance of its duties hereunder, including the costs
and  expenses  of  defending  against  any  claim  of  liability,  which  right  to  indemnification  will
survive the termination of this Agreement or the resignation or removal of the Rights Agent.
The Rights Agent shall be protected and shall incur no liability for or in respect of any action
taken, suffered or omitted by it in connection with its acceptance, execution and administration
of this Agreement in reliance upon any certificate for Voting Shares or Common Shares, or any
Rights Certificate or certificate for other securities of the Corporation, instrument of assignment
or  transfer,  power  of  attorney,  endorsement,  affidavit,  letter,  notice,  direction,  consent,
certificate, statement, or other paper or document believed by it to be genuine and to be signed,
executed and, where necessary, verified or acknowledged, by the proper Person or Persons.
The Corporation shall inform the Rights Agent in a reasonably timely manner of events which
may materially affect the administration of this Agreement by the Rights Agent and at any time
upon request, shall provide to the Rights Agent an incumbency certificate with respect to the then
current directors of the Corporation, provided that failure to inform the Rights Agent of any such
event, or any defect therein, shall not affect the validity of any action taken hereunder in relation
to such events.
Merger or Amalgamation or Change of Name of Rights Agent
Any corporation into which the Rights Agent or any successor Rights Agent may be merged or
amalgamated  or  with  which  it  may  be  consolidated,  or  any  corporation  resulting  from  any
merger, amalgamation, statutory arrangement or consolidation to which the Rights Agent or any
successor  Rights  Agent  is  a  party,  or  any  corporation  succeeding  to  the  shareholder  or
stockholder  services  business  of  the  Rights  Agent  or  any  successor  Rights  Agent,  will  be  the
successor to the Rights Agent under this Agreement without the execution or filing of any paper
or any further act on the part of any of the parties hereto, provided that such corporation would
be eligible for appointment as a successor Rights Agent under the provisions of Section 4.4.  In
case at the time each successor Rights Agent succeeds to the agency created by this Agreement
any  of  the  Rights  Certificates  have  been  countersigned  but  not  delivered,  any  such  successor
Rights Agent may adopt the countersignature of the predecessor Rights Agent and deliver such
Rights Certificates so countersigned; and in case at that time any of the Rights Certificates have
not  been  countersigned,  any  successor  Rights  Agent  may  countersign  such  Rights  Certificates
either in the name of the predecessor Rights Agent or in the name of the successor Rights Agent;
and  in  all  such  cases  such  Rights  Certificates  will  have  the  full  force  provided  in  the  Rights
Certificates and in this Agreement.
(b)
If at any time the name of the Rights Agent is changed and at such time any of the Rights
Certificates  shall  have  been  countersigned  but  not  delivered,  the  Rights  Agent  may  adopt  the
countersignature  under  its  prior name and deliver Rights Certificates so countersigned; and in
case  at  that  time  any  of  the  Rights  Certificate  shall  not  have  been  countersigned,  the  Rights
Agent may countersign such Rights Certificates either in its prior name or in its changed name;
- 29 -
and  in  all  such  cases  such  Rights  Certificates  shall  have  the full force provided in the Rights
Certificates and in this Agreement.
4.3
Duties of Rights Agent
The Rights Agent undertakes the duties and obligations imposed by this Agreement upon the following
terms  and  conditions,  by  all  of  which  the  Corporation  and  the  holders  of  Right  Certificates,  by  their
acceptance thereof, shall be bound:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the Rights Agent may retain, at the expense of the Corporation, and consult with legal counsel
(who may be legal counsel for the Corporation) and the opinion of such counsel will be full and
complete  authorization  and  protection  to  the  Rights  Agent  as  to  any  action  taken,  suffered  or
omitted by it in good faith and in accordance with such opinion; the Rights Agent may also, with
the approval of the Corporation (such approval not to be unreasonably withheld), consult with
such other experts as the Rights Agent shall consider necessary or appropriate to properly carry
out  the  duties  and  obligations  imposed  under  this  Agreement  and  the  Rights  Agent  shall  be
entitled to act and rely in good faith on the advice of any such expert;
whenever in the performance of its duties under this Agreement the Rights Agent deems it
necessary or desirable that any fact or matter be proved or established by the Corporation prior to
taking or suffering any action hereunder, such fact or matter (unless other evidence in respect
thereof  be  herein  specifically  prescribed)  may  be  deemed  to  be  conclusively  proved  and
established by a certificate signed by a Person believed by the Rights Agent to be the Chairman
of the Board, the President, any Vice President or the Corporate Secretary of the Corporation and
delivered to the Rights Agent; and such certificate will be full authorization to the Rights Agent
for any action taken or suffered in good faith  by it under the provisions of this Agreement in
reliance upon such certificate;
the Rights Agent will be liable hereunder only for its own negligence, bad faith or wilful
misconduct;
the Rights Agent will not be liable for or by reason of any of the statements of fact or recitals
contained in this Agreement or in the certificates for Voting Shares or Common Shares or the
Rights Certificates (except its countersignature thereof) or be required to verify the same, but all
such statements and recitals are and will be deemed to have been made by the Corporation only;
the Rights Agent will not be under any responsibility in respect of the validity of this Agreement
or the authorization, execution and delivery hereof (except the due authorization, execution and
delivery hereof by the Rights Agent) or in respect of the validity or execution of any Common
Share  certificate  or  Rights  Certificate  (except  its  countersignature  thereof);  nor  will  it  be
responsible  for  any  breach  by  the  Corporation  of  any  covenant  or  condition  contained  in  this
Agreement  or  in  any  Rights  Certificate;  nor  will  it  be  responsible  for  any  change  in  the
exercisability of the Rights (including the Rights becoming void pursuant to subparagraph 3.1(b))
or any adjustment required under the provisions of Section 2.3 or be responsible for the manner,
method or amount of any such adjustment or the ascertaining of the existence of facts that would
require any such adjustment (except with respect to the exercise of Rights after receipt of the
certificate contemplated by Section 2.3 describing any such adjustment); nor will it by any act
hereunder  be  deemed  to  make  any  representation  or  warranty  as  to  the  authorization  of  any
Common  Shares  to  be  issued  pursuant  to  this  Agreement  or  any  Rights  or  as  to  whether  any
Common  Shares  will,  when  issued,  be  duly  and  validly  authorized,  executed,  issued  and
delivered and fully paid and non-assessable;
- 30 -
(f)
(g)
(h)
the Corporation agrees that it will perform, execute, acknowledge and deliver or cause to be
performed,  executed,  acknowledged  and  delivered  all  such  further  and  other  acts,  instruments
and  assurances  as  may  reasonably  be  required  by  the  Rights  Agent  for  the  carrying  out  or
performing by the Rights Agent of the provisions of this Agreement;
the Rights Agent is hereby authorized and directed to accept written instructions with respect to
the performance of its duties hereunder from any person believed by the Rights Agent to be the
Chairman  of  the  Board,  the  President,  any  Vice  President  or  the  Corporate  Secretary  of  the
Corporation,  and  to  apply  to  such  individual  for  advice  or  instructions  in  connection  with  its
duties, and it shall not be liable for any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance
upon instructions of any such individual;
the Rights Agent and any shareholder or stockholder, director, officer or employee of the Rights
Agent may buy, sell or deal in Common Shares, Rights or other securities of the Corporation or
become pecuniarily interested in any transaction in which the Corporation may be interested, or
contract with or lend money to the Corporation or otherwise act as fully and freely as though it
were not Rights Agent under this Agreement.  Nothing herein shall preclude the Rights Agent
from acting in any other capacity for the Corporation or for any other legal entity; and
(i)
the Rights Agent may execute and exercise any of the rights or powers hereby vested in
it or perform any duty hereunder either itself or by or through its attorneys or agents, and
the Rights Agent will not be answerable or accountable for any act, default, neglect or
misconduct of any such attorneys or agents or for any loss to the Corporation resulting
from  any  such  act,  default,  neglect  or  misconduct,  provided  reasonable  care  was
exercised in the selection and continued employment thereof.
4.4
Change of Rights Agent
The  Rights  Agent  may  resign  and  be  discharged  from  its  duties  under  this  Agreement  upon  30  days'
notice (or such lesser notice as is acceptable to the Corporation) in writing delivered or mailed to the
Corporation and to each transfer agent of Common Shares by registered or certified mail in accordance
with Section 5.9 at the expense of the Corporation.  The Corporation may remove the Rights Agent upon
30 days' notice in writing, mailed to the Rights Agent and to each transfer agent of the Common Shares
by registered or certified mail in accordance with Section 5.9.  If the Rights Agent should resign or be
removed  or  otherwise  become  incapable  of  acting,  the  Corporation  will  appoint  a  successor  to  the
RightRightsgg
 Agent.  If the Corporation fails to make such appointment within a period of 30 days after
such removal or after it has been notified in writing of such resignation or incapacity by the resigning or
incapacitated Rights Agent then the resigning Rights Agent (at the Corporation's expense) or the holder
of  any  Rights  may  apply  to  any  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  for  the  appointment  of  a  new  Rights
Agent.  Any successor Rights Agent, whether appointed by the Corporation or by such a court, shall be a
corporation  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  Canada  or  a  province  thereof  authorized  to  carry  on  the
business of a trust company.  After appointment, the successor Rights Agent will be vested with the same
powers,  rights,  duties  and  responsibilities  as  if  it  had  been  originally  named  as  Rights  Agent  without
further act or deed; but upon payment of its outstanding fees and expenses the predecessor Rights Agent
shall deliver and transfer to the successor Rights Agent any property at the time held by it hereunder, and
execute and deliver any further assurance, conveyance, act or deed necessary for the purpose.  Not later
than the effective date of any such appointment, the Corporation will file notice thereof in writing with
the predecessor Rights Agent and each transfer agent of the Common Shares and give notice thereof to
the holders of the Rights in accordance with Section 5.9.  Failure to give any notice provided for in this
Section 4.4, however, or any defect therein, shall not affect the legality or validity of the resignation or
removal of the Rights Agent or the appointment of the successor Rights Agent, as the case may be.
- 31 -
ARTICLE 5
MISCELLANEOUS
Redemption and Waiver
p
p
Subject to the prior consent of the holders of the Voting Shares,,, or the Rights as set forth in
Subsectionsubparagraph
g p
g p  5.4(c), the Board of Directors acting in good faith may, at its option, at
any time prior to the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, elect to redeem all but not less than all of the
then outstanding Rights at a redemption price of $0.00001 per Right appropriately adjusted in a
manner analogous to the applicable adjustment provided for in Section 2.3 if an event of the type
analogous to any of the events described in Section 2.3 shall have occurred (such redemption
price being herein referred to as the "Redemption Price").
If the Board of Directors elects or is deemed to have elected to redeem the Rights, the right to
exercise the Rights will thereupon, without further action and without notice, terminate and the
only right thereafter of the holders of Rights shall be to receive the Redemption Price.
Within 10 days after the Board of Directors electing or having been deemed to have elected to
redeem the Rights, the Corporation shall give notice of redemption to the holders of the Rights in
accordance with Section 5.9.  Each such notice of redemption will state the method by which the
payment of the Redemption Price will be made.  The Corporation may not redeem, acquire or
purchase for value any Rights at any time in any manner other than that specifically set forth in
this Section 5.1 or other than in connection with the purchase of Common Shares prior to the
Separation Time.
5.1
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)(d)( )
p
p
gg
j
j
p
p
qq
pppp
g
g
yyyy
to  this  Section  5.1,,,  if  such  Flip-inpp
Subject to the prior consent of the holders of the Voting Shares as set forth in 
( ),
g p  5.4(b),
g p
subparagraph
( ), the Board of Directors may,y,y, at anyyy time
Flip-inpp
  Event  as  to  which  the  application
pp
pursuant
acquisition
of a Take-over Bid Circular to all holders of record of Votinggg Shares
in  the  circumstances  set  forth  in  subparagraph
g p
g p   5.1(e)( )( )  hereof,,,  waive  the  application
Section  3.1  hereof  to  such  Flip-inpp
) Business Daysyy  subsequent
)
 Time to a date at least ten (10)
extend the Separation
meeting of Shareholders called to approve such waiver.
to the occurrence of a
  of  Section  3.1  hereof  has  not  been  waived
  Event  would  occur  byyy  reason
  of  an
 to a Take-over Bid made byyy means
yyyy
 and otherwise than
  of
  Event.   In  such  event,,,  the  Board  of  Directors  shall
 to the
otherwise than pursuant
of Votinggg Shares
prior
pp
pppp
pp
pp
pp
pp
p
p
(
(
qq
yyyy
gg
(i)(i)( )
(ii)(ii)( )
g
g
yyyy
yyyy
yyyy
byyy  reason
Event  that  mayyy  occur
(d) The Board of Directors may, until a Flip-in Event shall occur, upon written notice
delivered to the Rights Agent, determine to waive the application of Section 3.1 to such
particular  Flip-in  Eventa  Flip-inpp
  of  a  Take-over  Bid
made byyy means
;
 of a Take-over Bid Circular to all holders of record of Votinggg Shares
provided  that  if  the  Board  of  Directors  waives  the  application  of  Section  3.1  to  a
particular Flip-in Event that may occur by reason of a Take-over Bid made to all holders
g p   5.1(d)(ii)
g p
  to  this  subparagraph
( )( )
( )( ),  the  Board  of
of  record  of  Voting  Sharespursuant
Directors shall be deemed to have waived the application of Section 3.1 to any future
Flip-in Event in respect of any other Take-over Bid made byyy means
 of a Take-over Bid
Circular to all holders of record of Voting Shares prior to the expiry of the Take-over Bid
in  respect  of  which  the  waiver  is,  or  is  deemed  to  have  been  granted  under  this
subparagraph 5.1(d)(ii)()( ).
yyyy
gg
pp
p
p
- 32 -
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
The Board of Directors may waive the application of Section 3.1 in respect of the occurrence of
any Flip-in Event if the Board of Directors has determined within eight Trading Days following a
Stock Acquisition Date that a Person became an Acquiring Person by inadvertence and without
any  intention  to  become,  or  knowledge  that it would become, an Acquiring Person under this
Agreement and, in the event that such a waiver is granted by the Board of Directors, such Stock
Acquisition  Date  shall  be  deemed  not  to  have  occurred.   Any  such  waiver  pursuant  to  this
subparagraph 5.1(e) must be on the condition that such Person, within 10 days after the foregoing
determination by the Board of Directors or such earlier or later date as the Board of Directors
may determine (the "Disposition Date"), has reduced its Beneficial ownership of Voting Shares
such  that  the  Person  is  no  longer  an  Acquiring  Person.   If  the  Person  remains  an  Acquiring
Person at the close of business on the Disposition Date, the Disposition Date shall be deemed to
be the date of occurrence of a further Stock Acquisition Date and Section 3.1 shall apply thereto.
If a Person makes a Permitted Bid or a Competing Permitted Bid pursuant to which more than 50 
per  cent  of  the  then  outstanding  Voting  Shares  (other  than  those  Voting  Shares  Beneficially
Owned by the Persons making the Permitted Bid or the Competing Permitted Bid, at the date of
the Permitted Bid or the Competing Permitted Bid)Votinggg Shares
 are taken up and paid for by
such  Person,  then  the  Board  of  Directors  shall,  immediately  upon  the  consummation  of  such
acquisition,  without  further  formality,  be  deemed  to  have  elected  to  redeem  the  Rights  at  the
Redemption Price on the expiry date of the Permitted Bid or Competing Permitted Bid, as the
case may be.
gg
Where a Take-over Bid that is not a Permitted Bid Acquisition is withdrawn or otherwise
terminated after the Separation Time has occurred and prior to the occurrence of a Flip-in Event,
the Board of Directors may elect to redeem all the outstanding Rights at the Redemption Price.
Upon the Rights being redeemed pursuant to subparagraph 5.1(g), all the provisions of this
Agreement  shall  continue  to  apply  as  if  the  Separation  Time  had  not  occurred  and  Rights
Certificates representing the number of Rights held by each holder of record of Common Shares
as of the Separation Time had not been mailed to each such holder and for all purposes of this
Agreement the Separation Time shall be deemed not to have occurred.
5.2
Expiration
No Person shall have any rights whatsoever pursuant to or arising out of this Agreement or in respect of
any Right after the Expiration Time, except the Rights Agent as specified in subparagraphs 4.1(a) and
(b).
5.3
Issuance of New Rights Certificates
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Agreement or of the Rights to the contrary, the Corporation
may, at its option, issue new Rights Certificates evidencing Rights in such form as may be approved by
the  Board  of  Directors  to  reflect  any  adjustment  or  change  in  the  number  or  kind  or  class  of  shares
purchasable upon exercise of Rights made in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.
5.4
(a)
Supplements and Amendments
Without the approval of any holders of Voting Shares or Rights, the Corporation may make
amendments or supplements to this Agreement to correct any clerical or typographical error or
which are required to maintain the validity of the Agreement as a result of any change in any
applicable  legislation,  regulations  or  rules  thereunder.   In  addition,  without  approval  of  any
- 33 -
holders of Voting Shares or Rights, the Corporation may, prior to the date of the initial meeting
of holders of Voting Shares of the Corporation to confirm this Agreement as contemplated by
Section  5.16  hereof,  amend,  vary,  delete,  rescind  or  supplement  any  of  the  provisions  of  this
Agreement  and  the  Rights  (whether  or  not  such  action  would  materially  adversely  affect  the
interests of holders of Rights generally) without the approval of any holders of Rights or Voting
Shares in order to make any changes which the Board of Directors acting in good faith may deem
necessary  or  desirable.
  Notwithstanding  anything  in  this  Section  5.4  to  the  contrary,  no
supplement or amendment shall be made to the provisions of Article 4 except with the written
concurrence of the Rights Agent to such change, supplement or amendment.
After this Agreement has been initially confirmed by holders of Voting Shares of the Corporation 
as contemplated by Section 5.16 hereof, subject to subsectionSubject
 to subparagraph
g p
g p  5.4(a), the
Corporation may, with the prior consent of the holders of Voting Shares obtained as set forth
below,  at  any  time  before  the  Separation  Time,  amend,  vary,  rescind,  supplement  any  of  the
provisions  of  this  Agreement  and  the  Rights  (whether  or  not  such  action  would  materially
adversely affect the interests of the holders of Rights generally).  Such consent shall be deemed
to have been given if the action requiring such approval is approved by the affirmative vote of a
majority of the votes cast by Independent Shareholders represented in person or by proxy at the
Special Meetinga meeting of the holders of Voting Shares
g
g
g
g
p
p
g
g
jj
.
After this Agreement has been initially confirmed by holders of Voting Shares of the Corporation 
as contemplated by Section 5.16 hereof, theThe Corporation may, with the prior consent of the
holders of Rights obtained as set forth below, at any time after the Separation Time amend, vary
or rescind any of the provisions of this Agreement and the Rights (whether or not such action
would materially adversely affect the interests of the holders of Rights generally), provided that
no such amendment, variation or deletion shall be made to the provisions of Article 4 except with
the written concurrence of the Rights Agent thereto.  Such consent shall be deemed to have been
given  if  such  amendment,  variation  or  deletion  is  authorized  by  the  affirmative  votes  of  the
holders  of  Rights which  have  not  become  void  pursuant
  to  subparagraph
g p
g p   3.1(b)( )( ) present  or
represented at and entitled to vote at a meeting of the holders and representing a majority of the
votes cast in respect thereof.
pp
p
p
Any approval of the holders of Rights shall be deemed to have been given if the action requiring
such  approval  is  authorized  by  the  affirmative  votes  of  the  holders  of  Rights  present  or
represented and entitled to vote at a meeting of the holders of Rights and representing a majority
of the votes cast in respect thereof.  For the purposes hereof, each outstanding Right (other than
Rights  which  are  void  pursuant  to  the  provisions  hereof  or  those  Rightsgg
  to  the
Separation
 Shareholders) shall be entitled
to one vote, and the procedures for the calling, holding and conduct of the meeting shall be those,
as  nearly  as  may  be,  which  are  provided  in  the  Corporation's  by-laws  and  the Business
Corporations  Act (Alberta)  with  respect  to  meetings  of shareholdersShareholders  of  the
Corporation.
Time,,, are held byyy Shareholders
other than Independent
which,,,  prior
yyyy
pp
pp
pp
Any amendments or supplements made by the Corporation to this Agreement pursuant to
subsection 5.4(a), after this Agreement has been initially confirmed by holders of Voting Shares
as contemplated by Section 5.16 hereofsubparagraph
g p
g p  5.4(a)( )( ), which are required to maintain the
validity of the Agreement as a result of any change in any applicable legislation, regulations or
rules thereunder, shall:
p
p
(i)
if made before the Separation Time, be submitted to the holders of the Voting Shares of
the Corporation at the next meeting of such shareholdersShareholders and the holders of
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
- 34 -
Voting Shares may, by the majority referred to in subparagraph 5.4(b) confirm or reject
such amendment;
(ii)
if made after the Separation Time, be submitted to the holders of Rights at a meeting to
be called for on a date not later than immediately following the next meeting of holders
of Voting Shares and the holders of Rights may, by resolution passed by the majority
referred to in subparagraph 5.4(d) confirm or reject such amendment.
Any such amendment shall be effective from the date of the resolution of the Board of Directors
adopting such amendment, until it is confirmed or rejected or until it ceases to be effective (as
described in the next sentence) and, where such amendment is confirmed, it continues in effect in
the form so confirmed.  If such amendment is rejected by the holders of Voting Shares or the
holders of Rights or is not submitted to the Shareholders or holders of Rights as required, then
such  amendment  shall  cease  to  be  effective  from  and  after  the  termination  of  the  meeting  at
which it was rejected or to which it should have been but was not submitted or from and after the
date  of  the  meeting  of  holders  of  Rights  that  should  have  been  but  was  not  held,  and  no
subsequent  resolution  of  the  Board  of  Directors  to  amend  this  Agreement  to  substantially  the
same  effect  shall  be  effective  until  confirmed  by  the  holders  of  Voting  Shares  or  holders  of
Rights as the case may be.
The Corporation shall be required to provide the Rights Agent with notice in writing of any such
amendment,  variation  or  rescission  to  this  Agreement  and/or  the  Rights  as  referred  to  in  this
Section 5.4 within five days of effecting such amendment, variation or rescission.
Fractional Rights and Fractional Shares
The Corporation shall not be required to issue fractions of Rights or to distribute Rights
Certificates which evidence fractional Rights.  In lieu of such fractional Rights, there shall be
paid  to  the  registered  holders  of  the  Rights  Certificates  with  regard  to  which  such  fractional
Rights would otherwise be issuable an amount in cash equal to the same fraction of the Market
Price of a whole Right determined on the date on which such fractional Right would otherwise be
issuable.
The Corporation shall not be required to issue fractions of Common Shares upon exercise of the
Rights  or  to  distribute  certificates  which  evidence  fractional  Common  Shares.   Fractions  of
Common Shares may, at the election of the Corporation, be evidenced by scrip certificates or in
lieu of issuing fractional Common Shares, the Corporation shall pay to the registered holders of
Rights Certificates, at the time such Rights are exercised as herein provided, an amount in cash
equal to the same fraction of the Market Price of one Common Share at the date of such exercise.
The Rights Agent shall have no obligation to make any payments in lieu of issuing fractions of
Rights or Common Shares pursuant to subparagraph (a) or (b), respectively, unless and until the
Corporation shall have provided to the Rights Agent the amount of cash in full to be paid in lieu
of  issuing  such  fractional  Rights  or  Common  Shares,  as  the  case  may  be,,,  in  accordance  with
Section 2.2(e)(iii)
)
).
( )(
( )(
(f)
5.5
(a)
(b)
(c)
5.6
Rights of Action
Subject to the terms of this Agreement, all rights of action in respect of this Agreement, other than rights
of action vested solely in the Rights Agent, are vested in the respective registered holders of the Rights;
and  any  registered  holder  of  any  Rights, without the consent of the Rights Agent or of the registered
- 35 -
holder of any other Rights, may, on such holder's own behalf and for such holder's own benefit and the
benefit of other holders of Rights, enforce, and may institute and maintain any suit, action or proceeding
against  the  Corporation  to  enforce  such  holder's  right  to  exercise  such  holder's  Rights  in  the  manner
provided in such holder's Rights Certificate and in this Agreement.  Without limiting the foregoing or any
remedies  available  to the holders of Rights, it is specifically acknowledged that the holders of Rights
would  not  have  an  adequate  remedy  at  law  for  any  breach  of  this  Agreement  and  will  be  entitled  to
specific performance of the obligations under, and injunctive relief against actual or threatened violations
of the obligations of any person subject to, this Agreement.
5.7
Regulatory Approvals
Any obligation of the Corporation or action or event contemplated by this Agreement shall be subject to
the  receipt  of  any  requisite  approval  or  consent  from  any  governmental  or  regulatory  authority,  and,
without limitation, necessary approval of the Toronto Stock Exchange shall be obtained, such as to the
issuance of Common Shares upon the exercise of Rights under subparagraph 2.2(d).  Notwithstanding
any provision of this Agreement, any amendment to this Agreement will be subject to the prior written
consent of the Toronto Stock Exchange.
5.8
Unlawful Distributions
If in the opinion of the Board of Directors (who may rely upon the advice of counsel) any action or event
contemplated by this Agreement would require compliance by the Corporation with the securities laws or
comparable  legislation  of  a  jurisdiction  outside  Canada  or  the  United  States,  the  Board  of  Directors
acting in good faith shall take such actions as it may deem appropriate to ensure that such compliance is
not required, including, without limitation, establishing procedures for the issuance to a Canadian or the
United States resident trustee of Rights or securities issuable on exercise of Rights, the holding thereof in
trust for the Persons entitled thereto (but reserving to the trustee or to the trustee and the Corporation, as
the Corporation may determine, absolute investment discretion with respect thereto) and the sale thereof
and remittance of proceeds of such sale, if any, to the Persons entitled thereto.  In no event shall the
Corporation or the Rights Agent be required to issue or deliver Rights or securities issuable on exercise
of Rights to Persons who are citizens, residents or nationals of any jurisdiction other than Canada or the
United  States,  in  which  such  issue  or  delivery  would  be  unlawful  without  registration  of  the  relevant
Persons or securities for such purposes.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent that the issuance or
delivery of the Rights or securities issuable on exercise of Rights to Persons who are citizens, residents or
nationals of any such jurisdiction in which such issue or delivery would be so unlawful, such Rights or
securities  shall  be  issued  and  delivered  to  such  Persons  to  the  extent  the  same  may  be  so  issued  and
delivered in reliance upon applicable exemptions from registration requirements in such jurisdictions.
5.9
Notices
Any notice or demand authorized or required by this Agreement to be given or made by the Rights Agent
or by the holder of any Rights to or on the Corporation shall be sufficiently given or made if delivered or
sent  by  first-class  mail,  postage  prepaid,  addressed  (until  another  address  is  filed  in  writing  with  the
Rights Agent) as follows:
- 36 -
g
g
Parex Resources Inc.
1000, Energy Plaza, East2700 Eighth Avenue Place, West
311
585 - 6th8 Avenue SW
S.W.
Calgary, Alberta
 AB T2P 3H21G1
,
,
Tower
Fax: (403) 265-8216
Attention: Chief Financial Officer
Any such notice or demand shall be deemed to have been received if delivered, on the date of delivery, or
if sent by prepaid first class mail, on the fifth Business Day after mailing thereof, except in the case of
interruption of regular mail service, in which case such notice shall be delivered.
Any notice or demand authorized or required by this Agreement to be given or made by the Corporation
or by the holder of any Rights to or on the Rights Agent shall be sufficiently given or made if delivered
or sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed (until another address is filed in writing with the
Corporation) as follows:
Valiant Trust Company
310, 606 – 4th Street SWS.W.
Calgary, Alberta
 AB T2P 1T1
Fax:  (403) 233-2857
Attention:  Manager, Stock Transfer
Any such notice or demand shall be deemed to have been received if delivered, on the date of delivery, or
if sent by prepaid first class mail, on the fifth Business Day after mailing thereof, except in the case of
interruption of regular mail service, in which case such notice shall be delivered.
Any notice or demand authorized or required by this Agreement to be given or made by the Corporation
or the Rights Agent to or on the holder of any Rights shall be sufficiently given or made if delivered or
sent  by  first-class  mail,  postage  prepaid,  addressed  to  such  holder  at  the  address  of  such  holder  as  it
appears  upon  the  register  of  the  Rights  Agent  or,  prior  to  the Separation Time, on the register of the
Corporation for its Common Shares.  Any notice which is mailed in the manner herein provided shall be
deemed given, whether or not the holder receives the notice.  In the event of any interruption of mail
service, such notice required or permitted to be given hereunder will be deemed to be sufficiently given
by  advertisement  of  such  notice  in  daily  newspapers  published  in  each  of  the  cities  of  Calgary  and
Toronto.
5.10
Costs of Enforcement
The  Corporation  agrees  that  if  the  Corporation  or  any  other  Person  the  securities  of  which  are
purchasable upon exercise of Rights fails to fulfil any of its obligations pursuant to this Agreement, then
the  Corporation  or  such  Person  will  reimburse  the  holder  of  any  Rights  for  the  costs  and  expenses
(including legal fees) incurred by such holder in actions to enforce his rights pursuant to any Rights or
this Agreement.
- 37 -
5.11
Successors
All the covenants and provisions of this Agreement by or for the benefit of the Corporation or the Rights
Agent shall bind and inure to the benefit of their respective successors and assigns hereunder.
5.12
Benefits of this Agreement
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to give to any Person other than the Corporation, the Rights
Agent and the holders of the Rights any legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under this Agreement;
but this Agreement shall be for the sole and exclusive benefit of the Corporation, the Rights Agent and
the holders of the Rights.
5.13
Governing Law
This Agreement and each Right issued hereunder shall be deemed to be a contract made under the laws
of the Province of Alberta and for all purposes shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the
laws of such province applicable to contracts to be made and performed entirely within such province.
5.14
Severability
If any Section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph or other provision hereof or the application hereof to
any  circumstances  or  any  right  hereunder  shall,  in  any  jurisdiction  and  to  any  extent,  be  invalid  or
unenforceable, such Section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph or other provision or such right shall
be ineffective only as to such jurisdiction and to the extent of such invalidity or unenforceability in such
jurisdiction  without  invalidating  or  rendering  unenforceable  or  ineffective  the  remaining  Sections,
subsections,  paragraphs,  subparagraphs  and  other  provisions  hereof  or  rights  hereunder  in  such
jurisdiction or the application of such Section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph or other provision or
rights  hereunder  in  any  other  jurisdiction  or  to  circumstances  other  than  those  as  to  which  it  is
specifically held invalid or unenforceable.
5.15
Effective Date
ThisNotwithstandinggg itsgg
and in full force and effect in accordance with its terms from and after the date hereofRecord Time.
amendment and restatement as of the date hereof,,, this Agreement is effective
5.16
Reconfirmation
pppp
j
j
p
p
pp
p
p
j
j
q
q
majority
y
yyyy
y  referred
( ),
g p   5.4(b),
g p
  to  in  subparagraph
( ),  if  this  Agreement
IfAssuminggg this Agreement is notapproved
 and confirmed by a resolution passed by Shareholders at the
yyyy
Shareholders'  Meetinggg  byg yg y  the
  is  not
subsequently
y
yyyy
y  reconfirmed
  byyy  ayyyy   resolution  passed
  byyyyyyy holders  of  the  Voting  Shares Corporation  at  a
meeting  of  such  shareholders  to  be  held  within  six  months  of  the  Record  Time  andbyyy  the
  majority
y
yyyyy
referred to in the last sentence of subparagraph
g p
g p  5.4(b)( )( ) at every third annual meeting of the Corporation
 Shareholders' Meetinggg, or if this Agreement is not presented for confirmation or
thereafterfollowinggg the
reconfirmation  byyy  Shareholders
  prior  to  such  dates,  as  the  case  may  be,  this  Agreement  and  all
outstanding Rights shall terminate and be void and of no further force and effect on and after: (i) in the
case  of  the  initial  confirmation,  the  first  to  occur  of  six  months  of  the  Record  Date  and  the  date  of
termination of such meeting of shareholders; and (ii) in the case of subsequent reconfirmations, the date
of termination of such applicable meeting of shareholdersShareholders; provided that termination shall
not occur if a Flip-in Event has occurred (other than a Flip-in Event which has been waived pursuant to
Section 5.1 hereof), prior to the date upon which this Agreement would otherwise terminate pursuant to
this Section 5.16.
gg
yyyy
gg
yyyy
- 38 -
5.17
Determinations and Actions by the Board of Directors
All actions, calculations and determinations (including, for purposes of Clause (ii) below, all omissions
with respect to the foregoing) which are done or made by the Board of Directors in good faith, shall: (i)
be final, conclusive and binding on the Corporation, the Rights Agent, the holders of the Rights and all
other parties; and (ii) not subject the Board of Directors to any liability to the holders of the Rights.
5.18
Time of the Essence
Time shall be of the essence in this Agreement.
5.19
Execution in Counterparts
This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts and each of such counterparts shall for
all purposes be deemed to be an original, and all such counterparts shall together constitute one and the
same instrument.
5.20
Language
Les parties aux présentes ont exigé que la présente convention ainsi que tous les documents et avis qui s'y
rattachent et/ou que en découlent soient redigés en langue anglaise.  The parties hereto have required that
this Agreement and all documents and notices related thereto and/or resulting therefrom be drawn up in
English.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed as of the
date first above written.
PAREX RESOURCES INC.
(Signed)
( g
)
By:
__________________________________
"Wayney
(Signed)
( g
)
By:
__________________________________
"Kenneth
VALIANT TRUST COMPANY
(Signed)
( g
)
By:
__________________________________
"Kirsten
Foo"
Pinsky"y
Dillon"
(Signed)
( g
)
By:
__________________________________
"Bonnie
Steedman"
EXHIBIT A
[Form of Rights Certificate]
Certificate No.
________ Rights
THE  RIGHTS  ARE  SUBJECT  TO  TERMINATION  ON  THE  TERMS  SET
IN  THE  SHAREHOLDER  PROTECTION  RIGHTS  PLAN
FORTH 
AGREEMENT.
  UNDER  CERTAIN  CIRCUMSTANCES  (SPECIFIED  IN
SECTION  3.1(b)  OF  THE  SHAREHOLDER  PROTECTION  RIGHTS  PLAN
AGREEMENT),  RIGHTS  BENEFICIALLY  OWNED  BY  AN  ACQUIRING
PERSON  OR  TRANSFEREES  OF  AN  ACQUIRING  PERSON  OR  ITS
AFFILIATES  OR  ASSOCIATES  (AS  SUCH  TERMS  ARE  DEFINED IN THE
RIGHTS  AGREEMENT)  OR  ANY  PERSON  ACTING  JOINTLY  OR  IN
CONCERT WITH ANY OF THEM MAY BECOME VOID.
Rights Certificate
This  certifies  that  _______________________________________,  or  its  registered  assigns,  is  the
registered holder of the number of Rights set forth above, each of which entitles the registered holder
thereof,  subject  to  the  terms,  provisions  and  conditions  of  the  Shareholder  Protection  Rights  Plan
Agreement dated as of the 29th day of September, 20092009,,, as amended and restated as of Mayyy 12,
 2015
,
,
(the "Rights Agreement") between Parex Resources Inc., a corporation incorporated under the Business
Corporations Act (Alberta) (the "Corporation") and Valiant Trust Company, a trust company, as rights
agent  (the  "Rights  Agent")  (which  term  shall  include  any  successor  Rights  Agent  under  the  Rights
Agreement),  to purchase from the Corporation at any time after the Separation Time (as such term is
defined in the Rights Agreement) and prior to the Expiration Time (as such term is defined in the Rights
Agreement), one fully paid common share of the Corporation (a "Common Share") at the Exercise Price
referred to below, upon presentation and surrender of this Rights Certificate together with the Form of
Election to Exercise duly executed and submitted to the Rights Agent at its principal office in the city of
Toronto.  Until adjustment thereof in certain events as provided in the Rights Agreement, the Exercise
Price is Fifty ($50.00) dollars.
y
yyy
yy
In certain circumstances described in the Rights Agreement, each Right evidenced hereby may entitle the
registered holder thereof to purchase or receive securities of an entity other than the Corporation, assets,
debt, equity or other securities or property or assets of the Corporation, or more or less than one Common
Share (or a combination thereof), all as provided in the Rights Agreement.
The Rights Certificate is subject to all of the terms, provisions and conditions of the Rights Agreement
which  terms,  provisions  and  conditions  are  hereby  incorporated  herein  by  reference  and  made  a  part
thereof  and  to  which  Rights  Agreement  reference  is  hereby  made  for  a  full  description  of  the  rights,
limitations of rights, obligations, duties and immunities thereunder of the Rights Agent, the Corporation
and the holders of the Rights Certificates.  Copies of the Rights Agreement are on file at the principal
office of the Corporation and are available upon written request.
The Rights Certificate, with or without other Rights Certificates, upon surrender at any of the offices of
the Rights Agent designated for such purpose, may be exchanged for another Rights Certificate or Rights
Certificates of like tenor and the date evidencing an aggregate number of Rights equal to the aggregate
number of Rights evidenced by the Rights Certificate or Rights Certificates surrendered.  If this Rights
Certificate shall be exercised in part, the registered holder shall be entitled to receive, upon surrender
hereof, another Rights Certificate or Rights Certificates for the number of whole Rights now exercised.
-  2 -
No fractional Common Shares will be issued upon the exercise of any Rights evidenced hereby, but in
lieu thereof a cash payment will be made as provided in the Rights Agreement.
Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Rights  Agreement,  the  Rights  evidenced  by  this  Certificate  may  be
redeemed  by  the  Corporation  at  a  redemption  price  of  $0.00001  per  Right,  subject  to  adjustment  in
certain events, under certain circumstances at its option.
No holder of this Rights Certificate, as such, shall be entitled to vote or receive dividends or be deemed
for  any  purpose  the  holder  of  Common  Shares  or  of  any  other  securities  which  may  at  any  time  be
issuable  upon  the  exercise  hereof,  nor  shall  anything  contained  in  the  Rights  Agreement  or herein be
construed to confer upon the holder hereof, as such, any of the rights of a shareholderShareholder of the
Corporation  or  any  right  to  vote  for  the  election  of  directors  or  upon  any  matter  submitted  to
shareholdersShareholders at any meeting thereof, or to give or withhold consent to any corporate action,
or to receive notice of meetings or other actions affecting shareholdersShareholders (except as provided
in the Rights Agreement), or to receive dividends or subscription rights, or otherwise, until the Rights
evidenced by this Rights Certificate shall have been exercised as provided in the Rights Agreement.
The  Rights  Certificate  shall  not  be  valid  or  obligatory  for  any  purpose  until  it  shall  have  been
countersigned by the Rights Agent.
WITNESS the facsimile signature of the proper officers of the Corporation and its corporate seal.
DATE:
PAREX RESOURCES INC.
By:
By:
Countersigned:
VALIANT TRUST COMPANY
By:
Authorized Signature
FORM OF ASSIGNMENT
(To be executed by the registered holder if such holder desires to transfer the Rights Certificates)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED ________________________ hereby sells, assigns and transfers unto
(please print name and address of transferee)
the Rights represented by this Rights Certificate, together with all right, title and interest therein, and
does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint ______________________________________ attorney,
to transfer the within Rights Certificate on the books of the within-named Corporation, with full power of
substitution.
Date:
Signature Guarantee:
Signature
(Signature  must  correspond  to  name  as  written  upon  the  face  of  this
Rights Certificate in every particular, without alteration or enlargement
or any change whatsoever)
Note:  Signature must be guaranteed by a major Canadian trust company, a Schedule I Canadian
chartered bank, or a member of a recognized Medallion Guarantee program.
(To be completed by the assignor if true)
The undersigned hereby represents, for the benefit of all holders of Rights and Common Shares, that the
Rights evidenced by this Rights Certificate are not, and, to the knowledge of the undersigned, have never
been, Beneficially Owned by an Acquiring Person or an Affiliate or Associate thereof or by any Person
acting jointly or in concert therewith.  Capitalized terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in the
Rights Agreement.
Signature
(please print name of Signatory)
(To be attached to each Rights Certificate)
FORM OF ELECTION TO EXERCISE
TO: VALIANT TRUST COMPANY
RE: PAREX RESOURCES INC.
The undersigned hereby irrevocably elects to exercise ___________________________________ whole
Rights represented by the Rights Certificate to purchase the Common Shares issuable upon the exercise
of such Rights and requests that certificates for such shares be issued in the name of:
Address
Social Insurance, Social Security or Other Taxpayer Identification Number
If such number of Rights shall not be all the Rights evidenced by this Rights Certificate, a new Rights
Certificate for the balance of such Rights shall be registered in the name of and delivered to:
Address
Social Insurance, Social Security or Other Taxpayer Identification Number
Date:
Signature
Signature Guaranteed:
(Signature must correspond to name as written upon the face of this Rights Certificate in
every particular, without alteration or enlargement or any change whatsoever)
Note:  Signature must be guaranteed by a major Canadian trust company, a Schedule I Canadian
chartered bank, or a member of a recognized Medallion Guarantee program.
(To be completed by exercisor if true)
-  2 -
The undersigned hereby represents, for the benefit of all holders of Rights and Common Shares, that the
Rights evidenced by this Rights Certificate are not, and, to the knowledge of the undersigned, have never
been, Beneficially Owned by an Acquiring Person or an Affiliate or Associate thereof or by any Person
acting jointly or in concert therewith.  Capitalized terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in the
Rights Agreement.
Signature
(please print name of Signatory)
NOTICE
In  the  event  the  Certificate  set  forth  above  in  the  applicable  Forms  of  Assignment  or  Election  is  not
completed,  the  Corporation  will  deem  the  Beneficial  Owner  of  the  Rights  evidenced  by  this  Rights
Certificate  to  be  an  Acquiring  Person  or  an  Affiliate  or  Associate  thereof  and,  in  the  case  of  an
Assignment,  will  affix  a  legend  to  that  effect  on  any  Rights  Certificates  issued  in  exchange  for  this
Rights Certificate.  Capitalized terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in the Rights Agreement.

