
10-K/A 1 v394930_10ka.htm 10-K/A
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D. C. 20549
FORM 10-K/A
(Amendment No. 2)
x
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE
ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014
or
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE
¨
ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from _____________________ to ________________
Commission File Number 01-33522
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or Other Jurisdiction of Incorporation or Organization)(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
 
Three Riverway, Suite 300, Houston, Texas
(Address of Principal Executive Offices)
77056
(Zip Code)
20-2110031
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (713) 579-0600
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act:
Common Stock, $.01 par valueNASDAQ Stock Market
(Title of Class)
(Name of Exchange on Which Registered)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the
Securities Act.
Yes  o     No  x
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section
15(d) of the Act.
Yes  o     No  x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements
for the past 90 days.     Yes  x    No  o
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate
Website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes  o    No  o
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§
229.405) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any
amendment to this Form 10-K. o
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-
accelerated filer or a smaller reporting company.  See the definitions of “accelerated filer,” “large
accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer  £Accelerated filer  £Non-accelerated filer  oSmaller reporting company  x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).
Yes  £     No  T
The aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of the last
business day of the most recently completed first fiscal quarter, September 30, 2014, was approximately
$72.0 million.
As of October 24, 2014, there were 73,224,330 shares of the registrant’s common stock outstanding, par
value $.01 per share.
EXPLANATORY NOTE
This Amendment No. 2 on Form 10-K/A (this “Amendment”) amends our Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014, originally filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(the “SEC”) on September 12, 2014, as amended on October 28, 2014 (the “Original Filing”). We are
filing this Amendment to include certain information required by Part II, Item 8 of Form 10-K. The Report
of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm inadvertently only referred to one year of financial
statements. In addition, the Report omitted references to the city and state where the Report was issued.
This amendment includes an audit report that corrects this information presented in our Original Filing.
In accordance with Rule 12b-15 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, Part II, Item 8,
and Part III, Item 15, of the Original Filing are amended and restated in their entirety, with the only
change being the changes to the audit report noted above. This Amendment does not amend or
otherwise update any other information in the Original Filing. The Original Filing continues to speak as
of the date of the Original Filing, and we have not updated the disclosures contained therein to reflect
any events which occurred at a date subsequent to the filing of the Original Filing. Accordingly, this
Amendment should be read in conjunction with the Original Filing and with our filings with the SEC
subsequent to the Original Filing.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART II
 
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.3
 
 
PART III
 
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules. 30
SIGNATURES
33
PART II
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page
 
 
 
4
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
 
5
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2014 and 2013
 
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 6
 
 
8
Consolidated Statement of Equity for the years ended June 30, 2014, and 2013
 
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended June 30, 2014, and 20139
 
 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
10
3
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To Board of Directors and Stockholders
Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Synthesis Energy Systems,
Inc. and subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”) as of June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2013, and
the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive loss, changes in
stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the years then ended. These consolidated financial
statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of
material misstatement. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform,
an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of
internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we
express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall consolidated financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all
material respects, the consolidated financial position of Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. and
subsidiaries as of June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2013, and the consolidated results of their
operations and their cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
/s/ UHY LLP
Houston, Texas
September 12, 2014
4
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(In thousands)
ASSETS
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
June 30,
 
 2014
 
    
 
    
 
 $19,407   $15,870
June 30,
  2013
Accounts receivable-related party, net
Prepaid expenses and other currents assets
Inventory
Total current assets
Property, plant and equipment, net
Intangible asset, net
Investment in joint ventures
Other long-term assets
Total assets
 
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
Current liabilities:
Accrued expenses and accounts payable
Short-term bank loan
Current portion of long-term bank loan
Total current liabilities
Total liabilities
 
Commitment and contingencies
 
Equity:
Common stock, $0.01 par value - 200,000 shares authorized – 73,107 and
63,583 shares issued and outstanding, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated Deficit
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Total stockholders’ equity
Noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries
Total equity
Total liabilities and equity
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
1,060
2,844
2
    2,636
    —
676
 
   873
   865
 
   21,821     18,508  
   31,499     32,641  
   1,049
 
   34,856     33,311  
   2,481
 
 $91,706   $88,364  
    
 
 
    
 
    
 
 $7,167
   3,251
 
   —
 
   10,418     10,060  
   10,418     10,060
$7,632
    $—
    2,428
731
636
5,958
241,125     224,337  
   (165,984)   (151,741)
   6,062
 
   81,934     79,190  
   (646
)
   81,288     78,304  
 $91,706   $88,364
)   (886
5
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
Revenue:
Product sales and other — related parties
Year Ended June 30, 
 2014
 
 
    
 $14,880   $45
2013
534
    —
Technology licensing and related services
Related party sale
Total revenue
Costs and Expenses:
 
Costs of sales and plant operating expenses
General and administrative expenses
Stock-based compensation expense
Depreciation and amortization
Other income
Total costs and expenses
Operating loss
 
Non-operating (income) expense:
Equity in losses of joint ventures
Foreign currency gains, net
Interest income
Interest expense
Net loss
Less: net income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interests   (246
Net loss attributable to stockholders
Net loss per share:
Basic and diluted
Weighted average common shares outstanding:
Basic and diluted
—
 
   2,627
 
   17,507     579
 
    
 
    
 
   17,361     750
    13,599  
   9,958
 
    2,317
   2,219
 
    2,292
   2,293
   (675
)   —
 
   31,156     18,958  
   (13,649 )   (18,379 )
 
    
    
 
 
   2
)
   (2
   (33
)
   381
 
   (13,997 )   (19,923 )
)
 $(14,243 ) $(19,933 )
 
    
 $(0.22
)
    
 
   66,118     60,171
1,372
)   (80
)   (50
    302
) $(0.33
)   (10
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
6
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss
(In thousands)
Net loss, as reported
Cumulative translation adjustment
Comprehensive loss
Less comprehensive loss attributable to non-controlling interests   (240
Comprehensive loss attributable to the Company
Year Ended June 30, 
 
 2014
  
 
 $(13,997 ) $(19,923 )
   98
 
   (13,899 )   (18,764 )
)
 $(14,139 ) $(18,777 )
2013
1,159
)   (13
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
7
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
Consolidated Statement of Equity
(In thousands)
Balance at
June 30, 2012
Net loss
Currency
translation
adjustment
Comprehensive
loss
Net proceeds
from issuance
of common
stock
Stock-based
compensation
Exercise of
stock options
Balance at
June 30, 2013
Net loss
Currency
translation
adjustment
Comprehensive
loss
Net proceeds
from issuance
of common
stock
Stock-based
Common  Additional
Common Stock
  
 Shares   Stock
Accumulated  Comprehensive  controlling
Accumulated
  Other
Non-
Paid-in Capital  Deficit
Income
Interest
Total
52,022  $ 520
$ 207,345
$ (131,808
) $ 4,802
$ (899
) $79,960
—
—
—
—
(19,933
)   —
10
(19,923)
—
—
—
1,156
3
1,159
(18,764)
11,060    111
14,670
—
—
—
14,781
280
3
2,317
221
2
5
—
—
—
—
—
2,320
—
7
63,583  $ 636
$ 224,337
$ (151,741
) $ 5,958
$ (886
) $78,304
—
—
—
—
(14,243
)   —
246
(13,997)
—
—
—
104
(6
)   98
(13,899)
8,470     84
14,065
—
—
—
14,149
—
2,219
1,054     11
504
compensation   —
Exercise of
stock options
and warrants
Balance at
June 30, 2014
—
—
—
—
—
—
2,219
515
73,107  $ 731
$ 241,125
$ (165,984
) $ 6,062
$ (646
) $81,288
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
8
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(In thousands)
2013
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:    
Stock-based compensation expense
Depreciation of property, plant and equipment
Amortization of intangible and other assets
Equity in losses of joint ventures
Foreign currency gains
Loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment
Write-off of GCL account payable
Write-off of deferred financing costs
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
Inventory
Other long-term assets
Accrued expenses and payables
Net cash used in operating activities
 
Cash flows from investing activities:
Capital expenditures
Equity investment in joint ventures
Proceeds from sale of fixed assets
Net cash provided by used in investing activities
 
Cash flows from financing activities:
2,317
    2,075
    217
    1,372
)   (80
    1
)   —
    1,004
     
)   314
    (566
)   26
    (113
    334
Year Ended June 30, 
 
 2014
    
 
 $(13,997 ) $(19,923 )
 
 
   2,219
 
   2,041
 
   252
 
   2
)
   (2
 
   —
 
   (675
 
   —
 
    
 
   (672
)
   1,892
 
   (873
)
   201
   112
 
   (9,500 )   (13,022 )
     
 
    
 
     
    
)   (12
   (892
)
)
   (1,547 )   (596
 
   —
)
   (2,439 )   (607
1
—
(2,448 )   (2,442 )
    (1,000 )
   —
   515
 
    7
   14,149     14,877  
   3,253
 
   15,469     11,442  
    
 
     
   3,530
    (2,187 )
   15,870     18,035  
   7
 
 $19,407   $15,870
22
Payments on long-term bank loan
Refund of advance toward sale of common stock
Proceeds from exercise of (repurchase of) stock options, net
Proceeds from issuance of common stock, net
Proceeds from short-term bank loan
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
Effect of exchange rates on cash
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
9
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
(A Development Stage Enterprise)
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 — Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
(a) Organization and description of business
Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. (“SES”), together with its wholly-owned and majority-owned
controlled subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”) is a development stage global energy and
gasification technology company that provides products and solutions to the energy and
chemical industries. The Company’s business is to create value by supplying its technology,
equipment and services into global projects where lower cost low quality coals, coal wastes,
municipal wastes, agricultural biomass, and other biomass feedstocks can be profitably
converted through its proprietary gasification technology into clean synthesis gas, or syngas (a
mixture of primarily hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and methane), which is then used to produce a
variety of high value energy and chemical products. The Company’s initial operating projects to
date convert high ash coal and coal wastes to chemical grade methanol, and the Company is
pursuing a variety of additional global projects under development by customers who may use
its technology platform to convert low quality coals such as lignite, coal wastes, municipal
wastes and agricultural waste biomass to high value products such as electric power,
transportation fuels, substitute natural gas fuel for direct reduction iron steel making and other
products. The Company’s technology is originally based on the U-GAS® process developed by
the Gas Technology Institute and the Company has augmented and differentiated the
technology through design, detailed engineering, constructing, starting up and operating two
commercial plants in China. The Company’s headquarters are located in Houston, Texas.
(b) Basis of presentation and principles of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements are in U.S. dollars. Non-controlling interests in
consolidated subsidiaries in the consolidated balance sheets represents minority stockholders’
proportionate share of the equity in such subsidiaries. All significant intercompany balances
and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
(c) Use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting
principles requires management to make estimates that affect the amounts reported in the
financial statements and accompanying notes. Management considers many factors in selecting
appropriate operational and financial accounting policies and controls, and in developing the
assumptions that are used in the preparation of these financial statements. Management must
apply significant judgment in this process. Among the factors, but not fully inclusive of all
factors that may be considered by management in these processes are: the range of accounting
policies permitted by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America;
management’s understanding of the Company’s business for both historical results and
expected future results; the extent to which operational controls exist that provide high degrees
of assurance that all desired information to assist in the estimation is available and reliable or
whether there is greater uncertainty in the information that is available upon which to base the
estimate; expectations of the future performance of the economy, both domestically, and
globally, within various areas that serve the Company’s principal customers and suppliers of
goods and services; expected rates of exchange, sensitivity and volatility associated with the
assumptions used in developing estimates; and whether historical trends are expected to be
representative of future trends. The estimation process often times may yield a range of
potentially reasonable estimates of the ultimate future outcomes and management must select
an amount that lies within that range of reasonable estimates based upon the risks associated
with the variability that might be expected from the future outcome and the factors considered in
developing the estimate. Management attempts to use its business and financial accounting
judgment in selecting the most appropriate estimate, however, actual amounts could and will
differ from those estimates.
(d) Cash and cash equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or
less to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents are carried at cost, which approximates market
value.
10
(e) Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information (in thousands):
Interest paid
 
Non-cash transactions:
Fair value of stock and warrants issued to consultants and employees   636
Years Ended June 30, 
 2014
 
 
 $ 344
2013
    $ 260
     
     
      346
(f) Accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts
Accounts receivable are stated at historical carrying amounts net of allowance for doubtful
accounts. The Company establishes provisions for losses on accounts receivable if it is
determined that collection of all or part of an outstanding balance is not probable. Collectability
is reviewed regularly and an allowance is established or adjusted, as necessary. As of June 30,
2014 and 2013, no allowance for doubtful accounts was necessary.
(g) Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using the average cost
method. Inventories include finished goods and raw materials (primarily coal) which are
expensed to cost of sales when consumed.
(h) Property, plant, and equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation. Depreciation
is computed by using the straight-line method at rates based on the estimated useful lives of the
various classes of property, plant and equipment. Estimates of useful lives are based upon a
variety of factors including durability of the asset, the amount of usage that is expected from the
asset, the rate of technological change and the Company’s business plans for the asset.
Leasehold improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the lease term
or estimated useful life of the asset. Should the Company change its plans with respect to the
use and productivity of property, plant and equipment, it may require a change in the useful life
of the asset or incur a charge to reflect the difference between the carrying value of the asset
and the proceeds expected to be realized upon the asset’s sale or abandonment. Expenditures
for maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred and significant major improvements are
capitalized and depreciated over the estimated useful life of the asset.
(i) Intangible assets
The Company accounts for intangible assets in accordance with ASC 350, “Intangibles-
Goodwill and Other.” This standard requires that goodwill and other intangible assets with
indefinite useful lives not be amortized but instead tested annually for impairment, or
immediately if conditions indicate that impairment could exist. Intangible assets with definite
useful lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment in
accordance with ASC 360, “Accounting for Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.”
Substantial judgment is necessary in the determination as to whether an event or circumstance
has occurred that may trigger an impairment analysis and in the determination of the related
cash flows from the asset. Estimating cash flows related to long-lived assets is a difficult and
subjective process that applies historical experience and future business expectations to
revenues and related operating costs of assets. Should impairment appear to be necessary,
subjective judgment must be applied to estimate the fair value of the asset, for which there may
be no ready market, which often times results in the use of discounted cash flow analysis and
judgmental selection of discount rates to be used in the discounting process. If the Company
determines an asset has been impaired based on the projected undiscounted cash flows of the
related asset or the business unit, and if the cash flow analysis indicates that the carrying
amount of an asset exceeds related undiscounted cash flows, the carrying value is reduced to
the estimated fair value of the asset. There were no events or circumstances that triggered an
impairment analysis of intangible assets during the year ended June 30, 2014.
11
(j) Impairment of long-lived assets
The Company evaluates its long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment,
construction-in-progress, equity method investments and specifically identified intangibles,
when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may
not be recoverable. When the Company believes an impairment condition may have occurred, it
is required to estimate the undiscounted future cash flows associated with a long-lived asset or
group of long-lived assets at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely
independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities for long-lived assets that are
expected to be held and used. The Company evaluates its operating plants as a whole.
Production equipment at each plant is not evaluated for impairment separately, as it is integral to
the assumed future operations of the plant. All construction and development projects are
reviewed for impairment whenever there is an indication of potential reduction in fair value. If it is
determined that it is no longer probable that the projects will be completed and all capitalized
costs recovered through future operations, the carrying values of the projects would be written
down to the recoverable value. If the Company determines that the undiscounted cash flows
from an asset to be held and used are less than the carrying amount of the asset, or if the
Company has classified an asset as held for sale, it estimates fair value to determine the amount
of any impairment charge.
We performed an analysis of the ZZ Joint Venture plant and determined that these assets were
not impaired based upon management’s estimated cash flow projections for the plant. Such
estimated cash flow projections included production capacity, methanol price, raw materials
consumption and a combination of technical improvements being made to Xuecheng Energy’s
methanol unit allowing for increased syngas off-take and other repairs and improvements being
made to the plant enabling more efficient joint production of methanol for a nine-year period. If
we are not successful in improving the ZZ Joint Venture’s profitability, or if management’s
estimated cash flow projections for these assets decrease, the ZZ Joint Venture plant could
become impaired which could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
There were no significant changes occurred during the year ended June 30, 2014.
(k) Income taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax
liabilities and assets are determined based on temporary differences between the basis of assets
and liabilities for income tax and financial reporting purposes. The deferred tax assets and
liabilities are classified according to the financial statement classification of the assets and
liabilities generating the differences. Valuation allowances are established when necessary
based upon the judgment of management to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected
to be realized and could be necessary based upon estimates of future profitability and
expenditure levels over specific time horizons in particular tax jurisdictions. The Company
recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position when, based on technical merits, it is
more likely than not the position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities.
(l) Debt issuance costs
The Company capitalizes direct costs incurred to issue debt or modify debt agreements. These
costs are deferred and amortized to interest expense over the term of the related debt agreement
using the effective interest rate method.
(m) Land use rights
Prepayments for land use rights are amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the rights
agreements and are included in long-term assets on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet.
(n) Foreign currency translation
Assets and liabilities of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at
period-end rates of exchange, and income and expenses are translated at average exchange
rates during the period. For the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, adjustments resulting from
translating financial statements into U.S. dollars are reported as cumulative translation
adjustments and are shown as a separate component of other comprehensive income. Gains
and losses from foreign currency transactions are included in the calculation of net loss.
(o) Revenue recognition
Revenue from sales of products, including the capacity fee and energy fee earned at the ZZ Joint
Venture plant and sales of methanol under the ZZ Cooperation Agreement, and sales of
equipment are recognized when the following elements are satisfied: (i) there are no
uncertainties regarding customer acceptance; (ii) there is persuasive evidence that an
agreement exists; (iii) delivery has occurred; (iv) the sales price is fixed or determinable; and
(v) collectability is reasonably assured.
Technology licensing revenue is typically received over the course of a project’s development
as milestones are met. The Company may receive upfront licensing fee payments when a license
agreement is entered into. Typically, the majority of a license fee is due once project financing
and equipment installation occur. The Company recognizes license fees as revenue when the
license fees become due and payable under the license agreement, subject to the deferral of the
amount of the performance guarantee. Fees earned for engineering services, such as services
that relate to integrating our technology to a customer’s project, are recognized using the
percentage-of-completion method.
12
(p) Stock-based compensation
The Company has a stock-based compensation plan under which stock-based awards have
been granted to employees and non-employees. Stock-based compensation is accounted for in
accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation – Stock Compensation.” The Company establishes
fair values for its equity awards to determine its cost and recognizes the related expense over
the appropriate vesting period. The Company recognizes expense for stock options, stock
warrants, and restricted stock awards. The fair value of restricted stock awards is based on the
market value as of the date of the awards, and for stock-based awards vesting based on service
period, the value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as
expense over the requisite service period on a straight-line basis for each separately vesting
portion of the award as if the award was, in substance, multiple awards. See Note 12 for
additional information related to stock-based compensation expense.
(q) Accounting for variable interest entities (VIEs) and financial statement consolidation criteria
The joint ventures which the Company enters into may be considered VIEs. The Company
consolidates all VIEs where it is the primary beneficiary. This determination is made at the
inception of the Company’s involvement with the VIE and is continuously assessed. The
Company considers qualitative factors and forms a conclusion that the Company, or another
interest holder, has a controlling financial interest in the VIE and, if so, whether it is the primary
beneficiary. In order to determine the primary beneficiary, the Company considers who has the
power to direct activities of the VIE that most significantly impacts the VIE’s performance and
has an obligation to absorb losses from or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could be
significant to the VIE. The Company does not consolidate VIEs where it is not the primary
beneficiary. The Company accounts for these unconsolidated VIEs using either the equity
method of accounting or the cost method of accounting and includes its net investment on its
consolidated balance sheets. Under the equity method, the Company’s equity interest in the net
income or loss from its unconsolidated VIEs is recorded in non-operating (income) expense on a
net basis on its consolidated statement of operations. Equity investments in which the Company
exercises significant influence but does not control and is not the primary beneficiary are
accounted for using the equity method. In the event of a change in ownership, any gain or loss
resulting from an investee share issuance is recorded in earnings. Investments in which the
Company is not able to exercise significant influence over the investee are accounted for under
the cost method. Controlling interest is determined by majority ownership interest and the ability
to unilaterally direct or cause the direction of management and policies of an entity after
considering any third-party participatory rights.
The Company has determined that the ZZ Joint Venture is a VIE and has determined that the
Company is the primary beneficiary. In making the initial determination, the Company
considered, among other items, the change in profit distribution between the Company and
Xuejiao after 20 years. The expected negative variability in the fair value of the ZZ Joint Venture’s
net assets was considered to be greater during the first 20 years of the ZZ Joint Venture’s life,
which coincided with our original 95% profit/loss allocation, versus the latter 30 years in which
the Company’s profit/loss allocation would be reduced to 10%. As the result of an amendment to
the ZZ Joint Venture agreement in 2010, the profit distribution percentages will remain in place
after the first 20 years, providing further support to the determination that the Company is the
primary beneficiary.
The following tables provide additional information on the ZZ Joint Venture’s assets and
liabilities as of June 30, 2014 and 2013 which are consolidated within the Company’s
consolidated balance sheets (in thousands):
Current assets
Long-term assets
June 30, 2014
 
 Consolidated  ZZ Joint Venture (1)  %(2) 
  
 
   
   10 %
 $ 21,821
   69,885
   48 %
$ 2,256
    33,193
Total assets
 $ 91,706
 
  
Current liabilities
 $ 10,418
Equity
   81,288
Total liabilities and equity $ 91,706
$ 35,449
   
  $ 7,462
    27,987
  $ 35,449
39 %
    
 
   72 %
   34 %
   39 %
June 30, 2013
 
 
 Consolidated  ZZ Joint Venture (1)  %(2) 
 
   
  
 
 
   3 %
 $ 18,508
Current assets
   69,856
   50 %
Long-term assets
   40 %
 $ 88,364
Total assets
    
  
 
 
 $ 10,060
   45 %
Current liabilities
   39 %
Equity
   78,304
Total liabilities and equity $ 88,364
   40 %
$ 523
    34,742
  $ 35,265
   
  $ 4,529
    30,736
  $ 35,265
13
(1) Amounts reflect information for the ZZ Joint Venture and exclude intercompany items.
(2)ZZ Joint Venture’s percentage of the amount on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
The Company has determined that the Yima Joint Ventures are VIEs and that Yima, the joint
venture partner, is the primary beneficiary since Yima has a 75% ownership interest in the Yima
Joint Ventures and has the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly
influence the VIE’s performance.
Until May 31, 2013, the Company accounted for its equity interest in the Yima Joint Ventures
under the equity method of accounting. Under this method, the Company recorded its
proportionate share of the Yima Joint Ventures’ net income or loss based on the Yima Joint
Venture’s financial results. As of June 1, 2013, the Company changed to the cost method of
accounting because the Company concluded that it is unable to exercise significant influence
over the Yima Joint Ventures. The Company’s conclusion regarding its lack of significant
influence is due to various circumstances including limited participation in operating and
financial policymaking processes and the Company’s limited ability to influence technological
decisions.
The Company has determined that SES Resource Solutions, Ltd. (“SRS”) which was formed in
June 2011 is a VIE and that the Company is not the primary beneficiary since neither the
Company nor Midas Resources AG control SRS since each have a 50% ownership interest in
SRS and the control, risks and benefits of SRS are shared equally. SRS had no assets or
liabilities as of June 30, 2014 and is inactive. Therefore the Company is in the process of winding
up this business.
The Company has determined that the TSEC Joint Venture (as defined in Note 3 – Current
Projects – TSEC Joint Venture) is VIE and that ZCM, the joint venture partner, is the primary
beneficiary since ZCM has a 65% ownership interest in the TSEC Joint Venture and has the
power to direct the activities of the TSEC Joint Venture that most significantly influence its
performance.
The Company has determined that the GC Joint Venture is a VIE and has determined that it is the
primary beneficiary since the Company has a 51% ownership interest in the GC Joint Venture
and since there are no qualitative factors that would preclude the Company from being deemed
the primary beneficiary. There were no significant assets recorded within the GC Joint Venture
as of June 30, 2014 or June 30, 2013. There were however, current liabilities of approximately
$0.6 million as of June 30, 2014 and $1.2 million as of June 30, 2013, related to unpaid
settlements of amounts due to various contractors from the initial construction work for the
project. In June 2014, the Company wrote off approximately $0.6 million of these unpaid
settlements according to current local business contract law. The GC Joint Venture project is not
currently being developed and the Company is continuing to work to liquidate and ultimately
dissolve the GC Joint Venture.
(r) Fair value measurements
Accounting standards require that fair value measurements be classified and disclosed in one of
the following categories:
Level
 
1
  
Level
 
2
  
Level
 
3
Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for
identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities;
 
Quoted prices in markets that are not active, or inputs that are observable, either directly or
indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset or liability; and
 
Prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both significant to the fair value
measurement and unobservable (i.e., supported by little or no market activity).
14
The Company’s financial assets and liabilities are classified based on the lowest level of input
that is significant for the fair value measurement. The following table summarizes the valuation of
the Company’s financial assets and liabilities by pricing levels, as of June 30, 2014 and 2013 (in
thousands):
June 30, 2014
 Level 1  Level 2  
  
 
(1) $ —   $50
Assets:
Certificates of Deposit $ —   $50
 
Money Market Funds    —     16,971(2)   —     16,971 
 
 
Liabilities:
 
Short-term bank loan    —     3,251 (3) $ —     3,251
Level 3  Total
June 30, 2013
 Level 1  Level 2 
 
  
(1) $ —   $50
Assets:
Certificates of Deposit $ —   $50
 
Money Market Funds    —     8,752 (2)   —     8,752 
 
 
Liabilities:
 
Long-term bank loan    —     2,428 (4) $ —     2,428
Level 3  Total
(1) Amount included in current assets on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
(2)Amount included in cash and cash equivalents on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
(3) Amount included in current liabilities on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
(4)
Current portion of long-term bank loan included in current liabilities on the Company’s consolidated
balance sheets.
The carrying values of the certificates of deposit, money market funds and long-term debt
approximate fair value, which was estimated using quoted market prices for those or similar
investments. The carrying value of the Company’s other financial instruments, including
accounts receivable and accounts payable, approximate their fair values.
Note 2 — Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In June 2014 the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASU 2014-10,
which amended disclosure requirements for development stage entities (“DSEs”). The FASB
concluded that users of financial statements of DSEs considered the inception-to-date
information and certain other disclosures required by U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles (“GAAP”) had little relevance and is generally not decision useful. As a result, the
FASB issued ASU 2014-10, which removed the definition of a DSE from the Master Glossary of
the Accounting Standards Codification, thereby removing the financial reporting distinction
between development state entities and other reporting entities from U.S. GAAP. In addition,
ASU 2014-10 eliminates the requirements for DSEs to (i) present inception-to-date information in
the statements of income, cash flows, and shareholder equity, (ii) label the financial statements
as those of a development stage entity, (iii) disclose a description of the development stage
activities in which the entity is engaged, and (iv) disclose in the first year in which the entity is no
longer a development stage entity that in prior years it had been in the development stage. For
public business entities, the ASU 2014-10 amendments are effective for annual reporting periods
beginning after December 15, 2014, and interim periods therein; however, early application is
permitted for any annual reporting period for which the entity’s financial statements have not yet
been issued. We adopted these new presentation requirements as of June 30, 2014.
Note 3 — Current Projects
Zao Zhuang Joint Venture
Joint Venture Agreement
On July 6, 2006, the Company entered into a cooperative joint venture contract with Shandong
Hai Hua Coal & Chemical Company Ltd., or Hai Hua, which established Synthesis Energy
Systems (Zao Zhuang) New Gas Company Ltd., or the ZZ Joint Venture, a joint venture company
that has the primary purposes of (i) developing, constructing and operating a syngas production
plant utilizing the U-GAS® technology in Zao Zhuang City, Shandong Province, China and
(ii) producing and selling syngas and the various byproducts of the plant. In August 2012, Hai
Hua’s name was changed to Shandong Weijiao Group Xuecheng Energy Company Ltd., or
Xuecheng Energy, after a change in control transaction. We own 97.6% of the ZZ Joint Venture
and Xuecheng Energy owns the remaining 2.4%. We consolidate the results of the ZZ Joint
Venture in our consolidated financial statements.
15
On July 24, 2013, the ZZ Joint Venture entered into a cooperation agreement (the “ZZ
Cooperation Agreement”) with Xuecheng Energy and its parent company, Shandong Xuejiao
Chemical Co., Ltd. (collectively referred to as “Xuejiao”), which serves to supersede the existing
syngas purchase and sale agreement among the parties dated October 22, 2006 and
supplemented previously in 2008. The ZZ Cooperation Agreement, which became effective on
October 31, 2013, represents the basis for an integrated syngas to methanol operation and
resolution of the nonpayment of the contractual capacity fees by Xuejiao.  Under the terms of the
ZZ Cooperation Agreement, Xuejiao will (i) provide the ZZ Joint Venture with use of their
methanol plant for ten years at no cost to the ZZ Joint Venture, (ii) provide a bank loan guarantee
of approximately $3.3 million for a majority of the financing necessary for the ZZ Joint Venture
for the retrofit and related costs of the ZZ Joint Venture plant, (iii) waive certain advances
previously made to the ZZ Joint Venture and (iv) supply discounted coke oven gas produced by
its existing coke ovens to be used in combination with synthesis gas to produce refined
methanol from the new ZZ Joint Venture integrated syngas methanol operation. The new
integrated operation will be managed by the ZZ Joint Venture.
Effective October 31, 2013, the ZZ Joint Venture terminated and waived its claims to past due
capacity fees owed by Xuejiao under the prior syngas purchase and sale agreement. Pursuant
to the ZZ Cooperation Agreement, prior payments of approximately $1.8 million were applied to
settling the prior payments due under the syngas purchase and sale agreement. As a result, the
ZZ Joint Venture recognized these related party advances as product sales of approximately
$1.5 million, net of value-added taxes, during the year ended June 30, 2014.
The ZZ Joint Venture began producing and selling methanol in November 2013 and sold 35,682
tonnes of methanol during the year ended June 30, 2014, generating approximately $13.3 million
of revenue. The Company assumed operational control of the integrated methanol production
facility in October 2013 under a restructured commercial arrangement. The ZZ Joint Venture has
worked to complete the plant retrofits and equipment upgrades to enable increased methanol
production from integrated syngas and coke oven gas feedstock. The ZZ Joint Venture is now
operating an integrated plant which has two operating modes where it (i) converts coke oven gas
directly to methanol and (ii) converts coal to syngas, then blends the syngas and coke oven gas
at a specific ratio to produce additional quantities of methanol.  The ZZ Joint Venture began
producing and selling methanol in November 2013 from coke oven gas. The ZZ Joint Venture
restarted its syngas plant for approximately two weeks during December 2013. In January 2014,
the ZZ Joint Venture produced methanol only from coke oven gas due to lower coke oven gas
supplies during the cold weather. The ZZ Joint Venture intends to manage syngas production in
order to optimize results. The syngas facility will generally operate when adequate coke oven
gas supplies are available to achieve the correct syngas to coke oven gas blend ratio. The ZZ
Joint Venture also recently executed agreements to secure an additional minimum 4,000 normal
cubic meters per hour of coke oven gas from a local supplier, with a target of 5,000 normal cubic
meters per hour, in order to increase methanol production and reduce supply risks. This
additional coke oven gas represents approximately a 30% increase in feedstock supply for the
ZZ Joint Venture Plant. In addition, the Company is focused on lowering our operating costs, as
well as reducing forced outages at the facility.
Additionally, the Company is also evaluating alternative products and partnership structures for
a possible expansion of the ZZ Joint Venture plant. In 2010, the ZZ Joint Venture received the
necessary government approval for an expansion into monoethylene glycol production. This
expansion project remains under evaluation by us. The Company is also evaluating certain new
downstream technologies to produce high value products.
Although we intend for the ZZ Joint Venture to sustain itself through its own earnings, we may
need to make additional contributions to the ZZ Joint Venture in order for it to meet its
obligations. In September 2014, we made a capital contribution of $1.5 million to the ZZ Joint
Venture. This capital contribution was used to pay a portion of the ZZ Short-term Loan, which
was due on September 9, 2014. We are currently in discussions with Zao Zhuang Bank Co., Ltd
to replace the ZZ Short-term Loan with another similar loan and line of credit.
Loan Agreement with ICBC
On March 22, 2007, the ZZ Joint Venture entered into a seven-year loan agreement and received
approximately $12.6 million of loan proceeds pursuant to the terms of a Fixed Asset Loan
Contract with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (“ICBC”) to complete the project
financing for the ZZ Joint Venture. Interest was adjusted annually based upon the standard rate
announced each year by the People’s Bank of China. The final principal payment of RMB 7.3
million (approximately $1.2 million) was repaid in January 2014.
16
Short-term Loan Agreement with Zao Zhuang Bank Co., Ltd
On September 10, 2013, the ZZ Joint Venture entered into a short-term loan agreement with Zao
Zhuang Bank Co., Ltd., (the “ZZ Short-term Loan”), and received approximately $3.3 million of
loan proceeds for the retrofit and related costs contemplated by the ZZ Cooperation Agreement.
Key terms of the ZZ Short-term Loan are as follows:
• Loan term is one year, due on September 9, 2014;
• Interest is payable monthly at an annual rate of 10.8%;
• Xuecheng Energy is the guarantor of the entire loan;
•Certain assets of the ZZ Joint Venture, including land use rights and the administration building, are
pledged as collateral; and
•
Subject to customary events of default which, should one or more of them occur and be continuing,
would permit Zao Zhuang Bank Co., Ltd. to declare all amounts owing under the agreement to be due
and payable immediately.
In September 2014, the Company has paid off the ZZ Short-term Loan, and the Company is
currently in discussions with Zao Zhuang Bank Co., Ltd to replace it with another similar loan
and line of credit.
Yima Joint Ventures
In August 2009, the Company entered into amended joint venture contracts with Yima, replacing
the prior joint venture contracts entered into in October 2008 and April 2009. The joint ventures
were formed for each of the gasification, methanol/methanol protein production, and utility island
components of the plant, or collectively, the Yima Joint Ventures. The amended joint venture
contracts provide that: (i) the Company and Yima contribute equity of 25% and 75%,
respectively, to the Yima Joint Ventures; (ii) Yima will guarantee the repayment of loans from
third party lenders for 50% of the project’s cost and, if debt financing is not available, Yima is
obligated to provide debt financing via shareholder loans to the project until the project is able to
secure third-party debt financing; and (iii) Yima will supply coal to the project from a mine located
in close proximity to the project at a preferential price subject to a definitive agreement to be
subsequently negotiated. In connection with entering into the amended contracts, the Company
and Yima contributed remaining cash equity contributions of $29.3 million and $90.8 million,
respectively, to the Yima Joint Ventures during the three months ended September 30, 2009. The
Company is responsible for our share of any cost overruns on the project.
In exchange for such capital contributions, the Company owns a 25% interest in each joint
venture and Yima owns a 75% interest. Notwithstanding this, in connection with an expansion of
the project, the Company has the option to contribute a greater percentage of capital for the
expansion, such that as a result, the Company would have up to a 49% ownership interest in the
Yima Joint Ventures.
The remaining capital for the project has been funded with project debt obtained by the Yima
Joint Ventures. Yima agreed to guarantee the project debt in order to secure debt financing from
domestic Chinese banking sources. The Company has agreed to pledge to Yima its ownership
interests in the joint ventures as security for the Company’s obligations under any project
guarantee. In the event that the necessary additional debt financing is not obtained, Yima has
agreed to provide a loan to the joint ventures to satisfy the remaining capital needs of the project
with terms comparable to current market rates at the time of the loan.
Under the terms of the joint venture agreements, the Yima Joint Ventures are to be governed by
a board of directors consisting of eight directors, two of whom were appointed by the Company
and six of whom were appointed by Yima. The joint ventures also have officers that are
nominated by the Company, Yima and/or the board of directors pursuant to the terms of the joint
venture contracts. The Company and Yima shall share the profits, and bear the risks and losses,
of the joint ventures in proportion to their respective ownership interests. The term of the joint
venture shall commence upon each joint venture company obtaining its business operating
license and shall end 30 years after commercial operation of the plant.
17
The Yima Joint Venture plant generated its first methanol production in December 2012. The
Yima Joint Venture plant’s refined methanol section was fully commissioned in December 2013,
and has operated at limited capacity since that date. The plant is designed to produce 300,000
tonnes per year of methanol from operating two of its three available gasifiers and has achieved
100% peak syngas production levels and 80% peak methanol production levels. This plant is
intended to provide a commercial demonstration of the Company’s technology as deployed on a
much larger scale than the ZZ Joint Venture plant.
The Yima Joint Venture initiated an outage in March that was intended to allow the plant to make
broad and miscellaneous improvements to many areas of the entire methanol producing facility
which had not been completed or properly installed. Many of these improvements were punch-
list items left over from construction, along with improvements which have been learned from the
past year’s operation at the plant. Additionally, it was identified during this time that the Yima
Joint Venture has not installed all the required units related to removal of sulfur compounds
from syngas. A portion of these repairs were completed and the facility was restarted in late
June, 2014. After three weeks of operation the plant was shut down again due to improper repair
techniques on its Heat Recovery System Generator.
The Company has included approximately $3.0 million of royalty costs due to GTI for the Yima
Joint Ventures’ U-GAS® license as part of its investment in joint ventures on its consolidated
balance sheet, including a $1.5 million payment paid to GTI in June 2009 (when the amended
joint venture contracts were signed), a $0.5 million payment in October 2013, and $1.0 million of
payments in January 2014.
Until May 31, 2013, the Company accounted for its equity interest in the Yima Joint Ventures
under the equity method of accounting. Under this method, the Company recorded its
proportionate share of the Yima Joint Ventures’ net income or loss based on the Yima Joint
Venture’s financial results. As of June 1, 2013, the Company changed to the cost method of
accounting because the Company concluded that it is unable to exercise significant influence
over the Yima Joint Ventures. The Company’s conclusion regarding its lack of significant
influence is based on its interactions with the Yima Joint Ventures related to the start-up and
operations and due to various other circumstances including limited participation in operating
and financial policymaking processes and the Company’s limited ability to influence
technological decisions. There was no equity in losses of the Yima Joint Ventures recognized
for financial reporting purposes for the three months and nine months ended March 31, 2014
since the Company changed from the equity method to the cost method of accounting as of
June 1, 2013. The Company’s equity in losses of the Yima Joint Ventures for the three months
and nine months ended March 31, 2013 were $0.2 million and $0.6 million, respectively.
Additionally, in January 2011, the Company signed gasifier sales agreements with the Yima Joint
Ventures to sell gasifiers and gasifier related equipment for an aggregate contract price of $3.0
million. A portion of the equipment associated with these orders was ordered from ZCM (as
defined under “Joint Venture with ZCM” in this Note 2). The gasifiers were completed and
delivered in January 2012 to the Yima Joint Ventures. As of June 30, 2014, the Yima Joint
Ventures had paid $2.4 million of the total contract price and still owed the remaining payment
approximately of $0.67 million to the Company. The Company still owed $0.67 million to both
ZCM and an additional vendor associated with the equipment purchase, which is accrued as a
current liability on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet.
TSEC Joint Venture
Joint Venture Contract
On February 14, 2014, SES Asia Technologies Limited, one of the Company’s wholly owned
subsidiaries, entered into a Joint Venture Contract (the “JV Contract”) with Zhangjiagang
Chemical Machinery Co., Ltd. (“ZCM”) to form Jangsu Tianwo-SES Clean Energy Technologies
Limited (the “TSEC” Joint Venture”). The purpose of the TSEC Joint Venture is to establish the
Company’s gasification technology as the leading gasification technology in the TSEC Joint
Venture territory (which is initially China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, Mongolia and
Malaysia) by becoming a leading provider of proprietary equipment for the technology. The
scope of the TSEC Joint Venture is to market and license the Company’s gasification
technology via project sublicenses; procurement and sale of proprietary equipment and
services; coal testing; and engineering, procurement and research and development related to
the technology. ZCM is contributing RMB 100,000,000 (approximately USD $16 million) in cash to
the TSEC Joint Venture, and owns 65% of the TSEC Joint Venture, and the Company has
contributed an exclusive license to use of its technology in the TSEC Joint Venture territory
pursuant to the terms of a Technology Usage and Contribution Agreement entered into among
the TSEC Joint Venture, ZCM and the Company (the “TUCA”) on the same date. The Company
owns 35% of the TSEC Joint Venture.
Under the JV Contract, neither party may transfer their interests in the TSEC Joint Venture
without first offering such interests to the other party. Notwithstanding this, the Company has
the right until 30 days after the first project sublicense is entered into by the TSEC Joint Venture
to transfer 5% of its interest to a financial investor. If the Company elects not to transfer such 5%
interest during that period, ZCM has the option to purchase such interest from the Company for
RMB 10,000,000 (approximately USD$1.6 million).
18
The JV Contract also includes a non-competition provision which requires that the JV be the
exclusive legal entity within the TSEC Joint Venture territory for the marketing and sale of any
gasification technology or related equipment that utilizes low quality coal feedstock.
Notwithstanding this, ZCM has the right to manufacture and sell gasification equipment outside
the scope of the TSEC Joint Venture within the TSEC Joint Venture territory. In addition, the
Company has the right to develop and invest equity in projects outside of the TSEC Joint
Venture within the TSEC Joint Venture territory. After the termination of the TSEC Joint Venture,
ZCM must obtain written consent from the Company for the market development of any
gasification technology that utilizes feedstock in the TSEC Joint Venture territory.
The JV Contract may be terminated upon, among other things, (i) a material breach of the JV
Contract which is not cured, (ii) a violation of the TUCA, (iii) the failure to obtain positive net
income within 24 months of establishing the TSEC Joint Venture or (iv) mutual agreement of the
parties.
On March 18, 2014, the TSEC Joint Venture received the required 20-year business license from
the State Administration for Industry & Commerce of the People’s Republic of China (SAIC) in
Zhangjiagang. On April 8, 2014, the transactions were completed and the TSEC Joint Venture
began operations.
Technology Usage and Contribution Agreement
Pursuant to the TUCA, the Company has contributed to the TSEC Joint Venture the exclusive
right to the Company’s gasification technology in the TSEC Joint Venture territory, including the
right to: (i) grant site specific project sub-licenses to third parties; (ii) use the Company’s marks
for proprietary equipment and services; (iii) engineer and/or design processes that utilize the
Company’s technology or other Company intellectual property; (iv) provide engineering and
design services for joint venture projects and (v) take over the development of projects in the
TSEC Joint Venture territory that have previously been developed by the Company and its
affiliates.
The TSEC Joint Venture will be the exclusive operational entity for business relating to the
Company’s technology in the TSEC Joint Venture Territory. If the TSEC Joint Venture loses
exclusivity due to a Company breach, ZCM is to be compensated for direct losses and all lost
project profits. The Company will also provide training for technical personnel of the TSEC Joint
Venture through the second anniversary of the establishment of the TSEC Joint Venture. The
Company will also provide a review of engineering works for the TSEC Joint Venture. If
modifications are suggested by the Company and not made, the TSEC Joint Venture bears the
liability resulting from such failure. If the Company suggests modifications and there is still
liability resulting from the engineering work, it is the liability of the Company.
Any party making, whether patentable or not, improvements relating to the Company technology
after the establishment of the TSEC Joint Venture, grants to the other Party an irrevocable, non-
exclusive, royalty free right to use or license such improvements and agrees to make such
improvements available to the Company free of charge. All such improvements shall become
part of the Company’s technology and both parties shall have the same rights, licenses and
obligations with respect to the improvement as contemplated by the TUCA.
The TSEC Joint Venture will establish an Intellectual Property Committee, with two
representatives from the TSEC Joint Venture and two from the Company. This Committee shall
review all improvements and protection measures and recommend actions to be taken by the
TSEC Joint Venture in furtherance thereof. Notwithstanding this, each party is entitled to take
actions on its own to protect intellectual property rights.
Any breach of or default under the TUCA which is not cured on notice entitles the non-breaching
party to terminate. The parties can suspend performance of the TUCA in the event of a dispute if
the dispute poses a significant adverse impact on performance. The TSEC Joint Venture
indemnifies the Company for misuse of the Company’s technology or infringement of the
Company’s technology upon rights of any third party.
19
The following table presents summarized unconsolidated financial information for the TSEC
Venture (in thousands):
Year Ended 
 
June 30, 2014
Income Statement data:  
Revenue
Operating loss
Net Loss
$ —
(466
(466
)
)
Balance sheet data:   
 $ 8,573
Current assets
   8,458
Noncurrent assets
Current liabilities
   3
Noncurrent liabilities   —
Equity
June 30, 2014
17,028
SES Resource Solutions
SES Resource Solutions, Ltd., or SRS, is a joint venture owned 50% by us and 50% by Midas
Resources AG, or Midas that was formed in June 2011 to provide additional avenues of
commercialization for the Company’s technology. Key objectives of the joint venture are to
identify and procure low cost, low rank coal resources for which the Company’s technology
represents the best route to commercialization; to provide investment opportunities in both
gasification facilities and coal resources; and to facilitate the establishment of gasification
projects globally based on the Company’s technology. In December 2012, SRS suspended its
activities due to the unavailability of financing for coal resources. Therefore we are in the
process of winding up this business.
The Company’s investment in SRS is accounted for using the equity method. SRS has no assets
or liabilities as amounts are funded by the Company as costs are incurred. The following table
presents summarized unconsolidated income statement data for SRS (in thousands):
Income statement data:   
 
  
Revenue
 $ —     $ 130
Operating income (loss)   —       55
Net income (loss)
   —       55
Three Months Ended  Year Ended  
 June 30,
 
  June 30,
 
 2014
  2014  2013
 
 
     
 
 
     
  $ —   $130
 
    (5 )   (1,108)
    (5 )   (1,108)
2013
Golden Concord Joint Venture
The Company’s joint venture with Golden Concord (“GC Joint Venture”) was formed to (i)
develop, construct and operate a coal gasification, methanol and dimethyl either (“DME”)
production plant utilizing U-GAS®. (ii) produce and sell methanol, DME and the various
byproducts of the plant. The Company has a 51% ownership interest in the GC Joint Venture and
consolidates the GC Joint Venture. There were no significant assets recorded within the GC
Joint Venture as of June 30, 2014 or 2013. There were however, current liabilities of
approximately $0.6 million as of June 30, 2014 and $1.2 million as of June 30, 2013 related to
unpaid settlements of amounts due to various contractors from the initial construction work for
the project. In June 2014, The Company wrote off approximately $0.6 million of these unpaid
settlements according to current local business contract law. The GC Joint Venture project is not
currently being developed and the Company is continuing to work to liquidate and ultimately
dissolve the GC Joint Venture.
Note 4 — Risks and Uncertainties
Any future decrease in economic activity in China, India or in other regions of the world, in which
the Company may in the future do business, could significantly and adversely affect its results
of operations and financial condition in a number of other ways. Any decline in economic
conditions may reduce the demand for prices from the products from our plants, thus the
Company’s ability to finance and develop its existing projects, commence any new projects and
sell its products could be adversely impacted.
As disclosed in Note 3, the ZZ Joint Venture began producing and selling methanol in November
2013 and sold 35,682 tonnes of methanol during the year ended June 30, 2014 generating
approximately $13.3 million of revenue. The ZZ Joint Venture has worked to complete the plant
retrofits and equipment upgrades to enable increased methanol production from integrated
syngas and coke oven gas feedstock. There can be no assurances that the methanol production
operations contemplated by the ZZ Cooperation Agreement will be profitable. Profitability will be
dependent on, among other things, our management of the operations of the plant, pricing of
methanol, coal and power, and maintaining necessary government approvals.
20
The Yima Joint Venture plant’s refined methanol section was fully commissioned in December
2013, and has operated at limited capacity since that date. Methanol production was
approximately 27% of its capacity during the twelve months ended June 30, 2014. The plant is
designed to produce 300,000 tonnes per year of methanol from operating two of its three
available gasifiers and has achieved 100% peak syngas production levels and 80% peak
methanol production levels. Yima has recently initiated an outage in March that should allow the
plant to make improvements to the upstream and downstream units adjacent to the Company’s
gasification systems at the Yima Joint Venture plant. Some of these are punch-list items, along
with the improvements which have been learned from the past year’s operation at the plant. The
improvements are currently scheduled to be completed in the next several months. The
Company has limited influence on the operating and financial policymaking of the Yima Joint
Ventures. There can be no assurances that the Yima Joint Ventures’ operations will be profitable
or that dividends will be paid to the Company. There have been a variety of minor construction
related shutdowns which are normally seen in the startup of these types of facilities, but the
shutdowns have generally not been related to the gasifier systems. In addition, the Yima Joint
Ventures still owe the Company approximately $0.67 million for certain gasifiers and gasifier
related equipment delivered in 2012, a portion of which is due from the Company to ZCM and the
balance to a second vendor for providing equipment associated with the gasifiers. It is unclear
when or if the balance of this money will be paid to the Company from the Yima Joint Venture.
Although the Company has made significant progress recently on partnering its China business
through the TSEC Joint Venture, the Company expects to continue to have negative operating
cash flows until it can generate sufficient cash flows from its technology, equipment and
services business and SES China (including the ZZ Joint Venture, the Yima Joint Ventures and
the TSEC Joint Venture) to cover its general and administrative expenses and other operating
costs. In addition, the Company may need to aggressively pursue additional partners in China
and may need to seek other equity financing or reduce its operating expenses. The Company
will also limit the development of any further projects until it has assurances that acceptable
financing is available to complete the project.
The majority of our revenues are derived from the sale of methanol in China. We do not have
long term offtake agreements for these sales, so revenues fluctuate based on local market spot
prices, which have been under significant pressure and are generally not consistent or
predictable, and we are unsure of how much longer this will continue. Our liquidity and capital
resources will be materially adversely affected if markets remain under pressure, and we are
unable to obtain satisfactory process for these commodities or if prospective buyers do not
purchase these commodities
The Company currently plans to use its available cash for (i) securing orders and other
associated tasks associated with the Company’s distributed power initiatives such as in
Pakistan with General Electric; (ii) executing the Company’s strategy to develop market based
business verticals, (iii) the ZZ Short-term Loan for $3.3 million, which was repaid in September
2014; (iv) general and administrative expenses and (v) working capital and other general
corporate purposes. Although the Company intends for the ZZ Joint Venture to sustain itself
through its own earnings, the Company may also need to make additional contributions to the
ZZ Joint Venture in order for it to meet its obligations until the ZZ Joint Venture generates
sufficient cash flows to cover its operating costs and debt service. The actual allocation and
timing of these expenditures will be dependent on various factors, including changes in the
Company’s strategic relationships, commodity prices and industry conditions, and other factors
that the Company cannot currently predict. In particular, any future decrease in economic
activity in China or in other regions of the world in which the Company may in the future do
business could significantly and adversely affect our results of operations and financial
condition. Operating cash flows from the Company’s joint venture operating projects can be
positively or negatively impacted by changes in coal and methanol prices. These are
commodities where market pricing is often cyclical in nature.
The Company does not currently have all of the financial and human resources to fully develop
and execute on all of its other business opportunities; however, the Company intends to finance
their development through paid services, technology access fees, equity and debt financings
and by securing financial and strategic partners focused on development of these opportunities.
The Company can make no assurances that its business operations will provide it with sufficient
cash flows to continue its operations. The Company may need to raise additional capital through
equity and debt financing for any new ventures that are developed, to support its existing
projects and possible expansions thereof and for its corporate general and administrative
expenses. The Company is considering a full range of financing options in order to create the
most value in the context of the increasing interest the Company is witnessing in its proprietary
technology. The Company cannot provide any assurance that any financing will be available to it
in the future on acceptable terms or at all. Any such financing could be dilutive to its existing
stockholders. If the Company cannot raise required funds on acceptable terms, it may not be
able to, among other things, (i) maintain its general and administrative expenses at current levels
including retention of key personnel and consultants; (ii) successfully develop its licensing and
related service businesses; (iii) negotiate and enter into new gasification plant development
contracts and licensing agreements; (iv) make additional capital contributions to its joint
ventures; (v) fund certain obligations as they become due; or (vi) respond to competitive
pressures or unanticipated capital requirements.
21
The Company is subject to concentration of credit risk with respect to our cash and cash
equivalents, which we attempt to minimize by maintaining our cash and cash equivalents with
major high credit quality financial institutions. At times, our cash balances in a particular
financial institution may exceed limits that are insured by the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or equivalent agencies in foreign countries such as Hong Kong.
Note 5 — Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment consisted of the following (in thousands):
2013
  $321
Estimated  June 30,
 
 
 useful lives  2014
 
 
 2 to 3 years $315
Furniture and fixtures
   36,286     35,480  
 20 years
Production equipment
   8,117     8,083  
 30 years
Building — plant and office
 
 Lease term    113
Leasehold improvements
 
   408
 3 years
Computer hardware
 
   975
 3 years
Computer software
 
 3 years
   257
Office equipment
   218
 5 years
 
Motor vehicles
   46,689     45,831  
 
  
Less: Accumulated depreciation  
   (15,190)   (13,190)
 $31,499   $32,641  
  
Net carrying value
122
    398
    959
    251
    217
Depreciation expense for both the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 was $2.1 million.
Note 6 — Detail of Selected Balance Sheet Accounts
Other long-term assets consisted of the following (in thousands):
June 30,
 
 
 2014   2013  
 
 $746   $760  
Land use rights
GTI license royalty, net — ZZ Joint Venture
   611     626  
Value added tax receivable — ZZ Joint Venture   773     1,106 
Other
   351     352  
 $2,481  $2,844
Accrued expenses and other payables consisted of the following (in thousands):
June 30,
 
 
 2014   2013  
 
 $427   $645  
Construction and equipment costs
   2,853    —  
Accounts payable — raw material
   336     255  
Accounts payable — trade
   586     555  
Accrued payroll, vacation and bonuses
Technical consulting, engineering and design services
   179     521  
Advances from Yima Joint Ventures toward purchase of gasifier equipment   825     2,391 
   —     1,780 
Advances from Xuejiao
   250     250  
GTI royalty expenses due to GTI
   1,711    1,235 
Other
 
 $7,167  $7,632
Note 7 — Intangible Assets
GTI License Agreement
On November 5, 2009, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated License Agreement
(the “GTI Agreement”) with GTI, replacing the Amended and Restated License Agreement
between the Company and GTI dated August 31, 2006, as amended. Under the GTI Agreement,
the Company maintains its exclusive worldwide right to license the U-GAS® technology for all
types of coals and coal/biomass mixtures with coal content exceeding 60%, as well as the non-
exclusive right to license the original U-GAS® technology for 100% biomass and coal/biomass
blends exceeding 40% biomass.
22
In order to sublicense any U-GAS® system, the Company is required to comply with certain
requirements set forth in the GTI Agreement. In the preliminary stage of developing a potential
sublicense, the Company is required to provide notice and certain information regarding the
potential sublicense to GTI and GTI is required to provide notice of approval or non-approval
within ten business days of the date of the notice from the Company, provided that GTI is
required to not unreasonably withhold their approval. If GTI does not respond within that ten
business day period, they are deemed to have approved of the sublicense. The Company is
required to provide updates on any potential sublicenses once every three months during the
term of the GTI Agreement. The Company is also restricted from offering a competing
gasification technology during the term of the GTI Agreement.
For each U-GAS® unit which the Company licenses, designs, builds or operates for itself or for a
party other than a sublicensee and which uses coal or a coal and biomass mixture or biomass
as the feed stock, the Company must pay a royalty based upon a calculation using the MMBtu
per hour of dry syngas production of a rated design capacity, payable in installments at the
beginning and at the completion of the construction of a project (the “Standard Royalty”). If the
Company invests, or has the option to invest, in a specified percentage of the equity of a third
party, and the royalty payable by such third party for their sublicense exceeds the Standard
Royalty, the Company is required to pay to GTI, an agreed percentage split of third party
licensing fees (the “Agreed Percentage”) of such royalty payable by such third party. However, if
the royalty payable by such third party for their sublicense is less than the Standard Royalty, the
Company is required to pay to GTI, in addition to the Agreed Percentage of such royalty payable
by such third party, the Agreed Percentage of its dividends and liquidation proceeds from its
equity investment in the third party. In addition, if the Company receives a carried interest in a
third party, and the carried interest is less than a specified percentage of the equity of such third
party, the Company is required to pay to GTI, in its sole discretion, either (i) the Standard Royalty
or (ii) the Agreed Percentage of the royalty payable to such third party for their sublicense, as
well as the Agreed Percentage of the carried interest. The Company will be required to pay the
Standard Royalty to GTI if the percentage of the equity of a third party that the Company
(a) invests in, (b) has an option to invest in, or (c) receives a carried interest in, exceeds the
percentage of the third party specified in the preceding sentence.
The Company is required to make an annual payment to GTI for each year of the term, with such
annual payment due by the last day of January of the following year; provided, however, that the
Company is entitled to deduct all royalties paid to GTI in a given year under the GTI Agreement
from this amount, and if such royalties exceed the annual payment amount in a given year, the
Company is not required to make the annual payment. The Company accrues the annual royalty
expense ratably over the calendar year as adjusted for any royalties paid during year as
applicable. The Company must also provide GTI with a copy of each contract that it enters into
relating to a U-GAS® system and report to GTI with its progress on development of the
technology every six months.
For a period of ten years, the Company and GTI are restricted from disclosing any confidential
information (as defined in the GTI Agreement) to any person other than employees of affiliates or
contractors who are required to deal with such information, and such persons will be bound by
the confidentiality provisions of the GTI Agreement. The Company has further indemnified GTI
and its affiliates from any liability or loss resulting from unauthorized disclosure or use of any
confidential information that the Company receives.
The GTI Agreement expires on August 31, 2016, but may be extended for two additional ten-year
periods at the Company’s option.
The cost and accumulated amortization of intangible assets were as follows (in thousands):
June 30, 2014
Gross
Accumulated
  
Amortization
Carrying
Amount
June 30, 2013
Gross
Net
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
  
Amortization
Net
Use rights of U-GAS®  $ 1,886   $ 1,480
Other intangible assets   684
Total
$ 2,570   $ 1,521
41
$406   $ 1,886   $ 1,292
    643     474
  $1,049  $ 2,360   $ 1,300
8
$594  
    466  
  $1,060
23
The use rights of U-GAS® have an amortization period of ten years. Amortization expense was
approximately $0.2 million for each of the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 and is recorded in
depreciation and amortization expense. Estimated amortization expense for each of the
remaining two subsequent fiscal years is expected to be approximately $0.2 million.
Note 8 — Income Taxes
For financial reporting purposes, net loss showing domestic and foreign sources was as follows
(in thousands):
Year Ended June 30, 
 
 
 2014
 
Domestic $(4,730 ) $(6,863 )
Foreign    (9,513 )   (13,060 )
Net loss  $(14,243 ) $(19,923 )
2013
Provision for income taxes
The following is a reconciliation of income taxes at the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% to
the income tax provision (benefit) recorded (in thousands);
Year Ended June 30, 
 
 2014
 
 
Net loss
 $(14,243 ) $(19,923 )
Computed tax benefit at statutory rate   (4,985 )   (6,973 )
 
Tax on global activities
2,747
5,472
2013
Other
Valuation allowance
192
   (679
 $—
(448
)   4,674
  $—
)
Deferred tax assets
Net deferred tax assets consisted of the following (in thousands):
June 30,
 2014
Deferred tax assets (liabilities):     
 
Net operating loss carry forward $23,835   $27,554  
Depreciation and amortization    365
 
   6,059     5,972  
Stock-based compensation
   4,396     1,324  
Investment in joint venture
   667
Accruals
 
AMT credit
   55
 
   35,377     36,001  
Subtotal
   (35,377)   (36,001)
Valuation allowance
Net deferred assets
 $—
748
    —
2013
403
$—
At June 30, 2014, the Company had approximately $43.6 million of U.S. federal net operating loss
(“NOL”) carry forwards, and $18.6 million of China NOL carry forwards. The U.S. federal NOL
carry forwards have expiration dates through the year 2033. The China NOL carry forwards have
expiration dates through 2018. The utilization of U.S. federal NOLs and other tax attributes may
be limited due to changes in ownership from equity offerings that occurred during the year and
any future equity offerings.
The Company’s tax returns are subject to periodic audit by the various taxing jurisdictions in
which the Company operates, which can result in adjustments to its NOLs. There are no
significant audits underway at this time.
In assessing the Company’s ability to utilize its deferred tax assets, management considers
whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be
realized. Based on the level of historical taxable income and projections for future taxable
income over the periods in which the deferred tax assets are deductible, management believes it
is more likely than not that the Company will not realize the benefits of these deductible
differences. Future changes in estimates of taxable income or in tax laws may change the need
for the valuation allowance.
24
The Company and one of its subsidiaries files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction,
and various states and foreign jurisdictions. The Company has been subject to U.S. federal,
state, and local, or non-U.S. income tax examinations by tax authorities for all tax years since its
operations began in 2003. As of June 30, 2014, the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and the
Chinese tax authorities have not proposed any adjustments to the Company’s material tax
positions. The Company establishes reserves for positions taken on tax matters which, although
considered appropriate under the regulations, could potentially be successfully challenged by
authorities during a tax audit or review. The Company did not have any liability for uncertain tax
positions as of June 30, 2014 or 2013.
Note 9 — Net Loss Per Share Data
Historical net loss per share of common stock is computed using the weighted average number
of shares of common stock outstanding. Basic loss per share excludes dilution and is computed
by dividing net loss available to common stockholders by the weighted average number of
shares of common stock outstanding for the period. Stock options, warrants and unvested
restricted stock are the only potential dilutive share equivalents the Company had outstanding
for the periods presented. For the year ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, options and warrants to
purchase common stock were excluded from the computation of diluted earnings per share as
their effect would have been antidilutive as the Company incurred net losses during those
periods.
Note 10 — Commitments and Contingencies
Litigation
The Company is currently not a party to any legal proceedings.
Operating leases
On June 3, 2014, the Company extended its corporate office lease term for twelve months ending
June 30, 2015 with rental payments of approximately $22,000 per month (monthly rent changes
depending on actual utility usage each month). Rental expenses incurred under operating
leases for the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 were approximately $0.4 million and $0.5
million, respectively.
Governmental and Environmental Regulation
The Company’s operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations
governing the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental
protection. Numerous governmental agencies, such as the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (the “EPA”), and various Chinese authorities, issue regulations to implement and
enforce such laws, which often require difficult and costly compliance measures that carry
substantial administrative, civil and criminal penalties or may result in injunctive relief for failure
to comply. These laws and regulations may require the acquisition of a permit before operations
at a facility commence, restrict the types, quantities and concentrations of various substances
that can be released into the environment in connection with such activities, limit or prohibit
construction activities on certain lands lying within wilderness, wetlands, ecologically sensitive
and other protected areas, and impose substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from our
operations. The Company believes that it is in substantial compliance with current applicable
environmental laws and regulations and it has not experienced any material adverse effect from
compliance with these environmental requirements.
Note 11 — Stock-Based Compensation
On August 1, 2013, Crystal Vision Energy Limited (“CVE”) made a $100,000 investment in the
Company’s common stock and received 136,986 shares and warrants to purchase 136,986
shares of the Company common stock. The shares of the Company’s common stock were
issued at a price of $0.73. The associated warrants have an exercise price of $0.91. The fair value
of the August 1, 2013 transaction, including the shares and warrants, was estimated to be
approximately $0.1 million. Under a consulting agreement with the Company, CVE was also
entitled to non-forfeitable incentive warrants. A warrant to purchase up to 1,200,000 shares of the
Company’s common stock with an exercise price of $1.50 was granted in February 20131,
became vested and fully exercisable on December 31, 2013 and has a term of five years.
25
On November 1, 2013, the Company entered into a management consulting agreement (the
“MDC Agreement”) with Market Development Consulting Group, Inc. d/b/a MDC Group (“MDC”)
for communications and investor relations advisory services. As part of MDC’s consideration,
MDC received an initial warrant to acquire 750,000 shares of common stock on November 1,
2013 at an exercise price of $.70 per share. The fair value of these warrants was estimated to be
approximately $0.4 million. MDC will receive additional warrants (“Anniversary Warrants”) to
acquire 1% of the then fully diluted common stock on each annual anniversary prior to
termination of the MDC Agreement. The exercise price of each such Anniversary Warrant shall
be equal to the average closing price over the twenty consecutive trading days immediately
preceding the anniversary. MDC is prohibited from exercising the initial warrant until the first
anniversary of the date of the Agreement, other than in connection with a change of control of
the Company.
On March 24, 2014, the Company raised gross proceeds of approximately $15 million through
the sale of 8,333,341 shares of common stock plus warrants to acquire 4,166,667 shares of
common stock. The aggregate fair value of these warrants was approximately $3.97 million. The
warrants have an exercise price of $2.16 per share and a three-year term from the date of
issuance. In connection with this offering, the Company paid commissions and other offering-
related expenses of approximately $1.0 million in cash and also issued warrants to the
placement agent to acquire 500,000 shares of common stock. The aggregate fair value of these
warrants was approximately $0.6 million. The warrants have an exercise price of $2.25 per share
and a five-year term from the date of issuance.
As of June 30, 2014, the Company has outstanding stock option and restricted stock awards
granted under the Company’s Amended and Restated 2005 Incentive Plan, as amended (the
“Incentive Plan”). On May 29, 2014, the Company’s stockholders authorized an additional
2,200,000 shares of common stock for future awards under the Incentive Plan. As of June 30,
2014, there were 2,021,708 shares authorized for future issuance pursuant to the Incentive Plan.
Under the Incentive Plan, the Company may grant incentive and non-qualified stock options,
stock appreciation rights, restricted stock units and other stock-based awards to officers,
directors, employees and non-employees. Stock option awards generally vest ratably over a one
to four year period and expire ten years after the date of grant.
For the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, the Company recorded stock-based compensation
expense of approximately $2.2 million and $2.3 million, respectively.
Assumptions
The fair values for the stock options granted during the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013
were estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes-Morton option-pricing model with the
following weighted-average assumptions.
Risk-free rate of return
Expected life of award
Expected dividend yield
Expected volatility of stock
Weighted-average grant date fair value $1.03
Year Ended June 30,
 2014
   1.63
   5.3 years 
   0.00
   99
%
   5.1 years 
%
%
2013
%   0.81
%   0.00
%   106
 
 $1.36
The expected volatility of stock assumption was derived by referring to changes in the historical
volatility of the company. We used the “simplified” method for “plain vanilla” options to estimate
the expected term of options granted during the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013.
Stock option activity during the two years ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 was as follows:
Weighted
Number of
 
Stock Options
Average
  
Exercise
Outstanding at June 30, 2012  6,750,201
Granted
  1,350,717
  (558,726
Exercised
(137,500
Cancelled/forfeited
Outstanding at June 30, 2013  7,404,692
  1,172,858
Granted
  (803,750
Exercised
Cancelled/forfeited
  (71,250
Outstanding at June 30, 2014  7,702,550
Exercisable at June 30, 2014   6,749,047
Price
$ 0.94
    1.08
)   0.80
)   1.03
    0.98
    1.38
)   0.64
)   1.70
    1.07
    1.02
26
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Aggregate
Intrinsic
  
Value
(in millions)
Term (years)
6.87
     
     
     
    6.50
    6.17
$ 0.6
6.8
6.3
The following table summarizes information with respect to stock options outstanding and
exercisable at June 30, 2014:
Range of Exercise Prices
Number
Outstanding
Weighted
Average
Weighted
Weighted
Remaining
Average
  
  
Contractual
Exercise
Number
  
Exercisable
Average
  
Exercise
Term
Price
Price
$0.43 to $0.66
$0.67 to $1.00
$1.01 to $2.00
$2.01 to $3.00
$3.01 to $4.00
Total
2,963,409
  1,443,062
  2,881,079
  15,000
  400,000
  7,702,550
(Years)
    4.6
    6.9
    8.3
    0.1
    6.8
$ 0.63
    0.85
    1.32
    2.32
    3.25
2,963,409   $ 0.63
   1,195,576     0.87
   2,175,062     1.22
   15,000
    2.32
   400,000
    3.25
   6,749,047
The fair values of the warrants issued were estimated using a Black-Scholes-Morton option-
pricing, and the following weighted-average assumptions for the year ended June 30, 2014 and
2013:
Risk-free rate of return
Expected life of award
Year Ended June 30, 
 
 2014
 
   1.25
%   0.85 %
   5 years  
   4.2 years
2013
Expected dividend yield
Expected volatility of stock
Weighted-average grant date fair value $0.92
0.00
   88
%   0.00 %
%   108 %
$0.83
The Company recognizes the stock-based compensation expense related to the Incentive Plan
awards and warrants over the requisite service period. The following table presents stock based
compensation expense attributable to stock option awards issued under the Incentive Plan and
attributable to warrants issued and sold to consulting firms (in thousands):
Year Ended June 30, 
 
 
 2014
 
 $ 1,186   $ 1,046
 
Incentive Plan
 
Warrants and stock
   1,033     1,271
Total stock-based compensation expense $ 2,219   $ 2,317
2013
As of June 30, 2014, approximately $0.5 million of estimated expense with respect to non-vested
stock option awards has yet to be recognized and will be recognized in expense over the
remaining weighted average period of approximately one year.
Note 12 – Segment Information
The Company’s reportable operating segments have been determined in accordance with the
Company’s internal management reporting structure and include SES China, Technology
Licensing and Related Services, and Corporate. The SES China reporting segment includes all
of the assets and operations and related administrative costs for China including initial closing
costs relating to our joint ventures. The Technology Licensing and Related Services reporting
segment includes all of the Company’s current operating activities outside of China. The
Corporate reporting segment includes the executive and administrative expenses of the
corporate office in Houston. The Company evaluates performance based upon several factors,
of which a primary financial measure is segment operating income or loss.
27
The following table presents statements of operations data and assets by segment (in
thousands):
571
    —
2013
192
    —
$ 518
    47
    4
  $ 569
Three Months Ended  Year Ended
 June 30,
 2014
    
 $ 4,358   $ —
June 30,
 
 
  2013
  2014
 
 
     
     
Revenue:
 
  $17,507   $8
SES China
 
     
Technology licensing and related services    —
 
    —
   —
Corporate
 
  $17,507   $579
Total revenue
 $ 4,358   $ 192
 
     
    
 
     
 
    
Depreciation and amortization:
  $2,067   $2,056  
SES China
 $ 516
 
    219
Technology licensing and related services    50
    7
 
   1
Corporate
  $2,293   $2,292  
 $ 567
Total depreciation and amortization
     
 
 
    
    
Operating loss:
 
     
   (2,334 )   (2,540 )   (6,703 )   (10,126)
SES China
Technology licensing and related services    (450
)   (1,210 )   (1,976 )
   (1,359 )   (2,460 )   (5,736 )   (6,277 )
Corporate
 $ (4,143 ) $ (5,484 ) $(13,649) $(18,379)
Total operating loss
 
    
 
     
 
    
Interest expense:
     
 
SES China
 $ 89
  $302
 
Technology licensing and related services    —
    —
Corporate
   —
 
    —
 
 $ 89
Total interest expense
  $302
 
 
    
     
Equity in losses (earnings) of joint ventures:    
 
     
 
SES China
 $ —
  $820
 
Technology licensing and related services    —
    —
Corporate
   —
 
    552
  $1,372  
 $ —
Total equity in losses of joint ventures
$ 54
    —
    —
  $ 54
     
     
  $ 241
    —
    (28
  $ 213
$381
    —
    —
  $381
     
     
  $—
    —
)   2
  $2
187
    49
)   (484
Assets:
SES China
Technology licensing and related services   943
Corporate
Total assets
June 30, 
June 30, 
  
 
 
2013
2014
 
    
     
 $76,316   $76,316  
    1,030  
   14,447     11,018  
 $91,706   $88,364
Note 13 — Quarterly Results of Operations (Unaudited) (in thousands, except per share
amounts)
1st Quarter  2nd Quarter  3rd Quarter  4th Quarter  Year
 
    
2014:
 $ —
Revenues
   (4,131
Operating loss
   (4,184
Net loss
Net loss attributable to stockholders
   (4,162
Net loss per share — basic and diluted   (0.07
    
2013:
 $ 71
Revenues
   (3,881
Operating loss
   (4,518
Net loss
Net loss attributable to stockholders
   (4,485
Net loss per share — basic and diluted   (0.09
$ 5,914
)   (1,336
)   (1,416
)   (1,435
)   (0.02
   
  $ 13
)   (3,940
)   (4,318
)   (4,403
)   (0.07
$ 7,235
)   (4,039
)   (4,183
)   (4,150
)   (0.06
     
  $ 303
)   (5,074
)   (5,400
)   (5,380
)   (0.09
$ 4,358
)   (4,143
)   (4,214
)   (4,496
)   (0.06
     
  $ 192
)   (5,484
)   (5,687
)   (5,665
)   (0.09
$17,507  
)   (13,649)
)   (13,997)
)   (14,243)
)   (0.22
)
 
     
  $579
 
)   (18,379)
)   (19,923)
)   (19,933)
)   (0.33
)
28
Note 14 — Subsequent Events
As stated in Note 3 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, on September 10, 2013
the Company entered into a short-term loan with Zao Zhuang Bank Co., Ltd., and received
approximately $3.3 million in proceeds. In September 2014, the Company has paid off the ZZ
Short-term Loan, and the Company is currently in discussions with Zao Zhuang Bank Co., Ltd to
replace it with another similar loan and line of credit.
29
PART III
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
1. Financial Statements. Reference is made to the Index to Consolidated Financial Statements at
Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2. Financial Statement Schedules. All schedules are omitted because they are not applicable or
the required information is shown in the financial statements or the notes to the financial
statements.
3. Exhibits.
NumberDescription of Exhibits
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
4.2
10.1
10.2
10.3**
10.4+
10.5+
10.6
Certificate of Incorporation of the Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the
Company’s Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on
January 31, 2007).
Certificate of Amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation of the Company dated effective
December 16, 2009 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on December 17, 2009).
Amended and Restated Bylaws of the Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to
Amendment No. 2 to the Company’s Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on
Form SB-2 filed on March 30, 2007).
Specimen Stock Certificate (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s
Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on January 31,
2007).
Form of Warrant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 25, 2014).
Cooperative Joint Venture Contract of SES (Zao Zhuang) New Gas Company Ltd. between
Shandong Hai Hua Coal & Chemical Company Ltd. and Synthesis Energy Systems
Investments, Inc. dated July 6, 2006 — English translation from original Chinese document
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Registration Statement
(Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on January 31, 2007).
Amendment to Cooperative Joint Venture Contract of SES (Zao Zhuang) New Gas Company
Ltd. between Shandong Hai Hua Coal & Chemical Company Ltd. and Synthesis Energy
Systems Investments, Inc. dated November 8, 2006 — English translation from original
Chinese document (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Registration
Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on January 31, 2007).
Contract for Synthesis Gas Purchase and Sales by and between Shandong Hai Hua Coal &
Chemical Company Ltd. and Synthesis Energy Systems (Zao Zhuang) New Gas Company Ltd.
dated October 22, 2006 — English translation from original Chinese document (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Amendment No. 4 to the Company’s Registration Statement
(Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on May 23, 2007).
Consulting Agreement between the Company and Lorenzo Lamadrid dated May 30, 2006
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to the Company’s Registration Statement
(Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on January 31, 2007).
Amended and Restated 2005 Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to
Amendment No. 3 to the Company’s Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on
Form SB-2 filed on May 1, 2007).
Fixed Assets Loan Contract between Synthesis Energy Systems (Zao Zhuang) New Gas
Company Ltd. and Industrial and Commercial Bank of China dated March 27, 2007 — English
translation from original Chinese document (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to
Amendment No. 2 to the Company’s Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on
Form SB-2 filed on March 30, 2007).
10.7
10.8
10.9
30
10.10
10.11+
10.12
10.13
10.14**
10.15+
10.16+
10.17
10.18
10.19+
Second Amendment to Cooperative Joint Venture Contract of SES (Zao Zhuang) New Gas
Company Ltd., between Shandong Hai Hua Coal & Chemical Company Ltd. and Synthesis
Energy Systems Investments, Inc., dated February 12, 2007 — English translation from original
Chinese document (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Amendment No. 3 to the
Company’s Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on May
1, 2007).
Co-Operative Joint Venture Contract of SES — GCL (Inner Mongolia) Coal Chemical Co., Ltd.
between Inner Mongolia Golden Concord (Xilinhot) Energy Investment Co., Ltd. and Synthesis
Energy Systems Investments, Inc. dated May 25, 2007 — English translation from original
Chinese document (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.21 to Amendment No. 5 to the
Company’s Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-140367) on Form SB-2 filed on June
6, 2007).
Form of Indemnification Agreement between the Company and its officers and directors
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB
for the year ended June 30, 2007).
Lease Agreement between Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. and AVPF Riverway Ltd. dated
January 14, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on January 31, 2008).
First Amendment to the Amended and Restated 2005 Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference
to Annex B to the Company’s Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed on November 15, 2007).
Form of Non-statutory Stock Option Agreement (incorporated by reference herein to Exhibit 10.8
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated April 2, 2009).
Form of Equity Joint Venture Contract between Yima Coal Industry (Group) Co., Ltd. and
Synthesis Energy Investment Holdings, Inc. dated August 27, 2009 — English translation from
original Chinese document. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on September 2, 2009).
Amended and Restated License Agreement by and between the Company and the Gas
Technology Institute dated November 5, 2009 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 12, 2009).
Letter Agreement between the Company and Lorenzo Lamadrid dated August 15, 2010
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
August 17, 2010).
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement between the Company and Robert W. Rigdon
dated April 8, 2011 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on April 12, 2011).
Share Purchase Agreement dated June 18, 2012 among Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. and
Hongye International Investment Group Co., Ltd. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 19, 2012).  
Share Purchase Agreement dated June 18, 2012 among Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. and
Shanghai Zhongmo Investment Management Co., Ltd. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 19, 2012).
Employment Letter between the Company and Kevin Kelly dated effective October 10, 2012
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
October 16, 2012). 
Second Amendment to the Amended and Restated 2005 Incentive Plan (incorporated by
Second Amendment to the Amended and Restated 2005 Incentive Plan (incorporated by
reference to Annex A to the Company’s Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed on October 26,
2012). 
Consulting Services Agreement between the Company and Crystal Vision Energy Limited dated
effective January 1, 2013 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on December 27, 2012).
Letter Agreement between Robert Rigdon and the Company dated February 27, 2013
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
March 4, 2013). 
Notice of Termination dated June 10, 2013 of Share Purchase Agreement dated March 31,
2011, as amended, among Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc., China Energy Industry Holdings
Group Co, Ltd. and Zhongjixuan Investment Management Company Ltd. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 10, 2013). 
Employment Letter between the Company and Donald P. Bunnell dated July 16, 2013
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
July 17, 2013). 
Cooperation Agreement among SES (Zao Zhuang) New Gas Co., Ltd., Shandong Weijiao
Group Xuecheng Energy Co., Ltd. and Shandong Xuejiao Chemical Co., Ltd. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 26, 2013).
Amendment to Consulting Services Agreement between the Company and Crystal Vision
Energy Limited dated July 29, 2013 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on September 25, 2013). 
Employment Letter between the Company and Charles Costenbader dated effective September
3, 2013 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on September 4, 2013).
Loan Agreement between Synthesis Energy Systems (Zao Zhuang) New Gas Co., Ltd and Zao
Zhuang Bank dated September 10, 2013 — English translation from original Chinese document
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed
on September 25, 2013).
10.20
10.21
10.22+
10.23
10.24+
10.25**
10.26
10.27+
10.28
31
10.29
10.30
Management Consulting Agreement between the Company and Market Development
Consulting Group, Inc. dated November 1, 2013 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 5, 2013).
Joint Venture Contract between Zhangjiagang Chemical Machinery Co., Ltd. and SES Asia
Technologies, Ltd., dated February 14, 2014 – English translation from Chinese document
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
February 14, 2014). **
Technology Usage and Contribution Agreement among SES-ZCM Clean Energy Technologies
Limited, Zhangjiagang Chemical Machinery Co., Ltd. and SES Asia Technologies, Ltd., dated
February 14, 2014 – English translation from Chinese document (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 14, 2014). **
Form of Securities Purchase Agreement among the Company and the purchasers identified
therein (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on March 25, 2014).
Employment Letter between the Company and Roger Ondreko dated April 29, 2014
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
10.31
10.32
10.33
May 5, 2014).
21.1
Subsidiaries of the Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 21.1 to the Company’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K filed on September 12, 2014).
23.1*
Consent of UHY LLP.
31.1*
31.2*
Certification of Chief Executive Officer of Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. pursuant to Rule 13a-
14(a) promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Certification of Chief Financial Officer of Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. pursuant to Rule 13a-
14(a) promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Certification of Chief Executive Officer of Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. pursuant to Rule 13a-
14(b) promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and Section 1350 of
Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
Certification of Chief Financial Officer of Synthesis Energy Systems, Inc. pursuant to Rule 13a-
14(b) promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and Section 1350 of
Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
32.1*
32.2*
101.INS
101.SCH
101.CAL
101.DEF
101.LAB
101.PRE
XBRL Instance Document (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 101.INS to the Company’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on September 12, 2014).
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
101.SCH to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on September 12, 2014).
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 101.CAL to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on September 12, 2014).
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 101.DEF to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on September 12,
2014).
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
101.LAB to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on September 12, 2014).
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 101.PRE to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on September 12,
2014).
______________
*          Filed herewith.
**        Portions of this exhibit have been omitted pursuant to a request for confidential treatment
accepted by the Securities and Exchange Commission and this exhibit has been filed separately
with the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with such request.
+           Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
32
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized.
Date: November 21, 2014By:/s/ Robert Rigdon_________________________
SYNTHESIS ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
Robert Rigdon, President
and Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
Name
/s/ Robert Rigdon
Robert Rigdon
Position
Date
President and Chief Executive Officer and Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
November 21, 2014
/s/ Roger Ondreko
Chief Financial Officer
Roger Ondreko
/s/ Lorenzo Lamadrid
Lorenzo Lamadrid
/s/ Denis Slavich
Denis Slavich
/s/ Harry Rubin
Harry Rubin
(Principal Financial Officer)
Director
Director
Director
November 21, 2014
November 21, 2014
November 21, 2014
November 21, 2014
__________________
Xu, Ziwang
__________________
Gao, Feng
__________________
Yang, Guang
/s/ Charles Brown
Charles Brown
Director
Director
Director
Director
33
November 21, 2014
November 21, 2014
November 21, 2014
November 21, 2014