
8-K 1 a15-15564_58k.htm 8-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported): July 20, 2015
MARKWEST ENERGY PARTNERS, L.P.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
001-31239
(Commission File Number)
27-0005456
(IRS Employer Identification No.)
1515 Arapahoe Street, Tower 1, Suite 1600, Denver CO 80202
(Address of principal executive officers)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: 303-925-9200
Not Applicable.
(Former name or former address, if changed since last report)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the filing obligation of the
registrant under any of the following provisions:
x                Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
o                  Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-
12)
o                  Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act
(17 CFR 240.14d-2(b))
o                  Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act
(17 CFR 240.13e-4(c))
Item 8.01. Regulation FD Disclosure.
On July 20, 2015, MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P. (the “Partnership”) and MPLX LP (“MPLX”) announced the
provision of supplemental information relating to their previously announced entry into a definitive merger agreement
pursuant to which the Partnership would become a wholly owned subsidiary of MPLX.  The full text of the press
release and the related investor presentation are included as Exhibit 99.1 and Exhibit 99.2, respectively, to this
Current Report on Form 8-K and are incorporated into this Item 8.01 by reference.
Item 9.01. Financial Statements and Exhibits.
(d)                                 Exhibits
Exhibit
No.
99.1
99.2
Description
Press Release dated July 20, 2015, issued by MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P. and MPLX LP
Investor Presentation dated July 20, 2015
***********
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This communication includes “forward-looking statements.” All statements other than statements of historical facts
included or incorporated herein may constitute forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and
uncertainties.  These statements may include statements regarding the proposed acquisition of the Partnership by
MPLX, the expected timetable for completing the transaction, benefits and synergies of the transaction, future
opportunities for the combined company and any other statements regarding the Partnership and MPLX’s future
operations, anticipated business levels, future earnings and distributions, planned activities, anticipated growth,
market opportunities, strategies and competition. All such forward-looking statements involve estimates and
assumptions that are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to
differ materially from those expressed or implied in such statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such
differences include: factors relating to the satisfaction of the conditions to the proposed transaction, including
regulatory approvals and the required approval of the Partnership’s unitholders; the parties’ ability to meet
expectations regarding the timing and tax treatment of the proposed transaction; the possibility that the combined
company may be unable to achieve expected synergies and operating efficiencies in connection with the transaction
within the expected time-frames or at all; the integration of the Partnership being more difficult, time-consuming or
costly than expected; the effect of any changes resulting from the proposed transaction in customer, supplier and
other business relationships; general market perception of the proposed transaction; exposure to lawsuits and
contingencies associated with MPLX; the ability to attract and retain key personnel; prevailing market conditions;
changes in the economic and financial conditions of the Partnership and MPLX; uncertainties and matters beyond the
control of management; and the other risks discussed in the periodic reports filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), including the Partnership’s and MPLX’s Annual Reports on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2014. The forward-looking statements should be considered in light of all these factors.  In addition,
other risks and uncertainties not presently known to the Partnership or MPLX or that the Partnership or MPLX
considers immaterial could affect the accuracy of the forward-looking statements.   The reader is cautioned not to rely
unduly on these forward-looking statements. The Partnership and MPLX do not undertake any duty to update any
forward-looking statement except as required by law.
Additional Information and Where to Find It
This communication may be deemed to be solicitation material in respect of the proposed acquisition of the
Partnership by MPLX. In connection with the proposed acquisition, the Partnership and MPLX intend to file relevant
materials with the SEC, including MPLX’s registration statement on Form S-4 that will include a joint
2
proxy statement/prospectus. Investors and security holders are urged to read all relevant documents filed with
the SEC, including the proxy statement/prospectus when they become available, because they will contain
important information about the proposed transaction. Investors and security holders are able to obtain the
documents (once available) free of charge at the SEC’s website, http://www.sec.gov, or for free from the Partnership
by contacting Investor Relations by phone at 1-(866) 858-0482 or by email at investorrelations@markwest.com or for
free from MPLX LP at its website, http://ir.mplx.com, or in writing at 200 E. Hardin Street, Findlay, Ohio 45840,
Attention: Corporate Secretary.
Participants in the Solicitation
This communication is not a solicitation of a proxy from any investor or securityholder.  However, the Partnership and
its directors and executive officers and certain employees may be deemed to be participants in the solicitation of
proxies from the holders of Partnership common units with respect to the proposed transaction. Information about the
Partnership’s directors and executive officers is set forth in the proxy statement for the Partnership’s 2015 Annual
Meeting of Common Unitholders, which was filed with the SEC on April 23, 2015 and the Partnership’s current reports
on Form 8-K, as filed with the SEC on May 5, 2015, May 19, 2015 and June 8, 2015.  Information about MPLX’s
directors and executive officers is available in MPLX’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on
February 27, 2015 and MPLX’s current report on Form 8-K, as filed with the SEC on March 9, 2015.  To the extent
holdings of Partnership securities have changed since the amounts contained in the proxy statement for the
Partnership’s 2015 Annual Meeting of stockholders, such changes have been or will be reflected on Statements of
Change in Ownership on Form 4 filed with the SEC.  Investors may obtain additional information regarding the interest
of such participants by reading the proxy statement/prospectus regarding the acquisition (once available).  These
documents (when available) may be obtained free of charge from the SEC’s website http://www.sec.gov, or from the
Partnership and MPLX using the contact information above.
Non-Solicitation
This communication shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to sell or the solicitation of an
offer to buy any securities, nor shall there be any sale of securities in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation
or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such jurisdiction.  No
offer of securities shall be made except by means of a prospectus meeting the requirements of Section 10 of the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
3
SIGNATURE
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this Report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
Date: July 20, 2015
MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P.
 
By: MarkWest Energy GP, L.L.C., its general partner
 
 
By:
/s/ Nancy K. Buese
Name: Nancy K. Buese
Title:
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer
4
EXHIBIT INDEX
Exhibit
No.
Description
Press Release dated July 20, 2015, issued by MarkWest Energy Partners, L.P. and MPLX LP
Investor Presentation dated July 20, 2015
99.1
99.2
5