
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-1
<SEQUENCE>2
<FILENAME>ex1a.txt
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 1.(A)
<TEXT>
<PAGE>
EXHIBIT 1(A)
ATLAS AMERICA PUBLIC #15-2005 PROGRAM
ANTHEM SECURITIES, INC.
                            DEALER-MANAGER AGREEMENT
<PAGE>
ANTHEM SECURITIES, INC.
                            DEALER-MANAGER AGREEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
PAGE
<S>                                                                             
<C>
1.    Description of Program and 
Units..........................................................1
2.    Representations, Warranties and Agreements of the Managing General 
Partner................2
3.    Grant of Authority to the Dealer-
Manager..................................................3
4.    Compensation and 
Fees.....................................................................3
5.    Covenants of the Managing General 
Partner.................................................6
6.    Representations and Warranties of the Dealer-
Manager......................................6
7.    State Securities 
Registration............................................................11
8.    Expense of 
Sale..........................................................................11
9.    Conditions of the Dealer-Manager's 
Duties................................................12
10.   Conditions of the Managing General Partner's 
Duties......................................12
11.   
Indemnification.................................................................
.........12
12.   Representations and Agreements to Survive 
Delivery.......................................13
13.   
Termination.....................................................................
.........13
14.   
Notices.........................................................................
.........13
15.   Format of Checks/Escrow 
Agent............................................................14
16.   Transmittal 
Procedures...................................................................14
17.   
Parties.........................................................................
.........15
18.   
Relationship....................................................................
.........15
19.   Effective 
Date...........................................................................1
5
20.   Entire Agreement, 
Waiver.................................................................15
21.   Governing 
Law............................................................................1
5
22.   
Complaints......................................................................
.........15
23.   
Privacy.........................................................................
.........16
24.   Anti-Money Laundering 
Provision..........................................................16
25.   
Acceptance......................................................................
.........16
Exhibit A - Form of Escrow Agreement
Exhibit B - Selling Agent Agreement
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
ANTHEM SECURITIES, INC.
DEALER-MANAGER AGREEMENT
                                 (Best Efforts)
Anthem Securities, Inc.
P.O. Box 926
Moon Township, Pennsylvania 15108-0926
RE:     ATLAS AMERICA PUBLIC #15-2005 PROGRAM
               -------------------------------------
Gentlemen:
The undersigned, Atlas Resources, Inc., which is referred to as the
"Managing General Partner," on behalf of Atlas America Public #15-2005 Program,
which is referred to as the "Program," is a series of up to four limited
partnerships formed under the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act
as described below. These limited partnerships are sometimes referred to in this
Agreement in the singular as a "Partnership" or in the plural as "Partnerships."
The Managing General Partner on behalf of the Partnerships hereby confirms its
agreement with you, as Dealer-Manager, as follows:
1.   DESCRIPTION OF PROGRAM AND UNITS.
(a)  The Managing General Partner, a Pennsylvania corporation, will be the
          sole managing general partner of up to four limited partnerships which
          will be named as follows:
(i)  Atlas America Public #15-2005(A) L.P.;
(ii) Atlas America Public #15-2006(B) L.P.;
(iii) Atlas America Public #15-2006(C) L.P.; and
(iv) Atlas America Public #15-2006(D) L.P.
On behalf of the Program and the Partnerships, a Registration
               Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 127355) relating to the
               offer and sale of the limited partner and investor general
               partner interests in the Partnerships, which are referred to as
               the "Units," was filed on August 9, 2005 with the Securities and
               Exchange Commission (the "Commission") under the Securities Act
               of 1933, as amended, which is referred to as the "Act." The
               Registration Statement has been declared effective by the
               Commission and the Partnerships and the Units are described in
               the Prospectus that forms a part of the Registration Statement.
               As used in this Agreement, the terms "Prospectus" and
               "Registration Statement" refer solely to the Prospectus and
               Registration Statement, as amended, described above, except that:
(i)  from and after the date on which any post-effective
                    amendment to the Registration Statement is declared
                    effective by the Commission, the term "Registration
                    Statement" shall refer to the Registration Statement as
                    amended by that post-effective amendment, and the term
                    "Prospectus" shall refer to the Prospectus then forming a
                    part of the Registration Statement; and
1
<PAGE>
(ii) if the Prospectus filed by the Managing General Partner
                    pursuant to Rule 424(b) or (c) promulgated by the Commission
                    under the Act differs from the Prospectus on file with the
                    Commission at the time the Registration Statement or any
                    post-effective amendment thereto shall have become
                    effective, the term "Prospectus" shall refer to the
                    Prospectus filed pursuant thereto from and after the date on
                    which it was filed.
Terms defined in the Prospectus and not otherwise defined in this
         Agreement shall have the meanings set forth in the Prospectus.
(b)  The Units will be sold at a price of $10,000 per Unit subject to the
          discounts for certain investors set forth in Section 4(c) of this
          Agreement for certain investors. Subject to the receipt and acceptance
          by the Managing General Partner of the minimum subscription proceeds
          of $2,000,000 in a Partnership by its Offering Termination Date for
          each Partnership as described in the Prospectus (the "Offering
          Termination Date"), the Managing General Partner may break escrow and
          use the subscription proceeds for the Partnership's drilling
          activities, which is referred to as the "Initial Closing Date." Also,
          the maximum subscription proceeds of all of the Partnerships, in the
          aggregate, must not exceed the registered amount of $200 million.
The Managing General Partner will notify you and the "Selling Agents,"
          as defined below, of the Initial Closing Date and Offering Termination
          Date for each Partnership.
2.   REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES AND AGREEMENTS OF THE MANAGING GENERAL PARTNER.
     The Managing General Partner represents and warrants to and agrees with you
     that:
(a)  The Partnerships composing the Program have a currently effective
          Registration Statement on Form S-1, including a final Prospectus, for
          the registration of the Units under the Act as described in Section 1
          of this Agreement.
(b)  The Managing General Partner shall provide to you for delivery to all
          offerees and purchasers and their representatives the information and
          documents that the Managing General Partner deems appropriate to
          comply with the Act and applicable state securities acts, which are
          referred to as the "Blue Sky" laws.
(c)  The Units when issued will be duly authorized and validly issued as
          set forth in the Agreement of Limited Partnership of each Partnership,
          which is referred to as the "Partnership Agreement," the form of which
          is included as Exhibit (A) to the Prospectus, and subject only to the
          rights and obligations set forth in the Partnership Agreement or
          imposed by the laws of the state of formation of each Partnership or
          of any jurisdiction to the laws of which each Partnership is subject.
(d)  Each Partnership was duly formed under the laws of the State of
          Delaware and is validly existing as a limited partnership in good
          standing under the laws of Delaware with full power and authority to
          own its properties and conduct its business as described in the
          Prospectus. Each Partnership will be qualified to do business as a
          limited partnership or similar entity offering limited liability in
          those jurisdictions where the Managing General Partner deems the
          qualification necessary to assure limited liability of the limited
          partners.
This Agreement, when executed by you, will be a valid and binding
          agreement of each Partnership and the Managing General Partner, duly
          authorized, executed and delivered by them and enforceable in
          accordance with its terms except as may be limited by the effect of
          bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium, preferential or fraudulent
          conveyance or other laws or equitable principles relating to or
          affecting the rights of creditors generally, general principles of
          equity, and public policy relating to claims for indemnification for
          securities laws violations.
2
<PAGE>
(e)  The Prospectus, as supplemented or amended, does not contain an untrue
          statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact
          necessary in order to make the statements in the Prospectus, in the
          light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading.
3.   GRANT OF AUTHORITY TO THE DEALER-MANAGER.
(a)  Based on the representations and warranties contained in this
          Agreement, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this
          Agreement, the Managing General Partner appoints you as the
          Dealer-Manager for the Partnerships and gives you the exclusive right
          to solicit subscriptions for the Units on a "best efforts" basis in
          all states during the offering period for each Partnership as
          described in the Prospectus.
(b)  You agree to use your best efforts to effect sales of the Units and to
          form and manage a selling group composed of soliciting broker/dealers,
          which are referred to as the "Selling Agents," each of which shall be
          a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc.,
          which is referred to as the "NASD," and shall enter into a "Selling
          Agent Agreement" in substantially the form attached to this Agreement
          as Exhibit "B."
(c)  The Managing General Partner shall have three business days after the
          receipt of an executed Selling Agent Agreement to refuse that Selling
          Agent's participation.
4.   COMPENSATION AND FEES.
(a)  As Dealer-Manager you shall receive from the Managing General Partner
          the following compensation, based on each Unit sold to investors in a
          Partnership whose subscriptions for Units are accepted by the Managing
          General Partner:
(i)    a 2.5% Dealer-Manager fee;
(ii)   a 7% Sales Commission;
(iii)  a .5% accountable Reimbursement for Permissible Non-Cash
                 Compensation which, under Rule 2810 of the NASD Conduct Rules,
                 is composed of the following:
(A)    training and education meetings for associated persons
                        of the Selling Agents meeting the requirements set forth
                        in Section 4(b), below;
(B)    gifts that do not exceed $100 per year and are not
                        preconditioned on the achievement of a sales target;
(C)    an occasional meal, a ticket to a sporting event or the
                        theater, or comparable entertainment which is neither so
                        frequent nor so extensive as to raise any question of
                        propriety and is not preconditioned on achievement of a
                        sales target; and
(D)    contributions to a non-cash compensation arrangement
                        between a Selling Agent and its associated persons,
                        provided that neither the Managing General Partner, the
                        Partnerships nor you directly or indirectly participate
                        in the Selling Agent's organization of the permissible
non-cash compensation arrangement; and
(iv)   an up to .5% reimbursement of the Selling Agents' bona fide due
                 diligence expenses.
3
<PAGE>
(b)  All of the up to .5% reimbursement of the Selling Agents' bona fide
          due diligence expenses shall be reallowed to the Selling Agents, and
          all or a portion of the 7% Sales Commission and the .5% Reimbursement
          for Permissible Non-Cash Compensation may be reallowed to the Selling
          Agents as described in the Selling Agent Agreement with each Selling
          Agent. All or a portion of the remaining balance of the 2.5%
          Dealer-Manager fee may be reallowed to the wholesalers as wholesaling
          fees for subscriptions obtained through their efforts. However, you
          may reduce the wholesaling fees by any reimbursements made by the
          Managing General Partner or the Partnership for expenses which are
          received by the wholesalers in connection with the Program or expenses
          which are owed by the wholesalers to the Managing General Partner or
          the Partnership in connection with the Program and any salaries for
          the wholesalers in connection with the Program.
You shall retain any of the 7% Sales Commission, the .5% accountable
          Reimbursement for Permissible Non-Cash Compensation and the 2.5%
          Dealer-Manager fee not reallowed to the Selling Agents or the
          wholesalers. Any Dealer-Manager fee not reallowed to the wholesalers,
          which may be used for such items as legal fees associated with the
          underwriting and salaries of dual employees of you and the Managing
          General Partner which are required to be included in underwriting
          compensation under NASD Conduct Rule 2810 as determined jointly by the
          Managing General Partner and you.
You are responsible for ensuring that all non-cash compensation
          arrangements comply with NASD Conduct Rule 2810. For example, payments
          or reimbursements by you or the Managing General Partner may be made
          in connection with meetings held by you or the Managing General
          Partner for the purpose of training or education of registered
          representatives of a Selling Agent, only if the following conditions
          are met:
(i)    the registered representative obtains his Selling Agent's prior
                 approval to attend the meeting and attendance by the registered
                 representative is not conditioned by his Selling Agent on the
                 achievement of a sales target;
(ii)   the location of the training and education meeting is
                 appropriate to the purpose of the meeting as defined in NASD
                 Conduct Rule 2810;
(iii)  the payment or reimbursement is not applied to the expenses of
                 guests of the registered representative;
(iv)   the payment or reimbursement by you or the Managing General
                 Partner is not conditioned by you or the Managing General
                 Partner on the achievement of a sales target; and
(v)    the recordkeeping requirements are met.
"Non-cash compensation" means any form of compensation received in
          connection with the sale of the Units that is not cash compensation,
          including but not limited to merchandise, gifts and prizes, travel
          expenses, meals and lodging.
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing:
(i)    the Managing General Partner, its officers, directors, and
                 affiliates, and investors who buy Units through the officers
                 and directors of the Managing General Partner may subscribe to
                 Units for a subscription price reduced by the 2.5%
                 Dealer-Manager fee, the 7% Sales Commission, the .5%
                 accountable Reimbursement for Permissible Non-Cash
                 Compensation, and the .5% reimbursement of the Selling Agents'
                 bona fide due diligence expenses, which shall not be paid to
                 you; and
4
<PAGE>
(ii)   registered investment advisors and their clients and Selling
                 Agents and their registered representatives and principals may
                 subscribe to Units for a subscription price reduced by the 7%
                 Sales Commission, which shall not be paid to you, although
                 their subscription price shall not be reduced by the 2.5%
                 Dealer-Manager fee, the .5% accountable Reimbursement for
                 Permissible Non-Cash Compensation, and the up to .5%
                 reimbursement of the Selling Agents' bona fide due diligence
                 expenses which shall be paid to you.
No more than 5% of the total Units sold in the Partnerships shall be
          sold, in the aggregate, with the discounts described above.
(d)  Pending receipt and acceptance by the Managing General Partner of the
          minimum subscription proceeds of $2,000,000 in each Partnership,
          excluding any optional subscription of the Managing General Partner
          and its Affiliates and the subscription discounts set forth in Section
          4(c) of this Agreement, all proceeds received by you from the sale of
          Units in each Partnership shall be held in a separate interest bearing
          escrow account as provided in Section 15 of this Agreement.
Unless at least the minimum subscription proceeds of $2,000,000 as
          described above are received on or before the Offering Termination
          Date of a Partnership as described in Section 1 of this Agreement,
          the offering of Units in that Partnership shall be terminated, in
          which event:
(i)    the 2.5% Dealer-Manager fee, the 7% Sales Commission, the .5%
                 accountable Reimbursement for Permissible Non-Cash
                 Compensation, and the up to .5% reimbursement of the Selling
                 Agents' bona fide due diligence expenses set forth in Section
                 4(a) of this Agreement shall not be payable to you;
(ii)   all funds advanced by subscribers shall be returned to them
                 with interest earned; and
(iii)  you shall deliver a termination letter in the form provided to
                 you by the Managing General Partner to each of the subscribers
                 and to each of the offerees previously solicited by you and the
                 Selling Agents in connection with the offering of the Units.
(e)  Except as otherwise provided below, the fees, reimbursements, and
          Sales Commissions set forth in Section 4(a) of this Agreement shall be
          paid to you within five business days after the following:
(i)    at least the minimum subscription proceeds of $2,000,000 as
                 described above have been received by the respective
                 Partnership and accepted by the respective Partnership; and
(ii)   the subscription proceeds have been released from the escrow
                 account to the respective Partnership.
You shall reallow to the Selling Agents and the wholesalers their
          respective fees, reimbursements, and Sales Commissions as set forth
          in Section 4(b) of this Agreement.
Thereafter, your fees, reimbursements and Sales Commissions shall be
          paid to you and shall be reallowed to the Selling Agents and
          wholesalers as described above approximately every two weeks until
          the Offering Termination Date for the respective Partnership. All
          your remaining fees, reimbursements, and Sales Commissions shall be
          paid to you by the Managing General Partner no later than fourteen
          business days after the Offering Termination Date for the respective
          Partnership.
5
<PAGE>
5.   COVENANTS OF THE MANAGING GENERAL PARTNER. The Managing General Partner
     covenants and agrees that:
(a)  The Managing General Partner shall deliver to you ample copies of the
          Prospectus and all amendments or supplements to the Prospectus.
(b)  If any event affecting a Partnership or the Managing General Partner
          occurs that in the opinion of the Managing General Partner should be
          set forth in a supplement or amendment to the Prospectus, then the
          Managing General Partner shall promptly at its expense prepare and
          furnish to you a sufficient number of copies of a supplement or
          amendment to the Prospectus so that it, as so supplemented or amended,
          will not contain an untrue statement of a material fact or omit to
          state any material fact necessary in order to make the statements in
          the Prospectus, in the light of the circumstances under which they are
          made, not misleading.
6.   REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE DEALER-MANAGER. You, as the
     Dealer-Manager, represent and warrant to the Managing General Partner and
     the respective Partnership that:
(a)  You are a corporation duly organized, validly existing and in good
          standing under the laws of the state of your formation or of any
          jurisdiction to the laws of which you are subject, with all requisite
          power and authority to enter into this Agreement and to carry out your
          obligations under this Agreement.
(b)  This Agreement when accepted and approved by you shall be duly
          authorized, executed, and delivered by you and shall be a valid and
          binding agreement on your part in accordance with its terms.
(c)  The consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement
          and the Prospectus shall not result in the following:
(i)    any breach of any of the terms or conditions of, or a default
                 under your Articles of Incorporation or Bylaws, or any other
                 indenture, agreement, or instrument to which you are a party or
                 by which you are bound; or
(ii)   any violation of any order applicable to you of any court or
                 regulatory body or administrative agency having jurisdiction
                 over you or your affiliates.
(d)  You are duly registered under the provisions of the Securities
          Exchange Act of 1934, which is referred to as the "Act of 1934," as a
broker or dealer, and you are a member in good standing of the NASD.
          You are duly registered as a broker/dealer in the states where you are
          required to be registered in order to carry out your obligations as
          contemplated by this Agreement and the Prospectus. You agree to
          maintain all the foregoing registrations in good standing throughout
          the term of the offer and sale of the Units in each Partnership, and
          you agree to comply with all statutes and other requirements
          applicable to you as a broker/dealer under those registrations.
(e)  Pursuant to your appointment as Dealer-Manager, you shall use your
          best efforts to exercise the supervision and control that you deem
          necessary and appropriate to the activities of you and the Selling
          Agents to comply with all the provisions of the Act, insofar as the
          Act applies to your and their activities under this Agreement.
          Further, you and the Selling Agents shall not engage in any activity
          which would cause the offer and/or sale of the Units not to comply
          with the Act, the Act of 1934, the applicable rules and regulations of
          the Commission, the applicable state securities laws and regulations,
          this Agreement, and the NASD Conduct Rules including Rules 2420, 2730,
          2740, 2750, and Rule 2810(b)(2) and (b)(3), which provide as follows:
6
<PAGE>
Sec. (b)(2)
                  SUITABILITY
(A)      A member or person associated with a member
                                    shall not underwrite or participate in a
                                    public offering of a direct participation
                                    program unless standards of suitability have
                                    been established by the program for
                                    participants therein and such standards are
                                    fully disclosed in the prospectus and are
                                    consistent with the provisions of
                                    subparagraph (B) of this section.
(B)      In recommending to a participant the
                                    purchase, sale or exchange of an interest in
                                    a direct participation program, a member or
                                    person associated with a member shall:
(i)     have reasonable grounds to believe,
                                            on the basis of information obtained
                                            from the participant concerning his
                                            investment objectives, other
                                            investments, financial situation and
                                            needs, and any other information
                                            known by the member or associated
                                            person, that:
(a)      the participant is or will
                                                     be in a financial position
                                                     appropriate to enable him
                                                     to realize to a significant
                                                     extent the benefits
                                                     described in the
                                                     prospectus, including the
                                                     tax benefits where they are
                                                     a significant aspect of the
                                                     program;
(b)      the participant has a fair
                                                     market net worth sufficient
to sustain the risks
                                                     inherent in the program,
                                                     including loss of
                                                     investment and lack of
                                                     liquidity; and
(c)      the program is otherwise
                                                     suitable for the
                                                     participant; and
(ii)    maintain in the files of the member
                                            documents disclosing the basis upon
                                            which the determination of
                                            suitability was reached as to each
                                            participant.
(C)      Notwithstanding the provisions of
                                    subparagraphs (A) and (B) hereof, no member
                                    shall execute any transaction in a direct
                                    participation program in a discretionary
                                    account without prior written approval of
                                    the transaction by the customer.
Sec. (b)(3)
                  DISCLOSURE
(A)      Prior to participating in a public offering
                                    of a direct participation program, a member
                                    or person associated with a member shall
                                    have reasonable grounds to believe, based on
                                    information made available to him by the
                                    sponsor through a prospectus or other
                                    materials, that all material facts are
                                    adequately and accurately disclosed and
                                    provide a basis for evaluating the program.
7
<PAGE>
(B)      In determining the adequacy of disclosed
                                    facts pursuant to subparagraph (A) hereof, a
                                    member or person associated with a member
                                    shall obtain information on material facts
                                    relating at a minimum to the following, if
                                    relevant in view of the nature of the
                                    program:
(i) items of compensation;
(ii) physical properties;
(iii) tax aspects;
(iv) financial stability and experience of
                                         the sponsor;
(v) the program's conflicts and risk
                                        factors; and
(vi) appraisals and other pertinent reports.
(C)      For purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B)
                                    hereof, a member or person associated with a
                                    member may rely upon the results of an
inquiry conducted by another member or
                                    members, provided that:
(i)     the member or person associated with
                                            a member has reasonable grounds to
                                            believe that such inquiry was
                                            conducted with due care;
(ii)    the results of the inquiry were
                                            provided to the member or person
                                            associated with a member with the
                                            consent of the member or members
                                            conducting or directing the inquiry;
                                            and
(iii)   no member that participated in the
                                            inquiry is a sponsor of the program
                                            or an affiliate of such sponsor.
(D)      Prior to executing a purchase transaction in
                                    a direct participation program, a member or
                                    person associated with a member shall inform
                                    the prospective participant of all pertinent
                                    facts relating to the liquidity and
                                    marketability of the program during the term
                                    of investment.
You and the Selling Agents shall maintain records on the information
          used to determine that the investment in the Units is suitable and
          appropriate for each subscriber, and shall maintain these records for
          at least six years after the Offering Termination Date for the
          respective Partnership.
(f)  You agree to advise the Managing General Partner in writing of each
          jurisdiction in which you and the Selling Agents propose to offer or
          sell the Units; and you shall not nor shall you permit any Selling
          Agent to offer or sell the Units in any jurisdiction until you have
          been advised in writing by the Managing General Partner, or the
          Managing General Partner's special counsel, that the offer or sale of
          the Units:
(i)  has been qualified in the jurisdiction;
(ii) is exempt from the qualification requirements imposed by the
               jurisdiction; or
8
<PAGE>
(iii) the qualification is otherwise not required.
(g)  You and the Selling Agents have received copies of the Prospectus
          relating to the Units and you and the Selling Agents have relied only
          on the statements contained in the Prospectus and not on any other
          statements whatsoever, either written or oral, with respect to the
          details of the offering of Units.
You agree and shall require the Selling Agents to agree to deliver a
          copy of the Prospectus to each subscriber to whom you sell the Units
          at or before the completion of any sale of Units to such subscriber
          (which sale shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Agreement to
          occur on the date on which that subscriber delivers subscription funds
to the escrow agent), or earlier if required by the Blue Sky or
          securities laws of any state. Unless advised otherwise by the Managing
          General Partner, you and the Selling Agents may choose to provide each
          offeree with the following, which are collectively referred to as the
          "Sales Literature":
(i)     a flyer entitled "Atlas America Public #15-2005 Program";
(ii)    an article entitled "Tax Rewards with Oil and Gas
                  Partnerships";
(iii)   a brochure of tax scenarios entitled "How an Investment in
                  Atlas America Public #15-2005 Program Can Help Achieve an
                  Investor's Tax Objectives";
(iv)    a brochure entitled "Investing in Atlas America Public
                  #15-2005 Program";
(v)     a booklet entitled "Outline of Tax Consequences of Oil and Gas
                  Drilling Programs";
(vi)    a brochure entitled "The Appalachian Basin: A Prime Drilling
                  Location Which Commands a Premium";
(vii)   a brochure entitled "Investment Insights - Tax Time";
(viii)  a brochure entitled "Frequently Asked Questions";
(ix)    a brochure entitled "AMT - A Little History and Reducing AMT
                  through Natural Gas Partnerships";
(x)     a brochure entitled "The Drilling Process"; and
(xi)    possibly other supplementary materials.
Any such Sales Literature, if distributed, must have been preceded or
          must be accompanied by the Prospectus.
(h)  You and the Selling Agents agree that you and the Selling Agents shall
          not place any advertisement or other solicitation with respect to the
          Units (including without limitation any material for use in any
          newspaper, magazine, radio or television commercial, telephone
          recording, motion picture, or other public media) without:
(i)  the prior written approval of the Managing General Partner; and
(ii) the prior written approval of the form and content thereof by the
               Commission, the NASD and the securities authorities of the states
               where such advertisement or solicitation is to be circulated.
9
<PAGE>
Any such advertisements or solicitations shall be at your expense.
(i)  If a supplement or amendment to the Prospectus is prepared and
          delivered to you by the Managing General Partner, you agree and shall
          require any Selling Agent to agree as follows:
(i)    to distribute each supplement or amendment to the Prospectus to
                 every person who has previously received a copy of the
                 Prospectus from you and/or the Selling Agent; and
(ii)   to include each supplement or amendment in all future
deliveries of any Prospectus.
(j)  In connection with any offer or sale of the Units, you agree and shall
          require any Selling Agent to agree to the following:
(i)    to comply in all respects with statements set forth in the
                 Prospectus, the Partnership Agreement, and any supplements or
                 amendments to the Prospectus;
(ii)   not to make any statement inconsistent with the statements in
                 the Prospectus, the Partnership Agreement, and any supplements
                 or amendments to the Prospectus;
(iii)  not to make any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to
                 state a material fact necessary in order to make statements
                 made, in light of the circumstances under which they were made,
                 not misleading in connection with the Partnerships, the Units
                 or the offering; and
(iv)   not to provide any written information, statements, or sales
                 materials other than the Prospectus, the Sales Literature, and
                 any supplements or amendments to the Prospectus unless approved
                 in writing by the Managing General Partner.
(k)  You agree to use your best efforts in the solicitation and sale of the
          Units and to coordinate and supervise the efforts of the Selling
          Agents, and you shall require any Selling Agent to agree to use its
          best efforts in the solicitation and sale of the Units, including
          that:
(i)    the prospective purchasers meet the suitability requirements
                 set forth in the Prospectus, the Subscription Agreement, and
                 this Agreement; and
(ii)   the prospective purchasers properly complete and execute the
                 Subscription Agreement, which has been provided as Exhibit
                 (I-B) to the Partnership Agreement, Exhibit (A) of the
                 Prospectus, together with any additional forms provided in any
                 supplement or amendment to the Prospectus, or otherwise
                 provided to you by the Managing General Partner to be completed
                 by prospective purchasers.
The Managing General Partner shall have the right to reject any
          subscription at any time for any reason without liability to it.
          Subscription funds and executed Subscription Agreements shall be
          transmitted as set forth in Section 16 of this Agreement.
(l)  You agree and covenant that:
(i)    the representations and warranties you make in this Agreement
                 are and shall be true and correct at the applicable closing
                 date; and
10
<PAGE>
(ii)   you shall have fulfilled all your obligations under this
                 Agreement at the applicable closing date.
7.   STATE SECURITIES REGISTRATION. Incident to the offer and sale of the Units,
     the Managing General Partner shall use its best efforts either in taking:
(a)  all necessary action and filing all necessary forms and documents
deemed reasonable by it in order to qualify or register Units for sale
          under the securities laws of the jurisdictions requested by you
          pursuant to Section 6(f) of this Agreement; or
(b)  any necessary action and filing any necessary forms deemed reasonable
          by it in order to obtain an exemption from qualification or
          registration in those jurisdictions.
Notwithstanding, the Managing General Partner may elect not to qualify
     or register Units in any state or jurisdiction in which it deems the
     qualification or registration is not warranted for any reason in its sole
     discretion. The Managing General Partner and its counsel shall inform you
     as to the states and jurisdictions in which the Units have been qualified
     for sale or are exempt under the respective securities or Blue Sky laws of
     those states and jurisdictions. The Managing General Partner, however, has
     not assumed and will not assume any obligation or responsibility as to
     your right or any Selling Agent's right to act as a broker/dealer with
     respect to the Units in any state or jurisdiction.
The Managing General Partner shall provide to you and the Selling Agents
     for delivery to all offerees and purchasers and their representatives any
     additional information, documents, and instruments that the Managing
     General Partner deems necessary to comply with the rules, regulations, and
     judicial and administrative interpretations in those states and
     jurisdictions for the offer and sale of the Units in those states.
The Managing General Partner shall file all post-offering forms,
     documents, or materials and take all other actions required by the states
     and jurisdictions in which the offer and sale of Units have been
     qualified, registered, or are exempt. However, the Managing General
     Partner shall not be required to take any action, make any filing, or
     prepare any document necessary or required in connection with your status
     or any Selling Agent's status as a broker/dealer under the laws of any
     state or jurisdiction.
The Managing General Partner shall provide you with copies of all
     applications, filings, correspondence, orders, other documents, or
     instruments relating to any application for qualification, registration,
     exemption, or other approval under applicable state or Federal securities
     laws for the offering.
8.   EXPENSE OF SALE. The expenses in connection with the offer and sale of the
     Units shall be payable as set forth below.
(a)  The Managing General Partner shall pay all expenses incident to the
          performance of its obligations under this Agreement, including the
          fees and expenses of its attorneys and accountants and all fees and
          expenses of registering or qualifying the Units for offer and sale in
          the states and jurisdictions as set forth in Section 7 of this
          Agreement, or obtaining exemptions from qualification or registration,
          even if the offering of the Partnerships is not successfully
          completed.
(b)  You shall pay all expenses incident to the performance of your
          obligations under this Agreement, including the formation and
          management of the selling group and the fees and expenses of your own
          counsel and accountants, even if the offering of the Partnerships is
          not successfully completed.
11
<PAGE>
9.   CONDITIONS OF THE DEALER-MANAGER'S DUTIES. Your obligations under this
     Agreement shall be subject to the accuracy, as of the date of this
Agreement and at the applicable closing date of:
(a)  the Managing General Partner's representations and warranties made in
          this Agreement; and
(b)  to the performance by the Managing General Partner of its obligations
          under this Agreement.
10.  CONDITIONS OF THE MANAGING GENERAL PARTNER'S DUTIES. The Managing General
     Partner's obligations provided under this Agreement, including the duty to
     pay compensation to you as set forth in Section 4 of this Agreement, shall
     be subject to the following:
(a)  the accuracy, as of the date of this Agreement and at the applicable
          closing date of each Partnership as if made at the applicable closing
          date, of your representations and warranties made in this Agreement;
(b)  the performance by you of your obligations under this Agreement; and
(c)  the Managing General Partner's receipt, at or before the applicable
          closing date of each Partnership, of a fully executed Subscription
          Agreement for each prospective purchaser as required by Section 6(k)
          of this Agreement.
11.  INDEMNIFICATION.
(a)  You and the Selling Agents shall indemnify and hold harmless the
          Managing General Partner, each Partnership and its attorneys against
          any losses, claims, damages or liabilities, joint or several, to which
          they may become subject under the Act, the Act of 1934, or otherwise
          insofar as the losses, claims, damages, or liabilities (or actions in
          respect thereof) arise out of or are based on your agreements with the
          Selling Agents or your breach of any of your duties and obligations,
          representations, or warranties under the terms or provisions of this
          Agreement, and you and the Selling Agents shall reimburse them for any
          legal or other expenses reasonably incurred in connection with
          investigating or defending the losses, claims, damages, liabilities,
          or actions.
(b)  The Managing General Partner shall indemnify and hold you and the
          Selling Agents harmless against any losses, claims, damages or
          liabilities, joint or several, to which you and the Selling Agents may
          become subject under the Act, the Act of 1934, or otherwise insofar as
          the losses, claims, damages, or liabilities (or actions in respect
          thereof) arise out of or are based on the Managing General Partner's
          breach of any of its duties and obligations, representations, or
          warranties under the terms or provisions of this Agreement, and the
          Managing General Partner shall reimburse you and the Selling Agents
          for any legal or other expenses reasonably incurred in connection with
          investigating or defending the losses, claims, damages, liabilities,
          or actions.
(c)  The foregoing indemnity agreements shall extend on the same terms and
          conditions to, and shall inure to the benefit of, each person, if any,
          who controls each indemnified party within the meaning of the Act.
12
<PAGE>
(d)  Promptly after receipt by an indemnified party of notice of the
          commencement of any action, the indemnified party shall, if a claim in
          respect of the action is to be made against an indemnifying party
under this Section, notify the indemnifying party in writing of the
          commencement of the action; but the omission to promptly notify the
          indemnifying party shall not relieve the indemnifying party from any
          liability which it may have to any indemnified party. If any action is
          brought against an indemnified party, it shall notify the indemnifying
          party of the commencement of the action, and the indemnifying party
          shall be entitled to participate in, and, to the extent that it
          wishes, jointly with any other indemnifying party similarly notified,
          to assume the defense of the action, with counsel satisfactory to the
          indemnified and indemnifying parties. After the indemnified party has
          received notice from the agreed on counsel that the defense of the
          action under this paragraph has been assumed, the indemnifying party
          shall not be responsible for any legal or other expenses subsequently
          incurred by the indemnified party in connection with the defense of
          the action other than with respect to the agreed on counsel who
          assumed the defense of the action.
12.  REPRESENTATIONS AND AGREEMENTS TO SURVIVE DELIVERY. All representations,
     warranties, and agreements of the Managing General Partner and you in this
     Agreement, including the indemnity agreements contained in Section 11 of
     this Agreement, shall:
(a)  survive the delivery, execution and closing of this Agreement;
(b)  remain operative and in full force and effect regardless of any
          investigation made by or on behalf of you or any person who controls
          you within the meaning of the Act, by the Managing General Partner, or
          any of its officers, directors, or any person who controls the
          Managing General Partner within the meaning of the Act, or any other
          indemnified party; and
(c)  survive delivery of the Units.
13.  TERMINATION.
(a)  You shall have the right to terminate this Agreement other than the
          indemnification provisions of Section 11 of this Agreement by giving
          notice as specified below any time at or before a closing date:
(i)  if the Managing General Partner has failed, refused, or been
               unable at or before a closing date, to perform any of its
               obligations under this Agreement; or
(ii) there has occurred an event materially and adversely affecting
               the value of the Units.
If you elect to terminate this Agreement other than the
               indemnification provisions of Section 11 of this Agreement, then
               the Managing General Partner shall be promptly notified by you by
               telephone, e-mail, facsimile, or telegram, confirmed by letter.
(b)  The Managing General Partner may terminate this Agreement other than
          the indemnification provisions of Section 11 of this Agreement, for
          any reason and at any time, by promptly giving notice to you by
          telephone, e-mail, facsimile, or telegram, confirmed by letter as
          specified below at or before a closing date.
14.  NOTICES.
(a)  All notices or communications under this Agreement, except as
          otherwise specifically provided, shall be in writing.
(b)  Any notice or communication sent by the Managing General Partner or a
          Partnership to you shall be mailed, delivered, or sent by facsimile,
e-mail or telegraph, and confirmed to you at P.O. Box 926, 311 Rouser
          Road, Moon Township, Pennsylvania 15108-0926.
13
<PAGE>
(c)  Any notice or communication sent by you to the Managing General
          Partner or a Partnership shall be mailed, delivered, or sent by
          facsimile, e-mail or telegraph, and confirmed at 311 Rouser Road, Moon
          Township, Pennsylvania 15108.
15.  FORMAT OF CHECKS/ESCROW AGENT. Pending receipt of the minimum subscription
     proceeds of $2,000,000 of each Partnership as set forth in Section 4(d) of
     this Agreement, the Managing General Partner and you and the Selling
     Agents, including customer carrying broker/dealers, agree that all
     subscribers shall be instructed to make their checks or wire transfers
     payable solely to the Escrow Agent as agent for the Partnership in which
     the Units are then being offered as follows:
(a)  "Atlas America Public #15-2005(A) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA";
(b)  "Atlas America Public #15-2006(B) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA";
(c)  "Atlas America Public #15-2006(C) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA"; or
(d)  "Atlas America Public #15-2006(D) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA."
You agree and shall require the Selling Agents, including customer
     carrying broker/dealers, to agree to comply with Rule 15c2-4 adopted under
     the Act of 1934. In addition, for identification purposes, wire transfers
     should reference the subscriber's name and the account number of the
     escrow account for the Partnership in which the Units are then being
     offered.
If you receive a check not conforming to the foregoing instructions, then
     you shall return the check to the Selling Agent not later than noon of the
     next business day following its receipt by you. The Selling Agent shall
     then return the check directly to the subscriber not later than noon of
     the next business day following its receipt from you. Checks received by
     you or a Selling Agent which conform to the foregoing instructions shall
     be transmitted by you under Section 16 "Transmittal Procedures," below.
You represent that you have or will execute the Escrow Agreement for each
     Partnership and agree that you are bound by the terms of the Escrow
     Agreement executed by you, for the respective Partnership, and the
     Managing General Partner, the form of which is attached to this Agreement
     as Exhibit "A."
16.  TRANSMITTAL PROCEDURES. You and each Selling Agent, including customer
     carrying broker/dealers, shall transmit received investor funds in
     accordance with the following procedures. For purposes of the following,
     the term "Selling Agent" shall also include you as Dealer-Manager when you
     receive subscriptions from investors.
(a)      Pending receipt of a Partnership's minimum subscription proceeds
              of $2,000,000 as set forth in Section 4(d) of this Agreement, the
              Selling Agents on receipt of any check from a subscriber shall
              promptly transmit the check and the original executed
Subscription Agreement to you, as Dealer-Manager, by noon of the
              next business day following receipt of the check by the Selling
              Agent. By noon of the next business daym following your receipt
              of the check and the original executed Subscription Agreement,
              you, as Dealer-Manager, shall transmit the check and a copy of
              the executed Subscription Agreement to the Escrow Agent, and the
              original executed Subscription Agreement and a copy of the check
              to the Managing General Partner.
(b)      On receipt by you, as Dealer-Manager, of notice from the Managing
              General Partner that a Partnership's minimum subscription
              proceeds of $2,000,000 as set forth in Section 4(d) of this
              Agreement have been received, the Managing General Partner, you,
              and the Selling Agents agree that all subscribers then may be
              instructed, in the Managing General Partner's sole discretion, to
              make their checks or wires payable solely to the Partnership in
              which Units are then being offered.
14
<PAGE>
Thereafter, the Selling Agents shall promptly transmit any and
                  all checks received from subscribers and the original executed
                  Subscription Agreement to you, as Dealer-Manager, by noon of
                  the next business day following receipt of the check by the
                  Selling Agent. By noon of the next business day following your
                  receipt of the check and the original executed Subscription
                  Agreement, you, as Dealer-Manager, shall transmit the check
                  and the original executed Subscription Agreement to the
                  Managing General Partner.
17.  PARTIES. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding on
     you, the Managing General Partner, and any respective successors and
     assigns. This Agreement shall also inure to the benefit of the indemnified
     parties, their successors and assigns. This Agreement is intended to be and
     is for the sole and exclusive benefit of the parties to this Agreement,
     including the Partnerships, and their respective successors and assigns,
     and the indemnified parties and their successors and assigns, and for the
     benefit of no other person. No other person shall have any legal or
     equitable right, remedy or claim under or in respect of this Agreement. No
     purchaser of any of the Units from you or a Selling Agent shall be
     construed a successor or assign merely by reason of the purchase.
18.  RELATIONSHIP. This Agreement shall not constitute you a partner of the
     Managing General Partner, a Partnership, or any general partner of a
     Partnership, nor render the Managing General Partner, the Partnerships, or
     any general partner of a Partnership liable for any of your obligations.
19.  EFFECTIVE DATE. This Agreement is made effective between the parties as of
     the date accepted by you as indicated by your signature to this Agreement.
20.  ENTIRE AGREEMENT, WAIVER.
(a)  This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the Managing
          General Partner and you, and shall not be amended or modified in any
          way except by subsequent agreement executed in writing. Neither party
          to this Agreement shall be liable or bound to the other by any
          agreement except as specifically set forth in this Agreement.
(b)  The Managing General Partner and you may waive, but only in writing,
          any term, condition, or requirement under this Agreement that is
          intended for its benefit. However, any written waiver of any term or
          condition of this Agreement shall not operate as a waiver of any other
          breach of that term or condition of this Agreement. Also, any failure
to enforce any provision of this Agreement shall not operate as a
          waiver of that provision or any other provision of this Agreement.
21.  GOVERNING LAW. This Agreement shall be governed and construed in accordance
     with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
22.  COMPLAINTS. The Managing General Partner and you, as Dealer-Manager, agree
     as follows:
(a)  to notify the other if either receives an investor complaint in
          connection with the offer or sale of Units by you or a Selling Agent;
(b)  to cooperate with the other in resolving the complaint; and
(c)  to cooperate in any regulatory examination of the other to the extent
          it involves this Agreement or the offer or sale of Units by you or a
          Selling Agent.
15
<PAGE>
23.  PRIVACY. The Managing General Partner and you each acknowledge that certain
     information made available to the other under this Agreement may be deemed
     nonpublic personal information under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, other
     federal or state privacy laws (as amended), and the rules and regulations
     promulgated thereunder, which are referred to collectively, as the "Privacy
     Laws." The Managing General Partner and you agree as follows:
(a)  not to disclose or use the information except as required to carry out
     each party's respective duties under this Agreement or as otherwise
     permitted by law in the ordinary course of business;
(b)  to establish and maintain procedures reasonably designed to assure the
     security and privacy of all the information; and
(c)  to cooperate with the other and provide reasonable assistance in ensuring
     compliance with the Privacy Laws to the extent applicable to either or
     both the Managing General Partner and you.
24.  ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING PROVISION. You and each Selling Agent each represent
     and warrant to the Managing General Partner that each of you have in place
     and will maintain suitable and adequate "know your customer" policies and
     procedures and that each of you shall comply with all applicable laws and
     regulations regarding anti-money laundering activity and will provide such
     documentation to the Managing General Partner on written request.
25.  ACCEPTANCE. Please confirm your agreement to the terms and conditions set
     forth above by signing and returning the enclosed duplicate copy of this
     Agreement to us at the address set forth above.
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
<S>                                                      <C>
Very truly yours,
MANAGING GENERAL 
PARTNER
ATLAS RESOURCES, INC.,
                                                          a Pennsylvania
corporation
, 2005                    By:
-------------------------------                                 
-------------------------------------------------
       Date                                                     Jack L. 
Hollander, Senior Vice President - Direct
                                                                        
Participation Programs
PROGRAM
ATLAS AMERICA PUBLIC 
#15-2005 PROGRAM
By:   Atlas Resources,
Inc.,
                                                                Managing General
Partner
, 2005                    By:
-------------------------------                                 
-------------------------------------------------
       Date                                                     Jack L. 
Hollander, Senior Vice President - Direct
                                                                        
Participation Programs
DEALER-MANAGER
ANTHEM SECURITIES, 
INC.,
                                                          a Pennsylvania 
corporation
, 2005                    By:
-------------------------------                                 
-------------------------------------------------
Date                                                            Justin Atkinson,
President
</TABLE>
16
<PAGE>
EXHIBIT "A"
ATLAS AMERICA PUBLIC #15-2005(A) L.P.
ESCROW AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made to be effective as of ________________, 2005, by
and among Atlas Resources, Inc., a Pennsylvania corporation (the "Managing
General Partner"), Anthem Securities, Inc., a Pennsylvania corporation
("Anthem"), the "Dealer-Manager," Atlas America Public #15-2005(A) L.P., a
Delaware limited partnership (the "Partnership") and National City Bank of
Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, as escrow agent (the "Escrow Agent").
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the Managing General Partner intends to offer publicly for sale
to qualified investors (the "Investors") up to __________ investor general
partner interests and up to __________ limited partner interests in the
Partnership (the "Units").
WHEREAS, each Investor will be required to pay his subscription in full
on subscribing by check or wire (the "Subscription Proceeds").
WHEREAS, the cost per Unit will be $10,000 subject to certain discounts
of up to10.5% ($1,050 per Unit) for sales to the Managing General Partner, its
officers, directors and affiliates, registered investment advisors and their
clients, Selling Agents and their registered representatives and principals, and
investors who buy Units through the officers and directors of the Managing
General Partner. Also, the Managing General Partner, in its discretion, may
accept one-half Unit ($5,000) subscriptions, with larger subscriptions permitted
in $1,000 increments.
WHEREAS, the Managing General Partner and Anthem have executed an
agreement ("Anthem Dealer-Manager Agreement") under which Anthem will solicit
subscriptions for Units in all states on a "best efforts" "all or none" basis
for Subscription Proceeds of $2,000,000 and on a "best efforts" basis for the
remaining Units on behalf of the Managing General Partner and the Partnership
and under which Anthem has been authorized to select certain members in good
standing of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD") to
participate in the offering of the Units ("Selling Agents").
WHEREAS, the Anthem Dealer-Manager Agreement, the "Dealer-Manager
Agreement," provides for compensation to the Dealer-Manager to participate in
the offering of the Units, subject to the discounts set forth above for certain
Investors, which compensation includes, but is not limited to, for each Unit
sold:
o    a 2.5% Dealer-Manager fee;
o    a 7% sales commission;
o    a .5% accountable Reimbursement for Permissible Non-Cash Compensation;
          and
o    an up to .5% reimbursement of the Selling Agents' bona fide due
          diligence expenses;
all or a portion of which will be reallowed to the Selling Agents and
wholesalers.
WHEREAS, under the terms of the Dealer-Manager Agreement the Subscription
Proceeds are required to be held in escrow subject to the receipt and acceptance
by the Managing General Partner of the minimum Subscription Proceeds of
$2,000,000, excluding any optional subscription by the Managing General Partner,
its officers, directors, and Affiliates.
1
<PAGE>
WHEREAS, the Units may also be offered and sold by the officers and
directors of the Managing General Partner without receiving a sales commission
or other compensation on their sales.
WHEREAS, no subscriptions to the Partnership will be accepted after the
"Offering Termination Date," which is the first to occur of either:
o    receipt of the maximum Subscription Proceeds of $200,000,000; or
o    December 31, 2005.
WHEREAS, to facilitate compliance with the terms of the Dealer-Manager
Agreement and Rule 15c2-4 adopted under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
Managing General Partner and the Dealer-Manager desire to have the Subscription
Proceeds deposited with the Escrow Agent and the Escrow Agent agrees to hold the
Subscription Proceeds under the terms and conditions set forth in this
Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and conditions
contained in this Agreement, the parties to this Agreement, intending to be
legally bound, agree as follows:
1.   APPOINTMENT OF ESCROW AGENT. The Managing General Partner, the Partnership,
     and the Dealer-Manager appoint the Escrow Agent as the escrow agent to
     receive and to hold the Subscription Proceeds deposited with the Escrow
     Agent by the Dealer-Manager and the Managing General Partner under this
     Agreement, and the Escrow Agent agrees to serve in this capacity during the
     term and based on the provisions of this Agreement.
2.   DEPOSIT OF SUBSCRIPTION PROCEEDS. Pending receipt of the minimum
     Subscription Proceeds of $2,000,000, the Dealer-Manager and the Managing
     General Partner shall deposit the Subscription Proceeds of each Investor to
     whom they sell Units with the Escrow Agent and shall deliver to the Escrow
     Agent a copy of the "Subscription Agreement," which is the execution and
     subscription instrument signed by the Investor to evidence his agreement to
     purchase Units in the Partnership. Payment for each subscription for Units
     shall be in the form of a check or wire made payable to "Atlas America
     Public #15-2005(A) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City Bank of Pennsylvania."
3.   INVESTMENT OF SUBSCRIPTION PROCEEDS. The Subscription Proceeds shall be
     deposited in an interest bearing account maintained by the Escrow Agent as
     directed by the Managing General Partner. This may be a savings account,
     bank money market account, short-term certificates of deposit issued by a
     bank, or short-term certificates of deposit issued or guaranteed by the
     United States government. The interest earned shall be added to the
     Subscription Proceeds and disbursed in accordance with the provisions of
     Paragraph 4 or 5 of this Agreement, as the case may be.
4.   DISTRIBUTION OF SUBSCRIPTION PROCEEDS. If the Escrow Agent:
(a)  receives proper written notice from an authorized officer of the
          Managing General Partner that at least the minimum Subscription
          Proceeds of $2,000,000 have been received and accepted by the Managing
          General Partner; and
(b)  determines that Subscription Proceeds for at least $2,000,000 are
          Distributable Subscription Proceeds;
2
<PAGE>
then the Escrow Agent shall promptly release and distribute to the
     Managing General Partner the Distributable Subscription Proceeds plus any
     interest paid and investment income earned on the Subscription Proceeds
     while held by the Escrow Agent in the escrow account. For purposes of the
     Agreement, "Distributable Subscription Proceeds" are Subscription Proceeds
     which have been deposited in the escrow account (1) by wire transfer; and
     (2) by check, but in the case of checks only at the time that the Escrow
     Agent believes an amount of time has passed which would usually be
sufficient for Subscription Proceeds paid by check to have returned unpaid
     by the bank on which the check was drawn and after a 10 day period from
     the date of deposit.
After the occurrence of 4(a) and (b) above, Escrow Agent will provide a
     letter to the Managing General Partner confirming receipt of checks and/or
     wires representing Subscription Proceeds totaling at least $2,000,000 have
     been received and the anticipated date the funds will be considered
     Distributable Subscription Proceeds.
After the initial distribution, any remaining Subscription Proceeds, plus
     any interest paid and investment income earned on the Subscription
     Proceeds while held by the Escrow Agent in the escrow account, shall be
     promptly released and distributed to the Managing General Partner by the
     Escrow Agent as the Subscription Proceeds become Distributable
     Subscription Proceeds after a 10 day period from the date of deposit.
The Managing General Partner shall immediately return to the Escrow Agent
     any Subscription Proceeds distributed to the Managing General Partner or
     refunded to an Investor to the extent that such Subscription Proceeds were
     paid by a check which is returned or otherwise not collected for any
     reason prior or subsequent to termination of this Agreement.
5.   SEPARATE PARTNERSHIP ACCOUNT. During the continuation of the offering after
     the Partnership is funded with cleared Subscription Proceeds of at least
     $2,000,000 and the Escrow Agent receives the notice described in Paragraph
     4 of this Agreement, and before the Offering Termination Date, any
     additional Subscription Proceeds may be deposited by the Dealer-Manager and
     the Managing General Partner directly in a separate Partnership account
     which shall not be subject to the terms of this Agreement.
6.   DISTRIBUTIONS TO SUBSCRIBERS.
(a)  If the Partnership is not funded as contemplated because less than the
          minimum Subscription Proceeds of $2,000,000 have been received and
          accepted by the Managing General Partner by twelve (12:00) p.m.
          (noon), local time, EASTERN STANDARD TIME on the Offering Termination
          Date, or for any other reason, then the Managing General Partner shall
          notify the Escrow Agent, and the Escrow Agent promptly shall
          distribute to each Investor, for which Escrow Agent has a copy of the
          subscription agreement, a refund check made payable to the Investor in
          an amount equal to the Subscription Proceeds of the Investor, plus any
          interest paid or investment income earned on the Investor's
          Subscription Proceeds while held by the Escrow Agent in the escrow
          account.
(b)  If a subscription for Units submitted by an Investor is rejected by
          the Managing General Partner for any reason after the Subscription
          Proceeds relating to the subscription have been deposited with the
          Escrow Agent, then the Managing General Partner promptly shall notify
          in writing, the Escrow Agent of the rejection, and the Escrow Agent
          shall promptly distribute to the Investor for which Escrow Agent has a
          copy of a Subscription Agreement, a refund check made payable to the
          Investor in an amount equal to the Subscription Proceeds of the
          Investor, plus any interest paid or investment income earned on the
          Investor's Subscription Proceeds while held by the Escrow Agent in the
          escrow account.
3
<PAGE>
7.   COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES OF ESCROW AGENT. The Managing General Partner
     shall be solely responsible for and shall pay the compensation of the
     Escrow Agent for its services under this Agreement, as provided in Appendix
1 to this Agreement and made a part of this Agreement, and the charges,
     expenses (including any reasonable attorneys' fees), and other
     out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Escrow Agent in connection with the
     administration of the provisions of this Agreement. The Escrow Agent shall
     have no lien on the Subscription Proceeds deposited in the escrow account
     unless and until the Partnership is funded with cleared Subscription
     Proceeds of at least $2,000,000 and the Escrow Agent receives the proper
     written notice described in Paragraph 4 of this Agreement, at which time
     the Escrow Agent shall have, and is granted, a prior lien on any property,
     cash, or assets held under this Agreement, with respect to its unpaid
     compensation and nonreimbursed expenses, superior to the interests of any
     other persons or entities.
8.   DUTIES OF ESCROW AGENT. The Escrow Agent shall not be obligated to accept
     any notice, make any delivery, or take any other action under this
     Agreement unless the notice or request or demand for delivery or other
     action is in writing and given or made by the Managing General Partner or
     an authorized officer of the Managing General Partner. In no event shall
     the Escrow Agent be obligated to accept any notice, request, or demand from
     anyone other than the Managing General Partner.
9.   LIABILITY OF ESCROW AGENT. The Escrow Agent shall not be liable for any
     damages, or have any obligations other than the duties prescribed in this
     Agreement in carrying out or executing the purposes and intent of this
     Agreement. However, nothing in this Agreement shall relieve the Escrow
     Agent from liability arising out of its own willful misconduct or gross
     negligence. The Escrow Agent's duties and obligations under this Agreement
     shall be entirely administrative and not discretionary. The Escrow Agent
     shall not be liable to any party to this Agreement or to any third-party as
     a result of any action or omission taken or made by the Escrow Agent in
     good faith. The parties to this Agreement will jointly and severally
     indemnify the Escrow Agent, hold the Escrow Agent harmless, and reimburse
     the Escrow Agent from, against and for, any and all liabilities, costs,
     fees and expenses (including reasonable attorney's fees) the Escrow Agent
     may suffer or incur by reason of its execution and performance of this
     Agreement. If any legal questions arise concerning the Escrow Agent's
     duties and obligations under this Agreement, then the Escrow Agent may
     consult with its counsel and rely without liability on written opinions
     given to it by its counsel.
The Escrow Agent shall be protected in acting on any written notice,
     request, waiver, consent, authorization, or other paper or document which
     the Escrow Agent, in good faith, believes to be genuine and what it
     purports to be.
If there is any disagreement between any of the parties to this Agreement,
     or between them or any other person, resulting in adverse claims or demands
     being made in connection with this Agreement, or if the Escrow Agent, in
     good faith, is in doubt as to what action it should take under this
     Agreement, then the Escrow Agent may, at its option, refuse to comply with
     any claims or demands on it or refuse to take any other action under this
     Agreement, so long as the disagreement continues or the doubt exists. In
     any such event, the Escrow Agent shall not be or become liable in any way
     or to any person for its failure or refusal to act and the Escrow Agent
     shall be entitled to continue to so refrain from acting until the dispute
     is resolved by the parties involved.
National City Bank of Pennsylvania is acting solely as the Escrow Agent and
     is not a party to, nor has it reviewed or approved any agreement or matter
     of background related to this Agreement, other than this Agreement itself,
     and has assumed, without investigation, the authority of the individuals
     executing this Agreement to be so authorized on behalf of the party or
     parties involved.
4
<PAGE>
10.  RESIGNATION OR REMOVAL OF ESCROW AGENT. The Escrow Agent may resign as such
     after giving thirty days' prior written notice to the other parties to this
     Agreement. Similarly, the Escrow Agent may be removed and replaced after
     receiving thirty days' prior written notice from the other parties to this
     Agreement. In either event, the duties of the Escrow Agent shall terminate
     thirty days after the date of the notice (or as of an earlier date as may
     be mutually agreeable); and the Escrow Agent shall then deliver the balance
     of the Subscription Proceeds (and any interest paid or investment income
     earned thereon while held by the Escrow Agent in the escrow account) in its
     possession to a successor escrow agent appointed by the other parties to
     this Agreement as evidenced by a written notice filed with the Escrow
     Agent.
If the other parties to this Agreement are unable to agree on a successor
     escrow agent or fail to appoint a successor escrow agent before the
     expiration of thirty days following the date of the notice of the Escrow
     Agent's resignation or removal, then the Escrow Agent may petition any
     court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor escrow
     agent or other appropriate relief. Any resulting appointment shall be
     binding on all of the parties to this Agreement.
On acknowledgment by any successor escrow agent of the receipt of the then
     remaining balance of the Subscription Proceeds (and any interest paid or
     investment income earned thereon while held by the Escrow Agent in the
     escrow account), the Escrow Agent shall be fully released and relieved of
     all duties, responsibilities, and obligations under this Agreement.
11.  TERMINATION. This Agreement shall terminate and the Escrow Agent shall have
     no further obligation with respect to this Agreement after the distribution
     of all Subscription Proceeds (and any interest paid or investment income
     earned thereon while held by the Escrow Agent in the escrow account) as
     contemplated by this Agreement or on the written consent of all the parties
     to this Agreement.
12.  NOTICE. Any notices or instructions, or both, to be given under this
     Agreement shall be validly given if set forth in writing and mailed by
     certified mail, return receipt requested, or by facsimile with confirmation
     of receipt (originals to be followed in the mail), or by a nationally
     recognized overnight courier, as follows:
If to the Escrow Agent:
National City Bank
                  c/o Allegiant Institutional Services
                  200 Public Square, 5th Floor
                  Cleveland, Ohio 44114
Attention:  Dawn DeWerth LOC 01-86PS-01
Phone: (216) 222-9225
                  Facsimile: (216) 222-7044
If to the Managing General Partner:
Atlas Resources, Inc.
                  311 Rouser Road
                  P.O. Box 611
                  Moon Township, Pennsylvania 15108
Attention:  Karen A. Black
Phone: (412) 262-2830
                  Facsimile: (412) 262-2820
5
<PAGE>
If to Anthem:
Anthem Securities, Inc.
                  311 Rouser Road
                  P.O. Box 926
                  Moon Township, Pennsylvania 15108
Attention:  Justin T. Atkinson
Phone: (412) 262-1680
                  Facsimile: (412) 262-7430
Any party may designate any other address to which notices and
instructions shall be sent by notice duly given in accordance with this
Agreement.
13.  MISCELLANEOUS.
(a)  This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with
          the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b)  This Agreement shall be binding on and shall inure to the benefit of
          the undersigned and their respective successors and assigns.
(c)  This Agreement may be executed in multiple copies, each executed copy
          to serve as an original.
14.  The parties hereto and subscribers acknowledge Escrow Agent has not
     reviewed and is not making any recommendations with respect to the
     securities offered.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement to be
effective as of the day and year first above written.
NATIONAL CITY BANK OF PENNSYLVANIA
                                      As Escrow Agent
By:
                                          --------------------------------------
                                              James Schultz, Vice President
ATLAS RESOURCES, INC.
                                      A Pennsylvania corporation
By:
                                          --------------------------------------
                                             Karen A. Black, Vice President -
                                             Partnership Administration
6
<PAGE>
ANTHEM SECURITIES, INC.
                                     A Pennsylvania corporation
By:
                                          --------------------------------------
                                             Justin T. Atkinson, President
ATLAS AMERICA PUBLIC #15-2005(A)
                                     L.P.
                                     By:     ATLAS RESOURCES, INC.
                                             Managing General Partner
By:
                                          --------------------------------------
                                             Karen A. Black, Vice President -
                                             Partnership Administration
7
<PAGE>
APPENDIX I TO ESCROW AGREEMENT
COMPENSATION FOR SERVICES OF ESCROW AGENT
REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE FEE:                                            $   WAIVED
For providing initial review of the Escrow Agreement and all supporting
documents and for initial services associated with establishing the Escrow
Account. This is a one (1) time fee payable upon the opening of the account.
I.       Annual Administrative Fee Payable in Advance                   $3000.00
         (or any portion thereof)
II.      Remittance of checks returned to subscribers                      20.00
         (set out in section 6 of the governing agreement)
III.     Wire transfers                                                     n/a
IV.      Purchase or Sale of Securities                                   100.00
V.       Investments (document limits investment to a checking or savings
         account, or certificates of deposit) such products offered by any
         National City Bank retail branch)- fees are subject to the type of
         account the Managing General Partner directs the Escrow Agent to open
         and to be governed by the Escrow Agreement.
EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES:
For any services other than those covered by the aforementioned, a special per
hour charge will be made commensurate with the character of the service, time
required and responsibility involved. Such services include but are not limited
to excessive administrative time, attendance at closings, specialized reports,
and record keeping, unusual certifications, etc.
Managing General Partner agrees to report all funds in accordance with
appropriate tax treatment.
FEE SCHEDULE IS SUBJECT TO ANNUAL REVIEW AND/OR ADJUSTMENT UPON AMENDMENT
THERETO.
8
<PAGE>
EXHIBIT "B"
SELLING AGENT AGREEMENT
                          WITH ANTHEM SECURITIES, INC.
TO:
    ------------------------------------------
RE:     ATLAS AMERICA PUBLIC #15-2005 PROGRAM
               -------------------------------------
Gentlemen:
Atlas Resources, Inc. will be the Managing General Partner in a series
of up to four limited partnerships organized under the Delaware Revised Uniform
Limited Partnership Act:
o    Atlas America Public #15-2005(A) L.P.;
o    Atlas America Public #15-2006(B) L.P.;
o    Atlas America Public #15-2006(C) L.P.; and
o    Atlas America Public #15-2006(D) L.P.
which are referred to as the "Partnership" or the "Partnerships." The Units in
the Partnerships, which are referred to as the "Units," and the offering are
described in the Prospectus, copies of which have been furnished to you with
this Agreement.
Our firm, Anthem Securities, Inc., which is referred to as the
"Dealer-Manager," has entered into a Dealer-Manager Agreement for sales in all
states, a copy of which has been furnished to you and is incorporated in this
Agreement by reference, with the Managing General Partner and the Partnerships
under which the Dealer-Manager has agreed to form a group of NASD member firms,
which are referred to as the "Selling Agents." The Selling Agents will obtain
subscriptions for Units in each Partnership in all states on a "best efforts"
basis under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, which is referred to as the
"Act," and the provisions of the Prospectus.
You are invited to become one of the Selling Agents on a non-exclusive
basis. By your acceptance below you agree to act in that capacity and to use
your best efforts, in accordance with the terms and conditions of this
Agreement, to solicit subscriptions for Units in each Partnership at the time
the Partnership is being offered as provided in Section 1 of the Dealer-Manager
Agreement in all states where you are duly registered or licensed as
broker/dealer.
1.   REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF SELLING AGENT. You represent and warrant
     to the Dealer-Manager that:
(a)  You are a corporation or other entity duly organized, validly
          existing, and in good standing under the laws of the state of your
          formation or of any jurisdiction to the laws of which you are subject,
with all requisite power and authority to enter into this Agreement
          and to carry out your obligations under this Agreement.
1
<PAGE>
(b)  This Agreement when accepted and approved by you will be duly
          authorized, executed, and delivered by you and will be a valid and
          binding agreement on your part in accordance with its terms.
(c)  The consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement
          and the Prospectus will not result in the following:
(i)  any breach of any of the terms or conditions of, or constitute a
               default under your organizational documents, bylaws, any
               indenture, agreement, or other instrument to which you are a
               party or by which you are bound; or
(ii) any violation of any order applicable to you of any court,
               regulatory body or administrative agency having jurisdiction over
               you or over your affiliates.
(d)  You are duly registered under the provisions of the Securities
          Exchange Act of 1934, which is referred to as the "Act of 1934," as a
          broker/dealer, and you are a member in good standing of the NASD. You
          are duly registered as a broker/dealer in the jurisdictions where you
          are required to be registered in order to carry out your obligations
          as contemplated by this Agreement and the Prospectus. You agree to
          maintain all the foregoing registrations in good standing throughout
          the term of the offer and sale of the Units, and you agree to comply
          with all statutes and other requirements applicable to you as a
          broker/dealer under those registrations.
(e)  Pursuant to your appointment as a Selling Agent, you shall comply with
          all the provisions of the Act, insofar as the Act applies to your
          activities under this Agreement. Further, you shall not engage in any
          activity which would cause the offer and/or sale of the Units not to
          comply with the Act, the Act of 1934, the applicable rules and
          regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is
          referred to as the "Commission," the applicable state securities laws
          and regulations, this Agreement, and the NASD Conduct Rules including
          Rules 2420, 2730, 2740, 2750, and 2810(b)(2) and (b)(3), which provide
          as follows:
Sec. (b)(2)
          SUITABILITY
(A)  A member or person associated with a member shall not
                    underwrite or participate in a public offering of a direct
                    participation program unless standards of suitability have
                    been established by the program for participants therein and
                    such standards are fully disclosed in the prospectus and are
                    consistent with the provisions of subparagraph (B) of this
                    section.
(B)  In recommending to a participant the purchase, sale or
                    exchange of an interest in a direct participation program, a
                    member or person associated with a member shall:
(i)  have reasonable grounds to believe, on the basis of
                         information obtained from the participant concerning
                         his investment objectives, other investments, financial
                         situation and needs, and any other information known by
                         the member or associated person, that:
2
<PAGE>
(a)  the participant is or will be in a financial
                              position appropriate to enable him to realize to a
                              significant extent the benefits described in the
                              prospectus, including the tax benefits where they
                              are a significant aspect of the program;
(b)  the participant has a fair market net worth
                              sufficient to sustain the risks inherent in the
                              program, including loss of investment and lack of
                              liquidity; and
(c)  the program is otherwise suitable for the
                              participant; and
(ii) maintain in the files of the member documents
                         disclosing the basis upon which the determination of
                         suitability was reached as to each participant.
(C)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs (A) and (B)
                    hereof, no member shall execute any transaction in a direct
                    participation program in a discretionary account without
                    prior written approval of the transaction by the customer.
Sec. (b)(3)
          DISCLOSURE
(A)  Prior to participating in a public offering of a direct
                    participation program, a member or person associated with a
                    member shall have reasonable grounds to believe, based on
                    information made available to him by the sponsor through a
                    prospectus or other materials, that all material facts are
                    adequately and accurately disclosed and provide a basis for
                    evaluating the program.
(B)  In determining the adequacy of disclosed facts pursuant to
                    subparagraph (A) hereof, a member or person associated with
                    a member shall obtain information on material facts relating
                    at a minimum to the following, if relevant in view of the
                    nature of the program:
(i)    items of compensation;
(ii)   physical properties;
(iii)  tax aspects;
(iv)   financial stability and experience of the sponsor;
(v)    the program's conflicts and risk factors; and
(vi)   appraisals and other pertinent reports.
(C)  For purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B) hereof, a member
                    or person associated with a member may rely upon the results
                    of an inquiry conducted by another member or members,
                    provided that:
3
<PAGE>
(i)    the member or person associated with a member has
                           reasonable grounds to believe that such inquiry was
                           conducted with due care;
(ii)   the results of the inquiry were provided to the
                           member or person associated with a member with the
                           consent of the member or members conducting or
                           directing the inquiry; and
(iii)  no member that participated in the inquiry is a
                           sponsor of the program or an affiliate of such
                           sponsor.
(D)  Prior to executing a purchase transaction in a direct
                    participation program, a member or person associated with a
                    member shall inform the prospective participant of all
                    pertinent facts relating to the liquidity and marketability
                    of the program during the term of investment.
(f)  You shall not offer or sell the Units in any jurisdiction until
               you have been advised in writing by the Managing General Partner,
               or the Managing General Partner's special counsel, that the offer
               or sale of the Units:
(i)   has been qualified in the 20 jurisdiction;
(ii)  is exempt from the qualification requirements imposed by
                     the jurisdiction; or
(iii) the qualification is otherwise not required.
(g)  You agree that you shall not place any advertisement or other
               solicitation with respect to the Units (including without
               limitation any material for use in any newspaper, magazine, radio
               or television commercial, telephone recording, motion picture, or
               other public media) without:
(i)  the prior written approval of the Managing General Partner;
                    and
(ii) the prior written approval of the form and content thereof
                    by the Commission, the NASD and the securities authorities
                    of the states where such advertisement or solicitation is to
                    be circulated.
Any such advertisements or solicitations shall be at your
               expense.
(h)  You have received copies of the Prospectus relating to the Units
               and you have relied only on the statements contained in the
               Prospectus and not on any other statements whatsoever, either
               written or oral, with respect to the details of the offering of
               Units.
You shall deliver a copy of the Prospectus to each subscriber to
               whom you sell the Units at or before the completion of any sale
               of Units to such subscriber (which sale shall be deemed, for the
               purposes of this Agreement to occur on the date on which that
               subscriber delivers subscription funds to the escrow agent), or
               earlier if required by the blue sky or securities laws of any
               jurisdiction. Unless advised otherwise by the Managing General
               Partner, you may choose to provide each offeree with the
               following sales materials which are collectively referred to as
               the "Sales Literature":
(i)    a flyer entitled "Atlas America Public #15-2005 Program";
4
<PAGE>
(ii)   an article entitled "Tax Rewards with Oil and Gas
                      Partnerships";
(iii)  a brochure of tax scenarios entitled "How an Investment in
                      Atlas America Public #15-2005 Program Can Help Achieve an
                      Investor's Tax Objectives";
(iv)   a brochure entitled "Investing in Atlas America Public
                      #15-2005 Program";
(v)    a booklet entitled "Outline of Tax Consequences of Oil and
                      Gas Drilling Programs";
(vi)   a brochure entitled "The Appalachian Basin: A Prime
                      Drilling Location Which Commands a Premium";
(vii)  a brochure entitled "Investment Insights - Tax Time";
(viii) a brochure entitled "Frequently Asked Questions"; and
(ix)   a brochure entitled "AMT - A Little History and Reducing
                      AMT through Natural Gas Partnerships";
(x)    a brochure entitled "The Drilling Process"; and
(xi)   possibly other supplementary materials.
Any such Sales Literature, if distributed, must have been
               preceded or must be accompanied by the Prospectus.
(i)  If a supplement or amendment to the Prospectus is prepared and
               delivered to you by the Managing General Partner or the
               Dealer-Manager, you agree as follows:
(i)     to distribute each supplement or amendment to the
                       Prospectus to every person who has previously received a
                       copy of the Prospectus from you; and
(ii)    to include each supplement or amendment in all future
                       deliveries of any Prospectus.
(j)  In connection with any offer or sale of the Units, you agree to
               the following:
(i)    to comply in all respects with statements set forth in the
                      Prospectus, the Partnership Agreement, and any supplements
                      or amendments to the Prospectus;
(ii)   not to make any statement inconsistent with the statements
                      in the Prospectus, the Partnership Agreement, and any
                      supplements or amendments to the Prospectus;
(iii)  not to provide any written information, statements, or
                      sales materials other than the Prospectus, the Sales
                      Literature, and any supplements or amendments to the
                      Prospectus unless approved in writing by the Managing
                      General Partner; and
(iv)   not to make any untrue statement of a material fact or
                      omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make
                      statements made, in light of the circumstances under which
                      they were made, not misleading in connection with the
                      Partnerships, the Units or the offering.
5
<PAGE>
(k)  You agree to use your best efforts in the solicitation and sale
               of the Units, including that:
(i)    you comply with all the provisions of the Act, the Act of
                      1934, the applicable rules and regulations of the
                      Commission, the applicable state securities laws and
                      regulations, this Agreement, and the NASD Conduct Rules;
(ii)   the prospective purchasers meet the suitability
                      requirements set forth in the Prospectus, the Subscription
                      Agreement, and this Agreement; and
(iii)  the prospective purchasers properly complete and execute
                      the Subscription Agreement, which has been provided as
                      Exhibit (I-B) to the Partnership Agreement, Exhibit (A) of
                      the Prospectus, together with any additional forms
                      provided in any supplement or amendment to the Prospectus,
                      or otherwise provided to you by the Managing General
                      Partner or the Dealer-Manager to be completed by
                      prospective purchasers.
You acknowledge and agree that the Managing General Partner shall
               have the right to reject any subscription at any time for any
               reason without liability to it. Subscription funds and executed
               subscription packets shall be transmitted as set forth in Section
               11 of this Agreement.
(l)  You agree and covenant that:
(i)    the representations and warranties you make in this
                      Agreement are and shall be true and correct as of the date
                      of this Agreement and at the applicable closing date; and
(ii)   you shall and have fulfilled all your obligations under
                      this Agreement at the applicable closing date.
2.   COMMISSIONS.
(a)  Subject to the receipt of the minimum required subscription proceeds
          of $2,000,000 as described in Section 4(d) of the Dealer-Manager
          Agreement, and the discounts set forth in Section 4(c) of the
          Dealer-Manager Agreement for sales to the Managing General Partner,
          its officers, directors and affiliates, registered investment advisors
          and their clients, Selling Agents and their registered representatives
          and principals, and investors who buy Units through the officers or
          directors of the Managing General Partner, the Dealer-Manager is
          entitled to receive from the Managing General Partner a 7% Sales
          Commission and a .5% accountable Reimbursement for Permissible
          Non-Cash Compensation, based on the aggregate amount of all Unit
          subscriptions to a Partnership secured by the Dealer-Manager or the
          selling group formed by the Dealer-Manager and accepted by the
          Managing General Partner.
The Permissible Non-Cash Compensation will be paid for training and
          education meetings, gifts that do not exceed $100 per year and are not
          preconditioned on the achievement of a sales target, an occasional
          meal, a ticket to a sporting event or the theater, or comparable
          entertainment which is neither so frequent nor so extensive as to
          raise any question of propriety and is not preconditioned on
          achievement of a sales target and contributions by the Dealer-Manager
          or Managing General Partner to a non-cash compensation arrangement
          between you and your associated persons, provided that the
          Dealer-Manager or Managing General Partner do not directly or
          indirectly participate in your organization of the permissible
          non-cash compensation arrangement.
6
<PAGE>
Additionally, the Dealer-Manager is entitled to receive from the
          Managing General Partner an up to .5% reimbursement of the Selling
          Agents' bona fide due diligence expenses per Unit.
Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement,
          including the Dealer-Manager's receipt from you of the documentation
          required of you in Section 1 of this Agreement, the Dealer-Manager
          agrees to pay you on Units sold by you and accepted by the Managing
          General Partner:
(i)     a 7% Sales Commission, subject to the performance by you of
                  your obligations under Appendix I to this Agreement, which is
                  incorporated in this Agreement by reference; and
(ii)    up to a .5% reimbursement of your bona fide due diligence
                  expenses per Unit. With respect to the up to .5% reimbursement
                  of your bona fide due diligence expenses, any bill presented
                  by you to the Dealer-Manager for reimbursement of costs
                  associated with your due diligence activities must be for
                  actual costs and may not include a profit margin. Although the
                  Dealer-Manager is not required to obtain an itemized expense
                  statement before paying out due diligence expenses, any bill
                  for due diligence submitted by you must be based on your
                  actual expenses incurred in conducting due diligence. If the
                  Dealer-Manager receives a non-itemized bill for due diligence
                  that it has reason to question, then it has the obligation to
                  ensure your compliance by requesting an itemized statement to
                  support the bill submitted by you. If such a due diligence
                  bill cannot be justified, any excess over actual due diligence
                  expenses that is paid is considered by the NASD to be
                  undisclosed underwriting compensation and is required to be
                  included within the 10% compensation guideline under NASD
                  Conduct Rule 2810, and reflected on your books and records.
                  Notwithstanding, if you provide an itemized bill in excess of
                  .5% then the excess over .5% will not be included within the
                  10% compensation guideline, but instead the 4.5% organization
                  and offering cost guideline of NASD Conduct Rule 2810.
(iii)   In addition, the Dealer-Manager or Managing General Partner
                  may make certain non-cash compensation arrangements of up to
                  .5% per Unit with you or your registered representatives,
                  which will be included in the accountable Reimbursement for
                  Permissible Non-Cash Compensation of up to .5% per Unit. The
                  Dealer-Manager is responsible for ensuring that all non-cash
                  compensation arrangements comply with the restrictions on
                  non-cash compensation in connection with direct participation
                  programs as set forth in NASD Conduct Rule 2810. For example,
                  if the Managing General Partner or Dealer-Manager pays or
reimburses you in connection with meetings held by the
                  Managing General Partner or Dealer-Manager for the purpose of
                  training or education of your registered representatives, then
                  the following conditions must be met:
7
<PAGE>
(A)  your registered representative must obtain your prior
                    approval to attend the meeting and attendance by your
                    registered representatives must not be conditioned by you on
                    the achievement of a sales target;
(B)  the location of the training and education meeting must be
                    appropriate to the purpose of the meeting, as defined in
                    NASD Conduct Rule 2810;
(C)  the payment or reimbursement must not be applied to the
                    expenses of guests of the registered representative;
(D)  the payment or reimbursement by the Managing General Partner
                    or Dealer-Manager must not be conditioned by the Managing
                    General Partner or Dealer-Manager on the achievement of a
                    sales target; and
(E)  the appropriate records must be maintained.
Non-cash compensation means any form of compensation received in
               connection with the sale of the Units that is not cash
               compensation, including but not limited to merchandise, gifts and
               prizes, travel expenses, meals and lodging.
(iv)    Your sales commissions which are owed to you as set forth
                  above shall be paid to you within seven business days after
                  the Dealer-Manager has received the related amounts owed to it
                  under the Dealer-Manager Agreement, which the Dealer-Manager
                  is entitled to receive within five business days after the
                  conditions described in Section 4(e) of the Dealer-Manager
                  Agreement are satisfied and approximately every two weeks
                  thereafter until the respective Partnership's Offering
                  Termination Date, which is described in Section 1 of the
                  Dealer-Manager Agreement. The balance of your sales
                  commissions and the reimbursements which are owed to you as
                  set forth above shall be paid to you within seven business
                  days after the Dealer-Manager has received the related amounts
                  owed to it under the Dealer-Manager Agreement, which the
                  Dealer-Manager is entitled to receive within fourteen business
                  days after the respective Partnership's Offering Termination
                  Date.
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, you agree
          to waive payment of your compensation and reimbursements which are
          owed to you as set forth above until the Dealer-Manager is in receipt
          of the related amounts owed to it under the Dealer-Manager Agreement,
          and the Dealer-Manager's liability to pay your compensation and
          reimbursements under this Agreement shall be limited solely to the
          proceeds of the related amounts owed to it under the Dealer-Manager
          Agreement.
(c)  As provided in Section 4(d) of the Dealer-Manager Agreement, a
          Partnership shall not begin operations unless it receives subscription
          proceeds for at least $2,000,000 by its respective Offering
          Termination Date. If this amount is not secured by the respective
          Partnership's Offering Termination Date, then nothing shall be payable
to you for the respective Partnership and all funds advanced by
          subscribers for Units in the respective Partnership shall be returned
          to them with interest earned, if any.
8
<PAGE>
3.   BLUE SKY QUALIFICATION. The Managing General Partner may elect not to
     qualify or register Units in any state or jurisdiction in which it deems
     the qualification or registration is not warranted for any reason in its
     sole discretion. On application to the Dealer-Manager you will be informed
     as to the states and jurisdictions in which the Units have been qualified
     for sale or are exempt under the respective securities or "Blue Sky" laws
     of those states and jurisdictions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Dealer-Manager, the Partnerships, and
     the Managing General Partner have not assumed and will not assume any
     obligation or responsibility as to your right to act as a broker/dealer
     with respect to the Units in any state or jurisdiction.
4.   EXPENSE OF SALE. The expenses in connection with the offer and sale of the
     Units shall be payable as set forth below.
(a)  The Dealer-Manager shall pay all expenses incident to the performance
          of its obligations under this Agreement, including the fees and
          expenses of its attorneys and accountants, even if the offering of any
          or all of the Partnerships is not successfully completed.
(b)  You shall pay all expenses incident to the performance of your
          obligations under this Agreement, including the fees and expenses of
          your own counsel and accountants, even if the offering of any or all
          of the Partnerships is not successfully completed.
5.   CONDITIONS OF YOUR DUTIES. Your obligations under this Agreement, as of the
     date of this Agreement and at the applicable closing date, shall be subject
     to the following:
(a)  the performance by the Dealer-Manager of its obligations under this
          Agreement; and
(b)  the performance by the Managing General Partner of its obligations
          under the Dealer-Manager Agreement.
6.   CONDITIONS OF DEALER-MANAGER'S DUTIES. The Dealer-Manager's obligations
     under this Agreement, including the duty to pay compensation and
     reimbursements to you as set forth in Section 2 of this Agreement, shall be
     subject to the following:
(a)  the accuracy, as of the date of this Agreement and at the applicable
          closing date as if made at the applicable closing date, of your
          representations and warranties made in this Agreement;
(b)  the performance by you of your obligations under this Agreement; and
(c)  the Dealer-Manager's receipt, at or before the applicable closing
          date, of a fully executed Subscription Agreement for each prospective
          purchaser as required by Section 1(k) of this Agreement.
7.   INDEMNIFICATION.
(a)  You shall indemnify and hold harmless the Dealer-Manager, the Managing
          General Partner, each Partnership and its attorneys against any
          losses, claims, damages or liabilities, joint or several, to which
          they may become subject under the Act, the Act of 1934, or otherwise
insofar as the losses, claims, damages, or liabilities (or actions in
          respect thereof) arise out of or are based on your breach of any of
          your duties and obligations, representations, or warranties under the
          terms or provisions of this Agreement, and you shall reimburse them
          for any legal or other expenses reasonably incurred in connection with
          investigating or defending the losses, claims, damages, liabilities,
          or actions.
9
<PAGE>
(b)  The Dealer-Manager shall indemnify and hold you harmless against any
          losses, claims, damages, or liabilities, joint or several, to which
          you may become subject under the Act, the Act of 1934, or otherwise
          insofar as the losses, claims, damages, or liabilities (or actions in
          respect thereof) arise out of or are based on the Dealer-Manager's
          breach of any of its duties and obligations, representations, or
          warranties under the terms or provisions of this Agreement, and the
          Dealer-Manager shall reimburse you for any legal or other expenses
          reasonably incurred in connection with investigating or defending the
          losses, claims, damages, liabilities, or actions.
(c)  The foregoing indemnity agreements shall extend on the same terms and
          conditions to, and shall inure to the benefit of, each person, if any,
          who controls each indemnified party within the meaning of the Act.
(d)  Promptly after receipt by an indemnified party of notice of the
          commencement of any action, the indemnified party shall, if a claim in
          respect of the action is to be made against the indemnifying party
          under this Section, notify the indemnifying party in writing of the
          commencement of the action; but the omission to promptly notify the
          indemnifying party shall not relieve the indemnifying party from any
          liability which it may have to the indemnified party. If any action is
          brought against an indemnified party, it shall notify the indemnifying
          party of the commencement of the action, and the indemnifying party
          shall be entitled to participate in, and, to the extent that it
          wishes, jointly with any other indemnifying party similarly notified,
          to assume the defense of the action, with counsel satisfactory to the
          indemnified and indemnifying parties. After the indemnified party has
          received notice from the agreed on counsel that the defense of the
          action under this paragraph has been assumed, the indemnifying party
          shall not be responsible for any legal or other expenses subsequently
          incurred by the indemnified party in connection with the defense of
          the action other than with respect to the agreed on counsel who
          assumed the defense of the action.
8.   REPRESENTATIONS AND AGREEMENTS TO SURVIVE DELIVERY. All representations,
     warranties, and agreements of the Dealer-Manager and you in this Agreement,
     including the indemnity agreements contained in Section 7 of this
     Agreement, shall:
(a)  survive the delivery, execution and closing of this Agreement;
(b)  remain operative and in full force and effect regardless of any
          investigation made by or on behalf of you or any person who controls
          you within the meaning of the Act, by the Dealer-Manager, or any of
          its officers, directors or any person who controls the Dealer-Manager
          within the meaning of the Act, or any other indemnified party; and
(c)  survive delivery of the Units.
9.   TERMINATION.
(a)  You shall have the right to terminate this Agreement other than the
indemnification provisions of Section 7 of this Agreement by giving
          notice as specified in Section 16 of this Agreement any time at or
          before a closing date:
(i)  if the Dealer-Manager has failed, refused, or been unable at or
               before a closing date, to perform any of its obligations under
               this Agreement; or
10
<PAGE>
(ii) there has occurred an event materially and adversely affecting
               the value of the Units.
If you elect to terminate this Agreement other than the
          indemnification provisions of Section 7 of this Agreement, then the
          Dealer-Manager shall be promptly notified by you by telephone, e-mail,
          facsimile, or telegram, confirmed by letter.
(b)  The Dealer-Manager may terminate this Agreement other than the
          indemnification provisions of Section 7 of this Agreement, for any
          reason and at any time, by promptly giving notice to you by telephone,
          e-mail, facsimile or telegram, confirmed by letter.
10.  FORMAT OF CHECKS/ESCROW AGENT. Pending receipt of the minimum subscription
     proceeds of $2,000,000 as set forth in Section 4(d) of the Dealer-Manager
     Agreement, the Dealer-Manager and you, including if you are a customer
     carrying broker/dealer, agree that all subscribers shall be instructed to
     make their checks or wire transfers payable solely to the Escrow Agent as
     agent for the Partnership in which the Units are then being offered as
     follows:
(a)  "Atlas America Public #15-2005(A) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA";
(b)  "Atlas America Public #15-2006(B) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA";
(c)  "Atlas America Public #15-2006(C) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA"; or
(d)  "Atlas America Public #15-2006(D) L.P., Escrow Agent, National City
          Bank of PA."
Also, you, including if you are a customer carrying broker/dealer,
          agree to comply with Rule 15c2-4 adopted under the Act of 1934. In
          addition, for identification purposes, wire transfers should reference
          the subscriber's name and the account number of the escrow account for
          the Partnership in which the Units are then being offered.
If you receive a check not conforming to the foregoing instructions,
          then you shall return the check directly to the subscriber not later
          than noon of the next business day following its receipt by you from
          the subscriber. If the Dealer-Manager receives a check not conforming
          to the foregoing instructions, then the Dealer-Manager shall return
          the check to you not later than noon of the next business day
          following its receipt by the Dealer-Manager and you shall then return
          the check directly to the subscriber not later than noon of the next
          business day following its receipt by you from the Dealer-Manager.
          Checks received by you which conform to the foregoing instructions
          shall be transmitted by you under Section 11 "Transmittal Procedures,"
          below.
You agree that you are bound by the terms of the Escrow Agreement, a
          copy of which is attached to the Dealer-Manager Agreement as Exhibit
          "A."
11.  TRANSMITTAL PROCEDURES. You, including if you are a customer carrying
     broker/dealer, shall transmit received investor funds in accordance with
     the following procedures.
(a)  Pending receipt of a Partnership's minimum subscription proceeds of
          $2,000,000 as set forth in Section 4(d) of the Dealer-Manager
          Agreement, you shall promptly transmit any and all checks received by
          you from subscribers and the original executed Subscription Agreement
          to the Dealer-Manager by noon of the next business day following
          receipt of the check by you. By noon of the next business day
          following the Dealer-Manager's receipt of the check and the original
          executed subscription documents, the Dealer-Manager shall transmit the
          check and a copy of the executed Subscription Agreement to the Escrow
          Agent, and the original executed Subscription Agreement and a copy of
          the check to the Managing General Partner.
11
<PAGE>
(b)  On receipt by you of notice from the Managing General Partner or the
          Dealer-Manager that a Partnership's minimum subscription proceeds of
          $2,000,000 as set forth in Section 4(d) of the Dealer-Manager
          Agreement have been received, you agree that all subscribers then may
          be instructed, in the Managing General Partner's sole discretion, to
          make their checks or wire transfers payable solely to the Partnership
          then being offered.
Thereafter, you shall promptly transmit any and all checks received by
          you from subscribers and the original executed Subscription Agreement
          to the Dealer-Manager by noon of the next business day following
          receipt of the check by you. By noon of the next business day
          following the Dealer-Manager's receipt of the check and original
          Subscription Agreement, the Dealer-Manager shall transmit the check
          and the original executed Subscription Agreement to the Managing
          General Partner.
12.  PARTIES. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding on
     you, the Dealer-Manager, and any respective successors and assigns. This
     Agreement shall also inure to the benefit of the indemnified parties, their
     successors and assigns. This Agreement is intended to be and is for the
     sole and exclusive benefit of the parties to this Agreement, including
     their respective successors and assigns, and the indemnified parties and
     their successors and assigns, and for the benefit of no other person. No
     other person shall have any legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under
     or in respect of this Agreement. No purchaser of any of the Units from you
     shall be construed a successor or assign merely by reason of the purchase.
13.  RELATIONSHIP. You are not authorized to hold yourself out as agent of the
     Dealer-Manager, the Managing General Partner, a Partnership or any other
     Selling Agent. This Agreement shall not constitute you a partner of the
     Managing General Partner, the Dealer-Manager, a Partnership, any general
     partner of a Partnership, or any other Selling Agent, nor render the
     Managing General Partner, the Dealer-Manager, the Partnerships, any general
     partner of a Partnership, or any other Selling Agent, liable for any of
     your obligations.
14.  EFFECTIVE DATE. This Agreement is made effective between the parties as of
     the date accepted by you as indicated by your signature to this Agreement.
15.  ENTIRE AGREEMENT, WAIVER.
(a)  This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the
          Dealer-Manager and you, and shall not be amended or modified in any
          way except by subsequent agreement executed in writing. Neither party
          to this Agreement shall be liable or bound to the other by any
          agreement except as specifically set forth in this Agreement.
(b)  The Dealer-Manager and you may waive, but only in writing, any term,
          condition, or requirement under this Agreement that is intended for
          its benefit. However, any written waiver of any term or condition of
          this Agreement shall not operate as a waiver of any other breach of
          the term or condition of this Agreement.
(c)  Also, any failure to enforce any provision of this Agreement shall not
          operate as a waiver of that provision or any other provision of this
          Agreement.
12
<PAGE>
16.  NOTICES.
(a)  Any communications from you shall be in writing addressed to the
          Dealer-Manager at P.O. Box 926, Moon Township, Pennsylvania
          15108-0926.
(b)  Any notice from the Dealer-Manager to you shall be deemed to have been
          duly given if mailed, faxed or telegraphed to you at your address
          shown below.
17.  COMPLAINTS. The Dealer-Manager and you agree as follows:
(a)  to notify the other if either receives an investor complaint in
          connection with the offer or sale of Units by you;
(b)  to cooperate with the other in resolving the complaint; and
(c)  to cooperate in any regulatory examination of the other to the extent
          it involves this Agreement or the offer or sale of Units by you.
18.  PRIVACY. The Dealer-Manager and you each acknowledge that certain
     information made available to the other under this Agreement may be deemed
     nonpublic personal information under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, other
     federal or state privacy laws (as amended), and the rules and regulations
     promulgated thereunder, which are referred to collectively as the "Privacy
     Laws." The Dealer-Manager and you agree as follows:
(a)  not to disclose or use the information except as required to carry out
          each party's respective duties under this Agreement or as otherwise
          permitted by law in the ordinary course of business;
(b)  to establish and maintain procedures reasonably designed to assure the
          security and privacy of all the information; and
(c)  to cooperate with the other and provide reasonable assistance in
          ensuring compliance with the Privacy Laws to the extent applicable to
          either or both the Dealer-Manager and you.
19.  ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING PROVISION. You represent and warrant to the Managing
     General Partner and the Dealer-Manager that you have in place and will
     maintain suitable and adequate "know your customer" policies and procedures
     and that you shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations
     regarding anti-money laundering activity and will provide such
     documentation to the Managing General Partner and the Dealer-Manager on
written request.
13
<PAGE>
20.  ACCEPTANCE. Please confirm your agreement to become a Selling Agent under
     the terms and conditions set forth above by signing and returning the
     enclosed duplicate copy of this Agreement to us at the address set forth
     above.
Sincerely,
__________________________________, 2005      ANTHEM SECURITIES, INC.
Date
ATTEST:
________________________________________     By: _______________________________
(SEAL)                         Secretary         Justin Atkinson, President
ACCEPTANCE:
We accept your invitation to become a Selling Agent under all the terms
and conditions stated in the above Agreement and confirm that all the statements
set forth in the above Agreement are true and correct. We hereby acknowledge
receipt of the Prospectuses and Sales Literature and a copy of the
Dealer-Manager Agreement referred to above.
__________________________________, 2005      _________________________________,
Date                                          a(n)________________ corporation,
ATTEST:
________________________________________      By:_______________________________
(SEAL)                         Secretary         ____________________, President
__________________________________
                                              (Address)
__________________________________
                                              __________________________________
__________________________________
                                              (Telephone Number)
Our CRD Number is ________________
                                              Our Tax ID Number is _____________
14
<PAGE>
APPENDIX I TO SELLING AGENT AGREEMENT
In partial consideration for the payment to you, as Selling Agent, by the
Dealer-Manager of the Sales Commission as set forth in Section 2(a) of the
Selling Agent Agreement, you warrant, represent, covenant, and agree with the
Dealer-Manager that you, as Selling Agent, shall do the following:
o    prominently and promptly announce your participation in the
               offering as Selling Agent to your registered representatives,
               whether by newsletter, e-mail, mail or otherwise, which
               announcement also shall advise your registered representatives to
               contact our Regional Marketing Director in whose territory the
               registered representative is located (the information concerning
               our Regional Marketing Directors has been provided to you by
               separate correspondence) with a copy of the announcement provided
               concurrently to the Dealer-Manager; and
o    provide the Dealer-Manager with the names, telephone numbers,
               addresses and e-mail addresses of your registered
               representatives, which information shall be kept confidential by
               the Dealer-Manager and the Managing General Partner and shall not
               be used for any purpose other than the marketing of the offering
               as set forth in the Dealer-Manager Agreement and the Selling
               Agent Agreement. Further, you, as Selling Agent, agree that the
               Dealer-Manager and the Managing General Partner may directly
               contact your registered representatives, in person or otherwise,
               to:
o    inform them of the offering;
o    explain the merits and risks of the offering; and
o    otherwise assist in your registered representatives' efforts
                    to solicit and sell Units.
15
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>