
29 August 2016
The Company Announcements Platform 
Australian Securities Exchange 
Exchange Centre 
20 Bond Street 
SYDNEY NSW 2000
DEALING IN SECURITIES POLICY
Tap Oil Limited 
ABN 89 068 572 341
Level 1, 47 Colin Street 
West Perth WA 6005 
Australia
T:  +61 8 9485 1000 
F:  +61 8 9485 1060 
E:   info@tapoil.com.au 
www.tapoil.com.au
In accordance with ASX Listing Rule 12.9, please find attached a copy of Tap’s Dealings in 
Securities Policy. 
 
 
Enquiries:
CEO 
Investor Relations & Commercial Manager 
+61 8 9485 1000 
info@tapoil.com.au 
www.tapoil.com.au
Troy Hayden 
Anna Sudlow 
Telephone: 
Email: 
Website:
350839_1
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
1
Introduction 
The purpose of this policy is:
(a)
(b)
to outline the type of conduct in relation to dealing in securities that is 
prohibited under insider trading laws and regulations, which is applicable 
to all personnel of the Tap group of companies (Tap); and
establish a best practice procedure relating to dealing in securities 
(including shares, options and share rights issued by Tap) that provides 
protection to both Tap and its personnel against the misuse of 
unpublished information which could materially affect the value of Tap 
securities.
Tap aims to achieve the highest possible standards of corporate conduct and 
governance. Accordingly, the Board of Directors considers that compliance 
with this policy is essential to ensure that the highest standards of conduct are 
being met by Tap personnel. Tap also wishes to ensure that any incorrect 
perception by any of its personnel is avoided as to when they may or should 
not deal in Tap securities.
This policy should be read in conjunction with the Continuous Disclosure Policy 
which details Tap’s obligations to disclose material information to the ASX.
Application
2 
2.1  Who does this policy apply to?
This policy applies to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
all directors of Tap or any related body corporate (as defined in the 
Corporations Act);
all employees of Tap or any related body corporate (as defined in the 
Corporations Act);
all persons working for Tap under a contract or a consultancy 
agreement, as opposed to an employment agreement,
referred to in this policy as Tap Personnel.
This policy also extends to some “Associates” of Tap Personnel, such as 
family members or entities controlled by Tap Personnel and their associates. 
For further information on who may be your “Associate”, refer to paragraph 1.2 
in Schedule 1 of this policy.
Any non‐compliance with this policy, whether or not it also constitutes a breach 
of the Corporations Act, will be regarded as serious misconduct which may
3473-7854-1570v8
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
entitle Tap to terminate the employment of any employee or the contract of any 
contractor found to be in breach of this policy. For directors, any non-
compliance with this policy may constitute a breach of your terms of 
appointment as a director of the Company.
If you are unsure about whether this policy applies to you, another person 
connected to you or to any particular instrument you wish to deal in, you should 
seek assistance from the Company Secretary before you deal in the 
instrument.
2.2  What type of transactions are covered by this policy?
This policy applies to all “dealing” in Tap securities including the sale and 
purchase of any Tap securities on issue from time to time. The General 
Prohibition set out in Section 3 also extends to dealing in securities of other 
entities (refer to Section 5 of this policy for further information).
For further information on what is a “dealing”, refer to paragraph 1.3 in 
Schedule 1 of this policy.
3 
3.1
Policy for Dealing in Tap Securities 
General Prohibition
It is illegal and you must not deal in, or procure others to deal in Tap securities, 
if:
(a)
you possess information which is not generally available;
(b)
(c)
a reasonable person would expect that that information (if it were 
generally available) would have a material effect on the price or value of 
Tap securities or the securities of another relevant body; and
you know, or ought reasonably to know, that the relevant information is 
not generally available and would have that effect on the price or value of 
securities.
In addition, it is also illegal to communicate such Inside Information to another 
person if you know, or ought reasonably to know, that the recipient of that 
information is likely to use that Inside Information to deal in, or procure 
someone else to deal in, securities.
This General Prohibition overrides all other rules and exceptions set out in 
this policy. It applies at all times. Further, the General Prohibition applies 
regardless of where the relevant conduct takes place.
It does not matter how or in what capacity you become aware of Inside 
Information. It does not have to be obtained from Tap or Tap Personnel to 
constitute Inside Information.
You may also owe duties or a contractual obligation to Tap not to use 
information acquired in your capacity as a member of Tap Personnel for
3473-7854-1570v8
page 2
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
improper purposes, including to gain an improper advantage for yourself or 
someone else, or to cause a detriment to Tap.
3.2
The Blackout Period Prohibition
Even if the General Prohibition does not apply, you must not deal in Tap’s 
securities during the following periods:
(a)
(b)
four weeks prior to the release of Tap's results for the financial year 
ended 31 December until the beginning of the next trading day after the 
announcement of such results; and
four weeks prior to the release of Tap's results for the half year ended 30 
June until the beginning of the next trading day after the announcement 
of such results,
each a Blackout Period.
Tap typically releases its results for the:
(a)
financial year ended 31 December on or around 28 February; and
(b)
half year ended 30 June on or around 31 August,
however, these dates are indicative only and the applicable Blackout Periods 
may vary.
3.3
Prohibition in Other Circumstances
From time to time outside a Blackout Period, it may be necessary to prohibit 
the dealing of Tap's securities by Tap Personnel or a group of them due to 
activity or knowledge within the Company at that time (Prohibited Trading 
Period). In these circumstances, the decision to impose (and subsequently lift) 
such a prohibition will be taken by the Managing Director/CEO in consultation 
with the Company Secretary.
To protect confidentiality, there may not be any announcement of the creation 
of a Prohibited Trading Period. Further, you may be told that a prohibition 
exists, but you may not necessarily be told why or for how long it will last.
If you hold Tap securities, you must recognise that a Prohibited Trading Period 
may apply at the time you wish to sell your shares and Tap will have no 
responsibility to you if that is the case.
3.4
How to Deal when there is no Prohibition
Subject to this Section 3.4, you may deal in Tap securities if none of the 
prohibitions set out in paragraph 3.1, 3.2 or 3.3 above (the Prohibitions) 
applies at that time. It is your responsibility to determine whether you are in 
possession of any Inside Information and if unsure or in any doubt, you should 
seek the advice of the Company Secretary before any dealing is undertaken. It 
is also your responsibility to make your Associates aware of the restrictions 
imposed under this policy and to put in place appropriate arrangements with 
your Associates to seek to ensure any dealings with or by your Associates
3473-7854-1570v8
page 3
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
comply with this policy as if the relevant dealing was undertaken by Tap 
Personnel.
Prior to undertaking a dealing to which this policy applies, all Tap Personnel 
must seek written clearance from the Company Secretary by providing the 
Company Secretary with a notice:
(a)
setting out details of the proposed dealing;
(b)
confirming that he or she is not in possession of any Inside Information; 
and
(c)
seeking written confirmation that none of the Prohibitions apply.
The Company Secretary may at the discretion of Tap:
(a)
refuse to give the written clearance without giving any reasons; and
(b)  withdraw a clearance if new information comes to light or there is a
change in circumstances;
Any refusal to provide the written clearance is final and binding on the Tap 
Personnel seeking that clearance on behalf of themselves or their Associates. 
If written clearance is not provided or withdrawn, that Tap Personnel must keep 
that information confidential and not disclose the refusal or withdrawal to 
anyone other than any of your Associates to which the proposed dealing 
relates.
On receipt of written clearance from the Company Secretary (if any), any 
dealing must be completed within two business days of receipt of the clearance 
from the Company Secretary and must be consistent with the terms of the 
notification given by the Company Secretary. Within three business days 
following any dealing in securities by Directors, details of the dealing and their 
holdings (including HINs or SRNs) must be provided to the Company Secretary 
to ensure that the notification obligations of Directors under the ASX Listing 
Rules and the Corporations Act are satisfied. Other Tap Personnel must 
provide the Company Secretary with the updated details of their holdings within 
five business days of any dealing.
A written clearance is not an approval for, or endorsement of the relevant 
dealing. It is your responsibility to determine whether you are in possession of 
any Inside Information at the time the dealing is undertaken.
3.5
Short term dealing
Even if none of the Prohibitions referred to above apply, you must not deal in 
Tap securities on a short term or speculative basis. You must not acquire Tap's 
securities with the intention of disposing or selling them within 30 days of 
acquisition.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 4
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
This short term dealing rule does not apply:
(a)
to securities acquired as a result of the exercise of an option or the 
vesting of rights under Tap's employee share plans as described below; 
or
(b)
shares acquired under Tap's employee share plans.
3.6
Short selling
Even if none of the above Prohibitions apply, Tap Personnel must not engage 
in the short selling of Tap securities at any time. Short selling is the sale of 
securities that you do not own but have borrowed with a view to later buying 
those securities back at a lower price to make a profit.
3.7
Employee, Executive and Director Share Plans
While any person remains employed by Tap, any dealing in securities 
(including vesting of rights) acquired pursuant to the Tap Oil Limited Share 
Rights Plan, following cessation of restrictions over any such securities, must 
only occur in accordance with this policy.
3.8
Exceptions to this policy
The following dealings are excluded from the operation of this policy:
(a)
(b)
transfers of Tap securities already held by Tap Personnel into a 
superannuation fund or other saving scheme in which that Tap 
Personnel is a beneficiary;
an investment in, or trading in units of, a fund or other scheme (other 
than a scheme only investing in Tap securities) where the assets of the 
fund or other scheme are invested at the discretion of an unrelated third 
party;
(c)  where Tap Personnel is a trustee, trading in Tap securities by that trust, 
provided the relevant Tap Personnel is not a beneficiary of the trust and 
any decision to trade during a prohibited period is taken by the other 
trustees or by the investment managers independently of the relevant 
Tap Personnel;
(d)
undertakings to accept, or the acceptance of, a takeover offer;
(e)
trading under an offer or invitation made to all or most of the security 
holders, such as, a rights issue, a security purchase plan, a dividend or 
distribution reinvestment plan and an equal access buy-back, where the 
plan that determines the timing and structure of the offer has been 
approved by the Board. This includes decisions relating to whether or not 
to take up the entitlements and the sale of the entitlements required to 
provide for the take up of the balance of entitlements under a 
renounceable pro rata issue;
(f)
subject to the relevant Tap Personnel having complied with paragraph 4 
of this policy, a disposal of Tap securities by a secured lender without the
3473-7854-1570v8
page 5
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
permission or authority of the relevant Tap Personnel at the time that is 
the result of that lender exercising its rights under a lending 
arrangement;
(g)
the exercise (but not the sale of Tap securities following exercise) of an 
option or vesting of a right under an employee incentive scheme, or the 
conversion of a convertible security, where the final date for the exercise 
of the option or right, or the conversion of the security, falls during a 
prohibited period and the entity has been in an exceptionally long 
prohibited period or the entity has had a number of consecutive 
prohibited periods and the relevant Tap Personnel could not reasonably 
have been expected to exercise it at a time when free to do so;
(h)
the acquisition of securities under an employee incentive scheme;
(i)
where Tap has an employee incentive scheme with a Director, executive 
or senior manager as trustee of that scheme, the acquisition of Tap 
securities by that Director, executive or senior manager in his or her 
capacity as trustee of the scheme;
(j)
the obtaining by a Director of a share qualification;
(k)
trading under a non-discretionary trading plan (but which does not 
include sales under stop/loss orders) for which prior written clearance 
has been provided in accordance with procedures set out in this policy 
and where:
(i)
(ii)
the relevant Tap Personnel did not enter into the plan or amend 
the plan during a prohibited period;
the trading plan does not permit the relevant Tap Personnel to 
exercise any influence or discretion over how, when, or whether to 
trade; and
(iii)
this policy does not allow for the cancellation of a trading plan 
during a prohibited period other than in exceptional circumstances;
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
where the beneficial interest in the relevant Tap security does not 
change;
transactions conducted between an individual and their spouse, civil 
partner, child, step-child or other close family member;
cancellation of the Tap securities as a result of failure to vest or other 
forfeiture of securities received by individuals as part of performance 
based remuneration; and
vesting (but not any subsequent sale) of Tap securities as a result of 
meeting tenure and/or performance hurdles or release of Tap securities 
from holding lock or holding term in respect of securities received by 
individuals as part of performance-based remuneration.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 6
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
You should note that, under insider trading laws, a person who possesses 
Inside Information may be prohibited from dealing in Tap securities even where 
the dealing falls within an exception specified in this policy.
3.9
Exceptional Circumstances
The Managing Director/CEO (in consultation with the Chairman) has the 
discretion to give approval to Tap Personnel to deal in Tap securities during a 
Blackout Period, Prohibited Trading Period or within a thirty day period as 
referred to in paragraph 3.5 above if:
(a)
that person is experiencing severe financial hardship or other exceptional 
circumstances (such as where there is a court order); and
(b)
the disposal would not breach the General Prohibition.
To be eligible for this relief, you must seek and obtain written approval from the 
Managing Director/CEO prior to undertaking the dealing. The request for 
approval must include details of the number of securities to be dealt with, the 
manner of the dealing, the proposed timing of the dealing, a statement 
confirming that you do not possess Inside Information and describing the 
exceptional circumstance necessitating the dealing.
By way of guidance a general tax liability or a tax liability relating to securities 
received under an employee incentive scheme or an obligation to sell under a 
collateralisation arrangement will not constitute exceptional circumstances. 
Granting of relief under this section of the policy is not expected to occur easily.
The authorised dealing in Tap securities must take place within 2 business 
days of obtaining approval under this paragraph 3.9.
Approval provided under this paragraph 3.9 is an exemption from the operation 
of this policy during a Blackout Period or Prohibited Trading Period and is not 
an approval for, or endorsement of, the relevant dealing. Under insider trading 
laws, a person who possesses Inside Information may be prohibited from 
dealing even where they have been given permission to deal under this policy.
4 
4.1
Hedging and Collateralisation of Tap Securities 
Hedging
4.1.1  Prohibited conduct
Hedging of Tap securities by Tap Personnel is subject to the following 
overriding prohibitions:
(a)
the hedge transaction may not be entered into, renewed, altered or 
closed out when the relevant Tap Personnel is in possession of Inside 
Information;
(b)  Tap securities may never be hedged prior to the vesting of those Tap
securities; and
3473-7854-1570v8
page 7
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
Tap securities may never be hedged while they are subject to a holding lock or 
restriction on dealing under the terms of an employee share plan operated by 
Tap.
4.1.2  Permitted conduct
You are permitted to hedge your Tap securities on the following conditions:
(a)
the hedge transaction is treated as an ordinary dealing in Tap securities 
for the purposes of this policy, and the relevant approvals and 
notifications are made on this basis; and
(b)
clearance has been obtained in accordance with paragraph 3.4.
4.1.3  Notification
Where you enter into a hedging arrangement in respect of Tap securities, the 
Company may, where appropriate, disclose the fact and nature of the hedge 
(eg in the annual report or to the ASX).
4.2
Collateralisation and margin loans
Any Tap Personnel who has used his/her Tap securities as collateral or has 
entered into a margin loan in relation to his/her Tap securities, or intends to do 
so, must provide a copy of this policy to the lender and notify the Company 
Secretary accordingly.
In addition, any Director, executive or senior manager of Tap is not permitted to 
use his/her Tap securities as collateral or to enter into a margin loan or similar 
arrangement in relation to them, without:
(a)
obtaining written confirmation from the lender or holder of the collateral 
that the Tap securities will not be dealt with by it in contravention of the 
Director, executive or senior manager’s obligations under this policy; and
(b)
seeking and obtaining, in writing, formal approval as follows:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
a Director of Tap (including the Managing Director/CEO) must 
inform and receive approval from the Chairman;
the Chairman must obtain approval from the Chairman of the Audit 
and Risk Committee and Managing Director/CEO or the Company 
Secretary; and
key management personnel (including the Managing 
Director/CEO) must inform and receive approval from the 
Chairman,
prior to entering into that collateralisation, margin loan or arrangement.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 8
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities 
 
 
5
Securities in Other Companies 
If Tap Personnel have Inside Information, relating to other entities whether 
listed in Australia or any other jurisdiction, then the General Prohibition applies 
to any dealing in the securities of that entity.
Examples of when these extended rules may arise include, but are not limited 
to, the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
another entity may provide material information about itself to Tap in the 
course of a proposed transaction;
another entity with whom Tap is dealing may provide material information 
about a third entity;
information concerning Tap or actions which may be taken by Tap (i.e. a 
planned transaction or strategic change) that could reasonably be 
expected to have an effect on a third party entity; and
information regarding the outcome of exploration, appraisal or 
development activities being undertaken by a joint venturer where this 
information has not been released to the market.
In addition to the application of the insider trading rules to securities of other 
entities, all Tap Personnel are also bound by a duty of confidentiality in relation 
to information obtained in the course of their duties.
6
Register of Dealings 
The Company Secretary will maintain a copy of:
(a)
all requests for approval to deal in Tap securities submitted by any Tap 
Personnel;
(b)
all decisions relating to requests; and
(c)
details of all dealings in Tap securities made by any Tap Personnel.
The Company Secretary will notify the Board of any dealings by a Director, 
senior manager or executive (or any related body corporate or Associates of 
those Tap Personnel).
7
Policy Governance 
The Company Secretary shall be responsible for assessing and monitoring the 
compliance with this policy and reporting to the Managing Director/CEO and 
the Board, as required. The Company Secretary shall also be responsible for 
the communication of this policy to employees and its implementation.
A copy of this policy will be provided to all Tap Personnel as part of Tap’s 
induction procedures. A copy can also be found on Tap’s website.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 9
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
This policy will be reviewed periodically to ensure it complies with all applicable 
laws and best corporate governance practices. Any amendment of this policy 
must be approved by the Board.
Breach of the insider trading laws may subject you to:
(a)
criminal liability - penalties include heavy fines and imprisonment; and
(b)
civil liability - you can be sued by another party or Tap for any loss 
suffered as a result of illegal trading activities
Breach of the law or this policy or both will be regarded by Tap as serious 
misconduct which may lead to disciplinary action or dismissal.
If you are in any doubt regarding your proposed dealing in Tap securities or 
those of another company or the impact of this policy upon you, you should 
contact the Company Secretary.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 10
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities 
 
 
Schedule 1
Key Concepts
This schedule provides further details on the key concepts underlying the insider trading 
laws, which are referred to in this policy.
1 
1.1
Relevant Terms  
Securities
The definition of securities in the Corporations Act is very broad, and includes:






ordinary shares;
preference shares;
options;
any financial product;
debentures; and
convertible notes.
It also extends to things relating to securities issued by Tap (for example, 
warrants and other derivative products).
1.2
Associate
The definition of “associate” specifically includes:
(a)
your spouse or de facto partner;
(b)
dependent children or those of your partner or de facto partner;
(c)
a company, partnership or trust which:



you control or have significant influence over;
you and any of the persons in (a) or (b) control or have 
significant influence over; or
any person referred to in (a) or (b) controls or has significant 
influence over;
(d)
any other person or entity, including a nominee, with whom you act or 
propose to act in concert regarding dealing in securities.
This policy extends to all of your associates, unless that person is over the age 
of 18 and acts, or makes decisions in respect of dealings in securities, 
completely independently of you, without any influence from or control by you.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 11
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities 
 
 
1.3
Dealing in Securities
Dealing in securities is a broad concept and covers more than simply buying or 
selling shares. It extends to exercising options over shares, entering 
agreements to buy or sell securities and creating a security interest in the 
securities.
Under this policy, the prohibition on dealing means that you are not permitted 
to:
(a)
buy or sell securities;
(b)
subscribe for new securities;
(c)
enter into an agreement to subscribe for, buy or sell, securities;
(d)
create a security interest in the securities;
(e)
enter into or close out of short term trades (including short selling);
(f)
enter into or close out of margin loans through the acquisition or disposal 
of shares,
where you possess Inside Information.
If you are subject to the General Prohibition at any time because you possess 
Inside Information, you are also prohibited from:
(a)
procuring any other person to deal in Tap securities; or
(b)
directly or indirectly communicating the information to another person 
who you believe is likely to deal in, or procure another to deal in, Tap 
securities.
“Procuring” means enticing, encouraging, persuading, causing or securing 
another person to do something. For the purposes of these provisions 
procuring includes inciting, inducing or encouraging an act or omission.
For example, you cannot ask or encourage family members to deal in Tap 
securities when you possess Inside Information and you should not 
communicate price sensitive information.
If you accidentally give somebody Inside Information when you should not 
have, you must immediately tell that person that it is ‘Inside Information’ and 
warn them against dealing in Tap securities, getting others to deal in Tap 
securities, or communicating the information to others.
1.4
Inside Information
“Inside Information” is “Material Information” which is not “generally available”. 
Refer to sections 1.5 and 1.6 of this schedule.
1.5
Information that is generally available
The concept of “information” under insider trading laws is very broad and 
includes intentions, matters that are not definite and matters of supposition.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 12
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
Information is considered to be “generally available” if:
(a)
it consists of readily observable matter;
(b)
it has been made known in a manner likely to bring it to the attention of 
investors in securities of corporations of that kind and a reasonable 
period for dissemination of that information has elapsed. That is, 
information will be “generally available” if it has been released to the 
ASX, published in an Annual Report or prospectus or otherwise has 
been made generally available to the investing public and a reasonable 
period of time has elapsed after the information has been disseminated 
in one of these ways; or
(c)
it may be deduced, inferred or concluded from the above.
1.6
Material information
Material Information is information considered to be likely to have a material 
effect on the price or value of securities of a company if the information would, 
or would be likely to, influence persons who commonly invest in securities in 
deciding whether or not to subscribe for, buy or sell those securities.
It is not possible to list all of the information that may be “material”, however, 
the following type of information would be likely to be considered to have a 
material effect on Tap’s share price:
(a)
information regarding a material increase or decrease in Tap’s financial 
performance from previous results or forecasts;
(b)
a proposed material business or asset acquisition or sale;
(c)  material exploration results;
(d)
the damage or destruction of a material operation of the company;
(e)
proposed material legal proceedings to be initiated by or against Tap;
(f)
regulatory action or investigations undertaken by a government authority;
(g)
the launch of a material new business; or
(h)
a proposal to undertake a new issue of shares or major change in 
financing.
Conclusion – seek assistance
The question of whether you hold Inside Information is often a difficult one to answer. 
For example, there are principles that may extend (or deem) you to possess Inside 
Information even if you don’t actually know the information personally. Please seek 
assistance from the Company Secretary if you have any questions or doubts about 
whether you would be considered to hold Inside Information at a particular time.
3473-7854-1570v8
page 13
Policy No:  LG3.0 
Policy:  Dealing in Securities
Approved by the Board of Tap Oil Limited
Douglas Bailey 
Chairman 
for and on behalf of the Board 
of Directors
Date: 25 August 2016
3473-7854-1570v8
page 14