
POS AM 1 alamoposam081712.htm ALAMO POS-AM 08/17/12 alamoposam081712.htm
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 30, 2012
Registration No. 333-176381
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
POST-EFFECTIVE AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO
FORM S-1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Alamo Energy Corp.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nevada
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation or organization)
1382
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
98-0489669
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300
Houston, Texas 77024
Tel: (832) 436-1832
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant's principal
executive offices)
Allan Millmaker
Alamo Energy Corp.
10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300
Houston, Texas 77024
Tel: (832) 436-1832
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies of all correspondence to:
Michael J. Muellerleile, Esq.
M2 Law Professional Corporation
500 Newport Center Drive, Suite 800
Newport Beach, CA 92660
Tel:  (949) 706-1470/Fax: (949) 706-1475
Approximate date of proposed sale to the public: From time to time after this registration statement
becomes effective.
 
If any of the securities being registered on this form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis
pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, check the following box:  x
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the
Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number
of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.o
 
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering.    o
 
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering.    o
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-
accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See definitions of “large accelerated filer,”
“accelerated filer,” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange
Act.                                                                              
 
Large accelerated filer  o  
Non-accelerated filer    o (Do not check if a smaller
reporting company) 
 
The registrant hereby amends this registration statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to
delay its effective date until the registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that
this registration statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or until this registration statement shall become effective on such
date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Small reporting company  T
Accelerated filer  o
1
EXPLANATORY NOTE
This Post-Effective Amendment No. 1 to Form S-1 (this “Post Effective Amendment No. 1”) is being filed
pursuant to Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act to update the Form S-1 Registration Statement
(Registration No. 333-176381), which was previously declared effective by the Securities and Exchange
Commission on October 11, 2011, to include the audited financial statements and the notes thereto
included in the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2012 and to
update certain other information in such Registration Statement.  No additional securities are being
registered under this Post-Effective Amendment No. 1. All applicable registration fees were paid at the
time of the original filing of such Registration Statement on August 18, 2011.
 
 
 
 
 
2
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. The selling shareholders will
not sell these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting an
offer to buy these securities in any state or other jurisdiction where the offer or sale of these securities is
not permitted.
Subject to completion, August 30, 2012
Preliminary Prospectus
Alamo Energy Corp.
Up to 11,575,000 Shares of Common Stock
This prospectus relates to the sale by the selling shareholders identified in this prospectus of up to
11,575,000 shares of our $0.001 par value common stock, which includes: (i) 2,995,000 shares of our
common stock held by a selling shareholder; (ii) 4,000,000 shares issuable upon conversion of
convertible promissory notes (“Eurasian First Notes”); (iii) 1,720,000 shares issuable upon the
conversion of convertible promissory notes adjusting the conversion price to $0.50 per share (“Eurasian
Second Notes”); (iv) 2,000,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of warrants with an exercise price of
$1.00 per share (“Eurasian First Warrants”); and (v) 860,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of
warrants with an exercise price of $1.25 per share (“Eurasian Second Warrants”).
All of these shares of our common stock are being offered for resale by the selling shareholders.
The selling shareholders may offer all or part of their shares for resale from time to time through public or
private transactions, at either prevailing market prices or at privately negotiated prices. We will not
receive any proceeds from the sale of these shares by the selling shareholders. However, we will
receive proceeds from the exercise of the warrants if they are exercised for cash by the selling
shareholders.
We will bear all costs relating to the registration of these shares of our common stock, other than any
selling shareholders’ legal or accounting costs or commissions.
 
Our common stock is quoted on the Over the Counter Bulletin Board and OTCQB under the symbol
"ALME". As of August 29, 2012, the last reported sale price of our common stock on the OTCQB was
$0.02 per share. We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of those shares being offered by
the selling shareholders, except the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of warrants held by selling
shareholders.
The securities offered by this prospectus involve a high degree of risk. See “Risk Factors” beginning
on Page 6  for factors to be considered before purchasing shares of our common stock.
 
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is _________, 2012.
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
   5
   6
  16
  16
  17
  17
  17
  18
  20
  21
  22
  22
Prospectus Summary
Risk Factors
Forward Looking Statements
Use of Proceeds
Dividend Policy
Price Range of Common Stock
Dilution
Selling Shareholders
Plan of Distribution
Description of Securities
Interest of Named Experts and Counsel
Business
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations
Description of Property
Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters
Management
Executive Compensation
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related
Stockholder Matters
Certain Relationships and Related Transaction
Changes in and Disagreements with Certifying Accountants
Legal Matters
Experts
Additional Information
Financial Statements
Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution
Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
Exhibits
Undertakings
Signatures
 
We have not authorized anyone to provide you with information different from that contained in this
prospectus.  The selling shareholders are offering to sell, and seeking offers to buy, shares of our
common stock only in jurisdictions where offers and sales are permitted.  The information contained in
this prospectus is accurate only as of the date of this prospectus, regardless of the time of delivery of this
prospectus or of any sale of the securities offered hereby.
49
  49
  49
  49
  49
  50
  73
  73
  73
  78
  81
  83
26
32
  35
  42
  45
47
4
In this prospectus, when we to refer to Alamo Energy Corp., we use the terms “Alamo Energy” “we,” “our”
and “us” when we do not need to distinguish among these entities or their predecessors or when any
distinction is clear from the context.
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
You should read this summary together with the entire prospectus, including the more detailed
information in our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this prospectus.
 
Our Business
Our principal business address is 10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300, Houston, Texas, 77024.  Our
telephone number is (832) 436-1832.
 
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada on March 29, 2006 as Green Irons Holdings Corp. to
conduct a business in the golfing industry. On November 18, 2009, we completed the purchase of
certain oil and gas assets from Alamo Oil Limited, a United Kingdom corporation. As a result of the asset
purchase transaction, we changed management, entered the oil and gas business, and ceased all
activity in our former business.
 
We are an oil and gas company led by an experienced management team and focused on exploration,
production and development of oil and natural gas within North America and the United Kingdom. Our
business plan is to acquire oil and gas properties for exploration, appraisal and development with the
intent to bring the projects to feasibility at which time we will either contract out the operations or joint
venture the project with qualified interested parties.  Our main priority will be given to projects with near
term cash flow potential, although consideration will be given to projects that may not be as advanced
from a technical standpoint but demonstrate the potential for significant upside.
In the United States, we have focused on the Appalachian Basin with an operation base in Gray,
Kentucky.  We are the operator of our wells in Knox County, Kentucky. We also own working interests in
properties located in Texas and West Virginia where we are not the operator.  In the United Kingdom,
we have focused on the Weald Basin in South England.  We currently have proved reserves in the
States of Texas, Kentucky and West Virginia.
Summary Financial Information
The summary financial information set forth below is derived from the more detailed financial statements
appearing elsewhere in this prospectus.  We have prepared our financial statements contained in this
prospectus in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. All
information should be considered in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes contained
elsewhere in this prospectus.
Income Statement For the Year Ended
For the Year Ended
Oil Revenues
Total Expenses
Operating Loss
Net Loss
Net Loss Per Share
April 30, 2012
April 30, 2011
$
704,938
2,008,489
(1,303,551)
(2,962,475)
(0.05)
$
251,337 
901,256
(649,919) 
(1,804,169)
(0.04)
Balance Sheet
April 30, 2012
April 30, 2011
$
$
Cash
Total Current Assets
Total Assets
Current Liabilities
Total Liabilities
Total Stockholders'
Equity (Deficit)
80.903
130,123
8,515,457
2,364,726
3,140,010
5,375,447
45,098
154,901
8,248,825
433,175
1,592,835
6,655,990
5
The Offering:
Offering Price:
The selling shareholders want to sell up to 11,575,000 shares of our $0.001 par
value common stock, which includes: (i) 2,995,000 shares of our common stock; (ii)
4,000,000 shares issuable upon conversion of the Eurasian First Notes; (iii)
1,720,000 shares issuable upon the conversion of the Eurasian Second Notes; (iv)
2,000,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of the Eurasian First Warrants; and (v)
860,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of the Eurasian Second Warrants.  All of
these shares of our common stock are being offered for resale by the selling
shareholders.
 
The selling shareholders may offer all or part of their shares for resale from time to
time through public or private transactions, at either prevailing market prices or at
privately negotiated prices.
Use of Proceeds: We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of those shares being offered
Trading:
by the selling shareholders except the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of
warrants held by selling shareholders, which could total $3,075,000.
 
Our common stock is traded on the Over the Counter Bulletin Board and
OTCQB under the symbol “ALME.”
RISK FACTORS
Before you invest in our common stock by purchasing shares from a selling stockholder named in this
prospectus, you should be aware that there are various risks involved in investing in our common stock.
You should consider carefully these risk factors, together with all of the other information included in this
prospectus and in the periodic reports we have filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, before you decide to purchase any shares of our common
stock. A purchase of our common stock is speculative in nature and involves a lot of risks. Additional
risks that we do not yet know of or that we currently think are immaterial may also impair our business
operations. Any person who cannot afford the loss of his or her entire purchase price for the offered
shares should not purchase the offered shares because such a purchase is highly speculative.
Purchasers of the offered shares may not realize any return on their purchase of the offered shares.
Purchasers may lose their investments in us completely.
 
Risks Related to our Business:
Since we have a limited operating history in our current line of business, it is difficult for potential
investors to evaluate our business.
We entered the oil and gas business in November 2009. Our limited operating history makes it difficult
for potential investors to evaluate our business or prospective operations. Since our formation, we have
generated only limited and sporadic revenues. As an early stage company, we are subject to all the
risks inherent in the financing, expenditures, operations, complications and delays inherent in a new
business. Accordingly, our business and success faces risks from uncertainties faced by developing
companies in a competitive environment. There can be no assurance that our efforts will be successful
or that we will ultimately be able to attain profitability.
We have a history of net losses which will continue and which may negatively impact our ability to
achieve our business objectives.
For the period from inception (September 1, 2009) to April 30, 2012, we had oil and gas revenues of
$1,021,706 and a net loss of $5,268,905. We cannot guaranty that our future operations will result in net
income. We may not ever be able to operate profitability on a quarterly or annual basis in the future. Our
failure to increase our revenues will harm our business. If our revenues grow more slowly than we
anticipate or our operating expenses exceed our expectations, our operating results will suffer.
6
Our independent auditors have expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going
concern.
In their report dated August 10, 2012, our current independent registered public accounting firm stated
that our financial statements for the year ended April 30, 2012, were prepared assuming that we would
continue as a going concern, and that they have substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a
going concern. Our auditors’ doubts are based on our ability to obtain sufficient working capital to fund
future operations. If we are unable to raise additional capital, our efforts to continue as a going concern
may not prove successful.
We will need additional financing to execute our business plan.
The revenues from our current operations are not sufficient to support our operating costs and
anticipated drilling programs. We will need substantial additional funds to:
·effectuate our business plan;
·fund the acquisition, exploration, development and production of oil and natural gas in the future;
·fund future drilling programs; and
·hire and retain key employees.
We may seek additional funds through public or private equity or debt financing, via strategic
transactions, and/or from other sources. There are no assurances that future funding will be available on
favorable terms or at all.  If additional funding is not obtained, we may need to reduce, defer or cancel
drilling programs, planned initiatives, or overhead expenditures to the extent necessary.  The failure to
fund our operating and capital requirements could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition and results of operations.
 
Our exploration appraisal and development activities are subject to many risks which may affect our
ability to profitably extract oil reserves or achieve targeted returns.  In addition, continued growth
requires that we acquire and successfully develop additional oil reserves.
Oil and gas exploration may involve unprofitable efforts, not only from dry wells, but from wells that are
productive but do not produce sufficient net revenues to return a profit after drilling, operating and other
costs. Completion of a well does not assure a profit on the investment or recovery of drilling, completion
and operating costs. In addition, drilling hazards or environmental damage could greatly increase the
cost of operations, and various field operating conditions may negatively affect the production from
successful wells. These conditions include delays in obtaining governmental approvals or consents,
shut-ins of connected wells resulting from extreme weather conditions, insufficient storage or
transportation capacity or other geological and mechanical conditions. While diligent well supervision
and effective maintenance operations can contribute to maximizing production rates over time,
production delays and declines from normal field operating conditions cannot be eliminated and can be
expected to negatively affect revenue and cash flow levels to varying degrees.
 
Our commercial success depends on our ability to find, acquire, develop and commercially produce oil
and natural gas reserves.
Without the continual addition of new reserves, any existing reserves and the production therefrom will
decline over time as such existing reserves are depleted. A future increase in our reserves will depend
not only on our ability to explore and develop any properties we may have from time to time, but also on
our ability to select and acquire suitable producing properties or prospects. We cannot guaranty that we
will be able to continue to locate satisfactory properties for acquisition or participation.  Moreover, if such
acquisitions or participations are identified, we may determine that current markets, terms of acquisition
and participation or pricing conditions make such acquisitions or participations economically
disadvantageous.  We cannot guaranty that commercial quantities of oil will be discovered or acquired
by us.
7
Our oil and gas operations are subject to operating hazards that may increase our operating costs to
prevent such hazards, or may materially affect our operating results if any of such hazards were to occur.
Oil and natural gas exploration, development and production operations are subject to all the risks and
hazards typically associated with such operations, including hazards such as fire, explosion, blowouts,
cratering, unplanned gas releases and spills, each of which could result in substantial damage to our
wells, production facilities, other property and the environment or in personal injury. Oil and gas
production operations are also subject to all the risks typically associated with such operations,
including encountering unexpected formations or pressures, premature decline of reservoirs and the
invasion of water into hydrocarbon producing formations. Losses resulting from the occurrence of any of
these risks could negatively affect our results of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
 
To date, we have generated limited revenues from production of our oil lease interests.  The acquisition
of the KYTX properties substantially increased our reserve base and future revenue stream. Our oil and
gas exploration and development activities are focused on the exploration and development of our
properties which are higher-risk ventures with uncertain prospects for success.  In addition, we will not
have earnings to support our activities should the wells drilled or properties acquired prove not to be
commercially viable.  We cannot guaranty that commercial quantities of oil and gas will be successfully
produced as a result of our exploration and development efforts.  Further there is no guarantee that we
will generate sufficient revenues from current production.
Our exploration and development activities will depend in part on the evaluation of data obtained
through geophysical testing and geological analysis, as well as test drilling activity.
The results of geophysical testing and geological analysis are subjective, and we cannot guaranty that
the exploration and development activities we conduct based on positive analysis will produce oil or
gas in commercial quantities or costs.  As we perform developmental and exploratory activities, further
data required for evaluation of our oil and gas interests will become available.  The exploration and
development activities that will be undertaken by us are subject to greater risks than those associated
with the acquisition and ownership of producing properties.  The drilling of development wells, although
generally consisting of drilling to reservoirs believed to be productive, may result in dry holes or a failure
to produce oil or gas in commercial quantities.  Moreover, any drilling of exploratory wells is subject to
significant risk of dry holes.
If we are unable to successfully compete with the large number of oil and natural gas producers in our
industry, we may not be able to achieve profitable operations.
Oil and natural gas exploration is intensely competitive in all its phases and involves a high degree of
risk.  We compete with numerous other participants in the search for and the acquisition of oil and
natural gas properties and in the marketing of oil and natural gas.  Our competitors include energy
companies that have substantially greater financial resources, staff and facilities than us. Our ability
to establish additional reserves in the future will depend not only on our ability to explore and develop
our existing properties, but also on our ability to select and acquire suitable producing properties or
prospects for exploratory drilling.  Competitive factors in the distribution and marketing of oil and natural
gas include price and methods and reliability of delivery.  Competition may also be presented by
alternate fuel sources.
We are subject to various regulatory requirements, including environmental regulations, and may incur
substantial costs to comply and remain in compliance with those requirements.
Our operations in the United States are subject to regulation at the federal, state and local levels,
including regulation relating to matters such as the exploration for and the development, production,
marketing, pricing, transmission and storage of oil and gas, as well as environmental and safety
matters.  Failure to comply with applicable regulations could result in fines or penalties being owed to
third parties or governmental entities, the payment of which could negatively impact our financial
condition or results of operations.  Our operations are subject to significant laws and regulations, which
may negatively affect our ability to conduct business or increase our costs.  Extensive federal, state and
local laws and regulations relating to health and environmental quality in the United States affect nearly
all of our operations.  These laws and regulations set various standards regulating various aspects of
health and environmental quality, provide for penalties and other liabilities for the violation of these
standards, and in some circumstances, establish obligations to remediate current and former facilities
and off-site locations.
 
8
Environmental legislation provides for, among other things, restrictions and prohibitions on spills,
releases or emissions of various substances produced in association with oil and gas operations. The
legislation also requires that wells and facility sites be operated, maintained, abandoned and reclaimed
to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory authorities. Compliance with such legislation can require
significant expenditures and a breach may result in the imposition of fines and penalties, some of which
may be material. Environmental legislation is evolving in a manner expected to result in stricter
standards and enforcement, larger fines and liability and potentially increased capital expenditures and
operating costs. The discharge of oil or other pollutants into the air, soil or water may give rise to
liabilities to governments and third parties and may require us to incur costs to remedy such discharge.
No assurance can be given that environmental laws will not result in a curtailment of production or a
material increase in the costs of production, development or exploration activities or otherwise adversely
impact our financial condition, results of operations or prospects.  We could incur significant liability for
damages, clean-up costs and/or penalties in the event of discharges into the environment,
environmental damage caused by us or previous owners of our property or non-compliance with
environmental laws or regulations. In addition to actions brought by governmental agencies, we could
face actions brought by private parties or citizens groups.
Moreover, we cannot predict what legislation or regulations will be enacted in the future or how existing
or future laws or regulations will be administered, enforced or made more stringent. Compliance with
more stringent laws or regulations, or more vigorous enforcement policies of the regulatory agencies,
could require us to make material expenditures for the installation and operation of systems and
equipment for remedial measures, all of which could have a material adverse effect on our financial
condition or results of operations.
Our ability to successfully market and sell oil and natural gas is subject to a number of factors that are
beyond our control, and that may adversely impact our ability to produce and sell hydrocarbons, or to
achieve profitability.
The marketability and price of oil and natural gas that may be acquired or discovered by us will be
affected by numerous factors beyond our control.  Our ability to market our oil and natural gas may
depend upon our ability to acquire space on pipelines that deliver hydrocarbons to commercial
markets. We may be affected by deliverability uncertainties related to the proximity of our reserves to
pipelines and processing facilities, by operational problems with such pipelines and facilities, and by
government regulation relating to price, taxes, royalties, land tenure, allowable production, the export of
oil and gas and by many other aspects of the oil and gas business.
Our revenues, profitability and future growth and the carrying value of our oil and gas properties are
substantially dependent on prevailing prices of oil and natural gas. Our ability to borrow and to obtain
additional capital on attractive terms is also substantially dependent upon oil and natural gas prices.
Prices for oil and natural gas are subject to large fluctuations in response to relatively minor changes in
the supply of and demand for oil and natural gas, market uncertainty and a variety of additional factors
beyond our control. These factors include economic conditions, in the United States and Canada, the
actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, governmental regulation, political stability
in the Middle East and elsewhere, the foreign supply of oil, the price of foreign imports and the
availability of alternative fuel sources. Any substantial and extended decline in the price of oil and
natural gas would have an adverse effect on our borrowing capacity, revenues, profitability and cash
flows from operations.
 
Volatile commodity prices make it difficult to estimate the value of producing properties for acquisition
and often cause disruption in the market for producing properties, as buyers and sellers have difficulty
agreeing on such value. Price volatility also makes it difficult to budget for and project the return on
acquisitions and development and exploitation projects.
Natural gas prices have declined substantially in the last year, and are expected to remain depressed
for the foreseeable future. Sustained depressed prices of natural gas will adversely affect our assets,
development plans, results of operations and financial position, perhaps materially.
 
Natural gas prices have declined during the past fiscal year 2012. The reduction in prices has been
caused by many factors, including recent increases in gas production from non-conventional (shale)
reserves, warmer than normal weather and high levels of natural gas in storage.  If prices for natural gas
remain depressed for long periods, we may be required to write down the value of our oil and gas
properties and/or revise our development plans which may cause certain of our undeveloped well
locations to no longer be deemed to be proved. In addition, sustained low prices for natural gas will
reduce the amounts we would otherwise have available for our operational costs, expenses and to
service our indebtedness.
9
We cannot guarantee that title to our properties does not contain a defect that may materially affect our
interest in those properties.
It is our practice in acquiring significant oil and gas leases or interest in oil and gas leases to retain
lawyers to fully examine the title to the interest under the lease.  In the case of minor acquisitions, we
rely upon the judgment of oil lease brokers or landmen who do the field work in examining records in the
appropriate governmental office before attempting to place under lease a specific interest. We believe
that this practice is widely followed in the energy industry. Nevertheless, there may be title defects which
affect lands comprising a portion of our properties which may adversely affect us.
 
Our properties are held in the form of leases and working interests in operating agreements and leases.
If the specific requirements of such licenses, leases and working interests are not met, the instrument
may terminate or expire.
All of our properties are held under interests in oil and gas leases and working interests in operating
agreements and leases. If we fail to meet the specific requirements of each lease or working interest,
especially future drilling and production requirements, the lease may be terminated or otherwise expire.
We cannot be assured that we will be able to meet our obligations under each lease and working
interest. The termination or expiration of our working interest relating to any lease would harm our
business, financial condition and results of operations.
We have substantial capital requirements that, if not met, may hinder our operations.
We anticipate that we will make substantial capital expenditures for the acquisition, exploration,
development and production of oil and natural gas in the future and for future drilling programs. If we
have insufficient revenues, we may have limited ability to expend the capital necessary to undertake or
complete future drilling programs. There can be no assurance that debt or equity financing, or cash
generated by operations will be available or sufficient to meet these requirements or for other corporate
purposes, or if debt or equity financing is available, that it will be on terms acceptable to us. Moreover,
future activities may require us to alter our capitalization significantly. Our inability to access sufficient
capital for our operations could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of
operations or prospects.
 
Additional capital may be costly or difficult to obtain.
Additional capital, whether through the offering of equity or debt securities, may not be available on
reasonable terms or at all, especially in light of the recent downturn in the economy and dislocations in
the credit and capital markets. If we are unable to obtain required additional capital, we may have to
curtail our growth plans or cut back on existing business and, further, we may not be able to continue
operating if we do not generate sufficient revenues from operations needed to stay in business.  We may
incur substantial costs in pursuing future capital financing, including investment banking fees, legal
fees, accounting fees, securities law compliance fees, printing and distribution expenses and other
costs. We may also be required to recognize non-cash expenses in connection with certain securities
we issue, such as convertible notes and warrants, which may adversely impact our financial condition.
Because we are small and have limited access to additional capital, we may have to limit our
exploration activity, which may result in a loss of investment.
We have a small asset base and limited access to additional capital. Accordingly, we must limit our
exploration activity. As such, we may not be able to complete an exploration program that is as thorough
as our management would like. In that event, existing reserves may go undiscovered. Without finding
reserves, we cannot generate revenues and investors may lose their investment.
 
 
10
Our reserve estimates are subject to numerous uncertainties and may be inaccurate.
We currently have proved reserves in Kentucky, Texas and West Virginia. We rely on an independent
third party petroleum engineering firm, Nova Resource, Inc., to calculate those reserve estimates.  There
are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of oil and natural gas reserves and cash
flows to be derived therefrom, including many factors beyond our control. In general, estimates of
economically recoverable oil and gas reserves and the future net cash flows therefrom are based upon
a number of variable factors and assumptions, such as historical production from the properties,
production rates, ultimate reserve recovery, timing and amount of capital expenditures, marketability our
products, royalty rates, the assumed effects of regulation by governmental agencies and future operating
costs, all of which may vary from actual results. All such estimates are to some degree speculative, and
classifications of reserves are only attempts to define the degree of speculation involved. For those
reasons, estimates of the economically recoverable reserves attributable to any particular group of
properties, classification of such reserves based on risk of recovery and estimates of future net revenues
expected therefrom prepared by different engineers, or by the same engineers at different times, may
vary. Our actual production, revenues, taxes and development and operating expenditures with respect
to our reserves will vary from estimates thereof and such variations could be material.
 
Estimates of proved or unproved reserves that may be developed and produced in the future are often
based upon volumetric calculations and upon analogy to similar types of reserves rather than actual
production history. Estimates based on these methods are generally less reliable than those based on
actual production history. Subsequent evaluation of the same reserves based upon production history
and production practices will result in variations in the estimated reserves and such variations could be
material.
Failure to generate increased revenues from the KYTX properties and other interests could hinder our
ability to expand and to continue our current operations.
Unless we generate increased revenues from the KYTX properties and other interests, or obtain
additional funding, we may not be able to implement our business plan, or continue or expand our
current operations.  Although, we had cash of $80,903 on hand, as of April 30, 2012, we estimate that
the cash will not be sufficient for us to continue and expand our current operations for the next twelve
months.  Therefore, failure to generate increased revenues from the KYTX properties and other interests
and failure to obtain additional funding could deter our ability to continue our existing operations.
Current global financial conditions have been characterized by increased volatility which could
negatively impact on our business, prospects, liquidity and financial condition.
Current global financial conditions and recent market events have been characterized by increased
volatility and the resulting tightening of the credit and capital markets has reduced the amount of
available liquidity and overall economic activity. We cannot guaranty that debt or equity financing, the
ability to borrow funds or cash generated by operations will be available or sufficient to meet or satisfy
our initiatives, objectives or requirements. Our inability to access sufficient amounts of capital on terms
acceptable to us for our operations will negatively impact our business, prospects, liquidity and financial
condition.
The potential profitability of oil and gas properties depends upon factors beyond our control.
The potential profitability of oil and gas properties is dependent upon many factors beyond our control.
For instance, world prices and markets for oil and gas are unpredictable, highly volatile, potentially
subject to governmental fixing, pegging, controls, or any combination of these and other factors, and
respond to changes in domestic, international, political, social, and economic environments.
Additionally, due to worldwide economic uncertainty, the availability and cost of funds for production
and other expenses have become increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to project. These changes and
events may materially affect our financial performance. In addition, a productive well may become
uneconomic in the event that water or other deleterious substances are encountered which impair or
prevent the production of oil and/or gas from the well. In addition, production from any well may be
unmarketable if it is impregnated with water or other deleterious substances. These factors cannot be
accurately predicted and the combination of these factors may result in us not receiving an adequate
return on invested capital.
 
 
11
The loss or unavailability of our key personnel for an extended period of time could adversely affect our
business operations and prospects.
Our success depends in large measure on certain key personnel, including Allan Millmaker, our Chief
Executive Officer. The loss of the services of Mr. Millmaker could significantly hinder our
operations.  Although we are looking into acquiring key person insurance, we do not currently have
such insurance in effect for Mr. Millmaker. In addition, the competition for qualified personnel in the oil
industry is intense and there can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to attract and retain all
personnel necessary for the development and operation of our business.
Seasonal weather conditions and other factors could adversely affect our ability to conduct drilling
activities.
Our operations could be adversely affected by seasonal weather conditions and wildlife restrictions on
federal leases. In some areas, certain drilling and other oil and gas activities can only be conducted
during limited times of the year, typically during the summer months. This would limit our ability to
operate in these areas and could intensify competition during those times for drilling rigs, oil field
equipment, services, supplies and qualified personnel, which may lead to periodic shortages. These
constraints and the resulting shortages or high costs could delay our operations and materially increase
our operating and capital costs, which could have a material adverse effect upon us and our results of
operations.
We depend on the services of third parties for material aspects of our operations, including drilling
operators, and accordingly if we cannot obtain certain third party services, we may not be able to
operate.
We rely on third parties to operate some of the assets in Texas and West Virginia in which we possess
an interest. The success of our operations, whether considered on the basis of drilling operations or
production operations, will depend largely on whether the operator of the property properly fulfills their
obligations.  As a result, our ability to exercise influence over the operation of these assets or their
associated costs may be limited.  Our performance will therefore depend upon a number of factors that
may be outside of our full control, including the timing and amount of capital expenditures, the operator’s
expertise and financial resources, the approval of other participants, the selection of technology, and
risk management practices.  The failure of third party operators and their contractors to perform their
services in a proper manner could adversely affect our operations.
Risks Related to our Common Stock
The issuance of shares upon conversion of the senior secured convertible promissory notes and
exercise of outstanding warrants may cause immediate and substantial dilution to our existing
stockholders.
If the price per share of our common stock at the time of conversion of our senior secured convertible
promissory notes, and exercise of any warrants, options, or any other convertible securities is in excess
of the various conversion or exercise prices of these convertible securities, conversion or exercise of
these convertible securities would have a dilutive effect on our common stock. As of August 17, 2012,
we had (i) outstanding senior secured convertible promissory notes which are convertible into an
aggregate of 4,000,000 shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $0.50 per share,
(ii) outstanding senior secured convertible promissory notes which are convertible into an aggregate of
1,720,000 shares of our common stock at an adjusted conversion price of $0.50 per share, (iii) warrants
to purchase up to 2,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per share, (v)
warrants to purchase 860,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per
share.  Further, any additional financing that we secure may require the granting of rights, preferences or
privileges senior to those of our common stock and which result in additional dilution of the existing
ownership interests of our common stockholders.
 
 
12
We are subject to the reporting requirements of federal securities laws, which is expensive.
We are a public reporting company in the U.S. and, accordingly, subject to the information and reporting
requirements of the Exchange Act and other federal securities laws, and the compliance obligations of
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The costs of preparing and filing annual and quarterly reports, proxy
statements and other information with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, and
furnishing audited reports to stockholders causes our expenses to be higher than they would be if we
remained a privately-held company.
Our compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and SEC rules concerning internal controls is time
consuming, difficult and costly.
We are a reporting company with the SEC and therefore must comply with Sarbanes-Oxley Act and
SEC rules concerning internal controls.  It is time consuming, difficult and costly for us to develop and
implement the internal controls and reporting procedures required by Sarbanes-Oxley. In order to
expand our operations, we will need to hire additional financial reporting, internal control, and other
finance staff in order to develop and implement appropriate internal controls and reporting procedures.
 
Failure to maintain the adequacy of our internal controls could impair our ability to provide accurate
financial statements and comply with the requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which could cause
our stock price to decrease substantially.
We have amended certain of our prior periodic reports to include required disclosures that were
previously omitted from those periodic reports. The filing of amendments to those periodic
reports resulted in a redetermination that our internal controls over financial reporting and disclosure
controls and procedures were not effective for those periods.  We have committed limited personnel and
resources to the development of the external reporting and compliance obligations that are required of a
public company. We have taken measures to address and improve our financial reporting and
compliance capabilities and we are in the process of instituting changes to satisfy our obligations in
connection with being a public company. We plan to obtain additional financial and accounting
resources to support and enhance our ability to meet the requirements of being a public company. In
May 2011, we hired a new Chief Financial Officer with oil and gas experience. We will need to continue
to improve our financial and managerial controls, reporting systems and procedures, and documentation
thereof. If our financial and managerial controls, reporting systems, or procedures fail, we may not be
able to provide accurate financial statements on a timely basis or comply with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002 as it applies to us. Any failure of our internal controls or our ability to provide accurate financial
statements could cause the trading price of our common stock to decrease substantially.
Our stock price may be volatile, which may result in losses to our stockholders.
The stock markets have experienced significant price and trading volume fluctuations, and the market
prices of companies quoted on the Over-The-Counter Bulletin Board, where our shares of common
stock will be quoted, generally have been very volatile and have experienced sharp share-price and
trading-volume changes. The trading price of our common stock is likely to be volatile and could
fluctuate widely in response to many of the following factors, some of which are beyond our control:
•
•
•
•
•
variations in our operating results;
changes in expectations of our future financial performance, including financial estimates by
securities analysts and investors;
changes in operating and stock price performance of other companies in our industry;
additions or departures of key personnel; and
future sales of our common stock.
Domestic and international stock markets often experience significant price and volume fluctuations.
These fluctuations, as well as general economic and political conditions unrelated to our performance,
may adversely affect the price of our common stock. In particular, following initial public offerings, the
market prices for stocks of companies often reach levels that bear no established relationship to the
operating performance of these companies. These market prices are generally not sustainable and
could vary widely. In the past, following periods of volatility in the market price of a public company’s
securities, securities class action litigation has often been initiated.
13
Our common shares are thinly-traded, and in the future, may continue to be thinly-traded, and you may
be unable to sell at or near ask prices or at all if you need to sell your shares to raise money or
otherwise desire to liquidate such shares.
We cannot predict the extent to which an active public market for our common stock will develop or be
sustained due to a number of factors, including the fact that we are a small company that is relatively
unknown to stock analysts, stock brokers, institutional investors, and others in the investment community
that generate or influence sales volume, and that even if we came to the attention of such persons, they
tend to be risk-averse and would be reluctant to follow an unproven company such as ours or purchase
or recommend the purchase of our shares until such time as we became more seasoned and viable. As
a consequence, there may be periods of several days or more when trading activity in our shares is
minimal or non-existent, as compared to a seasoned issuer which has a large and steady volume of
trading activity that will generally support continuous sales without an adverse effect on share price. We
cannot give you any assurance that a broader or more active public trading market for our common stock
will develop or be sustained, or that current trading levels will be sustained.
 
The market price for our common stock may be particularly volatile given our status as a relatively small
company and lack of significant revenues that could lead to wide fluctuations in our share price. You
may be unable to sell your common stock at or above your purchase price if at all, which may result in
substantial losses to you.
The market for our common shares may be characterized by significant price volatility when compared
to seasoned issuers, and we expect that our share price will be more volatile than a seasoned issuer for
the indefinite future. The potential volatility in our share price is attributable to a number of factors. First,
as noted above, our common shares may be sporadically and/or thinly traded. As a consequence of this
lack of liquidity, the trading of relatively small quantities of shares by our stockholders may
disproportionately influence the price of those shares in either direction. The price for our shares could,
for example, decline precipitously in the event that a large number of our common shares are sold on
the market without commensurate demand, as compared to a seasoned issuer that could better absorb
those sales without adverse impact on its share price. Secondly, an investment in us is a speculative or
“risky” investment due to our lack of revenues or profits to date. As a consequence of this enhanced risk,
more risk-adverse investors may, under the fear of losing all or most of their investment in the event of
negative news or lack of progress, be more inclined to sell their shares on the market more quickly and
at greater discounts than would be the case with the stock of a seasoned issuer.
Because we became public by means of a “reverse merger,” we may not be able to attract the attention
of major brokerage firm or investors in general.
Additional risks may exist since we have become public through a “reverse merger.” Securities analysts
of major brokerage firms may not provide coverage of us since there is little incentive to brokerage firms
to recommend the purchase of our common stock. No assurance can be given that brokerage firms will
want to conduct any secondary offerings on behalf of our company in the future. In addition, the SEC
has recently issued an investor bulletin warning investors about the risks of investing in companies that
enter the U.S. capital markets through a “reverse merger.” The release of such information from the SEC
may have the effect of reducing investor interest in companies, such as us, that enter the U.S. capital
markets through a “reverse merger.”
 
We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends.
We presently do not anticipate that we will pay any dividends on any of our capital stock in the
foreseeable future. The payment of dividends, if any, would be contingent upon our revenues and
earnings, if any, capital requirements, and general financial condition. The payment of any dividends
will be within the discretion of our Board of Directors. We presently intend to retain all earnings, if any, to
implement our business plan; accordingly, we do not anticipate the declaration of any dividends in the
foreseeable future.
14
Our common stock may be subject to penny stock rules, which may make it more difficult for our
stockholders to sell their common stock.
Broker-dealer practices in connection with transactions in “penny stocks” are regulated by certain penny
stock rules adopted by the SEC.  Penny stocks generally are equity securities with a price of less than
$5.00 per share.  The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a purchase or sale of a penny
stock not otherwise exempt from the rules, to deliver to the customer a standardized risk disclosure
document that provides information about penny stocks and the risks in the penny stock market.  The
broker-dealer also must provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock,
the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction, and monthly account
statements showing the market value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account.  In addition,
the penny stock rules generally require that prior to a transaction in a penny stock the broker-dealer
make a special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and
receive the purchaser’s written agreement to the transaction.  These disclosure requirements may have
the effect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary market for a stock that becomes
subject to the penny stock rules.
 
Volatility in our common stock price may subject us to securities litigation.
The market for our common stock is characterized by significant price volatility when compared to
seasoned issuers, and we expect that our share price will continue to be more volatile than a seasoned
issuer for the indefinite future. In the past, plaintiffs have often initiated securities class action litigation
against a company following periods of volatility in the market price of its securities. We may, in the
future, be the target of similar litigation. Securities litigation could result in substantial costs and
liabilities and could divert management’s attention and resources.
We may need additional capital, and the sale of additional shares or other equity securities could result
in additional dilution to our stockholders.
As of the date of this prospectus, we believe that our current cash and cash equivalents and anticipated
cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for the near future. We
may, however, require additional cash resources due to changed business conditions or other future
developments, including any investments or acquisitions we may decide to pursue. If our resources are
insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements, we will seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or
obtain a credit facility. The sale of additional equity securities could result in additional dilution to our
stockholders. The incurrence of additional indebtedness would result in increased debt service
obligations and could result in operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. We
cannot assure you that financing will be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
We have a substantial number of authorized common shares available for future issuance that could
cause dilution of our stockholders’ interest and adversely impact the rights of holders of our common
stock.
We have a total of 3,000,000,000 shares of common stock authorized for issuance.  As of August
17, 2012, we had 2,920,895,362 shares of common stock available for issuance.  We have reserved
5,720,000 shares for conversion of our outstanding notes and, 2,860,000 shares for issuance upon the
exercise of outstanding warrants.  We may seek financing that could result in the issuance of additional
shares of our capital stock and/or rights to acquire additional shares of our capital stock. We may also
make acquisitions that result in issuances of additional shares of our capital stock.  Those additional
issuances of capital stock would result in a significant reduction of your percentage interest in us. 
Furthermore, the book value per share of our common stock may be reduced. This reduction would
occur if the exercise price of any issued warrants, the conversion price of any convertible notes is lower
than the book value per share of our common stock at the time of such exercise or conversion.
The addition of a substantial number of shares of our common stock into the market or by the registration
of any of our other securities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, may significantly and
negatively affect the prevailing market price for our common stock.  The future sales of shares of our
common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding warrants may have a depressive effect on the
market price of our common stock, as such warrants would be more likely to be exercised at a time
when the price of our common stock is greater than the exercise price. 
 
 
15
The 11,580,000 shares of our common stock registered for resale by this prospectus may adversely
affect the market price of our common stock.
 
As of August 17, 2012, there were 79,104,638 shares of our common stock were issued and
outstanding.  This prospectus registers for resale 2,995,000 shares of our common stock, 5,720,000
shares that may be issued if the convertible notes are converted to shares of our common stock without
interest and registers for resale and 2,860,000 shares of common stock which may be issued upon
exercise of warrants held by the selling stockholders. Assuming all convertible notes are converted and
all warrants were exercised, the aggregated number of shares registered for resale by means of this
prospectus, or 11,575,000 shares, would represent 14.64% of our then issued and outstanding common
stock.
 
We are unable to predict the potential effect that sales into the market of up to 11,575,000 shares may
have on the then prevailing market price of our common stock.  On August 17, 2012, the last reported
closing price of our common stock on the OTCQB was $0.04.  Our shares have only had trading activity
since December 2009. It is likely that market sales of the 11,575,000 shares offered for resale pursuant
to this prospectus (or for those sales even if they do not actually occur) may have the effect of
depressing the market price of our common stock.  As a result, the potential resale and possible
fluctuations in trading volume of such a substantial amount of our stock may affect the share price
negatively beyond our control.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus includes “forward-looking statements.”  Forward-looking statements are not statements
of historical fact but rather reflect our current expectations, estimates and predictions about future results
and events.  These statements may use words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,”
“intend,” “predict,” “project” and similar expressions as they relate to us or our management.  When we
make forward-looking statements, we are basing them on our management’s beliefs and assumptions,
using information currently available to us.  These forward-looking statements are subject to risks,
uncertainties and assumptions, including but not limited to, risks, uncertainties and assumptions
discussed in this prospectus.  Factors that can cause or contribute to these differences include those
described under the headings “Risk Factors” and “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations.” These forward looking statements include, but are not limited to,
statements regarding the following: growth opportunities and increasing market share, earnings
estimates, future financial performance and other matters.  Although we believe that the expectations
contained in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, you cannot be assured that these
expectations will prove correct.
 
If one or more of these or other risks or uncertainties materialize, or if our underlying assumptions prove
to be incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those projected.  Any forward-looking statements
you read in this prospectus reflect our current views with respect to future events and are subject to
these and other risks, uncertainties and assumptions relating to our operations, results of operations,
growth strategy and liquidity.  All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to
us or individuals acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.  You
should specifically consider the factors identified in this prospectus which would cause actual results to
differ before making an investment decision.  We are under no duty to update any of the forward-looking
statements after the date of this prospectus or to conform these statements to actual results.
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of the shares of common stock offered under this
prospectus by the selling security holders.  Rather, the selling security holders will receive those
proceeds directly.
 
We will, however, receive the exercise price with respect to warrants to purchase 2,860,000 shares of
our common stock, when and if exercised by the selling stockholders who hold them. If all of the
warrants are exercised at each respective exercise price for cash, we estimate our net proceeds would
be approximately $3,075,000.  However, the holders of the warrants have the option to exercise the
warrants using a “cashless” exercise, in which case we would not receive any proceeds from the
exercise of the warrants.  Each of the warrants includes a cashless exercise option, pursuant to which
the holder thereof can exercise the warrant without paying the exercise price in cash.  If the holder elects
to use this cashless exercise option, such holder will receive a fewer number of our shares than it would
have received if the exercise price were paid in cash.  The number of our shares the holder of the
warrants would receive in connection with a cashless exercise is determined in accordance with a
formula set forth in the applicable warrant.  There can be no assurance that we will receive any
payments even if all of the warrants are exercised.  Any proceeds received will be used for working
capital and other general corporate purposes.
 
 
 
16
DIVIDEND POLICY
We currently anticipate that we will not declare or pay cash dividends on our common stock in the
foreseeable future.  We will pay dividends on our common stock only if and when declared by our Board
of Directors.  The ability of our Board of Directors to declare a dividend is subject to restrictions imposed
by Nevada law.  In determining whether to declare dividends, our Board of Directors will consider these
restrictions as well as our financial condition, results of operations, working capital requirements, future
prospects and other factors it considers relevant.
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK
Market Information. Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board and OTCQB under the
symbol “ALME.”  For the period indicated, the following table sets forth the high and low bid prices per
share of common stock. These prices represent inter-dealer quotations without retail markup,
markdown, or commission and may not necessarily represent actual transactions.
 
 
Fiscal Year 2012
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
1.25     $ 0.80  
  $
0.87     $ 0.33  
  $
  $
0.37     $ 0.10  
  $  0.13     $ 0.08
High ($)
Low ($)
Fiscal Year 2011
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
1.73     $ 0.96  
  $
1.27     $ 0.90  
  $
1.76     $ 1.00  
  $
  $  1.73     $ 1.01
The approximate number of stockholders of record at August 17, 2012 was 25.   The number of
stockholders of record does not include beneficial owners of our common stock, whose shares are held
in the names of various dealers, clearing agencies, banks, brokers and other fiduciaries.
DILUTION
Investors in this offering will be subject to increased dilution upon the conversion of outstanding
convertible promissory notes, the conversion of outstanding convertible debentures and the exercise of
outstanding warrants. As of August 17, 2012, our current outstanding convertible promissory notes
represent an additional 5,720,000 shares that could be issued in the future and outstanding stock
warrants represent an additional 2,860,000 shares that could be issued in the future.
17
The following table sets forth information concerning the selling shareholders including:
SELLING SHAREHOLDERS
1.  the number of shares owned by the selling shareholders prior to this offering;
2.  the total number of shares that are to be offered by the selling shareholders;
3.  the total number of shares of common stock that will be owned by the selling shareholders upon
completion of the offering; and
4.  the percentage of common stock that will be owned by the selling shareholders upon completion
of the offering if all of the offered shares are sold by the selling shareholders.
The shares offered for sale constitute all of the shares known to us to be beneficially owned by the
selling shareholders. The selling shareholders have no position or office with us, nor any material
relationship with us, except as specified below and in the Range Agreement and related agreements
described in the section entitled Description of Business. The shares of common stock being offered
under this prospectus may be offered for sale from time to time during the period the registration
statement of which this prospectus is a part remains effective, by or for the accounts of the selling
security holders listed below.
Name of Selling Security
Holder
Amount of
Shares of
Common Stock
Owned by
Selling Security
Holder Before
the Offering
Amount of Shares
of Common Stock
to be Offered by the
Selling Security
Holder
Amount of Shares
of Common Stock
Owned by Selling
Security Holder
After the Offering
Percentage of
Common Stock
Owned if all of
the Offered
Shares Are
Sold(4)(5)
0
6,889,353
9,884,353
2,995,000
0%
8.7%
8,580,000 (3)
8,580,000 (3)
Eurasian Capital Partners
Limited  (1)
Range Kentucky Holdings,
LLC(2)
 
(1)           Geoffrey Long has sole power to vote and dispose of the securities beneficially owned by
Eurasian Capital Partners Limited.
 
(2)           Range Exploration Partners LLC has sole power to vote and dispose of the securities
beneficially owned by Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC. William Byrd, Frode Aschim and Petter Hagland
are managers of Range Exploration Partners LLC and each report shared dispositive voting power as to
the 9,884,353 shares of common stock.  Each of Messrs. Byrd, Aschim and Hagland disclaim their
beneficial ownership of the common stock except to the extent of their pecuniary interest therein.
 
(3)           Includes: (i) 5,720,000 shares issuable upon conversion of senior secured convertible
promissory notes; (ii) 2,000,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of warrants with an exercise price of
$1.00 per share, and (iii) 860,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of warrants with an exercise price
of $1.25 per share, and assumes conversion of all senior secured convertible promissory notes and
exercise of all warrants and sale of all resulting shares of common stock.
 
(4)           We do not know when or in what amounts the selling security holders may offer shares for sale.
The stockholders may not sell any or all of the shares offered by this prospectus. Because the
stockholders may offer all or some of the shares pursuant to this offering, and because there are
currently no agreements, arrangements or understandings with respect to the sale of any of the shares,
we cannot estimate the number of the shares that will be held by the stockholders after completion of the
offering. However, for purposes of this table, we have assumed that, after completion of the offering,
none of the shares covered by this prospectus will be held by the stockholders.
 
(5)           Based on 79,104,638 shares of our common stock outstanding as of August 17, 2012.
18
Private Placements
On November 18, 2009, we entered into a Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement with Eurasian
Capital Partners Limited, whereby Eurasian Capital Partners Limited agreed to lend up to $2,000,000 to
us in multiple installments in exchange for senior secured convertible promissory notes with a
conversion price of $0.50 per share and five-year warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an
exercise price of $1.00 per share in the amount of each installment.  The notes are due on November
18, 2012, or upon default, whichever is earlier, and bear interest at the annual rate of 8%.  As of the date
of this prospectus, we have issued senior secured convertible promissory notes in the amount of
$2,000,000 and 2,000,000 warrants pursuant to the Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement.  We are
registering 4,000,000 shares issuable upon conversion of senior secured convertible promissory notes
and 2,000,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of warrants with an exercise price of $1.00 per share.
On April 12, 2011, we entered into a Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement with Eurasian Capital
Partners Limited, whereby Eurasian Capital Partners Limited agreed to lend up to $2,400,000 to us in
multiple installments in exchange for senior secured convertible promissory notes with a conversion
price of $1.00 per share and five-year warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an exercise price
of $1.00 per share in the amount of each installment.  The notes are due on April 12, 2014 or upon
default, whichever is earlier, and bear interest at the annual rate of 8%.  The notes also provide for
downside protection such that the conversion price will be adjusted downward to the price per share
received by us in a Dilutive Issuance (as defined in the Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement). As of
the date of this prospectus, we have issued senior secured convertible promissory notes in the amount
of $860,000 and 860,000 warrants pursuant to the Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement.  We are
registering 1,720,000 shares issuable upon conversion of senior secured convertible promissory notes
assuming an adjusted conversion price of $0.50 and 860,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of
warrants with an exercise price of $1.25 per share.
On April 12, 2011, we entered into a Membership Interest Purchase and Sale Agreement (the “Range
Agreement”) with Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC, a Wyoming limited liability company (“Range”),
pursuant to which we acquired all of the membership interests in each of Range’s wholly-owned
subsidiaries KYTX Oil and Gas, LLC, KYTX Pipeline, LLC, and KYTX Drilling Company, LLC.  In
exchange for those membership interests, we paid $400,000 to Range in cash and issued 8,500,000
shares of our common stock, valued at $6,375,000 or $0.75 per share, to Range.  
 
On October 12, 2011, we satisfied the downside price protection provision of the Additional Shares
Agreement dated April 12, 2011 with Range and issued Range an additional 1,389,353 shares of our
common stock.
 
 
 
19
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Each Selling Shareholder (the “Selling Shareholders”) of the securities and any of their pledgees,
assignees and successors-in-interest may, from time to time, sell any or all of their securities covered
hereby on the [principal Trading Market] or any other stock exchange, market or trading facility on which
the securities are traded or in private transactions.  These sales may be at fixed or negotiated prices.  A
Selling Shareholder may use any one or more of the following methods when selling securities:
·  ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer solicits purchasers;
·  block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the securities as agent but may position
and resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
·  purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by the broker-dealer for its account;
·  an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
·  privately negotiated transactions;
·  settlement of short sales entered into after the effective date of the registration statement of which
this prospectus is a part;
·  in transactions through broker-dealers that agree with the Selling Shareholders to sell a specified
number of such securities at a stipulated price per security;
·  through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transactions, whether through an
options exchange or otherwise;
·  a combination of any such methods of sale; or
·  any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
The Selling Shareholders may also sell securities under Rule 144 under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended (the “Securities Act”), if available, rather than under this prospectus.
 
Broker-dealers engaged by the Selling Shareholders may arrange for other brokers-dealers to
participate in sales.  Broker-dealers may receive commissions or discounts from the Selling
Shareholders (or, if any broker-dealer acts as agent for the purchaser of securities, from the purchaser)
in amounts to be negotiated, but, except as set forth in a supplement to this Prospectus, in the case of an
agency transaction not in excess of a customary brokerage commission in compliance with FINRA Rule
2440; and in the case of a principal transaction a markup or markdown in compliance with FINRA IM-
2440.
 
In connection with the sale of the securities or interests therein, the Selling Shareholders may enter into
hedging transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions, which may in turn engage in
short sales of the securities in the course of hedging the positions they assume.  The Selling
Shareholders may also sell securities short and deliver these securities to close out their short positions,
or loan or pledge the securities to broker-dealers that in turn may sell these securities.  The Selling
Shareholders may also enter into option or other transactions with broker-dealers or other financial
institutions or create one or more derivative securities which require the delivery to such broker-dealer
or other financial institution of securities offered by this prospectus, which securities such broker-dealer
or other financial institution may resell pursuant to this prospectus (as supplemented or amended to
reflect such transaction).
 
The Selling Shareholders and any broker-dealers or agents that are involved in selling the securities
may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act in connection with such
sales.  In such event, any commissions received by such broker-dealers or agents and any profit on the
resale of the securities purchased by them may be deemed to be underwriting commissions or
discounts under the Securities Act.  Each Selling Shareholder has informed us that it does not have any
written or oral agreement or understanding, directly or indirectly, with any person to distribute the
securities. In no event shall any broker-dealer receive fees, commissions and markups which, in the
aggregate, would exceed eight percent (8%).
20
We are required to pay certain fees and expenses incurred by us incident to the registration of the
securities.  We have agreed to indemnify the Selling Shareholders against certain losses, claims,
damages and liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
 
Because Selling Shareholders may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities
Act, they will be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act including Rule 172
thereunder.  In addition, any securities covered by this prospectus which qualify for sale pursuant to
Rule 144 under the Securities Act may be sold under Rule 144 rather than under this prospectus. The
Selling Shareholders have advised us that there is no underwriter or coordinating broker acting in
connection with the proposed sale of the resale securities by the Selling Shareholders.
 
We agreed to keep this prospectus effective until the earlier of (i) the date on which the securities may
be resold by the Selling Shareholders without registration and without regard to any volume or manner-
of-sale limitations by reason of Rule 144, without the requirement for us to be in compliance with the
current public information under Rule 144 under the Securities Act or any other rule of similar effect or
(ii) all of the securities have been sold pursuant to this prospectus or Rule 144 under the Securities Act
or any other rule of similar effect.  The resale securities will be sold only through registered or licensed
brokers or dealers if required under applicable state securities laws. In addition, in certain states, the
resale securities covered hereby may not be sold unless they have been registered or qualified for sale
in the applicable state or an exemption from the registration or qualification requirement is available and
is complied with.
 
Under applicable rules and regulations under the Exchange Act, any person engaged in the distribution
of the resale securities may not simultaneously engage in market making activities with respect to the
common stock for the applicable restricted period, as defined in Regulation M, prior to the
commencement of the distribution.  In addition, the Selling Shareholders will be subject to applicable
provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder, including Regulation M, which
may limit the timing of purchases and sales of securities of the common stock by the Selling
Shareholders or any other person.  We will make copies of this prospectus available to the Selling
Shareholders and have informed them of the need to deliver a copy of this prospectus to each purchaser
at or prior to the time of the sale (including by compliance with Rule 172 under the Securities Act).
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
Common Stock.  Our authorized capital stock consists of 3,000,000,000 common shares, par value
$.001 per share. On August 17, 2012, there were 79,104,638 common shares issued and outstanding.
 
Our common stock is the only class of voting securities issued and outstanding.  Holders of our common
shares are entitled to one vote for each share held of record on all matters submitted to a vote of
stockholders.  Holders of our common shares do not have cumulative voting rights.
 
The holders of our common shares are entitled to dividends when and if declared by our Board of
Directors from legally available funds.  The holders of our common shares are also entitled to share pro
rata in any distribution to stockholders upon our liquidation or dissolution. Our Board of Directors’ ability
to declare a dividend is subject to restrictions imposed by Nevada law.  In determining whether to
declare dividends, the Board of Directors will consider these restrictions as well as our financial
condition, results of operations, working capital requirements, future prospects and other factors it
considers relevant.
 
Warrants.  As of August 17, 2012, we had the following outstanding warrants that were exercisable for
approximately 2,860,000 shares of common stock:
·Warrants to purchase 2,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per
share, of which shares issuable upon exercise of these warrants are included in this prospectus.
·Warrants to purchase 860,000 of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share, of
which shares issuable upon exercise of these warrants are included in this prospectus.
21
Stock Split. In December 2009, we effected a 30-for-1 stock split of our common stock. All share
numbers presented in this filing have been adjusted to reflect the stock split.
 
Dividend Policy. We have never declared or paid a cash dividend on our capital stock. We do not
expect to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. We currently intend to
retain our earnings, if any, for use in our business. Any dividends declared in the future will be at the
discretion of our Board of Directors.
 
Transfer Agent and Registrar.   The transfer agent and registrar for our common stock is Island Stock
Transfer.  Its telephone number is (727) 289-0010.
 
Securities Authorized For Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans. As of April 30, 2012, we had no
compensation plans under which our equity securities were authorized for issuance.
INTEREST OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
No “expert” or our “counsel” was hired on a contingent basis, or will receive a direct or indirect interest in
us, except as specified below, or was a promoter, underwriter, voting trustee, director, officer, or
employee of the company, at any time prior to the filing of this registration statement.  M2 Law
Professional Corporation, our legal counsel, owns 1,900,000 shares of our common stock.
BUSINESS
Item 1.  Description of Business.
 
Our Background. Alamo Energy Corp. (“Alamo,” “We” or the “Company”), formerly Green Irons Holdings
Corp., was incorporated in the State of Nevada on March 29, 2006 as to conduct a business in the
golfing industry. On November 18, 2009, we entered into an Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement
(“Asset Purchase Agreement”) with Alamo Oil Limited (“Alamo Oil”), pursuant to which we acquired
certain oil and gas assets from Alamo Oil (“Asset Purchase”).  Following the closing of the Asset
Purchase Agreement and pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger”), effective as of
November 19, 2009, we merged our newly formed and wholly-owned subsidiary into us, pursuant to
which we changed our name to Alamo Energy Corp.  
 
As a result of the Asset Purchase, we changed management, entered the oil and gas business, and
ceased all activity in our former business. We are focused on exploration, acquisition, development,
production and sale of crude oil and natural gas primarily from exploration and production areas within
North America and the United Kingdom. We are qualified to do business in the State of Texas as “Texas
Alamo Energy Corp.” We have not undergone bankruptcy, receivership, or any similar proceeding.
 
Our Business.  We are an oil and gas company led by an experienced management team and focused
on exploration, production and development of oil and natural gas within North America and the United
Kingdom. Our business plan is to acquire oil and gas properties for exploration, appraisal and
development with the intent to bring the projects to feasibility at which time we will either contract out the
operations or joint venture the project with qualified interested parties.  Our main priority will be given to
projects with near term cash flow potential, although consideration will be given to projects that may not
be as advanced from a technical standpoint but demonstrate the potential for significant upside.
22
In the United States, we have focused on the Appalachian Basin with an operation base in Gray,
Kentucky.  We are the operator of our wells in Knox County, Kentucky. We also own working interests in
properties located in Texas and West Virginia where we are not the operator.  In the United Kingdom,
we have focused on the Weald Basin in the South of England.  We currently have proved reserves in
the States of Texas, Kentucky and West Virginia.
 
The following is a description of our oil and gas interests and operations in Kentucky:
KYTX Interests. Our operations in Kentucky increased substantially in April 2011, with our acquisition of
all of the membership interests of KYTX Oil and Gas, LLC, KYTX Pipeline, LLC, and KYTX Drilling
Company, LLC from Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC (“Range”). The acquired interests include: (i) 71
wells located on approximately 4,040 acres in Kentucky, all of which are held by production, (ii) a 23-
mile pipeline network capable of handling up to 9,000,000 cubic feet per day and (iii) drilling equipment
including one drilling rig, one service rig and additional well-servicing equipment (collectively, the
“KYTX Interests”). As of the date of this Report, approximately 14 of the 71 wells acquired have been
drilled but require further work to be completed and commence production.  We have devoted a
significant portion of our operations to the development of the KYTX Interests and other assets in the
southern Appalachian basin.
 
Taylor TDS Five Well Program. In March 2010, we entered into an operating agreement ("Operating
Agreement") with Boardman Energy Partners, LLC (“Boardman”), for the purchase of participation rights
with regard to Boardman’s operation of five wells in the Taylor TDS Five Well Program ("Program")
totaling approximately 55 gross acres located on the H.V. In conjunction with the Operating Agreement,
we entered into a Subscription and Customer Agreement (“Subscription Agreement”) with Third Coast
Energy & Development, LLC, (“Third Coast”) as consideration for our participation in the Operating
Agreement, and made a cash payment to Third Coast in the amount of $303,986.  We purchased eight
Units at the rate of $37,996 per Unit, or a total of $303,986, which means we own a 16% working interest
and 12% net revenue interest in the Program. Taylor Lease in the Middle Eastern section of the
Gradyville Quadrangle, Adair County, Kentucky, for the purpose of oil and gas exploration and
development. Boardman is the operator of the project with full control of all operations. Work on the
wells in the Taylor TDS Five Well Program commenced in June 2010. The wells were not completed
because the quantities of oil discovered were non-commercial.
The following is a description of our oil and gas interests and operations in the United Kingdom:
 
Aimwell Agreement. In January 2010, we entered into a letter agreement (the “Participation
Agreement”) with Aimwell Energy Limited, a corporation based in the United Kingdom (“Aimwell”), for
the participation rights with regard to Aimwell’s license to operation certain oil and gas properties
located on approximately 400 square kilometers in the United Kingdom (the “UK License”).  Pursuant to
the agreement, Aimwell assigned a 90% interest in the UK License to us in exchange for our payment of
1 pound sterling to Aimwell and Alamo was named the operator of the assets subject to the
license.  Aimwell retained a 10% interest in the license, though we will pay Aimwell’s proportional costs
of operating the license until a field development plan is approved, and after which, the parties will
share their costs in proportion to their ownership percentage interests in the license.   As of the date of
this Report, pre-existing seismic lines have been procured and reprocessed and technical evaluations
of the blocks have been made and an access/route survey has been conducted for a planned two
dimensional seismic survey.
On November 14, 2011, we entered into and closed a Farmout Agreement (the “Farmout Agreement”)
with Northdown Energy Limited, a U.K. corporation (“Northdown”) pursuant to which we assigned to
Northdown 45% of our working interest in the U.K. License in exchange for the purchase price of
£60,000.   The Farmout Agreement was approved by the United Kingdom Department of Energy and
Climate Control (the “DECC”).  In connection with the Farmout Agreement, we entered into and closed a
Novation and Amendment of Participation Agreement with Northdown and Aimwell (the “Amendment
Agreement”) amending the Participation Agreement such that Northdown will pay half of Aimwell’s
percentage interest share of all costs, expenses, liabilities and obligations arising from oil operations in
the licensed area which are attributable to us pursuant to the Participation Agreement.  We also entered
into and closed a Joint Operating Agreement with Northbound and Aimwell (the “Joint Operating
Agreement”) pursuant to which we will be the sole operator of the joint oil operations in the licensed
area under the overall supervision and control of the Joint Operating Committee, as defined in the Joint
Operating Agreement.
23
The following is a description of our oil and gas interests and operations in Texas, West Virginia and
Tennessee:
 
WEJCO Agreement. In April 2010, we entered into a participation agreement with WEJCO, Inc., located
in Texas (“WEJCO”), to acquire participation rights in WEJCO’s working interest in oil, gas and mineral
leases represented by a leasehold estate and well on approximately 453 gross acres in Brown County,
Texas, in exchange for our cash payment of $18,050 and the future payment of a proportional share of
drilling and completion costs in the project.  The initial cash payment of $18,050 represents twenty
percent (20%) of the total $90,250 cost of the geologic, land and seismic costs attributed to the well
project in exchange for an assignment of WEJCO’s interest in the project to us.  The subject of the
agreement is the Duffer Re-entry Prospect, Hubbard H-1 well, located in Brown County, Texas, and the
project involves re-entering the well or drilling a substitute well if the re-entry fails.  The agreement also
provides for us and WEJCO to enter into an operating agreement whereby WEJCO will be designated
the operator of the well, but that we will receive an interest in the net revenue of the project, as set forth
in an exhibit attached to the Agreement. Work on the Hubbard H-1 well commenced in July 2010.  The
well produced small quantities of commercial production and was subsequently re-completed to the
Duffer zone in March 2012.  Additionally, we participated in drilling three shallow oil wells on the
acreage adjacent to the Hubbard H-1 well location.  The wells were successful and are producing as of
the date of this Report.  
 
Valentine Agreement. In May 2010, we entered into a participation agreement with Allied Energy, Inc.
(“Allied”), pursuant to which we acquired an undivided 50% working interest in the Florence Valentine
Lease and a working interest and net revenue interest in the Valentine #1 re-entry well. This well is
located on approximately 115 acres in Ritchie County, West Virginia within the Burning Springs
Anticline. Allied is the operator of the project with full control of all operations. We paid the total drilling
and completion costs of $153,500 to earn in the Valentine #1 re-entry well and the Florence Valentine
lease before a payout working interest of 70% and net revenue interest of 59.08 (70% x 84.4%) and an
after payout working interest of 50% and net revenue interest of 42.2% (50% x 84.4).  Work on the
Valentine #1 re-entry well commenced in June 2010 and is currently producing as of date of this Report.
 
Dillon Agreement. On August 4, 2010, we entered into a participation agreement with Allied, pursuant to
which we acquired an undivided fifty percent (50%) working interest in the M. Dillon Lease and a
working interest and net revenue interest in the Dillon #1 re-entry Well. This well is located on
approximately 204 acres in Pleasants County, West Virginia. Allied is the operator of the project with full
control of all operations. We paid the total drilling and completion costs of $179,125 to earn in the Dillon
#1 re-entry well and M. Dillon Lease a before payout working interest of seventy percent (70%) and net
revenue interest of 59.08 (70% x 84.4%) and an after payout working interest of fifty percent (50%) and
net revenue interest of 42.2% (50% x 84.4%).  The participation agreement also provides that we have
the option to participate in the re-entry of sixteen additional wells owned by Allied in West Virginia,
including, but not limited to, the well WVIC D-12 as described below.
On October 15, 2010, we entered into an amendment to the participation agreement (“Amendment
Agreement”) with Allied, the practical effect of which is that we replaced our participation in the Dillon #1
well with participation in the Goose Creek #4 well in Ritchie County, West Virginia.  Specifically, the
Amendment Agreement amended the following: (i) the Operating Agreement with respect to the
Florence Valentine Lease, (ii) the Participation Agreement with respect to the reentry of the Dillon #1
well dated August 2, 2010, and (iii) the Joint Operating Agreement with respect to the M. Dillon Lease in
Ritchie County, West Virginia dated August 2, 2010.  The Amendment amends the Valentine JOA and
the Dillon JOA to include Exhibit C which provides the accounting procedures for the operations.  The
Amendment also amends the Participation Agreement by replacing all references of the Dillon #1 well
in Pleasant County, West Virginia, to the Goose Creek #4 well (API #47-082-06942) in Ritchie County,
West Virginia.  The Amendment also amends the Dillon JOA by replacing all references of the Dillon #1
well in Pleasant County, West Virginia, to the Goose Creek well #4 (API #47-082-06942). The
Amendment also amends the Participation Agreement and the Dillon JOA to delete the Exhibit A to
those agreements and replace it with the Exhibit A attached to the Amendment as Appendix 2. This
Goose Creek #4 well is included in the Eco Forrest Lease, which is located on approximately 493 acres
in Ritchie County, West Virginia.
On December 15, 2010, we exercised an option to participate in the recompletion of the well WVIC D-12
with Allied, pursuant to the Participation Agreement with Allied, as amended in the Amendment
Agreement on October 15, 2010. The well WVIC D-12 is included in the Eco Forrest Lease, which is
located on approximately 493 acres in Ritchie County, West Virginia. Allied is the operator of the project
with full control of all operations.  We are obligated to pay the total drilling and completion costs of
$157,575 to earn in the well WVIC D-12 and Eco Forrest Lease a before payout working interest of
seventy percent (70%) and net revenue interest of 59.08 (70% x 84.4%) and an after payout working
interest of fifty percent (50%) and net revenue interest of 42.2% (50% x 84.4).  Preparatory work
completion, including the preparation of an 8,000bbl containment pit, installation of two 100bbl oil
storage tanks and delivery of 3,000 ft of production tubing and rods and the running of logs in
preparation for a squeeze cement job on the well WVIC D-12 commenced. However, upon further
evaluation, the integrity of the casing was in doubt and the squeeze cement job has been
postponed.  All funds advanced by us are being returned.
24
Berry Agreement. On September 3, 2010, we entered into a Subscription Agreement (the “Sub
Agreement”) with Berry Resources, Inc. (“Berry”), to purchase 6.5 units of the Berry Prospect #22-A,
which includes two (2) wells to be drilled on approximately 300 acres in North Central, Pickett County,
Tennessee, in exchange for our cash payment of $97,500.  Each unit is equal to approximately 3.33%
working interest or approximately 2.33% net revenue interest in each of the two (2) wells to be drilled in
North Central, Pickett County, Tennessee.  The Sub Agreement also provides for Berry and us to enter
into an operating agreement whereby Berry will be designated the operator of the well.  Work on the
Berry Prospect commenced in September 2010.  The first well did not encounter hydrocarbons in
commercial quantities and as of the date of this Report, no additional activity in the Berry Prospect is
planned.
  
The Lozano Lease - Frio County, Western Gulf Province, Texas. In September 2009, Alamo Oil
acquired certain oil, gas and mineral leases totaling approximately 110 gross acres, located in Frio
County, Texas (the “Lozano Lease”).  As a result of the Asset Purchase, we owned a seventy-five
percent (75%) working interest in the Lozano Lease.  On November 4, 2011, we sold all of our working
interest in the Lozano Lease and all wellbores and personal property related thereto to the operator of
the Lozano Lease in exchange for $160,000 paid in cash.  We retained all sales proceeds attributable to
the sales of oil and gas produced from the wells prior to October 1, 2011, and we have no right to any
sales of oil and gas produced from the wells after October 1, 2011.
 
Business Strategy. Our strategy is to increase shareholder value through strategic acquisitions,
appraisal drilling and development. We are focused on the acquisition, appraisal development and
exploitation of oil and gas properties.  We are also searching for possible joint-ventures and new
prospects that fit our strategic focus.  In the US, we have focused on the Appalachian Basin.  In the UK,
we have focused on the Weald Basin in the South of England.
 
Competition. We compete with other companies for financing and for the acquisition of new oil and gas
properties. Many of the oil and gas exploration companies with whom we compete have greater
financial and technical resources than those available to us. Accordingly, these competitors may be
able to spend greater amounts on acquisitions of oil and gas properties of merit, on exploration of their
properties and on development of their properties. In addition, they may be able to afford more
geological and other technical expertise in the targeting and exploration of oil and gas properties. This
competition could result in competitors having properties of greater quality and interest to prospective
investors who may finance additional exploration and development. This competition could have an
adverse impact on our ability to achieve the financing necessary for us to conduct further exploration of
our acquired properties.
 
We will also compete with other junior oil and gas exploration companies for financing from a limited
number of investors that are prepared to make investments in junior oil and gas exploration companies.
The presence of competing junior oil and gas exploration companies may have an adverse impact on
our ability to raise additional capital in order to fund our exploration programs if investors are of the view
that investments in competitors are more attractive based on the merit of the oil and gas properties under
investigation and the price of the investment offered to investors.
 
We also compete with other junior and senior oil and gas companies for available resources, including,
but not limited to, professional exploration and production, geological and engineering personnel
services and supplies, for the drilling completion and production of hydrocarbon resources.
 
Intellectual Property. We do not presently own any copyrights, patents or trademarks. We own the
Internet domain name www.alamoenergycorp.com. Under current domain name registration practices,
no one else can obtain an identical domain name, but someone might obtain a similar name, or the
identical name with a different suffix, such as “.org”, or with a country designation. The regulation of
domain names in the United States and in foreign countries is subject to change, and we could be
unable to prevent third parties from acquiring domain names that infringe or otherwise decrease the
value of our domain names.
 
Governmental Regulation. Our oil and gas operations are subject to various federal, state and local
governmental regulations.  Matters subject to regulation include discharge permits for drilling
operations, drilling and abandonment bonds, reports concerning operations, the spacing of wells,
pooling of properties and taxation. From time to time, regulatory agencies have imposed price controls
and limitations on production by restricting the rate of flow of oil and gas wells below actual production
capacity in order to conserve supplies of oil and gas. The production, handling, storage, transportation
and disposal of oil and gas, by-products thereof, and other substances and materials produced or used
in connection with oil and gas operations are also subject to regulation under federal, state and local
laws and regulations relating primarily to the protection of human health and the environment. To date,
we have incurred no cost related to complying with these laws, for remediation of existing environmental
contamination and for plugging and reclamation of our oil and gas exploration property. The
requirements imposed by such laws and regulations are frequently changed and subject to
interpretation, and we are unable to predict the ultimate cost of compliance with these requirements or
their effect on our operations.
25
Our Subsidiaries. We own and operate the following wholly owned subsidiaries: KYTX Oil and Gas,
LLC, KYTX Pipeline, LLC, and KYTX Drilling Company, LLC.
 
Employees. As of August 17, 2012, we have six employees, with no significant employees other than
our officers and directors. We plan to outsource independent consultant engineers and geologists on
a part time basis to conduct the work programs on our mineral properties in order to carry out our plan of
operations.
We also have an advisory board that includes Richard Edmonson, Terry Davis and David Henderson.
We have advisory board member agreements with each of Richard Edmonson, Terry Davis and David
Henderson.
 
Facilities. Our executive offices are located at 10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300, Houston, Texas 77024,
where we occupy approximately 690 square feet of office space. We sublease our offices from Allan
Millmaker, our officer and director, in exchange for $1,000 per month on a month to month basis. We
also maintain an office in London, United Kingdom, where we occupy approximately 130 square feet of
office space, which we sublease from Philip Mann, our officer and director, in exchange for £1,500 per
month on a month to month basis.
 
Our subsidiary, KYTX Pipeline LLC, subleases an office from a stockholder (Range), a warehouse
building and a yard facility, for $1,500 per month in Gray County, Kentucky.
We believe that our current office space and facilities are sufficient to meet our current needs.
 
Internet Website. Our Internet website, which is located at www.alamoenergycorp.com, describes each
of our oil and gas projects, our management and provides additional information regarding our industry.
 
Legal Proceedings. There are no legal actions pending against us nor are any legal actions
contemplated by us at this time.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policy and Estimates. Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our financial statements, which have been
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-
going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue
recognition, accrued expenses, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. Management
bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are
believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making
judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other
sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The
most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our financial statements include
estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily
apparent from other sources. In addition, these accounting policies are described at relevant sections in
this discussion and analysis and in the notes to the financial statements included in this Registration
Statement on Form S-1.
 
Overview.  We are an oil and gas company led by an experienced management team and focused on
exploration, production and development of oil and natural gas within North America and the United
Kingdom. Our business plan is to acquire oil and gas properties for exploration, appraisal and
development with the intent to bring the projects to feasibility at which time we will either contract out the
operations or joint venture the project with qualified interested parties.  Our main priority will be given to
projects with near term cash flow potential, although consideration will be given to projects that may not
be as advanced from a technical standpoint but demonstrate the potential for significant upside.
26
In the United States, we have focus on the Appalachian Basin with an operation base in Gray,
Kentucky. We are the operator of our wells in Knox County, Kentucky.  We also own working interests in
properties located in Texas and West Virginia where we are not the operator.  In the United Kingdom,
we have focus on the Weald Basin in the South of England. We currently have proved reserves in the
States of Texas, Kentucky and West Virginia.
Our operations in Kentucky increased substantially in April 2011, with our acquisition of all of the
membership interests of KYTX Oil and Gas, LLC, KYTX Pipeline, LLC, and KYTX Drilling Company,
LLC from Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC (“Range”).  The acquired interests include: (i) 71 wells located
on approximately 4,040 acres in Kentucky, all of which are held by production, (ii) a 23-mile pipeline
network capable of handling up to 9,000,000 cubic feet per day and (iii) drilling equipment including one
drilling rig, one service rig and additional well-servicing equipment (collectively, the “KYTX
Interests”).  We have devoted a significant portion of our operations to the development of the KYTX
Interests and other assets in the southern Appalachian basin.
 
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in
conjunction with our audited financial statements for the year ended April 30, 2012 together with notes
thereto included in this Registration Statement on Form S-1.
For the year ended April 30, 2011, as compared to the year ended April 30, 2010.
Results of Operations.
Revenues.  We had oil and gas revenues of $704,938 for the year ended April 30, 2012, as compared to
oil and gas revenues of $251,337 for the year ended April 30, 2011. Those revenues were generated
from our interest in the Lozano lease and Hubbard Lease in Texas, the Valentine lease in West Virginia
and the KYTX leases in Kentucky. We expect the lease revenues from the Valentine and KYTX leases
will continue with slow decline for the foreseeable future.  Our revenues have been negatively impacted
by declining market prices of natural gas during the year ended April 30, 2012 and we expect that
natural gas prices will remain low for the foreseeable future.
To implement our business plan during the next twelve months, we need to generate increased
revenues from the KYTX properties and other interests.  Our failure to do so will hinder our ability to
increase the size of our operations and to generate additional revenues.  If we are not able to generate
additional revenues to cover our operating costs, we may not be able to expand our operations.
 
Operating Expenses.  For the year ended April 30, 2012, our total operating costs and expenses were
$2,008,489, which was comprised of lease operating costs of $100,767, production costs of $194,512,
depletion, depreciation and amortization costs of $313,236, wage related expenses of $426,736,
professional fees of $360,378 and general and administrative expenses of $612,860. By comparison,
our total operating costs and expenses were $901,256 for the year ended April 30, 2011 which was
comprised of lease operating costs of $103,331, production costs of $24,334, depletion, depreciation
and amortization costs of $26,622, wage related expenses of $207,572, professional fees of $234,451
and general and administrative expenses of $304,946.  The increases in total operating costs and
expenses from 2011 to 2012 was directly related to increases in production costs, wage related
expenses and general administrative expenses for the year ended April 30, 2012.
Operating Loss.  For the year ended April 30, 2012, our total loss from operations was $1,303,551, as
compared to a total loss from operations of $649,919 for the year ended April 30, 2011. We will continue
to incur significant general and administrative expenses, but also expect to generate increased
revenues after further developing our oil and gas assets.
 
Other Income and Expense.  For the year ended April 30, 2012, our net other expense was $1,658,924,
which was comprised of interest expense of $350,514, debt discount amortization of $1,308,765 and
other income of $355.  The total other expenses is attributed to the interest expense and debt discount
which resulted from the senior secured convertible promissory note financing.  In comparison, for the
year ended April 30, 2011, our net other expense was $1,154,250, which was comprised of interest
expense of $266,743 debt discount amortization of $903,711 and other income of $16,204.
 
 
27
Net Loss.  For the year ended April 30, 2012, our net loss was $2,962,475, as compared to a net loss of
$1,804,169 for the year ended April 30, 2011.  The significant increase in our net loss between the
comparable periods was directly related to the increase in operating expenses and net other expense
for the year ended April 30, 2012. We hope to generate additional revenues from our projects to cover
out operating costs, which will reduce our net loss in the future.  We cannot guaranty that we will be able
to generate additional revenues or, if that we do generate additional revenues, that such increased
revenues will reduce our net loss in future periods.
 
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources.  We had cash of $80,903 and accounts
receivable of $49,220 as of April 30, 2012, making our total current assets $130,123.  We also had
$6,991,119 in net property and equipment, which consists of oil and gas properties of $5,305,263,
property and equipment of $2,034,542, net of accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization of
$348,686, and goodwill of $1,394,215.  Therefore, our total assets as of April 30, 2012 were $8,515,457.
Our total liabilities were $3,140,010 as of April 30, 2012.  This was comprised of total current liabilities of
$2,364,726, represented by accounts payable and accrued expenses of $4,024 and accrued interest of
$604,472.  We had total long-term liabilities of $775,284, represented by senior secured convertible
promissory notes, net of discount of $1,147,737.  We had total stockholders’ equity of $5,375,447.  We
had no other liabilities and no long term commitments or contingencies as of April 30, 2012.
 
The following is a description of events affecting our financial condition, liquidity and capital resources
for the year ended April 30, 2012.
Eurasian Notes and Warrants.  On November 18, 2009, we entered into a note and warrant purchase
agreement (the “First Financing Agreement”) with Eurasian Capital Partners Limited (“Eurasian”),
whereby Eurasian agreed to lend up to $2,000,000 to us in multiple installments in exchange for senior
secured convertible promissory notes with a conversion price of $0.50 per share (“Notes”) and five-year
warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per share (“Warrants”) in the
amount of each installment. The Warrants expire five years from the date of the investment.  The Notes
are due on November 18, 2012, or upon default, whichever is earlier, and bear interest at the annual
rate of 8%. The Notes have an optional conversion feature by which this lender can convert the principal
and accrued interest into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $0.50 per share.
 
In connection with the First Financing Agreement, we issued the following Notes and Warrants to
Eurasian on the following dates:
Date of Note
November 18, 2009
February 5, 2010
March 4, 2010
March 25, 2010
April 15, 2010
July 22, 2010
August 12, 2010
August 18, 2010
September 7, 2010
September 24, 2010
December 2, 2010
December 15, 2010
February 8, 2011
March 1, 2011
April 12, 2011
Total
Amount
of Note
$334,905
$80,000
$300,000
  $100,000
  $250,000
  $175,000
 $ 25,000
$150,000
 $ 70,000
  $40,000
  $25,000
  $75,000
  $100,000
 $160,000
 $115,095
 $2,000,000
Number of Warrants
334,905
80,000
300,000
100,000
250,000
175,000
25,000
150,000
70,000
40,000
25,000
75,000
100,000
160,000
115,095
2,000,000
28
On April 12, 2011, we entered into a second Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement with Eurasian
(“Second Financing Agreement”), whereby Eurasian agreed to lend up to $2,400,000 to us multiple
installments in exchange for senior secured convertible promissory notes with a conversion price of
$1.00 per share (“New Notes”) and five-year warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an exercise
price of $1.25 per share (“New Warrants”) in the amount of each installment. The New Warrants expire
five years from the date of the investment. The New Notes are due on April 12, 2014, or upon default,
whichever is earlier, bears interest at the annual rate of 8%.  The New Notes have an optional
conversion feature by which Eurasian can convert the principal and accrued interest into shares of our
common stock at a conversion price of $1.00 per share. 
 
In connection with the Second Financing Agreement, we issued the following New Notes and New
Warrants to Eurasian on the following dates:
Date of New Note
Amount of
New Note
April 12, 2011
May 24, 2011
June 21, 2011
Total
$410,000
$50,000
$400,000
$860,000
Number of New
Warrants
410,000
50,000
400,000
860,000
Discount Debentures and Series Warrants.  On August 1, 2011, we closed a securities purchase
agreement, dated July 26, 2011 (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional
investors (the “Investors” or, individually, the “Investor”) and issued to the Investors an aggregate
principal value of approximately $1,310,621 of original issue discount 5% convertible debentures (the
“Discount Debentures” or, individually, the “Discount Debenture”) and three series of warrants, the
Series A Warrants, the Series B Warrants and the Series C Warrants, to purchase an aggregate of
2,621,241 shares of our common stock (collectively, the “Series Warrants” and the shares issuable upon
exercise of the Series Warrants, collectively, the “Series Warrant Shares”) at an exercise price of $1.25
for the Series A and C Warrants and $1.00 for the Series B Warrants. In addition, we also issued
warrants to purchase 91,743 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share to its
placement agent in connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement.  We will need to make interest
payments at the rate of 5% per annum on the Discount Debentures while they are outstanding.  These
notes are due July 29, 2013.
On November 15, 2011, one of the Investors elected to convert a portion of its outstanding Discount
Debenture into shares of our common stock.  The Investor elected to convert $5,000 of the outstanding
principal due on its Discount Debenture into 10,000 shares of our common stock, or approximately
$0.50 per share.  On November 21, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $20,000 of the
outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 40,000 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.  On November 23, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $75,000 of
the outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 150,000 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.  On November 30, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $135,300
of the outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 270,600 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.
On December 6, 2011 and January 6, 2012, we issued 64,471 shares and 78,192 shares, respectively,
to pay the interest due January 1, 2012 on the outstanding principal of the Discount Debentures to the
Investors.  These interest conversion shares were calculated by dividing the applicable interest amount
due to each Investor by the interest conversion rate of $0.1062 per share (90% of the 20-day VWAP for
the 20-day VWAP for the 20 trading days prior to January 1, 2012), pursuant to the Discount
Debentures.
On April 2, 2012, we issued 91,885 interest conversion shares and $4,250.11 in cash to pay the interest
due April 1, 2012 on the outstanding principal of the Discount Debentures to the Investors.  The interest
conversion shares were calculated by dividing the applicable interest amount due to each Investor by
the interest conversion rate of $0.1110 per share (90% of the 20-day VWAP for the 20-day VWAP for the
20 trading days prior to April 1, 2012), pursuant to the Discount Debentures.
29
Range Kentucky Holdings LLC.  On October 12, 2011, we satisfied the downside price protection
provision of the Additional Shares Agreement dated April 12, 2011 with Range and issued Range an
additional 1,389,353 shares of our common stock.
 
On December 9, 2011, we entered into an amendment to the Additional Shares Agreement dated April
12, 2011 with Range pursuant to which we agreed to extend the amount of time in which Range must
provide notice of their election to adjust the per share price of the shares received pursuant to the
Membership Interest Purchase Agreement dated April 12, 2011 from 30 days to 150 calendar days.
On April 12, 2012, we entered into an second amendment to the Additional Shares Agreement dated
April 12, 2011 with Range pursuant to which we agreed to extend the amount of time in which Range
must provide notice of their election to adjust the per share price of the shares received pursuant to the
Membership Interest Purchase Agreement dated April 12, 2011 from 150 days to 240 calendar days.   
 
Employees and Consultants.  On August 4, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an
employee and two independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us valued at $19,500,
or $0.65 per share.
On August 12, 2011, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange
for services provided to us valued at $17,000, or $0.68 per share.
On September 22, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us valued at $15,300, or $0.51 per share.
On September 22, 2011, we issued 43,207 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
consulting services provided to us valued at $22,036, or $0.51 per share.
 
On November 23, 2011, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in
exchange for services provided to us valued at $4,000 or $0.16 per share.
On November 23, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us valued at $4,800 or $0.16 per share.
On November 23, 2011, we issued 41,545 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
consulting services provided to us valued at $6,647 or $0.16 per share.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange
for services provided to us valued at $3,000 or $0.12 per share.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us valued at $3,600 or $0.12 per share.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 109,034 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
services provided to us valued at $13,084 or $0.12 per share.
On May 9, 2012, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange for
services provided to us valued at $1,750 or $0.07 per share.
30
On May 9, 2012, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two independent
contractors in exchange for services provided to us valued at $2,100 or $0.07 per share.
On May 9, 2012, we issued 161,792 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
services provided to us valued at $11,325 or $0.07 per share.
 
Other Events.  On November 15, 2011, we submitted a bid to purchase from a bankruptcy trustee
substantially all the assets of an unrelated, third party oil and gas entity.  Per the requirements of the bid
process, we placed a deposit with the trustee.  The bid process was withdrawn by the trustee and all
deposits have been returned.
On November 16, 2011, we entered into a Farm-Out Agreement with Northdown Energy ("Northdown")
to further develop our four UK onshore license blocks located in the Weald basin.  The agreement
provides that (i) Northdown obtained a 45% working interest in exchange for $93,000 paid to us, (ii) we
retained a 45% working interest and (iii) Aimwell Energy retained its 10% working interest in the
blocks.  The agreement has received approval from the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change
(DECC).
On November 4, 2011, we sold all of our working interest in the Lozano Lease, which totals
approximately 110 gross acres located in Frio County, Texas, and all wellbores (“Wells”) and personal
property related thereto to the operator of the Lozano Lease in exchange for $160,000 paid in cash.  We
retained all sales proceeds attributable to the sales of oil and gas produced from the Wells prior to
October 1, 2011, and we have no right to any sales of oil and gas produced from the Wells after October
1, 2011.
On December 2, 2011, we purchased a 20% working interest in three wells, including the surface and
downhole equipment associated with the wells, in Brown County, Texas in exchange for $58,400.
 
As of April 30, 2012, we had cash of $80,903.  As discussed above, we received $1,114,000 in
proceeds from sales of debentures and warrants in July 2011.  We estimate that our cash on hand will
not be sufficient for us to continue our current operations for the next twelve months. We will need
additional cash to expand our operations, including the development of the KYTX Interests. Our forecast
for the period for which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations involves risks
and uncertainties and actual results could differ as a result of a number of factors. In addition to
generating revenues from our current operations, we will need to raise additional capital to expand our
operations to the point at which we are able to operate profitably.
We have been, and intend to continue, working toward identifying and obtaining new sources of
financing. No assurances can be given that we will be successful in obtaining additional financing in the
future.  Any future financing that we may obtain may cause significant dilution to existing stockholders.
Any debt financing or other financing of securities senior to common stock that we are able to obtain will
likely include financial and other covenants that will restrict our flexibility. Any failure to comply with
these covenants would have a negative impact on our business, prospects, financial condition, results
of operations and cash flows.
If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay, scale back or eliminate portions of our
operations or to obtain funds through arrangements with strategic partners or others that may require us
to relinquish rights to certain of our assets. Accordingly, the inability to obtain such financing could result
in a significant loss of ownership and/or control of our assets and could also adversely affect our ability
to fund our continued operations and our expansion efforts with respect to the KYTX Interests.
Recent Events. On July 10, 2012, we entered into a third amendment to the Additional Shares
Agreement dated April 12, 2011 with Range pursuant to which we agreed to extend the amount of time
in which Range must provide notice of their election to adjust the per share price of the shares received
pursuant to the Membership Interest Purchase Agreement dated April 12, 2011 from 240 calendar days
to 330 calendar days.
On July 10, 2012, we participated in an oilfield equipment auction held by Kruse Energy and
Equipment.  On August 6, 2012, we received $226,796, net of all expenses, for the equipment that was
auctioned.
31
On August 1, 2012, we issued 16,724,329 shares to the Investors in exchange for all of the outstanding
Discount Debentures and Series Warrants held by the Investors. The number of shares issued in
exchange for the Discount Debentures was calculated by dividing the applicable principal and interest
due on the Discount Debentures by the conversion rate of $0.07 per share. The number of shares
issued in exchange for the Series Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the Series A
Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Discount Debentures and the Series Warrants are no
longer outstanding, and we extinguished $1,076,612.52 in principal and accrued and unpaid interest
due under the Discount Debentures and 1,344,150 shares of common stock underlying the Series
Warrants.
On August 1, 2012, we issued an aggregate of 523,483 shares of the Investors holding only Series A
Warrants in exchange for the Series A Warrants held by those Investors. The number of shares issued
in exchange for the Series A Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the Series A
Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Series A Warrants are no longer outstanding, and we
extinguished 523,483 shares of common stock underlying the Series A Warrants. 
 
During the fiscal year ending 2012, we expect that the legal and accounting costs of being a public
company will continue to impact our liquidity. We also expect to make future payments related to certain
of our oil and gas projects as discussed above. Other than the anticipated increases in legal and
accounting costs due to the reporting requirements of being a reporting company and future payments
related to certain of our oil and gas projects, we are not aware of any other known trends, events or
uncertainties, which may affect our future liquidity.
We are not currently conducting any research and development activities.  We do not anticipate
conducting such activities in the near future. In the event that we expand our operations, then we may
need to hire additional employees or independent contractors as well as purchase or lease additional
equipment. Our management believes that we do not require the services of independent contractors to
operate at our current level of activity.  However, if our level of operations increases beyond the level
that our current staff can provide, then we may need to supplement our staff in this manner.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
 
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY
 
Facilities. Our executive offices are located at 10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300, Houston, Texas 77024,
where we occupy approximately 690 square feet of office space. We sublease our offices from Allan
Millmaker, our officer and director, in exchange for $1,000 per month on a month to month basis. We
also maintain an office in London, United Kingdom, where we occupy approximately 130 square feet of
office space, which we sublease from Philip Mann, our officer and director, in exchange for £1,500 per
month on a month to month basis.
 
Our subsidiary, KYTX Pipeline LLC, subleases an office from a stockholder (Range), a warehouse
building and a yard facility, for $1,500 per month in Gray County, Kentucky.
 
We believe that our current office space and facilities are sufficient to meet our current needs.
 
A description of our oil and gas properties is included in “Item 1. Business” of this prospectus.
 
Proved Reserves.
The following reserve schedule summarizes the Company's net ownership interests in estimated
quantities of proved oil and gas reserves and changes in its proved reserves, all of which are located in
the continental United States. All reserve estimates for crude oil and natural gas were internally
prepared by the Company and estimated by Nova Resource, Inc. (“Nova”), independent petroleum
engineers.  In accordance with SEC guidelines, Nova's estimates of future net revenues from our
properties, and the PV-10 and standardized measure thereof, were determined to be economically
producible under existing economic conditions, which requires the use of the 12-month average price
for each product, calculated as the unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for
the period May 2011 through April 2012, except where such guidelines permit alternate treatment,
including the use of fixed and determinable contractual price escalations.  The Company emphasizes
that reserve estimates are inherently imprecise and that estimates of new discoveries are more
imprecise than those of currently producing oil and gas properties. Accordingly, we anticipate that these
oil and gas reserve estimates will change as future information becomes available.
 
32
The technical person at Nova is responsible for preparing the reserves estimates presented herein and
meets the requirements regarding qualifications, independence, objectivity, and confidentiality set forth
in the Standards Pertaining to the Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Gas Reserves Information
promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers. Allan Millmaker, our officer and director, acted as
the liaison with the technical person at Nova.  Mr. Millmaker's technical qualifications are described in
the section entitled Management in this prospectus.
 
Reserve Technologies.  Proved reserves are those quantities of oil and natural gas, which, by analysis
of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically
producible from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions,
operating methods, and government regulations. The term “reasonable certainty” implies a high degree
of confidence that the quantities of oil and/or natural gas actually recovered will equal or exceed the
estimate. To achieve reasonable certainty, Nova employed technologies that have been demonstrated
to yield results with consistency and repeatability. The technologies and economic data used in the
estimation of our proved reserves include, but are not limited to, well logs, geologic maps and available
down well and production data, seismic data, well test data.
 
Oil and Gas Reserve Information (Unaudited). The following reserve quantities and future net cash flow
information for our proved reserves located in the United States have been estimated as of April 30,
2012.  The determination of oil and gas reserves is based on estimates, which are highly complex and
interpretive. The estimates are subject to continuing change as additional information becomes
available.
PROVED DEVELOPED AND
UNDEVELOPED RESERVES:
 
April 30, 2010
 
Revision of previous estimates
Purchase of reserves
Extensions, discoveries, and other
additions
Sale of reserves
Production
 
April 30, 2011
 
Revision of previous estimates
Purchase of reserves
Extensions, discoveries, and other
additions
Sale of reserves
Production
 
April 30, 2012
33
Crude Oil
Natural Gas
(Bbls)
(Mcf)
16,009
- 
  
 
19,558       12,355,996
1,357     
-     
(9,286)
153,480 
- 
 
  
27,638      12,509,476 
  
18,151         (6,073,677
(5,777)       
(1,807)
4,814        10,547,460 
 
(124,216) 
  
43,019      16,859,043
8,804     
- 
10,651      1,608,975 
26,167      2,578,660
PROVED DEVELOPED RESERVES
 
April 30, 2010
April 30, 2011
April 30, 2012
Standardized Measure
 
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved oil and natural gas
reserves is as follows:
$ 71,668,651    $ 63,764,737 
   
(22,027,861 )    (15,628,515)
     (17,582,000)     (14,103,000)
   
- 
    32,058,790      34,033,222
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated
timing of cash flows
Years Ended April 30,
2011
2012
(28,454,210)     (27,184,770)
-
Standardized measure of discounted
future net cash flow related to proved
reserves
$
6,848,452
3,604,580    $
A summary of the changes in the standardized measure of discounted future new cash flow applicable
to proved oil and natural reserves is as follows:
 
Change in Standardized Measure
Balance, beginning of period
Sales of oil and gas, net
Years Ended April 30,
 
 
2011
  $  6,848,452    $ 328,686 
   
(123,672)
(539,961)
2012
Net change in prices and production costs    
   
Net change in future development costs
Extensions and discoveries
   
Revisions of previous quantity estimates
   
Previously estimated development costs
incurred
Net change in income taxes
Accretion of discount
Purchase of minerals in place
Sales of reserves
Balance, end of period
(3,863,187)    
  (841,000)      
  871,780     
  220,272
(18,886) 
 
187,002 
(28,678
580,639     
     
  448,161
- 
     
  - 
   
  - 
     
      6,504,000 
   
  - 
  $  3,604,580    $ 6,848,452
(120,576)
34
Average crude oil price per barrel
Average gas price per MCF
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows as of April 30, 2012 and 2011 was
calculated using the following Average Fiscal-Year prices:
 
 
 
 
 
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows is provided using the 12-month
unweighted arithmetic average. The oil price used as of April 30, 2012 was $88.59 per Bbl of oil and
$4.025 per Mcf of gas. Future production costs are based on year-end costs and include severance and
ad valorem taxes of approximately 4.5%. Each property that is leased by the Company is also charged
with field-level overhead in the reserve calculation. The present value of future cash inflows is based on
a 10% discount.
88.59    $ 76.180 
4.025    $
4.929
$
  $
2012
2011
The Company used discounted future net cash flows, which is calculated without deducting estimated
future income tax expenses, and the present value thereof as one measure of the value of the
Company's current proved reserves and to compare relative values among peer companies without
regard to income taxes.  While future net revenue and present value are based on prices, costs and
discount factors which are consistent from company to company, the standardized measure of
discounted future net cash flows is dependent on the unique tax situation of each individual company. 
As of April 30, 2012, the present value of discounted future net cash flows and the standardized
measure of discounted future net cash flows are equal because the effects of estimated future income
tax expenses are zero.
 
Production
 
During the year ended April 30, 2012, we produced approximately 1,807 bbls of oil on a net basis
and 124,216 Mcf of gas on a net basis.  Based on the net production for the year ended April 30, 2012,
our average sales price per barrel was $80.06 on a net basis and the average sales price per Mcf was
$2.66 on a net basis.
 
For the year ended April 30, 2012, we had production from our interests in the Valentine #1 well, the
KYTX properties in Kentucky and the Lozano and Brown County wells in Texas.
Production by State:
Kentucky
West Virginia
Texas 
 
Total Production
Crude
Oil
Natural Gas
(Bbls)       
      
  129     
  969     
  709     
       
  1,807
(Mcf)
111,206 
  12,454 
  160 
 
  124,216
Drilling Activity.  During the period from inception (September 1, 2009) through April 30, 2012, we did
not participate or conduct any drilling activity in Kentucky or West Virginia. We performed 11
recompletions in Kentucky and, 1 in Texas and participated in drilling 3 shallow old wells in Texas.  
 
Delivery Commitments.  We are not obligated to provide a fixed and determinable quantity of oil or gas
in the near future under existing contracts or agreements in Kentucky, Texas or West Virginia.
35
Gross and Net Productive Wells.
September 1, 2009 (Inception) through
April 30, 2012
Kentucky
Texas
West Virginia
 Total gross and net
productive wells
Oil
Gross  
    
  6 
  1 
  7
Net
Gas
Gross  
 
  82  
  
  1.2   
  0.7   
  
  82 
  1.9
Net
  69.01
69.01
Gross and Net Developed Acreage.
September 1, 2009 (Inception) through
April 30, 2012
Kentucky
Texas
Oil
Gross  
   
  500
Net
Gas
Gross  
  1,640 
 
  100
Net
  1,380
West Virginia
 Total gross and net
developed acreage
Gross and Net Undeveloped Acreage.
Kentucky
Texas
West Virginia
 Total gross and net
undeveloped acreage
115  
  615
77   
  177
1,640
1,380
September 1, 2009 (Inception) through
April 30, 2012
Oil
Gross  
  
- 
  - 
  -
Net
Gas
Gross  
  
  4,900 
   
  -   
  -   
   
  4,900 
-
Net
  4,228
4,228
MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Reports to Shareholders. We are a reporting company with the SEC. The public may read and copy any
materials filed with the SEC at the Security and Exchange Commission’s Public Reference Room at
100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. The public may also obtain information on the operation of
the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC maintains an Internet site
that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file
electronically with the SEC. The address of that site is http://www.sec.gov.
 
 
36
Market Information.  Our common shares are not listed on any stock exchange, but are quoted on the
OTC Bulletin Board and OTCQB under the symbol “ALME.”  Shares of our common stock have only
been thinly traded since December 22, 2009, when our stock first became eligible for quotation.  The
following table sets forth, for the time period indicated, the high and low closing sales price of our
common stock as quoted on the OTCQB.
 
 
Fiscal Year 2012
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Low ($)
  High ($)
       
   
1.25     $
  $
0.87     $
  $
  $
0.37     $
  $  0.13     $
0.80  
0.33  
0.10  
0.08
Fiscal Year 2011
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
1.73     $
  $
1.27     $
  $
  $
1.76     $
  $  1.73     $
0.96  
0.90  
1.00  
1.01
Holders.  The approximate number of stockholders of record at August 17, 2012 was 25. The number of
stockholders of record does not include beneficial owners of our common stock, whose shares are held
in the names of various dealers, clearing agencies, banks, brokers and other fiduciaries.
Dividend Policy. We have never declared or paid a cash dividend on our capital stock. We do not
expect to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. We currently intend to
retain our earnings, if any, for use in our business. Any dividends declared in the future will be at the
discretion of our Board of Directors.
  
Securities Authorized For Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans. As of April 30, 2012, we had no
compensation plans under which our equity securities were authorized for issuance.
Recent sales of unregistered securities. There have been no sales of unregistered securities within the
last three years, which would be required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 701 of Regulation S-K,
except for the following:
 
On November 18, 2009, we completed the acquisition of certain assets from Alamo Oil pursuant to the
Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement (“Asset Purchase Agreement”) with Alamo Oil Limited (“Alamo
Oil”), pursuant to which we acquired certain oil and gas assets from Alamo Oil.  In connection with the
Asset Purchase Agreement, we issued 350,000 shares of our common stock to Alamo Oil, which
became 10,500,000 shares after the 30 for 1 forward split that occurred in December 2009. Those
shares were issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from
the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), which exemption is specified by the provisions of Regulation S promulgated pursuant
to that act by the SEC.
 
Eurasian Notes and Warrants.  In connection with the Asset Purchase Agreement, on November 18,
2009, we entered into the First Financing Agreement with Eurasian pursuant to which Eurasian agreed
to lend up to $2,000,000 to us in multiple installments in exchange for senior secured convertible
promissory notes with a conversion price of $0.50 per share (“Notes”) and five-year warrants to acquire
shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per share (“Warrants”) in the amount of each
installment. The Warrants expire five years from the date of the investment.  The Notes are due on
November 18, 2012, or upon default, whichever is earlier, and bear interest at the annual rate of 8%.
The Notes have an optional conversion feature by which this lender can convert the principal and
accrued interest into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $0.50 per share. This brief
description of the First Financing Agreement is only a summary of all material terms of the First
Financing Agreement, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the agreement, filed as
Exhibit 10.8 to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009. Pursuant to the First
Financing Agreement, we issued the following Notes and Warrants to Eurasian on the following dates:
 
 
37
Date of Note
November 18, 2009
 February 5, 2010
 March 4, 2010
 March 25, 2010
 April 15, 2010
 July 22, 2010
 August 12, 2010
 August 18, 2010
 September 7, 2010
 September 24, 2010
Amount
of Note
$334,905
$80,000
$300,000
$100,000
$250,000
$175,000
$ 25,000
$150,000
$ 70,000
$40,000
Number of Warrants
334,905
80,000
300,000
100,000
250,000
175,000
25,000
150,000
70,000
40,000
December 2, 2010
 December 15, 2010
 February 8, 2011
 March 1, 2011
 April 12, 2011
Total
$25,000
$75,000
$100,000
$160,000
$115,095
$2,000,000
25,000
75,000
100,000
160,000
115,095
2,000,000
The issuances were made pursuant to Regulation S promulgated by the SEC.  We believe that
exemptions were available because (iii) the sales were made to eligible non-U.S. persons as that term
is defined for purposes of Regulation S, and with regard to all transactions, (iii) transfers were restricted
in accordance with the requirements of the Securities Act (including by legending of certificates
representing the securities). We are obligated to register the shares of common stock underlying the
Notes and the shares of common stock underlying the Warrants for resale. 
 
On April 12, 2011, we entered into a second note and warrant purchase agreement with Eurasian
(“Second Financing Agreement”), whereby Eurasian agreed to lend up to $2,400,000 to us multiple
installments in exchange for senior secured convertible promissory notes with a conversion price of
$1.00 per share (“New Notes”) and five-year warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an exercise
price of $1.25 per share (“New Warrants”) in the amount of each installment. The New Warrants expire
five years from the date of the investment. The New Notes are due on April 12, 2014, or upon default,
whichever is earlier, bears interest at the annual rate of 8%.  The New Notes have an optional
conversion feature by which Eurasian can convert the principal and accrued interest into shares of our
common stock at a conversion price of $1.00 per share. This brief description of the Second Financing
Agreement is only a summary of all material terms of the Second Financing Agreement, and is qualified
in its entirety by reference to the full text of the agreement, filed as Exhibit 10.9 to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011.  Pursuant to the Second Financing Agreement, we issued the
following New Notes and New Warrants to Eurasian on the following dates:
Date of New Note
April 12, 2011
May 24, 2011
June 21, 2011
Total
Amount of
New Note
$410,000
$50,000
$400,000
$860,000
Number of New
Warrants
410,000
50,000
400,000
860,000
38
The New Notes and New Warrants were issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the
requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the
Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to
that act by the SEC. We are obligated to register the shares of common stock underlying the New Notes
and the shares of common stock underlying the New Warrants for resale. 
 
Discount Debentures and Series Warrants. On August 1, 2011, we closed a securities purchase
agreement, dated July 26, 2011 (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional
investors (the “Investors” or, individually, the “Investor”) and issued to the Investors an aggregate
principal value of approximately $1,310,621 of original issue discount convertible debentures (the
“Debentures” or, individually, the “Discount Debenture”) and three series of warrants, the Series A
Warrants, the Series B Warrants and the Series C Warrants, to purchase an aggregate of 2,621,241
shares of our common stock (collectively, the “Series Warrants” and the shares issuable upon exercise
of the Series Warrants, collectively, the “Series Warrant Shares”) at an exercise price of $1.25 for the
Series A and C Warrants and $1.00 for the Series B Warrants.  The Series A Warrants grant each
Investor the right to purchase up to a number of shares of common stock equal to 50% of the shares
underlying the principal amount of the Discount Debenture issued to such Investor, are exercisable
immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to five years.  The Series B Warrants
grant each Investor the right to purchase up to a number of shares of common stock equal to 100% of
the shares underlying the principal amount of the Discount Debenture issued to such Investor, are
exercisable immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to twelve months.  The
Series C Warrants grant each Purchaser the right to purchase up to a number of shares of common
stock equal to 50% of the shares underlying the principal amount of the Discount Debenture issued to
such Investor, vest and are exercisable ratably commencing on the exercise of the Series B Warrants
held by each Investor (or its assigns) and have a term of exercise equal to five years.  We are obligated
to register the shares of common stock underlying the Discount Debentures and the shares of common
stock underlying the Series Warrants for resale. 
 
In connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement, we also closed a Placement Agent Agreement
on June 20, 2011 with our placement agent (the “Placement Agent Agreement”) and issued Series A
Warrants to purchase 91,743 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share to our
placement agent for services provided to us in connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement.  
The securities sold pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement and the Placement Agent
Agreement were issued in transactions which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption
from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is
specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act and Rule 506 of Regulation D
promulgated pursuant to that act by the SEC.
The foregoing description of the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Discount Debentures, the Series
Warrants and the Placement Agent Agreement is only a summary of the material terms of each
document and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of each document.  Copies of the
Form of Securities Purchase Agreement, the Form of Discount Debenture, the Form of Series A
Warrant, the Form of Series B Warrant, the Form of Series C Warrant, and the Placement Agent
Agreement are attached as Exhibits 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, and 10.8, respectively, to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2011 and are incorporated herein by reference.
 
On November 15, 2011, one of the Investors elected to convert a portion of its outstanding Discount
Debenture into shares of our common stock.  The Investor elected to convert $5,000 of the outstanding
principal due on its Discount Debenture into 10,000 shares of our common stock, or approximately
$0.50 per share.  On November 21, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $20,000 of the
outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 40,000 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.  On November 23, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $75,000 of
the outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 150,000 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.  On November 30, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $135,300
of the outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 270,600 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.
On December 6, 2011 and January 6, 2012, we issued 64,471 shares and 78,192 shares, respectively,
to pay the interest due January 1, 2012 on the outstanding principal of the Discount Debentures to the
Investor.  These interest conversion shares were calculated by dividing the applicable interest amount
due to each Investor by the interest conversion rate of $0.1062 per share (90% of the 20-day VWAP for
the 20-day VWAP for the 20 trading days prior to January 1, 2012), pursuant to the Discount
Debentures.
39
On April 2, 2012, we issued 91,885 shares to pay the interest due April 1, 2012 on the outstanding
principal of the Discount Debentures to the Investors.  These interest conversion shares were calculated
by dividing the applicable interest amount due to each Investor by the interest conversion rate of
$0.1110 per share (90% of the 20-day VWAP for the 20-day VWAP for the 20 trading days prior to April
1, 2012), pursuant to the Discount Debentures.
On August 1, 2012, we issued 16,724,329 shares to the Investors in exchange for all of the outstanding
Discount Debentures and Series Warrants held by the Investors. The number of shares issued in
exchange for the Discount Debentures was calculated by dividing the applicable principal and interest
due on the Discount Debentures by the conversion rate of $0.07 per share. The number of shares
issued in exchange for the Series Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the Series A
Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Discount Debentures and the Series Warrants are no
longer outstanding, and we extinguished $1,076,612.52 in principal and accrued and unpaid interest
due under the Discount Debentures and 1,344,150 shares of common stock underlying the Series
Warrants.  The shares were issued to each Investor pursuant to the exemption from registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, amended (the “Act”), provided by
Section 3(a)(9) of the Act.
On August 1, 2012, we issued an aggregate of 523,483 shares of the Investors holding only Series A
Warrants in exchange for the Series A Warrants held by those Investors. The number of shares issued
in exchange for the Series A Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the Series A
Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Series A Warrants are no longer outstanding, and we
extinguished 523,483 shares of common stock underlying the Series A Warrants. The shares were
issued to each Investor pursuant to the exemption from registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, amended (the “Act”), provided by Section 3(a)(9) of the Act.
Range Kentucky Holdings LLC.  On April 12, 2011, pursuant to the Range Agreement, we issued
8,500,000 shares of our common stock to Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC.  The shares of our common
stock were issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from
the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified
by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act and Rule 506 of Regulation D promulgated
pursuant to that act by the SEC.
 
On October 12, 2011, we satisfied the downside price protection provision of the Additional Shares
Agreement dated April 12, 2011 with Range and issued Range an additional 1,389,353 shares of our
common stock.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
Employees and Consultants.  On April 29, 2011, we issued 64,257 shares of our common stock to two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were
issued in transactions which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
On August 4, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two independent
contractors in exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a
transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of
Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
On August 12, 2011, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange
for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we
believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
 
On September 22, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were
issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
40
On September 22, 2011, we issued 43,207 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
consulting services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which
we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
 
On November 23, 2011, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in
exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction
which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus
delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section
4(2) of the Securities Act.
On November 23, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were
issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On November 23, 2011, we issued 41,545 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
consulting services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which
we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange
for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we
believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were
issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 109,034 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
On May 9, 2012, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange for
services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On May 9, 2012, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two independent
contractors in exchange for services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a
transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of
Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On May 9, 2012, we issued 161,792 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
On August 1, 2012, we issued 1,900,000 shares of our common stock to M2 Law Professional
Corporation, our legal counsel, in exchange for professional services provided to us.  The shares of our
common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that
exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which
exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
  
Purchases of Equity Securities. None.
41
Penny stock regulation.  Shares of our common stock will probably be subject to rules adopted by the
SEC that regulate broker-dealer practices in connection with transactions in “penny stocks.”  Penny
stocks are generally equity securities with a price of less than $5.00, except for securities registered on
certain national securities exchanges or quoted on the NASDAQ system, provided that current price and
volume information with respect to transactions in those securities is provided by the exchange or
system.  The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny stock not
otherwise exempt from those rules, deliver a standardized risk disclosure document prepared by the
SEC, which contains the following:
·  a description of the nature and level of risk in the market for penny stocks in both public
offerings and  secondary trading;
·  a description of the broker’s or dealer’s duties to the customer and of the rights and remedies
available to the customer with respect to violation to such duties or other requirements of
securities’ laws;
·  a brief, clear, narrative description of a dealer market, including “bid” and “ask” prices for penny
stocks and the significance of the spread between the “bid” and “ask” price;
·  a toll-free telephone number for inquiries on disciplinary actions;
·  definitions of significant terms in the disclosure document or in the conduct of  trading in penny
stocks; and
·  such other information and is in such form, including language, type, size and format, as the
SEC shall require by rule or regulation.
Prior to effecting any transaction in penny stock, the broker-dealer also must provide the customer the
following:
·  the bid and offer quotations for the penny stock;
·  the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction;
·  the number of shares to which such bid and ask prices apply, or other comparable information
relating to the depth and liquidity of the market for such stock; and
·  monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock held in the
customer’s account.
In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise
exempt from those rules, the broker-dealer must make a special written determination that the penny
stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written acknowledgment of
the receipt of a risk disclosure statement, a written agreement to transactions involving penny stocks,
and a signed and dated copy of a written suitably statement.  These disclosure requirements may have
the effect of reducing the trading activity in the secondary market for a stock that becomes subject to the
penny stock rules.  Holders of shares of our common stock may have difficulty selling those shares
because our common stock will probably be subject to the penny stock rules.
MANAGEMENT
Executive Officers and Directors. Our directors and principal executive officers are as specified on the
following table:
Age
60
60
26
Name
Allan Millmaker
Donald Sebastian
Philip Mann
 
Directors are elected to serve until the next annual meeting of stockholders and until their successors
are elected and qualified. The Our Bylaws specify that we shall have at least two and not more than
seven directors. The number of directors may be increased or decreased from time to time by the Board
of Directors.
Position
Chief Executive Officer, President, Director
Chief Financial Officer
Secretary, Director
Officers are elected by the Board of Directors and serve until their successors are appointed by the
Board of Directors. Biographical resumes of each officer and director are set forth below.
42
Allan Millmaker. Mr. Millmaker, our Chief Executive Officer and President since April 13, 2012
(previously our Chief Executive Officer and President from November 19, 2009 to December 14,
2011) and one of our directors since November 19, 2009, has over thirty years of experience in the oil
and gas industry. From 2005 to the present, Mr. Millmaker has worked as an independent project
generator specializing in the development of quality oil and gas projects and oil service business
ventures. From 2002 to 2005, Mr. Millmaker worked for Bluewater Offshore Production Systems
(U.S.A.), Inc., one of Europe’s leading providers to the offshore oil industry, where he was responsible
for operations in North and South America. Bluewater Offshore Production Systems, Inc. ("Bluewater")
specializes in the design, development, lease and operation of tanker-based production and storage
systems, owns and operates a number of floating production storage and offloading systems, and
provides single point mooring systems.  Bluewater has working interest in oil and gas properties.  Mr.
Millmaker was instrumental in acquiring oil and gas properties for Bluewater.
From 1995 to 2001, Mr. Millmaker worked for Navion ASA (“Navion”) as Senior Vice President for the
Floating Production Business. His division was responsible for developing business for the
Multipurpose Shuttle Tankers and establishing Navion as a Floating Production Storage and Offloading
(FPSO) supplier. During his tenure, Navion won contracts for the Navion Munin FPSO, operating at the
Lufeng 22-1 field in the South China Sea and the Berge Hugin FPSO, which is producing at the Pierce
field in the UK sector of the North Sea. From 1991 to 1995, he acted as an independent consultant for
Kerr McGee in the UK on the Gryphon project and later for Shell on the Troll and Draugen projects.
 
From 1979 to 1986, he worked for Mobil Exploration Norway Inc.’s (“Mobil”) engineering team, helping
to bring the Statfjord “A” wells on-stream, and later became Offshore Production Supervisor. In 1983, he
joined Mobil’s operations team where he was Operations Superintendent for the Statfjord “A” platform
and in 1986, Platform Manager for Statfjord “B” platform.  When the operatorship of the Statfjord field
was transferred to Statoil, Mr. Millmaker accepted the offer to continue with Statoil and from 1987 was
seconded to Shell as Deputy Project Manager on the Troll Phase 1 Project. In 1989 he joined Shell as
Operations Manager on the Northwest Shelf Gas Project in Western Australia.
From 1974 to 1979, Mr. Millmaker served as a production engineer for British Petroleum (BP) in Abu
Dhabi, where he worked in the production and drilling departments. He obtained a first class honors and
Bachelors of Science. Degree in Production Engineering and Management from the University of
Strathclyde, Glasgow in 1974.
Mr. Millmaker’s long term of service in the oil and gas industry and his management skills exhibited, and
experience obtained were material considerations that led the Board of the Directors to conclude that
Mr. Millmaker should serve as one of our directors. Mr. Millmaker is not an officer or director of any other
reporting company.
Donald Sebastian.  Mr. Sebastian has been our Chief Financial Officer since May 1, 2011.  Prior to
joining our Company, Mr. Sebastian served as Chief Financial Officer, Principal Accounting Officer and
Vice President of Velocity Energy Inc. (OTCBB: VYCE) from June 2008 to April 2011.  From 2004 to
2008, Mr. Sebastian served as Vice President of Onshore Operations and Business Development with
Michael Baker Corporation (NYSE Amex: BKR).  From 1979 to 2004, he served in various executive
capacities including Senior Vice President responsible for the Gulf Coast Onshore and Offshore
Business Unit and Chief Financial Officer of J. M. Huber Corporation. He has over 37 years of
experience in the oil and gas industry and has the financial and accounting expertise traditionally
associated with Chief Financial Officers as well as substantial onshore and offshore operating
expertise.  Mr. Sebastian earned a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Administration from Trinity
University in 1974.   Mr. Sebastian is not an officer or director of any other reporting company.
Philip Mann. Mr. Mann has been our Secretary and one of our directors since November 19, 2009. Mr.
Mann also served as our Chief Financial Officer from November 2009 to May 2011.  Mr. Mann currently
devotes approximately 40 to 50 hours per week to us. Mr. Mann has approximately five years of
experience with companies in the oil and gas industry. From August 2008 to July 2009, Mr.
Mann worked as an independent consultant, providing accounting and financial services to several
public and private oil companies. From June to August 2008, Mr. Mann worked for Aker Floating
Production ASA in Singapore working on the conversion of the Dhirubhai-1 Floating Production Storage
and Offloading vessel as a member of the site team, where Mr. Mann’s role included commercial and
accounting work related to overseeing and managing purchase orders and work order claims. Mr. Mann
did not provide any other accounting and financial services to Aker Floating Production ASA. From
2006 to 2007, Mr. Mann worked for Capital Shipbrokers Ltd., a leading tanker broker, where Mr. Mann’s
role was as a trainee and junior shipbroker. Mr. Mann did not provide financing and accounting services
to Capital Shipbrokers Ltd. From July 2005 to the present, Mr. Mann has been working as a consultant
for SMV Engineering Ltd. Mr. Mann’s role includes accounting and financial services, specifically
financial planning and project costing and financing with the commercial department for the
development of new projects with a focus on engineering, commissioning and project management of
Floating Production Storage & Offloading vessels and Floating Storage & re-gasification units. He was
awarded an International Baccalaureate Certificate from King William’s College, Isle of Man in 2004.
43
Mr. Mann’s experience and skill with companies in the oil and gas industry and his experience with
project development, management and finance background were the material considerations that led
our Board of Directors to conclude that Mr. Mann should serve as one of our directors.  Mr. Mann is not
an officer or director of any other reporting company.
 
All directors hold office until the completion of their term of office, which is not longer than one year, or
until their successors have been elected.  All officers are appointed annually by the Board of Directors
and, subject to employment agreements, serve at the discretion of the board. Currently, directors receive
no cash compensation.
There are no orders, judgments, or decrees of any governmental agency or administrator, or of any court
of competent jurisdiction, revoking or suspending for cause any license, permit or other authority to
engage in the securities business or in the sale of a particular security or temporarily or permanently
restraining any of our officers or directors from engaging in or continuing any conduct, practice or
employment in connection with the purchase or sale of securities, or convicting such person of any
felony or misdemeanor involving a security, or any aspect of the securities business or of theft or of any
felony. Nor are any of the officers or directors of any corporation or entity affiliated with us so enjoined.
There are no family relationships among our directors or among our executive officers.
 
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance. Section 16(a) of the Securities and
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, requires our directors, officers and persons owning more than 10%
of our common stock to file reports of ownership and changes of ownership with the SEC.  Based upon
our review of the copies of such reports furnished to us, or representations from certain reporting
persons that no other reports were required, we believe all applicable filing requirements were complied
with during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2012.
Corporate Governance.
Nominating Committee. The Board of Directors has no formal nominating committee. Our entire Board of
Directors participates in consideration of director nominees. The Board will consider candidates who
have experience as a board member or senior officer of a company or who are generally recognized in a
relevant field as a well-regarded practitioner, faculty member or senior government officer.  The Board of
Directors will also evaluate whether the candidates' skills and experience are complementary to the
existing Board of Directors' skills and experience as well as the Board’s need for operational,
management, financial, international, technological or other expertise. The Board of Directors will
interview candidates that meet the criteria and then select nominees that the Board believes best suit
our needs.
The Board of Directors will consider qualified candidates suggested by stockholders for director
nominations. Stockholders can suggest qualified candidates for director nominations by writing to our
Corporate Secretary, at 10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300, Houston, Texas 77024. Submissions that are
received that meet the criteria described above will be forwarded to the Board of Directors for further
review and consideration. The Board of Directors will not evaluate candidates proposed by stockholders
any differently than other candidates.  There have been no material changes to the procedures by which
our stockholders may recommend nominees to the Board of Directors.
 
Compensation Committee. The Board of Directors has no formal compensation committee.  Our Board
of Directors acts as the compensation committee.
Audit Committee. Presently, our Board of Directors acts as the audit committee. During the next six to
twelve months, we hope to establish a formal audit committee, which will be responsible for: (1)
selection and oversight of our independent accountant; (2) establishing procedures for the receipt,
retention and treatment of complaints regarding accounting, internal controls and auditing matters; (3)
establishing procedures for the confidential, anonymous submission by our employees of concerns
regarding accounting and auditing matters; (4) engaging outside advisors; and, (5) funding for the
independent auditor and any outside advisors engaged by the audit committee. We will adopt an audit
committee charter when we establish the audit committee.
44
Audit Committee Financial Expert. We do not have a board member who is an “audit committee
financial expert” as defined in Item 407(d)(5)(ii) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Act. We do not
have an audit committee financial expert because we believe the cost related to retaining a financial
expert at this time is prohibitive. Further, because we have not commenced operations, at the present
time, we believe the services of a financial expert are not warranted.
Code of Ethics. We have adopted a corporate code of ethics. We believe our code of ethics is
reasonably designed to deter wrongdoing and promote honest and ethical conduct; provide full, fair,
accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in public reports; comply with applicable laws; ensure
prompt internal reporting of code violations; and provide accountability for adherence to the code.
Director Independence. None of our directors are deemed independent. Our directors also hold
positions as officers.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Summary Compensation Table.   The table set forth below summarizes the annual and long-term
compensation for services in all capacities to us payable to our principal executive officers during the
years ended April 30, 2012 and 2011.
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
Name and
Principal
Position
Year
Ended
Salary
Bonus
$
$
Stock
Awards
Option
Awards
$
$
Non-Equity
Nonqualified
All Other
Incentive Plan
Compensation
$
Deferred
Compensation
Compensation
Earnings
$
Total
$
2011  $111,000
0
0
Allan
Millmaker,
President,
CEO
 
 
Donald
Sebastian,
CFO
 
 
Philip
Mann,
CFO,
Secretary*
2012 $110,000 $5,000
0
2012 $69,000 $3,000$25,750
2011
0
2012 $72,000
0
0
2011 $67,500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$115,000
$111,000
 
  $97,750
0
$72,000
$67,500
* On May 1, 2011, Philip Mann resigned his position as our Chief Financial Officer, and Don Sebastian
was appointed as our Chief Financial Officer.
45
Employment Contracts and Termination of Employment. On November 19, 2009, we entered into an
executive employment agreement with Allan Millmaker (“Millmaker Agreement”).  Under the terms of the
Millmaker Agreement, Mr. Millmaker has agreed to serve as our President and Chief Executive Officer
for a period of three years.  The Millmaker Agreement provides for an initial base salary of $6,000 per
month. The base salary amount shall increase by $1,000 after the last day of each of our fiscal quarters
during the first fiscal year of the Millmaker Agreement.  Mr. Millmaker is also eligible to participate in
benefit and incentive programs we may offer.
On November 19, 2009, we entered into an executive employment agreement with Philip Mann (“Mann
Agreement”).  Under the terms of the Mann Agreement, Mr. Mann has agreed to serve as our Chief
Financial Officer and Secretary for a period of three years.  The Mann Agreement provides for an initial
base salary of $4,000 per month. The base salary amount shall increase by $500 after the last day of
each of our fiscal quarters during the first fiscal year of the Mann Agreement.  Mr. Mann is also eligible to
participate in benefit and incentive programs we may offer.
 
On May 1, 2011, we entered into an employment agreement with Don Sebastian (“Sebastian
Agreement”).  Pursuant to the Sebastian Agreement, Mr. Sebastian will serve as our Chief Financial
Officer for an initial term of two years with an additional one year extension granted automatically unless
a sixty day written notice to the contrary is provided by either Mr. Sebastian or us.  Mr. Sebastian will
receive base compensation of $5,000 per month, with a $500 increase at the end of each fiscal quarter
during the first fiscal year of the Employment Agreement and, subject to the sole discretion of the
Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors, additional bonuses upon (1) the listing of our
common stock on the NYSE Amex and (2) the last day of each fiscal year.  Mr. Sebastian will also
receive equity compensation of 25,000 shares of our common stock for each fiscal quarter during the
term of the Sebastian Agreement.  Mr. Sebastian is also eligible to participate in benefit and incentive
programs we may offer.
Any compensation received by our officers, directors, and management personnel will be determined
from time to time by our Board of Directors.
Outstanding Equity Awards. As of April 30, 2012, the following named executive officers had the
following unexercised options, stock that has not vested, and equity incentive plan awards:
Name
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options
#
Exercisable
Option
Exercise
Price
Option  Awards
# Un-
exercisable
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Awards:
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options
Option
Number
Expiration
of
Date
Shares
or Units
of Stock
Not
Vested
Market
Value of
Shares or
Units  Not
Vested
Stock Awards
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Awards:
Number
of
Unearned
Shares,
Units or
Other
Rights
Not
Vested
Value of
Unearned
Shares,
Units or
Other
Rights
Not
Vested
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Allan
Millmaker,
President,
CEO
Donald
Sebastian,
CFO
Philip
Mann,
CFO,
Secretary*
  * On May 1, 2011, Philip Mann resigned his position as our Chief Financial Officer, and Don Sebastian
was appointed as our Chief Financial Officer.
0C
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
46
Stock Options/SAR Grants. On December 21, 2011, our Board of Directors approved the Alamo Energy
Corp. 2011 Stock Option Plan (the “Plan”).  No grants of stock options were made pursuant to the Plan
during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2012.
 
Long-Term Incentive Plans. There are no arrangements or plans in which we provide pension,
retirement or similar benefits for directors or executive officers. We do not have any material bonus or
profit sharing plans pursuant to which cash or non-cash compensation is or may be paid to our directors
or executive officers.
Director Compensation. Our directors received the following compensation for their service as directors
during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2012:
Name
Fees
Earned or
Stock
Awards
Option
Awards
Paid in
Cash
$
0
0
$
0
0
$
0
0
Allan
Millmaker
Philip Mann
Non-Equity
Incentive Plan
Compensation
$
0
0
Non-Qualified
All Other
Total
Deferred
Compensation
Compensation
Earnings
$
0
0
$
0
0
$
0
0
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the beneficial ownership of our common
stock as of August 17, 2012, by each person or entity known by us to be the beneficial owner of more
than 5% of the outstanding shares of common stock, each of our directors and named executive officers,
and all of our directors and executive officers as a group.
 
The number of shares beneficially owned by each 5% holder, director or executive officer is determined
by the rules of the SEC, and the information does not necessarily indicate beneficial ownership for any
other purpose. Under such rules, beneficial ownership includes any shares over which the person or
entity has sole or shared voting power or investment power and also any shares that the person or entity
can acquire within 60 days of August 17, 2012 through the exercise of any stock option or other right.
For purposes of computing the percentage of outstanding shares of common stock held by each person
or entity, any shares that the person or entity has the right to acquire within 60 days after August 17,
2012 are deemed to be outstanding with respect to such person or entity but are not deemed to be
outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage of ownership of any other person or entity.
Unless otherwise indicated, each person or entity has sole investment and voting power (or shares such
power with his or her spouse) over the shares set forth in the following table. The inclusion in the table
below of any shares deemed beneficially owned does not constitute an admission of beneficial
ownership of those shares. As of August 17, 2012, and after giving effect to the issuances described
above, there were 79,104,638 shares of common stock issued and outstanding.
 
 
47
Title Of Class
Common Stock
Common Stock
Name and Address
 of Beneficial Owner
Amount and
Nature Of Beneficial
Percentage of
Class (1)
Alamo Oil Limited (2)
5 Spinnaker Close
Hedon Hull, United Kingdom HU12
8RE101
 
Anson Investments Master Fund LP (3)
5950 Berkshire Lane, Suite 510
Owner
10,500,000 Shares
Beneficial Owner
13.27%
7,857,339 Shares
Beneficial Owner
9.93%
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
5,342,990 Shares 
Beneficial Owner
2,244,950 Shares
Secretary and Director
7,000,020 Shares
Chief Executive Officer,
President and Director
9,884,353 Shares
Beneficial Owner
6.75%
2.84%
8.85%
12.50%
114,059 Shares (6)
Chief Financial Officer
*
Dallas, Texas 75225
 
Capital Ventures International (4)
c/o Heights Capital Management Inc.
101 California Street, Suite 3250
San Francisco, California 94111
 
Philip Mann
10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300
Houston, Texas  77024
 
Allan Millmaker
10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300
Houston, Texas  77024
Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC (5)
504 Fremont
Thermopolis, WY 82443-2913
 
Donald Sebastian
10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300
Houston, Texas  77024
 
All Executive Officers and Directors as a
Group
11.83%
9,359,029 Shares
Common Stock
 
* Denotes less than 1%.
(1)  Percentage of beneficial ownership of our common stock is based on 79,104,638 shares of common
stock outstanding as of the date of the table.
(2)  Michael Stott holds voting and dispositive power over the shares held by Alamo Oil Limited.
(3)  Adam Spears is the portfolio manager of Anson Investments Master Fund LP and has voting and
dispositive power over the shares beneficially owned by Anson Investments Master Fund LP.
(4)  Heights Capital Management, Inc. is the investment manager to Capital Ventures International and
has voting and dispositive power over the shares beneficially owned by Capital Ventures International. 
The number of Shares was calculated based on the Schedule 13G filed by Capital Ventures
International on August 9, 2012. 
(5)  Range Exploration Partners LLC is the sole manager of Range Kentucky Holdings LLC. Range
Exploration Partners LLC is managed by Messrs. Frode Aschim, William Byrd and Petter Hagland.
Each of Messrs. Aschim, Byrd and Hagland hold shared voting and dispositive power over the shares
held by Range Exploration Partners LLC.  Each of Messrs. Aschim, Byrd and Hagland disclaims
beneficial ownership of the shares held of record by Range Exploration Partners LLC to the extent of his
respective pecuniary interest therein.  The number of Shares was calculated based on the Schedule
13G/A filed by Range Kentucky Holdings LLC on February 10, 2012. 
(6)   Includes 14,059 shares, which are held by Tahoe Energy, LLC, of which Donald Sebastian is the
managing member.  Mr. Sebastian holds voting and dispositive power over the shares held by Tahoe
Energy, LLC.
48
Changes in Control.  Our management is not aware of any arrangements which may result in “changes
in control” as that term is defined by the provisions of Item 403(c) of Regulation S-K.   Our Articles of
Incorporation and our Bylaws do not contain any other provisions which were included to delay, defer,
discourage or prevent a change in control.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
Related party transactions.
Office Space.  Our executive offices are located at 10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300, Houston, Texas
77024, where we occupy approximately 690 square feet of office. We sublease our offices from Allan
Millmaker, our Chief Executive Officer, President and a director, and in exchange for $1,000 per month
on a month to month basis.
We also maintain an office in London, United Kingdom, where we occupy approximately 130 square
feet of office space, which we sublease from Philip Mann, our Secretary and a director, in exchange for
£1,500 per month on a month to month basis.
 
Our subsidiary, KYTX Pipeline LLC, subleases an office from a stockholder (Range), a warehouse
building and a yard facility in Gray County, Kentucky with a value of  $1,500 per month that is
contributed by one of the Company’s employees.
 
Director Independence. We do not have any independent directors.  The determination of independence
of directors has been made using the definition of “independent director” contained under Rule 4200(a)
(15) of the Rules of National Association of Securities Dealers.
 
There have been no other related party transactions, or any other transactions or relationships required
to be disclosed pursuant to Item 404 of Regulation S-K.
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANTS
There have been no changes in or disagreements with our accountants during two most recent fiscal
years required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 304 of Regulation S-K.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the issuance of the shares of common stock offered by the selling shareholders has been
passed upon by M2 Law Professional Corporation, located in Newport Beach, California.
EXPERTS
Our financial statements for the period from inception to April 30, 20112, and for the year ended April 30,
2012 appearing in this prospectus which is part of a Registration Statement have been audited by Q
Accountancy Corporation and are included in reliance upon such reports given upon the authority of Q
Accountancy Corporation, as experts in accounting and auditing.
 
The proved reserves, future production and discounted future net income information prepared by Nova
Resource, Inc. appearing in this prospectus which is part of a Registration Statement has been included
herein in reliance upon the authority of such firms as experts with respect to matters contained in such
reserve reports.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed a registration statement on Form S-1 with the SEC pursuant to the Securities Act.  This
prospectus does not contain all of the information set forth in the registration statement and the exhibits
and schedules to the registration statement. For further information regarding us and our common stock
offered hereby, reference is made to the registration statement and the exhibits and schedules filed as a
part of the registration statement.
 
 
49
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED APRIL 30, 20121 AND
FOR THE PERIOD OF INCEPTION (SEPTEMBER 1, 2009) THROUGH APRIL 30, 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
Consolidated Statements of Operations
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
50
51
52
53
55
56
50
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders of
Alamo Energy Corp.
 
We have audited the accompanying  consolidated balance sheets of Alamo Energy Corp. (an
exploration stage company) as of April 30, 2012 and 2011, and the related consolidated statements of
operations, stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the years then ended and for the period from
inception (September 1, 2009) through April 30, 2012.  These financial statements are the responsibility
of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audit.
 
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States).  Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.  The Company is
not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial
reporting. Our audits included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for
designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Accordingly, we express no such opinion.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.  An audit also includes assessing
the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating
the overall financial statement presentation.  We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for
our opinion.
 
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of Alamo Energy Corp. (an exploration stage company) as of April 30,
2012 and 2011 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended and for the
period from inception (September 1, 2009) through April 30, 2012 in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
 
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue
as a going concern.  As more fully described in Note 4, the Company has incurred an operating loss and
has an accumulated deficit.  These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to
continue as a going concern.  Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note
4.  The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this
uncertainty.
 
Q Accountancy Corporation
 
Irvine, California
August 10, 2012
51
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
ASSETS
Current assets:
    Cash and cash equivalents
    Accounts receivable
    Prepaid expenses
    Total current assets
 
Oil and gas properties
    Proved
    Unproved
Property, plant and equipment
    Well machinery and equipment
    Furniture, fixtures and other
Less: accumulated depletion, depreciation and amortization
    Net oil and gas properties, plant and equipment
$
2012
80,903   $
49,220    
-    
130,123    
      
      
1,983,105    
3,322,158    
      
1,755,472    
279,070    
(348,686)   
6,991,119
2011
45,098 
107,218 
2,585 
154,901 
  
  
1,435,726 
3,288,898 
  
1,736,385 
274,149 
(35,449)
6,699,709
Goodwill
 
Total assets
$
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
1,394,215
1,394,215 
  
8,515,457   $ 8,248,825
Current liabilities:
    Accounts payable
    Accrued liabilities
    Senior convertible promissory notes, net of
      discount of $243,770
    Total current liabilities
 
Senior convertible promissory notes, net of discount
   of $1,147,737 and $1,300,340, respectively
 
Stockholders’ Equity:
    Common stock, $0.001 par value, 3,000,000,000
       shares authorized, 59,484,145 and 57,232,777 shares
       issued and outstanding, respectively
    Additional paid in capital
    Deficit accumulated during exploration stage
    Total stockholders’ equity
Total liabilities and stockholders’’ equity
$
4,024   $
604,472
1,756,230     
2,364,726
109,115 
324,060
- 
433,175
775,284
1,159,660
57,233 
  
59,484    
8,905,189 
   10,584,870    
(2,306,432)
(5,268,907)   
  
5,375,447    
  
6,655,990 
8,515,457   $ 8,248,825 
 $
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
52
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended
Year Ended
April 30,
April 30,
Inception
(September
1, 2009)
through
April 30,
Oil and gas revenues
 
Operating costs and expenses:
    Lease operating costs
    Production costs
    Depletion, depreciation and amortization
    Salaries, wages and related expense
    Legal and professional
    Other general and administrative
$
2012
704,938   $
      
      
100,767    
194,512    
313,236    
426,736    
360,378    
612,860
2011
2012
251,337   $ 1,021,706 
  
      
  
      
209,957 
103,331    
236,564 
24,334    
348,685 
26,622    
708,076 
207,572    
234,451    
828,692 
304,946     1,034,717
Total operating costs and expenses
 
Loss from operations
 
Other income (expense):
    Interest expense
    Interest expense – debt discount amortization
    Other income
 
    Total other income (expense)
 
Net loss before income taxes
 
Provision for income taxes
 
Net loss
 
Net loss per share – basic and diluted
 
Weighted average shares outstanding – basic and
diluted
2,008,489    
      
(1,303,551)   
      
      
(350,514)   
(1,308,765)   
355    
      
(1,658,924)   
      
(2,962,475)   
      
-
901,256     3,366,691 
  
  
   
(2,344,985)
  
  
   
  
   
(636,026)
  
(2,304,455)
  
16,561 
  
  
   
(2,923,920)
  
  
   
(5,268,905)
  
  
   
- 
   
   
  
 $ (2,962,475)  $ (1,804,169)  $ (5,268,905)
  
   
  
 $
(649,919)   
      
      
(266,743)   
(903,711)   
16,204    
      
(1,154,250)   
      
(1,804,169)   
      
-
(0)  $
(0)
58,402,967     51,020,552
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
FOR THE PERIOD FROM INCEPTION (SEPTEMBER 1, 2009) THROUGH APRIL 30, 2012
53
Additional
Paid-In
Capital
Deficit
Accumulated
During
Total
Exploration
Stockholders’
Balance, September 1, 2009
 
Shares issued for oil and gas
properties
 
Cancellation of shares for cash
and assumption of liabilities
 
Discount on convertible notes
payable
Shares *
176,668,500      176,669    $ (176,669)  $
Amount
10,500,000      10,500      289,500
(138,499,980)    (138,500)
58,635
-
-      900,935
Stage
-    $
-
-
-
Equity
-
300,000
(79,865)
900,935
-     
      
-
-     
      
-
2,800     
   
Contribution of facilities rent
      
   
 
-     
   
Net loss
   
      
 
    48,668,250      48,669      1,075,201     
Balance, April 30, 2010
   
      
 
8,500      6,366,500     
Shares issued for acquisitions    
      
   
 
Shares issued for services
   
64,193     
 
      
   
Discount on convertible notes
payable
 
Contribution of facilities rent
 
* retroactively stated for 30-for-1 forward stock split.
8,500,000     
      
64,257
-      1,395,095     
      
      
4,200     
-
64
-     
      
-
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
-
Net loss
 
Balance, April 30, 2012
 
 
 
* retroactively stated for 30-for-1 forward stock split.
-
-      C(2,962,475)   
      
   
      
    59,484,145    $ 59,484    $10,584,870    $ (5,268,907)  $
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
55
Year Ended
Year Ended
April 30,
April 30,
(2,962,475)
  
5,375,447
Inception
(September
1, 2009)
through
April 30,
Cash flows from operating activities:
     Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash
   provided by (used in) operating activities:
     Warrants issued to placement agent
     Depletion, depreciation and amortization
     Rent contributed by officer
     Common stock issued for services
     Accretion of debt discount
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
     (Increase) decrease in accounts receivable
     (Increase) decrease in prepaid expenses
     Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
     Increase in accrued liabilities
 
    Net cash used in operating activities
 
Cash flows from investing activities:
     Purchase of oil and gas properties
     Purchase of property and equipment
 
    Net cash used in investing activities
 
Cash flows from financing activities:
    Proceeds from issuance of senior convertible notes
2012
$ (2,962,475)  $ (1,804,169)  $ (5,268,907)
2012
2011
62,188 
-    
62,188     
  
348,685 
26,622    
313,236    
  
7,000 
4,200    
-    
   
64,256    
232,091 
  
167,835    
903,711     2,304,455 
   1,308,765    
  
      
   
(49,220)
57,998    
  
- 
  
2,585    
4,024 
(104,092)   
  
604,472 
280,412    
  
  
   
      
(1,755,212)
(873,548)   
  
  
      
   
  
      
   
(2,108,581)
  
(580,639)   
(29,304)
(24,008)   
  
  
      
   
(2,239,019)
  
(604,647)   
  
      
   
   
  
      
   1,514,000     1,395,095     3,974,000
(89,184)   
5,499     
50,489    
305,337    
      
(533,239)   
      
      
(1,096,920)   
(5,296)   
      
(1,102,216)
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash
 
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
 
Supplemental Cash Flow Information
     Cash paid for:
          Interest
          Income taxes
     Non-cash transactions:
          Common stock issued for oil and gas properties
     Shares issued for conversion of notes payable
1,514,000     1,395,095     3,974,000 
   
  
      
80,903 
  
35,805    
  
   
      
  
- 
45,098    
   
  
      
80,903 
 $
80,903   $
   
  
      
  
   
      
  
   
      
  $
- 
-    $
- 
  $
-    $
      
   
  
-   $ 6,375,000   $ 6,675,000 
  $
 $
30,412
(240,360)   
      
285,458     
      
45,098   $
      
      
      
-    $
-    $
30,412    $
-   $
56
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
1. BUSINESS AND ORGANIZATION
 
Alamo Energy Corp. is an early stage oil and gas company focused on exploration and production of oil
and natural gas.
 
Alamo Energy Corp. (the Company) was incorporated as Alamo Oil Limited, a UK corporation (Alamo
Oil) on September 1, 2009.  On November 18, 2009 (the Closing Date), Alamo Oil completed an Asset
Purchase and Sale Agreement (the Asset Purchase Agreement) with Green Irons Holdings Corporation
(Green Irons).  Following the closing of the Asset Purchase Agreement and pursuant to the Plan of
Merger (the Merger), the assets of Alamo Oil were acquired by Green Irons and a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Green Irons was then merged with Green Irons, and Green Irons changed its name to
Alamo Energy Corp.  For accounting purposes, the Asset Purchase was treated as a reverse merger
and a recapitalization of Alamo Oil.  Effective November 19, 2009, the Company effectuated a thirty-for-
one split (the Stock Split) of the authorized number of shares of its common stock and all of its then-
issued and outstanding common stock, par value $0.001 per share.
 
On April 12, 2011, the Company acquired 100% of the membership interest of three (3) affiliated entities,
KYTX Oil and Gas, LLC, KYTX Pipeline, LLC, and KYTX Drilling, LLC from their sole member in
exchange for cash and shares of the Company’s common stock.  As a result, the each of the entities
became wholly owned subsidiaries to further exploit the oil and gas properties held by KYTX Oil and
Gas, LLC and the related well equipment and gathering assets held by KYTX Pipeline, LLC and KYTX
Drilling, LLC, respectively.
Principles of Consolidation
 
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Alamo Energy Corp. and
our wholly-owned subsidiaries from the date of acquisition.  All intercompany transactions have been
eliminated.
 
Exploration Stage
 
These financial statements and related notes are presented in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America, and are expressed in United States dollars.  The
Company has not produced significant revenues from its principal business and is in the exploration
stage company as defined by ASC 915, Development Stage Entities.
 
As of April 30, 2012, the Company owns a 100% working interest in certain oil and gas leases in Knox
County, Kentucky, a 20% working interest in certain oil and gas leases in Brown County, Texas, a 50%
working interest in certain leases in Ritchie County, West Virginia, and farm-in and participation rights
agreements in onshore oil and gas properties in the UK.
 
The Company’s success will depend in large part on its ability to obtain and develop oil and gas
interests within the United States and other countries. There can be no assurance that oil and gas
properties obtained by the Company will contain reserves or that properties with reserves will be
profitable to extract. The Company will be subject to local and national laws and regulations which
could impact our ability to execute our business plan.
 
As discussed in Note 4, the accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the
Company will continue as a going concern.
57
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
2.           SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 
Use of Estimates
 
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the
reported amounts of revenues and expenses.  Actual amounts could materially differ from those
estimates.
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
 
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less when
purchased, to be cash equivalents.
 
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
 
The Company is required to estimate the fair value of all financial instruments included on its balance
sheet.  The carrying value of cash, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities
approximate their fair value due to the short period to maturity of these instruments.
 
Oil and Gas Properties
 
The Company follows the full cost method of accounting for its investments in oil and gas properties.
Under the full cost method, all costs associated with the exploration of properties are capitalized into
appropriate cost centers within the full cost pool. Internal costs that are capitalized are limited to those
costs that can be directly identified with acquisition, exploration, and development activities undertaken
and do not include any costs related to production, general corporate overhead, or similar activities.
Cost centers are established on a country-by-country basis.
 
Capitalized costs within the cost centers are amortized on the unit-of-production basis using proved oil
and gas reserves. The cost of investments in unproved properties and major development projects are
excluded from capitalized costs to be amortized until it is determined whether or not proved reserves
can be assigned to the properties. Until such a determination is made, the properties are assessed
annually to ascertain whether impairment has occurred. The costs of drilling exploratory dry holes are
included in the amortization base immediately upon determination that the well is dry.
 
For each cost center, capitalized costs are subject to an annual ceiling test, in which the costs shall not
exceed the cost center ceiling. The cost center ceiling is equal to i) the present value of estimated future
net revenues computed by applying current prices of oil and gas reserves (with consideration of price
changes only to the extent provided by contractual arrangements) to estimated future production of
proved oil and gas reserves as of the date of the latest balance sheet presented, less estimated future
expenditures (based on current costs) to be incurred in developing and producing the proved reserves
computed using a discount factor of ten percent and assuming continuation of existing economic
conditions; plus ii) the cost of properties not being amortized; plus iii) the lower of cost or estimated fair
value of unproven properties included in the costs being amortized; less iv) income tax effects related to
differences between the book and tax basis of the properties. If unamortized costs capitalized within a
cost center, less related deferred income taxes, exceed the cost center ceiling, the excess is charged to
expense and separately disclosed during the period in which the excess occurs.
58
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
2.           SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
 
Wells and Equipment
Wells and equipment are stated at cost.  Expenditures for major additions and improvements are
capitalized and minor replacements, maintenance, and repairs are charged to expense as
incurred.  When property and equipment are retired or otherwise disposed of, the cost and accumulated
depreciation are removed from the accounts and any resulting gain or loss is included in the results of
operations for the respective period.  Depreciation of property and equipment is computed using the
units of production and straight line methods over the estimated useful lives of the assets.  Leasehold
improvements are amortized over the shorter of the estimated useful life of the asset or the related lease
term.
 
 Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
 
The Company reviews the carrying values of its long-lived and intangible assets for possible impairment
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not
be recoverable.  In cases where undiscounted expected future cash flows are less than the carrying
value, an impairment loss is recognized equal to an amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair
value of assets.
 
The factors considered by management in performing this assessment include current operating results,
trends, and prospects, as well as the effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, and other economic
factors.  For the years ended April 30, 2011 and 2010, the Company has not incurred an impairment
loss on its long-lived assets.
 
Asset Retirement Obligation
 
The Company accounts for its future asset retirement obligations by recording the fair value of the
liability during the period in which it was incurred. The associated asset retirement costs are capitalized
as part of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset. The increase in carrying value of a property
associated with the capitalization of an asset retirement cost is included in proved oil and gas properties
within the Company’s balance sheets. The Company depletes the amount added to proved oil and gas
property costs using the units-of-production method and the straight-line basis over the life of the assets.
 
The Company’s asset retirement obligation consists of costs related to the plugging of wells, removal of
facilities and equipment and site restoration on its oil and gas properties and gathering assets. The
asset retirement liability is allocated to operating expense using a systematic and rational method.
 
Revenue Recognition
 
Working interest, royalty and net profit interests are recognized as revenue when oil and gas are
sold.  The Company records the sale of its interests in prospects generally as a reduction to the cost
pool without gain or loss recognition unless such a sale would significantly alter the relationship
between capitalized costs and the proved reserves attributable to a cost center.  A significant alternation
would typically involve a sale of 25% or more of the proved reserves related to a single full cost pool.  All
terms of the sale are to be finalized and price readily determinable.
59
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
2.           SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
 
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
 
The Company reports and displays its components of comprehensive income or loss in its financial
statements with the same prominence as other financial statement amounts.  For the years ended April
30, 2012 and 2011, the Company had no other component of comprehensive loss other than its net loss
as reported within the statements of operations.
 
Basic and Diluted Earnings (Loss) Per Share
 
Basic earnings (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) available to common
shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted
earnings (loss) per common share is computed in the same way as basic earnings (loss) per common
share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that
would be outstanding if all potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common
shares were dilutive.
 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
 
In September 2011, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2011-08, Intangibles -
Goodwill and Other (Topic 350) - Testing Goodwill for Impairment (ASU 2011-08), to allow entities to
use a qualitative approach to test goodwill for impairment. ASU 2011-08 permits an entity to first perform
a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting
unit is less than its carrying value. If it is concluded that this is the case, it is necessary to perform the
currently prescribed two-step goodwill impairment test. Otherwise, the two-step goodwill impairment test
is not required. ASU 2011-08 is effective for us in fiscal 2013 and earlier adoption is permitted. The
Company is currently evaluating the impact of our pending adoption of ASU 2011-08 on our
consolidated financial statements.
 
There were various updates recently issued, most of which represented technical corrections to the
accounting literature or application to specific industries and are not expected to a have a material
impact on the Company's consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
 
Reclassifications
 
Certain amounts in the 2011 financial statements have been reclassified for comparative purposes to
conform to the current year presentation.
3.           CONCENTRATION OF CREDIT RISK AND ECONOMIC DEPENDENCY
 
The Company collects its receivables on its working interests in oil and gas properties from the well
operators.  As such, the Company generally has relatively few customers.  These receivables are
unsecured and the Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of the well operators’ financial
condition whenever necessary.  At April 30, 2012, the Company had two (2) customers that accounted
for 100% of its outstanding receivables and correspondingly, its oil and gas sales.  Bad debt expense is
recognized on an account-by-account review after all means of collection have been exhausted and
recovery is not probable.  There has been no bad debt expense for the years ended April 30, 2012 and
2011.
The Company receives certain well drilling and pipeline transportation services from its subsidiaries.
60
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
4.           GOING CONCERN
 
The Company is in the exploration stage, has minimal revenues and has incurred losses from
operations of ($5,268,907) since inception and has used $1,755,212 in cash for operating activities
since inception.  Due to the Company’s sustained losses, additional debt and equity financing will be
required by the Company to fund its activities and to support operations.  There is no assurance that the
Company will be able to obtain additional financing.  Furthermore, the Company's existence is
dependent upon management's ability to develop profitable operations.  These factors, among others,
raise substantial doubt that the Company will be able to continue as a going concern.
 
Management is currently devoting substantially all of its efforts to exploit its existing oil and gas
properties and recover as much of the resources available.  The Company also continues to search for
additional productive properties.  There can be no assurance that the Company's efforts will be
successful, or that those efforts will translate in a beneficial manner to the Company. The accompanying
statements do not include any adjustments that might result should the Company be unable to continue
as a going concern.
 
5.           ACQUISITION
 
On April 12, 2011, the Company acquired 100% of the membership interest of three (3) affiliated entities,
KYTX Oil and Gas, LLC, KYTX Pipeline, LLC, and KYTX Drilling, LLC (the KYTX entities) from their
sole member in exchange for $400,000 in cash and 8,500,000 shares of the Company’s common stock
valued at $6,375,000 and subject to certain other conditions and obligations.
 
The acquisition was accounted for as a purchase, with the assets acquired and liabilities assumed
recorded at fair value, and the results of the KYTX entities’ operations included in our financial
statements from the date of acquisition.
 
The allocation of the purchase price of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair
values is as follows:
Proved oil and gas properties
Unproved oil and gas properties
Other property and equipment
Goodwill
 
Total assets acquired
Liabilities assumed
$ 1,135,725
   
2,204,640
2,053,741
   
   
1,394,215
6,788,321
(13,321)
Total purchase price
$ 6,775,000
61
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
6.           OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
 
On November 18, 2009, the Company acquired various oil and gas property rights in Frio County,
Texas, with a fair value of $300,000, in exchange for 10,500,000 (350,000 pre-split) shares of the
Company’s common stock.
On March 4, 2010, the Company entered into an operating agreement (the “Operating Agreement”) with
Boardman Energy Partners, LLC (“Boardman”), for the purchase of participation rights with regard to
Boardman’s operation of wells in the Taylor TDS Five Well Program (“Program”) located on the H.V.
Taylor Lease in the Middle Eastern section of the Gradyville Quadrangle, Adair County, Kentucky, for
the purpose of oil and gas exploration and development. Boardman is the operator of the project with full
control of all operations. The Operating Agreement provides for the Company's purchase of fractional
undivided working interests (“Units”) in the operation of the wells drilled and operated under the
Operating Agreement. Each Unit gives the purchaser the participation rights and revenue interests in the
operation of the Program, at the rate of 2.0% working interest and 1.5% net revenue interest per Unit
purchased.
 
The Operating Agreement is subject to an Addendum (Operating Agreement Addendum), referencing
the incorporation of the subscription agreement concerning the purchase of the participation rights set
forth in the Operating Agreement. The Operating Agreement Addendum sets forth the representation
Boardman had met the escrow conditions as of September 12, 2009 such that the funds received from
the Company would be immediately available for use.
In conjunction with the Operating Agreement, the Company entered into a Subscription and Customer
Agreement (“Subscription Agreement”) with Third Coast Energy & Development, LLC, (“Third Coast”) as
consideration for the Company's participation in the Operating Agreement, in the amount of $303,986.
The Company purchased eight Units at the rate of $37,996 per Unit in the Program described above.
The Units have not been registered with any federal or state agency, and in accordance with applicable
securities laws, may not be freely transferred except in accordance with such laws.
 
In May 2010, the Company entered into a participation agreement with Allied Energy, Inc. (“Allied”),
pursuant to which the Company acquired an undivided 50% working interest in the Florence Valentine
Lease and a working interest and net revenue interest in the Valentine #1 re-entry well. This well is
located on approximately 115 acres in Ritchie County, West Virginia within the Burning Springs
Anticline. Allied is the operator of the project with full control of all operations. The Company paid the
total drilling and completion costs of $153,500 to earn in the Valentine #1 re-entry well and the Florence
Valentine lease a before payout working interest of 70% and net revenue interest of 59.08 (70% x
84.4%) and an after payout working interest of 50% and net revenue interest of 42.2% (50% x 84.4%).
On August 4, 2010, the Company entered into a Participation Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Allied
Energy, Inc. (“Allied”), which the Company acquired an undivided fifty percent (50%) working interest in
the M. Dillon Lease (the “Lease”) and a working interest and net revenue interest in the Dillon #1 re-
entry well (“Well”). The Well is located on approximately 204 acres in Pleasants County, West Virginia.
Allied is the operator of the project with full control of all operations. The Company paid the total drilling
and completion costs of $179,125 to earn in the Well and Lease a before payout working interest of
seventy percent (70%) and net revenue interest of 59.08 (70% x 84.4%) and an after payout working
interest of fifty percent (50%) and net revenue interest of 42.2% (50% x 84.4%). The Agreement also
provides that the Company shall have the option to participate in the re-entry of sixteen additional wells
owned by Allied in West Virginia.
 
 
 
62
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
6.           OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES (Continued)
 
On September 3, 2010, the Company entered into a Subscription Agreement (the “Agreement”) with
Berry Resources, Inc. (“Berry”), to purchase 6.5 units of the Berry Prospect #22-A, which includes two
(2) wells to be drilled in North Central, Pickett County, Tennessee, in exchange for the Company’s cash
payment of $97,500. Each unit is equal to approximately 3.33% working interest or approximately 2.33%
net revenue interest in each of the two (2) wells to be drilled in North Central, Pickett County,
Tennessee. The Agreement also provides for Berry and the Company to enter into an operating
agreement whereby Berry will be designated the operator of the well.
 
On October 15, 2010, the Company entered into an amendment to the Agreement (“Amendment
Agreement”) with Allied, the practical effect of which is that the Company replaced its participation in the
Dillon #1 well with participation in the Goose Creek #4 well in Ritchie County, West Virginia.
Specifically, the Amendment Agreement amended the following: (i) the Operating Agreement with
respect to the Florence Valentine Lease, (ii) the Participation Agreement with respect to the reentry of
the Dillon #1 well dated August 2, 2010, and (iii) the Joint Operating Agreement with respect to the M.
Dillon Lease in Ritchie County, West Virginia dated August 2, 2010. The Amendment amends the
Valentine JOA and the Dillon JOA to include Exhibit C which provides the accounting procedures for
the operations. The Amendment also amends the Participation Agreement by replacing all references of
the Dillon #1 well in Pleasant County, West Virginia, to the Goose Creek #4 well (API #47-082-06942)
in Ritchie County, West Virginia. The Amendment also amends the Dillon JOA by replacing all
references of the Dillon #1 well in Pleasant County, West Virginia, to the Goose Creek well #4 (API #47-
082-06942). The Amendment also amends the Participation Agreement and the Dillon JOA to delete the
Exhibit A to those agreements and replace it with the Exhibit A attached to the Amendment as Appendix
2. This Goose Creek #4 well is included in the Eco Forrest Lease, which is located on approximately
493 acres in Ritchie County, West Virginia.
 
On December 15, 2010, the Company exercised an option to participate in the recompletion of the well
WVIC D-12 with Allied, pursuant to the Participation Agreement with Allied, as amended in the
Amendment Agreement on October 15, 2010. The well WVIC D-12 is included in the Eco Forrest Lease,
which is located on approximately 493 acres in Ritchie County, West Virginia. The Company is
obligated to pay the total drilling and completion costs of $157,575 to earn in the well WVIC D-12 and
Eco Forrest Lease a before payout working interest of seventy percent (70%) and net revenue interest of
59.08 (70% x 84.4%) and an after payout working interest of fifty percent (50%) and net revenue interest
of 42.2% (50% x 84.4%).
 
On April 12, 2011, the Company acquired a 100% working interest and 72.5% net royalty interest in
4,040 gross acres in Knox County, Kentucky comprising of approximately 70 wells and related well
equipment and gathering assets in connection with its acquisition of the KYTX entities as discussed
above in Note 5.
 
The following table presents information regarding the Company’s net costs incurred in the purchase of
proved and unproved properties and in exploration and development activities:
April 30,
April 30,
Property acquisition costs:
Proved
Unproved
Exploration costs
Development costs
Totals
63
2011
2012
$ 1,983,105    $ 1,435,725 
    2,993,305      3,121,601 
128,991 
   
   
38,307 
    5,305,263    $ 4,724,624
42,628     
286,025
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
6.           OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES (Continued)
 
On October 28, 2011, the Company sold its 75% working interest in proved properties located in Frio
County, Texas for $160,000.  Since this transaction did not result in a significant alteration to the
Company’s cost pool, this amount reduced the Company’s proved property pool and accordingly, no
gain or loss was recorded.
 
As of April 30, 2012 and 2011, the Company’s unproved properties consist of leasehold acquisition and
exploration costs in the following geographical areas:
$ 2,489,626    $ 2,655,629 
332,625 
   
   
97,500 
35,847
Kentucky
West Virginia
Tennesee
Texas
332,625     
97,500     
74,154
2012
2011
Totals
$ 2,993,305    $ 3,121,601
2011
Prior
2012
Acquisition costs
Exploration costs
 
Total
The following table sets forth a summary of oil and gas property costs not being amortized as of April 30,
2012, by the year in which such costs were incurred:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Company believes that the majority of its unproved costs will become subject to depletion within the
next five to ten years, by proving up reserves relating to the acreage through exploration and
development activities, by impairing the acreage that will expire before the Company explore or develop
it further, or by making decisions that further exploration and development activity will not occur.
$ 2,661,280    $ 2,788,976    $ 303,968 
- 
   
     
 
  $ 2,993,305    $ 3,121,601    $ 303,968
332,625
332,625
64
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
2011
2012
279,070
$ 1,755,472    $ 1,736,385 
   
274,149 
    2,034,542      2,010,534 
   
  
(10,194)
   
   
  
  $ 2,003,743    $ 2,000,340
Wells, machinery and equipment
Furniture, fixtures and office equipment
 
 
Less: accumulated depreciation
7.           PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
 
Property, plant and equipment consist of the following at April 30:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Depreciation expense was $20,605 and $10,194 for the years ended April 30, 2012 and 2011,
respectively.
 
8. SENIOR CONVERTIBLE PROMISSORY NOTES
 
In connection with the Asset Purchase Agreement on November 18, 2009, the Company entered into a
Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement (First Financing Agreement) with Eurasian Capital Partners
Limited (Eurasian) pursuant to which Eurasian agreed to lend up to $2,000,000 to the Company in
multiple installments in exchange for senior secured convertible promissory notes that mature
November 18, 2012, together with interest at 8% per annum, convertible at any time at the option of the
(30,799)
holder, with a conversion price of $0.50 per share (the Conversion Feature) and five-year warrants to
acquire shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per share (the Warrants) in the amount of
each installment.
 
As of April 30, 2012, the Company had issued all $2,000,000 in senior convertible promissory notes
along with 2,000,000 in warrants pursuant to the First Financing Agreement.
 
On April 12, 2011, the Company entered into an additional Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement
(Second Financing Agreement) with Eurasian pursuant to which Eurasian agreed to lend up to
$2,400,000 to the Company in multiple installments in exchange for senior secured convertible
promissory notes that mature April 12, 2014, together with interest at 8% per annum, convertible at any
time at the option of the holder, with a conversion price of $1.00 per share (the Conversion Feature) and
five-year warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share (the
Warrants) in the amount of each installment.
 
As of April 30, 2012, the Company had issued $860,000 in senior convertible promissory notes along
with 860,000 in warrants pursuant the Second Financing Agreement.  
 
On August 1, 2011, the Company closed a Securities Purchase Agreement with the purchasers
identified therein (each a “Purchaser” and, collectively, the “Purchasers”) providing for the issuance and
sale by the Registrant to the Purchasers of an aggregate principal value of approximately $1,310,621 of
5% original issue discount convertible debentures (the “Debentures”) and three series of warrants, the
Series A Warrants, the Series B Warrants and the Series C Warrants, to purchase an aggregate of
2,621,241 shares of the Registrant’s Common Stock (collectively, the “Warrants” and the shares
issuable upon exercise of the Warrants, collectively, the “Warrant Shares”), in exchange for the
aggregate purchase price of approximately $1,114,000.
65
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
8.   SENIOR CONVERTIBLE PROMISSORY NOTES (Continued)
 
The Debentures become due and payable two years from the date of issuance.  The Debentures may
be converted at any time at the option of the Purchasers into shares of the Registrant’s common stock at
a conversion price of $1.00 per share (the “Conversion Price”). On and after the earlier of (i) the Effective
Date (as defined in the Registration Rights Agreement) or (ii) February 1, 2012 (such earlier date, the
“Trigger Date”), the Conversion Price shall be reduced to the lesser of (x) the then Conversion Price, as
adjusted and (y) the average of the volume weighted average price for the 10 trading days immediately
following the Trigger Date, which shall thereafter be the new Conversion Price. The adjusted
Conversion Price shall not be lower than $0.50.The Debentures bear interest at the rate of 5% per
annum increasing to 18% in an event of default.  Interest is payable quarterly payable in cash or equity if
certain conditions are met.  The Debentures will be unsecured, general obligations of the Registrant,
and rank pari passu with the Registrant’s other unsecured and unsubordinated liabilities.  The
Debentures are not subject to voluntary prepayment by the Registrant prior to maturity and are identical
for all of the Purchasers except for principal amount.
Pursuant to the terms of the Securities Purchase Agreement, each Purchaser has been issued a Series
A Warrant, a Series B Warrant and a Series C Warrant.  The Series A Warrants grant each Purchaser
the right to purchase up to a number of shares of Common Stock equal to 50% of the shares underlying
the principal amount of the Debenture issued to such Purchaser, have an exercise price of $1.25 per
share, are exercisable immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to five years.
 
The Series B Warrants grant each Purchaser the right to purchase up to a number of shares of Common
Stock equal to 100% of the shares underlying the principal amount of the Debenture issued to such
Purchaser, have an exercise price of $1.00 per share, are exercisable immediately upon issuance and
have a term of exercise equal to twelve months. The Series C Warrants grant each Purchaser the right
to purchase up to a number of shares of Common Stock equal to 50% of the shares underlying the
principal amount of the Debenture issued to such Purchaser, have an exercise price of $1.25 per share,
vest and are exercisable ratably commencing on the exercise of the Series B Warrants held by each
Purchaser (or its assigns) and have a term of exercise equal to five years. In addition, on and after the
earlier of (i) the Effective Date (as defined in the Registration Rights Agreement) or (ii) February 1, 2012
(such earlier date, the “Warrant Trigger Date”), the exercise price of each Warrant shall be reduced to
the lesser of (x) the then exercise price for each Warrant, as adjusted, and (y) for Series A and Series C
Warrants, 125% of the average of the VWAPs, and for Series B Warrants, 100% of the average of the
VWAPs, for the 10 Trading Days immediately following the Warrant Trigger Date (the “Reset Exercise
Price”) and the number of Warrant Shares issuable hereunder shall be increased such that the
aggregate exercise price payable hereunder, after taking into account the adjustment to the Reset
Exercise Price, shall be equal to the aggregate exercise price prior to such adjustment; provided,
however, that such adjusted exercise price shall not be lower than $0.50 (subject to adjustment for
forward and reverse stock splits and the like).
 
In connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement, each of the Registrant’s subsidiaries, KYTX
Drilling Company, LLC, KYTX Oil and Gas, LLC, and KYTX Pipeline, LLC (collectively, the
“Subsidiaries”), entered into a Subsidiary Guarantee dated July 26, 2011 (the “Subsidiary Guarantee”),
pursuant to which the Subsidiaries jointly and severally guaranteed to the Purchasers and their
respective successors and assigns, the prompt and complete repayment of the Debentures.
 
In connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company and the Purchasers entered into a
Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”).  Under the Registration Rights
Agreement, the Company is required to file a registration statement within 45 days following such
closing to register the resale of the shares underlying the Debentures and the Warrant Shares.  The
Company filed a registration statement on August 18, 2011 which became effective on October 11,
2011.
66
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
8.           SENIOR CONVERTIBLE PROMISSORY NOTES (Continued)
In addition, the Company entered into a Placement Agent Agreement whereby the Company, (a) paid
placement agent fees equal to 7% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the private placement, (b)
issued warrants to the placement agent to purchase 91,743 shares of the Company’s common stock,
and (c) to reimburse the placement agent for certain expenses.
 
The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model for the Warrants and Conversion
Features of the convertible notes were as follows:
0.25% to 0.41%
100.00%
Risk-free interest rate
Expected volatility of common
stock
Dividend yield
Expected life of warrants and
conversion feature
Weighted average warrants and
conversion feature
0.00%
5 years
$0.65 - $1.34
During the year ended April 30, 2012, certain Purchasers of the Company’s Debentures converted their
outstanding balances of approximately $247,300 into 494,600 shares of the Company’s common stock.
 
9.           WARRANTS
 
A summary of warrant activity for the year ended April 30, 2012 is presented below:
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contract
Price
Term
Number of
Warrants
2,460,000     
    3,021,241    $
   
-
1.05  3.2 years  
1.14  2.1 years
-
5,481,241    $
1.10  2.6 years
5,841,241    $
1.10  2.6 years
Outstanding May 1,
2011
Issued
Exercised
Outstanding, April 30,
2012
Exercisable, April 30,
2012
The Company has reserved shares for future issuance upon conversion of convertible notes payable
and warrants as follows:
67
Conversion of notes payable
Warrants
Reserved shares at April 30, 2012
5,676,021 
8,995,150 
14,671,171
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
10.         STOCK OPTION PLAN
 
On December 21, 2011, the Company’s Board of Directors approved the Alamo Energy Corp. 2011
Stock Option Plan (the “Plan”).  The Plan permits flexibility in types of awards, and specific terms of
awards, which will allow future awards to be based on then-current objectives for aligning compensation
with increasing long-term shareholder value.
 
The Board of Directors, acting as a compensation committee (the “Committee”) will generally administer
the Plan. The Committee will have full power and authority to determine when and to whom awards will
be granted, including the type, amount, form of payment and other terms and conditions of each award,
consistent with the provisions of the Plan.  In addition, the Committee has the authority to interpret the
Plan and the awards granted under the Plan, and establish rules and regulations for the administration
of the Plan.
 
Awards under the Plan may be granted to any person who is (i) an employee of the Registrant, (ii) a
non-employee member of the Board of Directors or the board of directors of any subsidiary, or (iii) a
consultant who provides services to the Company; provided that stock appreciation rights and non-
qualified stock options shall be granted only to persons as to which the Company is the “service
recipient,” as such term is defined in Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code.
 
The Plan will terminate on December 21, 2021, unless all shares available for issuance have been
issued, the Plan is earlier terminated by the Board or the Committee, or the Plan is extended by an
amendment approved by the Company’s shareholders. No awards may be made after the termination
date. However, unless otherwise expressly provided in an applicable award agreement, any award
granted under the Plan prior to the termination date may extend beyond the end of such period through
the award’s normal expiration date.
 
The aggregate number of shares of the common stock authorized for issuance as awards under the
Plan is 7,500,000. The maximum aggregate number of shares of common stock subject to stock options,
stock appreciation rights, restricted stock or stock unit awards which may be granted to any one
participant in any one year under the Plan is 1,000,000.
 
Under the Plan, the Committee can grant stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, stock
units and performance units. Awards may be granted alone, in addition to, or in combination with any
other award granted under the Plan. Subject to the limitations set forth in the Plan, the terms and
conditions of each award shall generally be governed by the particular document or agreement granting
the award.
 
Unless otherwise provided by the Committee, awards under the Plan may only be transferred by will or
the laws of descent and distribution. The Committee may permit further transferability pursuant to
conditions and limitations that it may impose, except that no transfers for consideration will be permitted.
 
In the event of any stock dividend, stock split, combination of shares, extraordinary dividend of cash
and/or assets, recapitalization, reorganization or any similar event, the Committee is entitled to
appropriately and equitably adjust the number and kind of shares or other securities which are subject to
the Plan or subject to any award under the Plan.
 
Subject to any restrictive terms which may be set forth in award agreements, in the event the Company
is a party to a merger or other reorganization, outstanding awards shall be subject to the agreement of
merger or reorganization. Such agreement may provide, without limitation, for the assumption of
outstanding awards by the surviving corporation or its parent, for their continuation by the Company (if
the Company is a surviving corporation) for accelerated vesting and accelerated expiration, or for
settlement in cash.
 
 
 
68
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
10.         STOCK OPTION PLAN (Continued)
 
The Board may generally amend or terminate the Plan as determined to be advisable. Shareholder
approval may also be required for certain amendments pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, the rules
of any market in which the Registrant participates, or rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
No amendment or alteration of the Plan may be made which would impair the rights of any participant
under any outstanding award, without such participant’s consent, provided that no consent is required
with respect to any amendment or alteration if the Committee determines that such amendment or
alteration is either:
●   required or advisable in order for the Company, the Plan or the award to satisfy any law or
regulation or to meet the requirements of any accounting standard, or
●   not reasonably likely to significantly diminish the benefits provided under such award, or that
any such diminishment has been adequately compensated.
As of April 30, 2012, the Company has not granted any options pursuant to the Plan to purchase shares
of its common stock.
 
11.          SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND GAS RESERVE INFORMATION (Unaudited)
 
The following reserve quantities and future net cash flow information for our proved reserves located in
the United States have been estimated as of April 30, 2012.  The determination of oil and gas reserves
is based on estimates, which are highly complex and interpretive. The estimates are subject to
continuing change as additional information becomes available.
PROVED DEVELOPED AND
UNDEVELOPED RESERVES:
 
April 30, 2010
 
Revision of previous estimates
Purchase of reserves
Extensions, discoveries, and other
additions
Crude Oil
Natural Gas
(Bbls)
(Mcf)
16,009     
      
       
19,558
- 
  
 
  12,355,996
1,357
153,480
Sale of reserves
Production
 
April 30, 2011
 
Revision of previous estimates
Purchase of reserves
Extensions, discoveries, and other
additions
Sale of reserves
Production
 
April 30, 2012
(9,286)       
        
27,638     
      
  18,151
12,509,476 
  
  (6,073,677)
4,814     
  (5,777)      
  (1,807)    
      
43,019
10,547,460 
 
  (124,216) 
  
16,859,043
PROVED DEVELOPED RESERVES    
   
 
April 30, 2010
   
   
April 30, 2011
April 30, 2012
None of the proved undeveloped oil reserves were converted during the year ended April 30, 2012 as
the Company is reviewing the production performance and assessment of the remaining recoverable
resources.  In addition, there were no proved undeveloped reserves over five (5) years.
- 
1,608,975 
  2,578,660
8,804     
10,651     
  26,167
69
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
11.          SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND GAS RESERVE INFORMATION (Unaudited) (Continued)
 
Standardized Measure
 
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved oil and natural gas
reserves is as follows:
$ 71,668,651    $ 63,764,737 
(15,628,515)
      (22,027,861 )   
      (17,582,000)    
(14,103,000)
     
- 
     
34,033,222 
  32,058,790
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated
timing of cash flows
Standardized measure of
Years Ended April 30,
2012
2011
(28,454,210)
(27,184,770)
discounted future net cash flow
related to proved reserves
A summary of the changes in the standardized measure of discounted future new cash flow applicable
to proved oil and natural reserves is as follows:
3,604,580    $
6,848,452
$
Change in Standardized Measure
Balance, beginning of period
Sales of oil and gas, net
Net change in prices and production
costs
Net change in future development
costs
Extensions and discoveries
Revisions of previous quantity
estimates
Previously estimated development
costs incurred
Net change in income taxes
Accretion of discount
Purchase of minerals in place
Sales of reserves
Balance, end of period
70
$   6,848,452    $
   
  (539,961)
Years Ended April 30,
 
2012
2011
328,686 
(123,672)
(3,863,187)
(18,886)
(841,000)      
  871,780
187,002
220,272
(28,678
580,639     
     
  448,161     
     
  (120,576)
- 
   
  - 
     
  - 
   
6,504,000 
     
   
  - 
  $   3,604,580    $ 6,848,452
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2012 AND 2011
11.          SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND GAS RESERVE INFORMATION (Unaudited) (Continued)
 
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows as of April 30, 2012 and 2011 was
calculated using the following Average Fiscal-Year prices:
Average crude oil price per barrel
Average gas price per MCF
76.180 
4.929
88.59    $
4.025    $
$
  $
2012
2011
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows is provided using the 12-month
unweighted arithmetic average. The oil price used as of April 30, 2012 was $88.59 per Bbl of oil and
$4.025 per Mcf of gas. Future production costs are based on year-end costs and include severance and
ad valorem taxes of approximately 4.5%. Each property that is leased by the Company is also charged
with field-level overhead in the reserve calculation. The present value of future cash inflows is based on
a 10% discount.
The Company used discounted future net cash flows, which is calculated without deducting estimated
future income tax expenses, and the present value thereof as one measure of the value of the
Company's current proved reserves and to compare relative values among peer companies without
regard to income taxes.  While future net revenue and present value are based on prices, costs and
discount factors which are consistent from company to company, the standardized measure of
discounted future net cash flows is dependent on the unique tax situation of each individual company. 
As of April 30, 2012, the present value of discounted future net cash flows and the standardized
measure of discounted future net cash flows are equal because the effects of estimated future income
tax expenses are zero.
 
12.         SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On July 10, 2012, the Company entered into a third amendment to the Additional Shares Agreement
dated April 12, 2011 with Range pursuant to which the Company agreed to extend the amount of time in
which Range must provide notice of their election to adjust the per share price of the shares received
pursuant to the Membership Interest Purchase Agreement dated April 12, 2011 from 240 calendar days
to 330 calendar days. 
 
On July 10, 2012, the Company participated in an oilfield equipment auction held by Kruse Energy and
Equipment.  On August 6, 2012, the Company received $226,796, net of all expenses, for the equipment
that was auctioned.
 
On August 1, 2012, the Company issued 16,724,329 shares to the Investors in exchange for all of the
outstanding Discount Debentures and Series Warrants held by the Investors. The number of shares
issued in exchange for the Discount Debentures was calculated by dividing the applicable principal and
interest due on the Discount Debentures by the conversion rate of $0.07 per share. The number of
shares issued in exchange for the Series Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the
Series A Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Discount Debentures and the Series Warrants
are no longer outstanding, and the Company extinguished $1,076,612.52 in principal and accrued and
unpaid interest due under the Discount Debentures and 1,344,150 shares of common stock underlying
the Series Warrants. 
 
On August 1, 2012, the Company issued an aggregate of 523,483 shares of the Investors holding only
Series A Warrants in exchange for the Series A Warrants held by those Investors. The number of shares
issued in exchange for the Series A Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the Series
A Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Series A Warrants are no longer outstanding, and the
Company extinguished 523,483 shares of common stock underlying the Series A Warrants.
71
[OUTSIDE BACK COVER]
PROSPECTUS
11,575,000 SHARES OF COMMON STOCK
ALAMO ENERGY CORP.
10575 Katy Freeway, Suite 300
Houston, TX, 77024
Tel: (832) 436-1832
, 2012
Until                           , 2012, all dealers that effect transactions in our shares, whether or not participating
in this offering, may be required to deliver a prospectus.  This is in addition to the dealer’s obligation to
deliver a prospectus when acting as underwriters and with respect to their unsold allotments or
subscriptions.
72
PART II - INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 13.  Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
 
We will pay all expenses in connection with the registration and sale of our common stock. None of the
expenses will be paid by the selling shareholders. The estimated expenses of issuance and distribution
are set forth below.
Registration Fees
Transfer Agent Fees
Costs of Printing and
Engraving
Approximately
Approximately
Approximately
$1,625.58 
$1,000 
$1,000
Approximately
Approximately
$25,000 
$10,000
Legal Fees
Accounting Fees
Item 14. Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
 
Under our Bylaws, directors and officers will be indemnified to the fullest extent allowed by the law
against all damages and expenses suffered by a director or officer being party to any action, suit, or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative. This same indemnification is
provided pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes, Chapter 78, except the director or officer must have
acted in good faith and in a manner that he believed to be in our best interest, and the stockholders or
the Board of Directors unless ordered by a court, must approve any discretionary indemnification.
 
The general effect of the foregoing is to indemnify a control person, officer or director from liability,
thereby making us responsible for any expenses or damages incurred by such control person, officer or
director in any action brought against them based on their conduct in such capacity, provided they did
not engage in fraud or criminal activity.
 
Accordingly, our directors may have no liability to our shareholders for any mistakes or errors of
judgment or for any act of omission, unless the act or omission involves intentional misconduct, fraud, or
a knowing violation of law or results in unlawful distributions to our shareholders.
 
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to our
directors, officers and controlling persons pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, we have
been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is
against public policy as expressed in the Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
 
Item 15. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities.
 
There have been no sales of unregistered securities within the last three years, which would be required
to be disclosed pursuant to Item 701 of Regulation S-K, except for the following:
73
On November 18, 2009, we completed the acquisition of certain assets from Alamo Oil pursuant to the
Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement (“Asset Purchase Agreement”) with Alamo Oil Limited (“Alamo
Oil”), pursuant to which we acquired certain oil and gas assets from Alamo Oil.  In connection with the
Asset Purchase Agreement, we issued 350,000 shares of our common stock to Alamo Oil, which
became 10,500,000 shares after the 30 for 1 forward split that occurred in December 2009. Those
shares were issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from
the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified
by the provisions of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to that act by the SEC.
 
Eurasian Notes and Warrants.  In connection with the Asset Purchase Agreement, on November 18,
2009, we entered into a Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement (the “First Financing Agreement”) with
Eurasian pursuant to which Eurasian agreed to lend up to $2,000,000 to us in multiple installments in
exchange for senior secured convertible promissory notes with a conversion price of $0.50 per share
(“Note”) and three-year warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per
share (“Warrants”) in the amount of each installment. Pursuant to the First Financing Agreement, we
issued the following Notes and Warrants to Eurasian on the following dates:
Date of Note
Amount
of Note
Number of Warrants
November 18, 2009
 February 5, 2010
 March 4, 2010
 March 25, 2010
 April 15, 2010
 July 22, 2010
 August 12, 2010
 August 18, 2010
 September 7, 2010
 September 24, 2010
 December 2, 2010
 December 15, 2010
 February 8, 2011
 March 1, 2011
 April 12, 2011
$334,905
$80,000
$300,000
  $100,000
  $250,000
  $175,000
 $ 25,000
$150,000
 $ 70,000
  $40,000
  $25,000
  $75,000
  $100,000
 $160,000
 $115,095
$2,000,000
334,905
80,000
300,000
100,000
250,000
175,000
25,000
150,000
70,000
40,000
25,000
75,000
100,000
160,000
115,095
2,000,000
Total
The Note and Warrants were issued in transactions which we believe satisfy the requirements of that
exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which
exemption is specified by the provisions of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to that act by the SEC.
We believe that exemptions were available because (iii) the sale was made to eligible non-U.S. persons
as that term is defined for purposes of Regulation S, and with regard to all transactions, (iii) transfer was
restricted in accordance with the requirements of the Securities Act (including by legending of
certificates representing the securities).
74
On April 12, 2011, we entered into a second Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement with Eurasian
(“Second Financing Agreement”), whereby Eurasian agreed to lend up to $2,400,000 to us multiple
installments in exchange for senior secured convertible promissory notes with a conversion price of
$1.00 per share (“New Notes”) and five-year warrants to acquire shares of common stock at an exercise
price of $1.25 per share (“New Warrants”) in the amount of each installment. The New Warrants expire
five years from the date of the investment. The New Notes are due on April 12, 2014, or upon default,
whichever is earlier, bears interest at the annual rate of 8%.  The New Notes have an optional
conversion feature by which Eurasian can convert the principal and accrued interest into shares of our
common stock at a conversion price of $1.00 per share.  Pursuant to the Second Financing Agreement,
we issued the following New Notes and New Warrants to Eurasian on the following dates:
Date of New Note
Number of New
Amount of
New Note
April 12, 2011
May 24, 2011
June 21, 2011
Total
$410,000
$50,000
$400,000
$860,000
Warrants
410,000
50,000
400,000
860,000
The New Notes and New Warrants were issued in transactions which we believe satisfy the
requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the
Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to
that act by the SEC. We are obligated to register the shares of common stock underlying the New Notes
and the shares of common stock underlying the New Warrants for resale.
Discount Debentures and Series Warrants. On August 1, 2011, we closed a securities purchase
agreement, dated July 26, 2011 (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional
investors (the “Investors” or, individually, the “Investor”) and issued to the Investors an aggregate
principal value of approximately $1,310,621 of original issue discount convertible debentures (the
“Debentures” or, individually, the “Discount Debenture”) and three series of warrants, the Series A
Warrants, the Series B Warrants and the Series C Warrants, to purchase an aggregate of 2,621,241
shares of our common stock (collectively, the “Series Warrants” and the shares issuable upon exercise
of the Series Warrants, collectively, the “Series Warrant Shares”) at an exercise price of $1.25 for the
Series A and C Warrants and $1.00 for the Series B Warrants.  The Series A Warrants grant each
Investor the right to purchase up to a number of shares of common stock equal to 50% of the shares
underlying the principal amount of the Discount Debenture issued to such Investor, are exercisable
immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to five years.  The Series B Warrants
grant each Investor the right to purchase up to a number of shares of common stock equal to 100% of
the shares underlying the principal amount of the Discount Debenture issued to such Investor, are
exercisable immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to twelve months.  The
Series C Warrants grant each Purchaser the right to purchase up to a number of shares of common
stock equal to 50% of the shares underlying the principal amount of the Discount Debenture issued to
such Investor, vest and are exercisable ratably commencing on the exercise of the Series B Warrants
held by each Investor (or its assigns) and have a term of exercise equal to five years.  We are obligated
to register the shares of common stock underlying the Discount Debentures and the shares of common
stock underlying the Series Warrants for resale. 
 
In connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement, we also closed a Placement Agent Agreement
on June 20, 2011 with our placement agent (the “Placement Agent Agreement”) and issued Series A
Warrants to purchase 91,743 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share to our
placement agent for services provided to us in connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement.  
The securities sold pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement and the Placement Agent
Agreement were issued in transactions which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption
from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is
specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act and Rule 506 of Regulation D
promulgated pursuant to that act by the SEC.
75
The foregoing description of the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Discount Debentures, the Series
Warrants and the Placement Agent Agreement is only a summary of the material terms of each
document and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of each document.  Copies of the
Form of Securities Purchase Agreement, the Form of Discount Debenture, the Form of Series A
Warrant, the Form of Series B Warrant, the Form of Series C Warrant, and the Placement Agent
Agreement are attached as Exhibits 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, and 10.8, respectively, to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2011 and are incorporated herein by reference.
On November 15, 2011, one of the Investors elected to convert a portion of its outstanding Discount
Debenture into shares of our common stock.  The Investor elected to convert $5,000 of the outstanding
principal due on its Discount Debenture into 10,000 shares of our common stock, or approximately
$0.50 per share.  On November 21, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $20,000 of the
outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 40,000 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.  On November 23, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $75,000 of
the outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 150,000 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.  On November 30, 2011, the same Investor elected to convert $135,300
of the outstanding principal due on its Discount Debenture into 270,600 shares of our common stock, or
approximately $0.50 per share.
 
On December 6, 2011 and January 6, 2012, we issued 64,471 shares and 78,192 shares, respectively,
to pay the interest due January 1, 2012 on the outstanding principal of the Discount Debentures to the
Investor.  These interest conversion shares were calculated by dividing the applicable interest amount
due to each Investor by the interest conversion rate of $0.1062 per share (90% of the 20-day VWAP for
the 20-day VWAP for the 20 trading days prior to January 1, 2012), pursuant to the Discount
Debentures.
On April 2, 2012, we issued 91,885 shares to pay the interest due April 1, 2012 on the outstanding
principal of the Discount Debentures to the Investors.  These interest conversion shares were calculated
by dividing the applicable interest amount due to each Investor by the interest conversion rate of
$0.1110 per share (90% of the 20-day VWAP for the 20-day VWAP for the 20 trading days prior to April
1, 2012), pursuant to the Discount Debentures.
On August 1, 2012, we issued 16,724,329 shares to the Investors in exchange for all of the outstanding
Discount Debentures and Series Warrants held by the Investors. The number of shares issued in
exchange for the Discount Debentures was calculated by dividing the applicable principal and interest
due on the Discount Debentures by the conversion rate of $0.07 per share. The number of shares
issued in exchange for the Series Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the Series A
Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Discount Debentures and the Series Warrants are no
longer outstanding, and we extinguished $1,076,612.52 in principal and accrued and unpaid interest
due under the Discount Debentures and 1,344,150 shares of common stock underlying the Series
Warrants.  The shares were issued to each Investor pursuant to the exemption from registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, amended (the “Act”), provided by
Section 3(a)(9) of the Act.
On August 1, 2012, we issued an aggregate of 523,483 shares of the Investors holding only Series A
Warrants in exchange for the Series A Warrants held by those Investors. The number of shares issued
in exchange for the Series A Warrants was equal to the number of shares underlying the Series A
Warrants.  Following such consummation, the Series A Warrants are no longer outstanding, and we
extinguished 523,483 shares of common stock underlying the Series A Warrants. The shares were
issued to each Investor pursuant to the exemption from registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, amended (the “Act”), provided by Section 3(a)(9) of the Act.
Range Kentucky Holdings LLC.  On April 12, 2011, pursuant to the Range Agreement, we issued
8,500,000 shares of our common stock to Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC.  The shares of our common
stock were issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from
the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified
by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act and Rule 506 of Regulation D promulgated
pursuant to that act by the SEC.
 
On October 12, 2011, we satisfied the downside price protection provision of the Additional Shares
Agreement dated April 12, 2011 with Range and issued Range an additional 1,389,353 shares of our
common stock.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
 
76
Employees and Consultants.  On April 29, 2011, we issued 64,257 shares of our common stock to two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were
issued in transactions which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
On August 4, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two independent
contractors in exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a
transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of
Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On August 12, 2011, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange
for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we
believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
On September 22, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were
issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On September 22, 2011, we issued 43,207 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
consulting services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which
we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
 
On November 23, 2011, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in
exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction
which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus
delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section
4(2) of the Securities Act.
On November 23, 2011, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were
issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On November 23, 2011, we issued 41,545 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
consulting services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which
we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange
for services provided to us.  The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we
believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two
independent contractors in exchange for services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were
issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by
the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On February 2, 2012, we issued 109,034 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
On May 9, 2012, we issued 25,000 shares of our common stock to one of our officers in exchange for
services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
77
On May 9, 2012, we issued 30,000 shares of our common stock to an employee and two independent
contractors in exchange for services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a
transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of
Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On May 9, 2012, we issued 161,792 shares of our common stock to a consultant in exchange for
services provided to us. The shares of our common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe
satisfies the requirements of that exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
On August 1, 2012, we issued 1,900,000 shares of our common stock to M2 Law Professional
Corporation, our legal counsel, in exchange for professional services provided to us.  The shares of our
common stock were issued in a transaction which we believe satisfies the requirements of that
exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act, which
exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of the Securities Act.
 
Item 16. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
 
(a) The exhibits listed in the following Exhibit Index are filed as part of this registration statement.
 
Exhibit
No.
Description
Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement by and among Green Irons Holdings Corp. and Alamo
Oil Limited, dated November 18, 2009, Incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Agreement and Plan of Merger between Green Irons Holdings Corp. and Alamo Energy
Corp., dated November 18, 2009, Incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-
K filed on November 24, 2009
Articles of Incorporation, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 of Green Irons’ Registration
Statement on Form SB-2 filed on June 22, 2006
Bylaws of the Company, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 of Green Irons’ Registration
Statement on Form SB-2 filed on June 22, 2006
Articles of Merger between Green Irons Holdings Corp. and Alamo Energy Corp.,
incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Form of Registration Rights Agreement, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Executed Opinion Re: Legality *
Employment Agreement with Allan Millmaker, dated as of November 19, 2009, incorporated
by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Employment Agreement with Philip Mann, dated as of November 19, 2009, incorporated by
reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Stock Vesting Agreement with Allan Millmaker, dated as of November 19, 2009, incorporated
by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Stock Vesting Agreement with Philip Mann, dated as of November 19, 2009, incorporated by
reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Lock-Up Agreement with Allan Millmaker, dated as of November 19, 2009, incorporated by
reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Lock-Up Agreement with Philip Mann, dated as of November 19, 2009, incorporated by
reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Stock Repurchase and Debt Forgiveness Agreement, by and between the Company and
Sandy McDougall, dated as of November 18, 2009, incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Form of Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement , incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Form of Convertible Promissory Note, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on November 24, 2009
Form of Warrant Agreement , incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on November 24, 2009
Form of Security Agreement, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on November 24, 2009
Letter Agreement with Aimwell Energy Limited, dated as of January 11, 2010, incorporated by
reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 14, 2010
Form of Amended and Restated Security Agreement, incorporated by reference to our
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 9, 2010
Operating Agreement with Boardman Energy Partners LLC., incorporated by reference to our
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2010
Addendum to Operating Agreement with Boardman Energy Partners LLC., incorporated by
reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2010
2.1
2.2
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
5
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
78
10.16
10.17
10.18
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.22
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.26
10.27
10.28
10.29
10.30
10.31
10.32
10.33
10.34
10.35
10.36
10.37
10.38
Subscription and Customer Agreement with Third Coast Energy & Development LLC,
incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2010
Participation Agreement with WEJCO Inc. incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on April 21, 2010
Participation Agreement with Allied Energy, Inc. incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on May 20, 2010
Participation Agreement with Allied Energy, Inc. incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on August 5, 2010
Subscription Agreement with Berry Resources, Inc. incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on September 9, 2010
Advisory Agreement with Richard Edmonson incorporated by reference to our Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on October 18, 2010
Amendment Agreement with Allied Energy, Inc. incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on October 20, 2010
Advisory Agreement with Terry Davis incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 30, 2011
Membership Interest Purchase and Sale Agreement with Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC
incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Lock-Up Agreement, by and between the Registrant and Range Kentucky Holdings, LLC
incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Development Agreement, by and between the Registrant and Range Kentucky Holdings,
LLC incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Accounting Services Agreement, by and between the Registrant and Range Kentucky
Holdings, LLC incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13,
2011
Additional Shares Agreement, by and between the Registrant and Range Kentucky Holdings,
LLC incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Form of Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement, incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Form of Registration Rights Agreement, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Form of Second Amended and Restated Security Agreement, incorporated by reference to
our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Form of Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Note, incorporated by reference to our
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2011
Form of Warrants, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April
13, 2011
Advisory Agreement with Richard Henderson incorporated by reference to our Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on April 21, 2011
Employment Agreement with Donald Sebastian incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on May 4, 2011
Form of Securities Purchase Agreement, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2011
Form of Original Issue Discount Convertible Debenture, incorporated by reference to our
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2011
Form of Series A Warrant, incorporated by reference to our Report on Form 8-K filed on
August 1, 2011
10.39
Form of Series B Warrant, incorporated by reference to our Report on Form 8-K filed on
August 1, 2011
Form of Series C Warrant, incorporated by reference to our Report on Form 8-K filed on
August 1, 2011
Form of Registration Rights Agreement, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2011
Placement Agent Agreement with Rodman & Renshaw, LLC, incorporated by reference to
our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2011
Purchase Agreement with United American Petroleum Corp., incorporated by reference to our
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 8, 2011
Form of Farmout Agreement with Northdown Energy Limited, incorporated by reference to our
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 16, 2011
Form of Novation and Amendment of Participation Agreement with Northdown Energy
Limited and Aimwell Energy Limited, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on November 16, 2011
Form of Joint Operating Agreement with Northdown Energy Limited and Aimwell Energy
Limited, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 16,
2011
Amendment to Additional Shares Agreement with Range Kentucky Holdings LLC,
incorporated by reference to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on December 15, 2011
2011 Stock Option Plan, incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
December 21, 2011
Second Amendment to Additional Shares Agreement with Range Kentucky Holdings LLC,
incorporated by reference to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 13, 2012
10.40
10.41
10.42
10.43
10.44
10.45
10.46
10.47
10.48
10.49
79
14.1
21
23.1
23.2
23.3
99.1
Code of Ethics, incorporated by reference to our Annual Report on Form 10-KSB filed on
August 14, 2007
List of Subsidiaries, incorporated by reference to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on
August 14, 2012
Consent of Technical Report Author *
Consent of Q Accountancy Corporation *
Consent of Counsel**
Certified Revised SEC Reserves Report and Economic Valuation for Alamo Energy Corp.
regarding KYTX Properties located in Kentucky, the Valentine Property located in West
Virginia, and Wells in Brown County, Texas, incorporated by reference to our Annual Report
on Form 10-K filed on August 14, 2012
* Filed herewith.
** Filed as Exhibit 5. 
 
 
80
Item 17.  Undertakings
A.   The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
 
    (1)              To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective
amendment to this registration statement to:
(i)
Include any prospectus required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii)    Reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration
statement.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities
offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was
registered) and any deviation from the low or high and of the estimated maximum offering
range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule
424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20 percent
change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration
Fee” table in the effective registration statement.
(iii)    Include any material or changed information with respect to the plan of distribution.
(2)              That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each
such post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial
bona fide offering thereof.
 
    (3)              To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
 
    (4)              That, for the purpose of determining liability of the undersigned registrant under the
Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities, the undersigned
registrant undertakes that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this
registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser,
if the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications,
the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such
securities to such purchaser:
(i) Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424 of Regulation C of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii)    Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned
registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant;
(iii)    The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrant;
(iv)     Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to
the purchaser.
81
B.
(1) Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to
directors, officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or
otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange
Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act of
1933 and is, therefore, unenforceable.
(2) In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the
registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in
the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or
controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in
the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as
expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and will be governed by the final adjudication of such
issue.
C. Each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an
offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in
reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as
of the date it is first used after effectiveness, provided, however, that no statement made in a
registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document
incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that
is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to
such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or
prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately
prior to such date of first use.
82
SIGNATURE
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the Registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement on Form S-1 to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized in the City of Houston, State of Texas, on August 30, 2012.
Alamo Energy Corp.
 
 
By: /s/ Allan Millmaker
Allan Millmaker
President, Chief Executive
Officer, Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
By: /s/ Donald Sebastian
Donald Sebastian
Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial and
Accounting Officer)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed
by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 
By: /s/ Allan Millmaker
Allan Millmaker
President, Chief Executive
Officer, Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
August 30, 2012
By: /s/ Philip Mann
Philip Mann
Secretary, Director
August 30, 2012
83