
S-8 1 v446767_s8.htm S-8
Registration No. 333-
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 15, 2016.
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C.  20549
FORM S-8
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
MACQUARIE INFRASTRUCTURE CORPORATION
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of
43-2052503
(I.R.S. Employer
incorporation or organization)
Identification Number)
125 West 55th Street
New York, New York 10019
(Address of Principal Executive Offices)(Zip Code)
Macquarie Infrastructure Corporation 2016 Omnibus Employee Incentive Plan
(Full title of the plan)
Michael Kernan, Esq.
General Counsel and Secretary
Macquarie Infrastructure Corporation
125 West 55th Street
New York, New York 10019
(Name and address of agent for service)
(212) 231-1000
(Telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Michelle Rutta, Esq.
White & Case LLP
1155 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036
(212) 819-8200
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated
filer or a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company.  See the definitions of
“large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act.  (Check one):
Large accelerated filer  xAccelerated filer  oNon-accelerated filer  oSmaller reporting company  o
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of
Securities to be
Registered
Common stock,
par value $0.001
Amount to
be registered
(1)
Proposed maximum
offering price per
share (2)
Proposed maximum
aggregate offering
price (2)
500,000
$78.97
$39,485,000
Amount of
registration
fee
$3,976.14
500,000 shares of common stock are being registered under the Macquarie Infrastructure
Corporation 2016 Omnibus Employee Incentive Plan (the “Plan”).  In addition, this
Registration Statement, pursuant to Rule 416(a) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended
(the “Securities Act”), shall cover any additional shares of common stock that become
issuable under the Plan by reason of any mergers, amalgamations, stock dividends, bonus
issues, stock splits, subdivisions, recapitalizations or any other similar transactions effected
without the receipt of consideration which results in an increase in the number of shares of
common stock of Macquarie Infrastructure Corporation (the “Registrant”).
Pursuant to Rule 457(h) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, these prices are
estimated solely for the purpose of calculating the registration fee and are based upon the
average of the high and low sales prices of the Registrant’s shares reported on the New York
Stock Exchange on August 9, 2016.
(1)
(2)
Part I
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE SECTION 10(a) PROSPECTUS
The Registrant has sent or given or will send or give documents containing the
information specified by Part I of this Registration Statement on Form S-8 (the
“Registration Statement”) to participants in the Macquarie Infrastructure Corporation 2016
Omnibus Employee Incentive Plan, or the Plan, as specified in Rule 428(b)(1) promulgated
by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “Commission”) under the Securities Act
of 1933, as amended.  The Registrant is not filing such documents with the Commission,
but these documents constitute (along with the documents incorporated by reference into
this Registration Statement pursuant to Item 3 of Part II hereof) a prospectus that meets
the requirements of Section 10(a) of the Securities Act.
Part II
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT
Item 3.Incorporation of Documents by Reference.
The following documents which we have filed with the Commission are incorporated
herein by reference and made part of this Registration Statement:
(a) our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015, filed on
February 23, 2016; and
(b) our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31, 2016, filed
on May 2, 2016 and for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2016, filed on August 1, 2016;
(c) our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on February 23, 2016 (except for information
furnished under Item 2.02 which is not deemed to be filed and not incorporated by
reference herein) and May 18, 2016;
(d) the description of our Common Stock contained in Exhibit 99.2 to our Current Report
on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on May 21, 2015, and any subsequent amendments and
reports filed to update that description.
In addition, all documents subsequently filed by us pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14
and 15(d) of the Exchange Act, before we file a post-effective amendment to this
Registration Statement which indicates that all securities offered have been sold or which
deregister all securities then remaining unsold, shall be deemed to be incorporated by
reference in this Registration Statement and are a part thereof from the date of filing of
such documents.
Any statement contained in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by
reference in this Registration Statement shall be deemed to be modified or superseded for
purposes of this Registration Statement to the extent that a statement contained herein or
in any other subsequently filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated
by reference herein modifies or supersedes such statement.  Any such statement so
modified or superseded shall not be deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to
constitute a part of this Registration Statement.
Item 4.Description of Securities.
Not applicable.
Item 5.Interests of Named Experts and Counsel.
None.
Item 6.Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Section 145 of the Delaware General Corporation Law (the “DGCL”) provides that a
corporation has the power to indemnify a director, officer, employee or agent of the
corporation and certain other persons serving at the request of the corporation in related
capacities against amounts paid and expenses incurred in connection with an action or
proceedings to which such person is, or is threatened to be made, a party by reason of
such position, if such person shall have acted in good faith and in a manner he
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation, and,
in any criminal proceedings, if such person had no reasonable cause to believe his
conduct was unlawful; provided that, in the case of actions brought by or in the right of the
corporation, no indemnification shall be made with respect to any matter as to which such
person shall have been adjudged to be liable to the corporation unless and only to the
extent that the adjudicating court determines that such indemnification is proper under the
circumstances.
Section 102(b)(7) of the DGCL enables a Delaware corporation to provide in its certificate
of incorporation for the elimination or limitation of the personal liability of a director to the
corporation or its stockholders for monetary damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a
director. However, no provision can eliminate or limit a director’s liability:
•for any breach of the director’s duty of loyalty to the corporation or its stockholders;
•
for acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a knowing
violation of law;
•
under Section 174 of the DGCL, which imposes liability on directors for unlawful payment of
dividends or unlawful stock purchase or redemption; or
•for any transaction from which the director derived an improper personal benefit.
Pursuant to the certificate of incorporation and bylaws, the Registrant will indemnify, to the
fullest extent permitted by the DGCL, each person who was or is made a party or is
threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action (i) by
reason of the fact that such person is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of
Registrant, or is or was a director or officer of Registrant serving at the request of
Registrant as a director, officer, employee or agent of another enterprise or (ii) by or in the
right of Registrant to procure a judgment in its favor by reason of the fact that such person
is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of Registrant, or is or was a director or
officer of Registrant serving at the request of Registrant as a director, officer, employee or
agent of another enterprise. Registrant will not indemnify a director, officer, employee or
agent if he or she is found liable to Registrant unless the Delaware Court of Chancery or
the court in which such action was brought determines otherwise.
The Registrant will not, however, indemnify an officer, director, employee or agent when
the proceeding relates to: (i) payments under a statute, insurance policy, indemnity
provision, or vote; (ii) an accounting or disgorgement under the Exchange Act or similarly
applicable law; (iii) reimbursement of Registrant for a bonus, compensation, or other
profits realized from the sale of Registrant’s securities under the Exchange Act; (iv)
initiation of an action including those against Registrant or its directors, unless authorized
by the board of directors, provided for in Registrant’s sole discretion, or otherwise
required under the bylaws or DGCL; or (v) prohibition of payment under applicable law.
The indemnification provisions contained in the certificate of incorporation and bylaws are
not exclusive of any other rights to which a person may be entitled by law, agreement, vote
of members or disinterested directors or otherwise.
In addition, the Registrant will maintain insurance on behalf of our directors and executive
officers and certain other persons insuring them against any liability asserted against
them in their respective capacities or arising out of such status.
Item 7.Exemption from Registration Claimed.
Not applicable.
Item 8.Exhibits.
See attached “Exhibit Index”.
Item 9.Undertakings.
(a)          The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes:
1.             To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made of securities
registered hereby, a post-effective amendment to this Registration Statement:
(i)           To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act;
(ii)          To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of
this Registration Statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which,
individually or in aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in
this Registration Statement — notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in
volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed
that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated
maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the
Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price
represent no more than a 20 percent change in the maximum aggregate offering price set
forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective Registration Statement;
and
(iii)         To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not
previously disclosed in this Registration Statement or any material change to such
information in this Registration Statement;
provided, however, that the undertakings set forth in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii)
above do not apply if the information required to be included in a post-effective
amendment by those paragraphs is contained in periodic reports filed with or furnished to
the Commission by us pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act that
are incorporated by reference in this Registration Statement.
2.             That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each
such post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement
relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time
shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
3.             To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the
securities being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(b)          The undersigned Registrant hereby further undertake that, for purposes of
determining any liability under the Securities Act, each filing of the Registrant’s annual
report filed on Form 10-K pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act that is
incorporated by reference in this Registration Statement shall be deemed to be a new
registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(c)           Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be
permitted to directors, officers and controlling persons of the Registrant pursuant to the
foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the Registrant has been advised that in the opinion of
the Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.  In the event that a claim for
indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by us of expenses
incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of us in the successful defense
of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling
person in connection with the securities being registered, we will, unless in the opinion of
our counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by us is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of
such issue.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the Registrant certifies that it
has reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form
S-8 and has duly caused this Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of New York, State of New York, on this
15 day of August, 2016.
MACQUARIE INFRASTRUCTURE CORPORATION
  
  
  
 By:
/s/ James Hooke
 James Hooke
 Chief Executive Officer
 (Principal Executive Officer)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS that each person whose signature appears
below hereby constitutes and appoints James Hooke as such person’s true and lawful
attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and resubstitution for such
person and in such person’s name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign and
file (1) a registration statement or statements on Form S-8, or such other form as may be
recommended by counsel, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
“Commission”), and any and all amendments and post-effective amendments thereto, and
any and all post-effective amendments to registration statements or statements on Form
S-8 previously filed with the Commission, and any and all instruments and documents
filed as a part of or in connection with the said registration statement or amendments
thereto, with respect to the Macquarie Infrastructure Corporation 2016 Omnibus Employee
Incentive Plan, and (2) any registration statements, reports and applications relating
thereto to be filed by Macquarie Infrastructure Corporation with the Commission and/or
any national securities exchanges under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, and any and all amendments thereto, and any and all instruments and
documents filed as part of or in connection with such registration statements or reports or
amendments thereto; granting unto said attorney-in-fact and agent full power and
authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be
done in and about the premises, as fully for all intents and purposes as he or she might or
could do in person, and hereby ratifying and confirming all that the said attorney-in-fact
and agent or any of them, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration
Statement has been signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the
date indicated.
Date
 
 
August 15, 2016
Name and Signature
 
 
/s/ James Hooke
James Hooke
 
/s/ Liam Stewart
Liam Stewart
 
/s/ Robert Choi
Robert Choi
 
/s/ Martin Stanley
Martin Stanley
 
/s/ Norman H. Brown, Jr.
Norman H. Brown, Jr. 
 
/s/ George W. Carmany, III Director
George W. Carmany, III
Title
  
  
 Chief Executive Officer
 (Principal Executive Officer)  
 
  
 Chief Financial Officer
August 15, 2016
 
 (Principal Financial Officer)
 
  
 Chief Accounting Officer
August 15, 2016
 (Principal Accounting Officer) 
 
  
 Chairman/Director
August 15, 2016
 
  
 
  
 Director
August 15, 2016
 
  
 
  
August 15, 2016
Director
  
  
 Director
  
  
 Director
/s/ Henry E. Lentz
Henry E. Lentz
 
/s/ Ouma Sananikone
Ouma Sananikone
 
/s/ William H. Webb
William H. Webb
EXHIBIT INDEX
August 15, 2016
 
 
August 15, 2016
 
 
August 15, 2016
Description of Document
Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 of
the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on May 21, 2015.
Amended and Restated Bylaws of the Registrant, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1
of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 18, 2016.
 
Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement among Macquarie Infrastructure
Corporation and Macquarie Infrastructure Management (USA) Inc., dated May 21, 2015,
incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed with the SEC on May 21, 2015.
 
Specimen certificate evidencing the common stock of Macquarie Infrastructure
Corporation, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.5 of the Registrant’s Registration
Statement on Form S-4 (Reg. No. 333-202162).
 
Macquarie Infrastructure Corporation 2016 Omnibus Employee Incentive Plan,
incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Proxy Statement relating to its 2016 Annual
Meeting of Shareholders, filed with the SEC on April 1, 2016.
 
Opinion of White & Case LLP
Exhibit
No.
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
*  Filed herewith
*5.1
 
*23.1 Consent of KPMG LLP
 
*23.2 Consent of White & Case LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1)
 
*24.1 Power of Attorney (included on signature page hereto)