
P.O. Box 10351 
#888 – 700 West Georgia Street 
Vancouver, BC 
Canada V7Y 1G5 
 
Tel: 604-708 3788 
Fax: 604-708 3728 
Email: info@canasil.com
NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
TO THE SHAREHOLDERS: 
 
NOTICE  IS  HEREBY  GIVEN  that  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  Canasil  Resources  Inc.  (the 
"Company")  will  be  held  at  888-700  West  Georgia  Street,  Vancouver,  B.C.  V7Y 1G5,  on 
Wednesday, May 23, 2007 at 10:00 a.m. (local time) to transact the usual business of an Annual 
General Meeting and for the following purposes: 
 
 1. 
 
 2.
To receive and consider the audited financial statements of the Company for the fiscal period 
ended December 31, 2006, including the accompanying notes and the auditor’s report, and 
the annual Management Discussion and Analysis.
To receive the report of the directors.
3.
4. 
 
 5. 
 
 6.
7.
8.
To  appoint  an  auditor  for  the  Company  to  hold  office  until  the  close  of  the  next  Annual 
General Meeting.
To authorize the directors to fix the remuneration to be paid to the auditor of the Company.
To elect directors to hold office until the close of the next Annual General Meeting.
To  consider,  and  if  thought  fit,  to  approve,  with  or  without  amendment,  an  ordinary 
resolution  approving  the  Company’s  Incentive  Stock  Option  Plan  (the  "Plan") 
whereunder  the  Company  will  allocate  and  reserve  up  to  10%  of  its  issued  common 
shares from time to time for the purpose of granting options under the Plan.
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass an ordinary resolution approving and ratifying the 
implementation  of  a  Shareholder  Rights  Plan  contained  in  a  Shareholder  Rights  Plan 
Agreement as described in management’s information circular accompanying this Notice.
To transact such other business as may properly come before the meeting or any adjournment 
or adjournments thereof.
The audited financial statements of the Company, including the accompanying notes and auditor’s 
report for the financial year ended December 31, 2006, accompany this Notice.
p:\clients\1-sedar\canasil\agm\2007\notice_final.doc
2
The accompanying Information Circular provides additional information relating to the matters to be 
dealt with at the Meeting and is deemed to form part of this Notice.  Copies of any documents to be 
considered,  approved,  ratified  and  adopted  or  authorized  at  the  Meeting  will  be  available  for 
inspection at the registered and records office of the Company at 1040-999 West Hastings Street, 
Vancouver, B.C. V6C 2W2, during normal business hours up to May 23, 2007 being the date of the 
Meeting, and at the Meeting. 
 
The directors of the Company fixed the close of business on April 18, 2007 as the record date for 
determining holders of common shares who are entitled to vote at the Meeting. 
 
A shareholder entitled to attend and vote at the Meeting is entitled to appoint a proxy to attend and 
vote in his stead.  If you are unable to attend the Meeting in person, please complete, sign and date 
the enclosed Form of Proxy and return the same in the enclosed return envelope provided for that 
purpose within the time and to the location in accordance with the instructions set out in the Form of 
Proxy and Information Circular accompanying this Notice. 
 
Please advise the Company of any change in your address. 
 
DATED at Vancouver, B.C. this 20th day of April, 2007.
“Bahman Yamini” 
Bahman Yamini, President
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD 
CANASIL RESOURCES INC.
p:\clients\1-sedar\canasil\agm\2007\notice_final.doc