
PREC14A 1 t1600527_prec14a.htm SCHEDULE 14A
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
(Rule 14a-101)
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN PROXY STATEMENT
SCHEDULE 14A INFORMATION
Proxy Statement pursuant to Section 14(a) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Filed by the Registrant ¨
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant x
Check the appropriate box:
x Preliminary Proxy Statement
¨Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as Permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
¨ Definitive Proxy Statement
¨ Definitive Additional Materials
¨Soliciting Material Pursuant to §240.14a-11(c) or §240.14a-12
SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST
(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)
Southwest Bank
Robert Lansford
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
xNo fee required.
¨Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(4) and 0-11.
(1)Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(3)
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act
Rule 0-11 (Set forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was
determined):
(4)Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(5)Total fee paid:
¨ Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and
¨
identify the filing for which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by
registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)Amount Previously Paid:
(2)Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(3)Filing Party:
(4)Date Filed:
PRELIMINARY COPY SUBJECT TO COMPLETION
DATED AUGUST 16, 2016
SOLICITATION OF WRITTEN REQUEST
TO CALL A SPECIAL MEETING OF UNITHOLDERS
OF
SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST
SOLICITATION STATEMENT OF
SOUTHWEST BANK AND ROBERT LANSFORD
_______________, 2016
To the Fellow Unitholders of San Juan Basin Royalty Trust:
This Solicitation Statement, the enclosed Special Meeting Request Form attached as
Exhibit A-1 and the accompanying WHITE Request Card attached as Exhibit A-2 are being
furnished to you as a unitholder of San Juan Basin Royalty Trust (which we refer to as the
“Trust”) by and on behalf of Robert Lansford and Southwest Bank (“Southwest Bank”
and, collectively with Mr. Lansford unless the context requires otherwise, “we,” “our” and
“us”), for the purpose of soliciting your revocable proxy in the form of the accompanying
WHITE Request Card to authorize us to deliver to the trustee of the Trust the Special
Meeting Request Form on your behalf in order to call a Special Meeting of the Trust’s
unitholders for the purposes described below (the “Special Meeting”). We are mailing a
printed copy of this Solicitation Statement, the enclosed Special Meeting Request Form
attached as Exhibit A-1 and the accompanying WHITE Request Card attached as Exhibit
A-2 beginning on or about ____________, 2016.
We are seeking your support to call the Special Meeting to consider and vote upon the
following proposals:
Proposal 1: to remove Compass Bank as the trustee of the Trust;
Proposal 2: if Proposal 1 prevails, to nominate Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the
Trust; and
Proposal 3: if Proposals 1 and 2 prevail, to elect Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the
Trust.
As discussed in more detail in this Solicitation Statement, we believe that the replacement
of Compass Bank with Southwest Bank as trustee of the Trust will be beneficial to the
unitholders as it will maintain the continuity of the Trust’s administration by an institution
with an experienced royalty trust group, including a trust officer who, prior to joining
Southwest Bank in October 2015, served as the trust officer for the Trust for approximately
30 years.
At this time, we are only soliciting your proxy in the form of the accompanying WHITE
Request Card to empower us to deliver the valid, executed and completed Special Meeting
Request Form on your behalf to the trustee of the Trust to call the Special Meeting. We are
not currently seeking your proxy, consent, authorization or agent designation for approval
of the Proposals or any other actions. If the Special Meeting is called, we will send you
proxy materials relating to the Proposals to be voted upon at the Special Meeting.
Under Section 8.02 of the San Juan Basin Amended and Restated Royalty Trust Indenture
(the “Trust Indenture”), the calling of the Special Meeting requires the written request of
the holders of record of at least 15% of the outstanding units of beneficial interest in the
Trust (the “Units”). As of the close of business on August 15, 2016, we collectively
beneficially owned an aggregate of 2,000 Units, representing approximately 0.004% of the
outstanding Units of the Trust.
We intend to submit the request for the Special Meeting not later than __________, 2016
assuming that we receive WHITE Request Cards authorizing us to request the Special
Meeting from unitholders holding at least 15% of the outstanding Units as of the date the
Special Meeting Request Form is submitted (the “Requisite Percentage”). By completing
and returning a WHITE Request Card authorizing us to request the Special Meeting, you
will authorize us to execute the Special Meeting Request Form to request the Special
Meeting on your behalf.
By completing and returning the WHITE Request Card, you will be agreeing to inform us if
you dispose of any of the Units with respect to which you are furnishing the WHITE
Request Card prior to ______, 2016. By completing and returning the WHITE Request
Card, you will not be entering into any agreement with us to hold or dispose of your Units,
which you are free to do in your sole discretion. However, if you do dispose of your Units
prior to __________, 2016, you will be deemed to have revoked your WHITE Request Card
to the extent of the Units that you dispose of. If you do not inform us that you have
disposed of any Units with respect to which you have furnished the WHITE Request Card,
we will assume that you continue to own those Units at least through __________, 2016.
This proxy solicitation is being made by Southwest Bank and Mr. Lansford, and not on
behalf of the Trust or the trustee of the Trust. You may receive a revocation consent
statement from the Trust, together with an accompanying revocation card. We urge you
not to return any revocation card you may receive from the Trust, since only the last dated
card that you execute will count.
We encourage you to join us in calling the Special Meeting by submitting your completed,
signed and dated WHITE Request Card promptly.
IMPORTANT
If your Units are registered in your own name, please complete, sign, date and mail the
enclosed WHITE Request Card to our solicitation agent, Okapi Partners, in the postage-
paid envelope provided as soon as possible.
If your Units are held in the name of a brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other
institution, only the brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other institution can execute a
WHITE Request Card for your Units and will do so only upon receipt of specific
instructions from you. Accordingly, please contact the person responsible for your
account and give instructions for a written request to be signed representing your Units or
follow the instructions on the voting instruction form that may have been sent to you by
your brokerage firm, bank, nominee or other institution together with this Solicitation
Statement.
IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS OR REQUIRE ASSISTANCE, PLEASE CONTACT:
1212 Avenue of the Americas, 24th Floor
New York, New York 10036
(212) 297-0720 (Main)
Unitholders Call Toll-Free: (877) 279-2311
Email: info@okapipartners.com
2
WHY WE ARE SEEKING TO CALL THE SPECIAL MEETING
As the trustee or disbursing agent for eight royalty trusts in the energy sector, Southwest
Bank has a team of nine professionals with extensive experience in the administration of
royalty trusts including nearly thirty years of experience with the Trust. We strongly
believe that combining the independence and experience of Southwest Bank with the
extensive historical knowledge of the Trust’s operations possessed by Southwest Bank’s
royalty trust group professionals would be beneficial for the unitholders of the Trust.
Continuity of Administration Valuable
In November of 2015, Southwest Bank announced that Lee Ann Anderson had joined its
royalty trust group following her departure from Compass Bank. Prior to joining
Southwest Bank, Ms. Anderson served as the principal trust officer responsible for the
Trust at the Trust’s current and predecessor bank trustees for approximately thirty years.
We believe that Ms. Anderson’s significant history and experience with the Trust are
compelling reasons for unitholders to now desire a change in trusteeship for the Trust.
Without Ms. Anderson, Compass Bank offers little experience to reassure unitholders at a
time when the stock market performance of the Trust is under pressure during a period of
low natural gas prices. Moreover, considering the ongoing litigation with Burlington
Resources Oil & Gas Company LP, the operator of the Trust properties, regarding alleged
underpayments and overcharges made by Burlington Resources, Compass Bank’s ability
to pursue prudently the strongest case on behalf of the Trust appears weakened with the
loss of Ms. Anderson as a long-standing trust officer with extensive historical knowledge
of the Trust, the underlying litigation and the natural gas industry.
Royalty Trusts not a Core Business for BBVA
The Trust is the only royalty trust for which Compass Bank serves as trustee. In February
of 2007, the multinational banking group Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, N.A. (“BBVA”),
then the second largest bank in Spain, acquired Compass Bank’s parent company and
renamed it BBVA Compass. We contend that the administration of a single royalty trust is
not a core component of BBVA’s global business. In contrast, royalty trusts are a core
business for Southwest Bank. With a dedicated royalty trust group of nine employees with
over 160 combined years of experience in administration of royalty trusts, Southwest
Bank currently serves as the trustee for seven royalty trusts in the energy sector: Permian
Basin Royalty Trust, Sabine Royalty Trust, Hugoton Royalty Trust, Cross Timbers Royalty
Trust, Tidelands Royalty Trust “B”, Marine Petroleum Trust and Dominion Resources
Black Warrior Trust. In addition, Southwest Bank currently serves as the disbursing agent
for the Westbrook-Thompson Royalty Trust. Southwest Bank has made the commitment
to the administration of royalty trusts as part of its core business and is providing the
resources and management that are required by that commitment.
Reduced Potential for Conflicts of Interest
We believe that Southwest Bank, as a qualified independent bank with a reduced potential
for conflict of interest, would be a more suitable trustee for the Trust than a large global
bank. BBVA as a large global bank presents the potential for more conflicts of interest that
could impact the ability of Compass Bank to serve the best interests of the unitholders.
At times, the trustee of a royalty trust may be required to pursue legal action on behalf of
the royalty trust against the operator of the royalty trust’s properties to resolve a dispute.
Conflicts may arise for the trustee if the operator or its affiliates are also significant
banking customers of the trustee or its affiliates. We believe that large producers are more
likely to conduct their banking business with large national or global banks than with an
independent regional bank such as Southwest Bank. These banking relationships or
opportunities can create a conflict of interest for the trustee which may consider the
royalty trust to be less important to its business and profits.
3
We have already seen evidence of the abandonment by larger global banks of royalty trust
operations inherited through acquisition activity. After serving as trustee of the Trust
since 1994, the large global Bank One, N.A. resigned as trustee of the Trust in 2002 based
on its determination that the administration of royalty trusts was not core to its long-term
strategy. Bank One nominated TexasBank, an independent community bank, as
successor trustee for the Trust. After 2006, the trustee for the Trust again evolved into a
large global bank through a series of mergers or acquisitions when TexasBank was
acquired by the large regional Compass Bank in 2006 that in turn was acquired in 2007 by
the multinational BBVA based in Madrid, Spain. As another example, after U.S. Bank,
another royalty trust trustee, was acquired by Bank of America, N.A. in 2007, Bank of
America determined that administration of royalty trusts was not part of its core business,
and in 2014 Bank of America resigned as the trustee of seven royalty trusts and
nominated Southwest Bank as successor trustee.
Southwest Bank has been an independent community bank for 50 years and has
strategically chosen to include royalty trust administration services as part of its core
business. We believe that Southwest Bank, as a qualified independent bank with a
reduced potential for conflict of interest, would be a more suitable trustee for the Trust
than a large global bank.
THE PROPOSALS TO BE INTRODUCED AT THE SPECIAL MEETING
We are soliciting your support and consent to request a Special Meeting, the purpose of
which would be to give unitholders the opportunity to vote on the removal and
replacement of Compass Bank as the current trustee of the Trust. The three Proposals
that we believe are required to accomplish this result, and for which we are calling upon
the trustee of the Trust to convene the Special Meeting, are as described below.
Proposal 1
Under Proposal 1, the unitholders would be asked to vote at the Special Meeting to
remove Compass Bank as the trustee of the Trust. The following is the text of Proposal 1:
RESOLVED that Compass Bank is hereby removed from its position as trustee of the
Trust.
Section 6.04 of the Trust Indenture provides that the trustee of the Trust may be removed,
with or without cause, at a meeting held in accordance with the Trust Indenture by the
affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the Units then outstanding. Approval of
Proposal 1 at the Special Meeting will require the affirmative vote of the holders of a
majority of the Units then outstanding.
Proposal 2 (to be presented to the Special Meeting only if Proposal 1 is approved)
Under Proposal 2, which will be presented to the Special Meeting only if Proposal 1 is
approved, the unitholders would be asked to vote at the Special Meeting to nominate
Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the Trust. The following is the text of
Proposal 2:
RESOLVED that Southwest Bank is hereby nominated as successor trustee of the Trust.
Section 6.05 of the Trust Indenture provides that nominations for appointment of a
successor trustee of the Trust may be made by unitholders owning at least 15% of the
Units. Section 6.05 of the Trust Indenture requires that any successor trustee of the Trust
shall be a bank or trust company having a capital, surplus and undivided profits (as of the
end of its last fiscal year prior to its appointment) of at least $50,000,000. With a capital,
surplus and undivided profits of $236,590,000 as of December 31, 2015, Southwest Bank
meets the criteria established for a successor trustee under the Trust Indenture and is
willing to accept the nomination and serve as successor trustee of the Trust if Proposals 2
and 3 are presented and approved at the Special Meeting.
Approval of Proposal 2, if presented at the Special Meeting, will require the affirmative vote
of the holders of at least 15% of the Units.
Proposal 3 (to be presented to the Special Meeting only if Proposals 1 and 2 are approved)
If both Proposal 1 and Proposal 2 are approved, the unitholders would be asked to vote at
the Special Meeting to appoint Southwest Bank as the successor trustee of the Trust. The
following is the text of Proposal 3:
4
RESOLVED that Southwest Bank is hereby appointed as successor trustee of the Trust.
Section 6.05 of the Trust Indenture provides that in the event of a vacancy in the position
of trustee of the Trust or if a trustee of the Trust has given notice of its intention to resign,
the unitholders present or represented at a meeting held in accordance with the Trust
Indenture may appoint a successor trustee of the Trust. The presence in person or by
proxy of unitholders holding a simple majority of the outstanding Units shall constitute a
quorum for purposes of acting at the Special Meeting. Approval of Proposal 3, if presented
at the Special Meeting, will require the affirmative vote of a majority of the Units present or
represented by proxy and constituting a quorum at the Special Meeting. Accordingly,
once a quorum is established, Proposal 3 may be approved by a majority of those present
at the Special Meeting, in person or represented by proxy, even though they hold less
than a majority of all of the Units at the time outstanding.
Effect if Proposals are not Approved at the Special Meeting
If Proposal 1 is not approved at the Special Meeting, then Compass Bank will remain as
the trustee of the Trust until its subsequent resignation or removal in accordance with the
Trust Indenture.
If Proposal 1 is approved at the Special Meeting, but Proposals 2 and 3 are not each
approved at the Special Meeting, then Compass Bank will be removed as the trustee of the
Trust but no successor trustee will be appointed at such time, resulting in a vacancy in the
trustee position. Section 6.05 of the Trust Indenture provides that in the event of any
vacancy in the position of trustee of the Trust, the unitholders may appoint a successor
trustee at a meeting held in accordance with the Trust Indenture. If a vacancy in the
position of trustee of the Trust continues for sixty (60) days, then a successor trustee may
be appointed by any State or Federal District Court holding terms in Tarrant County,
Texas, upon the application of any unitholder. If a unitholder files such application, the
court may appoint a temporary trustee at any time after such application is filed. Pending
the final appointment of a successor trustee, a temporary trustee will have such powers
and duties as the court appointing the temporary trustee provides in its order of
appointment, consistent with the provisions of the Trust Indenture.
We strongly recommend that you complete and return the enclosed WHITE Request Card
authorizing us to execute the Special Meeting Request Form on your behalf to call the
Special Meeting.
BACKGROUND OF THE SOLICITATION
The following is a description of the events and circumstances, including contacts that we
have had with representatives of the Trust and Compass Bank, that have preceded our
decision to request that unitholders join us in requesting the Special Meeting:
In 1985, Lee Ann Anderson began working on administration of the Trust at Texas American
Bank/Fort Worth, and in 1986 she was assigned primary responsibility for its administration. In
·
2002, Bank One, successor to Texas American Bank/Fort Worth, resigned as trustee of the Trust
and TexasBank became the successor trustee. Ms. Anderson joined TexasBank at that time to
continue her role as principal trust officer for the Trust.
From 1989 to March 2006, Vernon Bryant, the current Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of
·
Southwest Bank, served as Chief Executive Officer of TexasBank. In March 2006, Compass
Bank acquired TexasBank.
In late 2006, Mr. Bryant formed a holding company that acquired Southwest Bank in 2007 and
·
Mr. Bryant became the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Southwest Bank.
·In February of 2007, BBVA acquired the parent company of Compass Bank.
In July of 2014, Southwest Bank expanded its royalty trust operations and succeeded Bank of
·
America as trustee of seven royalty trusts. In addition, the royalty trust team at Bank of America
joined Southwest Bank.
5
In August of 2014, Southwest Bank approached BBVA Compass and expressed an interest in a
transaction that would transfer the trustee position for the Trust to Southwest Bank. Shortly
thereafter, representatives of Southwest Bank and BBVA Compass met to discuss whether
·
BBVA Compass had any interest in a transaction, but no decisions were made at that meeting.
Southwest Bank continued over the following months to follow up with BBVA Compass
regarding a transaction, but BBVA Compass declined to engage in further discussions other
than to advise Southwest Bank that BBVA Compass would contact them with any interest.
In October of 2015, Ms. Anderson resigned from Compass Bank and subsequently joined the
·
trust department and royalty trust group of Southwest Bank.
On August 5, 2016, Mr. Lansford submitted a letter to Compass Bank pursuant to Section 11.01
·
of the Trust Indenture requesting acess to certain books and records of the Trust, including a
complete record or list of the unitholders of the Trust.
THE SPECIAL MEETING
For the Special Meeting to be properly requested in accordance with the Trust Indenture, a
written request in favor of calling the Special Meeting must be executed and delivered to
the trustee of the Trust by unitholders representing at least 15% of the outstanding Units.
We are the beneficial holders of 2,000 Units, constituting approximately 0.004% of the
Units outstanding. This percentage is based on 46,608,796 Units reported outstanding at
August 9, 2016 according to the Trust’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9,
2016. Accordingly, based on this number of Units outstanding, WHITE Request Cards
representing an aggregate of at least 6,990,320 Units will be required to demand the call of
the Special Meeting, or at least 6,990,320 Units in addition to the 2,000 Units we beneficially
own.
According to Section 8.02 of the Trust Indenture, after a request for a meeting has been
delivered to the trustee of the Trust by holders of the required percentage of the
outstanding Units, the trustee is required to cause written notice of the meeting to be
given to the unitholders setting forth the time and place of the meeting and the general
terms of the matters proposed to be acted on at that meeting. The notice must be given
not more than 60 nor less than 20 days before such meeting to all unitholders of record
not more than 60 days before the date of the mailing of the notice. It is our intention to
submit the Special Meeting Request Form not later than ______________, 2016, assuming
that we receive WHITE Request Cards from unitholders holding the Requisite Percentage
of Units.
While we are currently only soliciting WHITE Request Cards in support of calling the
Special Meeting, if the Special Meeting is called, our current intention is to solicit votes in
favor of the Proposals described above under “The Proposals to be Introduced at the
Special Meeting.” We also expect to request, in our proxy solicitation relating to the
Special Meeting, authority to (i) initiate and vote for our own proposals to recess or
adjourn the Special Meeting for any reason, and (ii) oppose and vote against any other
party’s proposal to recess or adjourn the Special Meeting.
We do not currently anticipate presenting additional proposals on any substantive
matters. Nevertheless, we reserve the right to either modify the Proposals or cause
additional proposals to be identified in the notice of, and in, the proxy materials to be
distributed to you for the Special Meeting. We are not currently aware of any other
proposals that might be brought before the Special Meeting.
INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PARTICIPANTS IN THIS SOLICITATION
Mr. Lansford and Southwest Bank are referred to as “Participants” in this proxy
solicitation. The principal business address of each Participant is 2200 West 7th Street,
Suite 210, Fort Worth, Texas 76107.
6
Southwest Bank is a 50 year-old independent state bank chartered under the laws of the
State of Texas and headquartered in Fort Worth, Texas. With fifteen full-service banking
centers and a sixteenth bank office dedicated to trusts and royalty trusts, it is the largest,
locally owned, independent commercial bank headquartered in Tarrant County. Southwest
Bank offers a wide range of treasury management, wealth group and mortgage services,
and currently manages $1.3 billion in trust assets. With a dedicated royalty trust group of
nine employees with over 160 combined years of experience in the administration of
royalty trusts, Southwest Bank currently serves as the trustee for Permian Basin Royalty
Trust, Sabine Royalty Trust, Hugoton Royalty Trust, Cross Timbers Royalty Trust,
Tidelands Royalty Trust “B”, Marine Petroleum Trust and Dominion Resources Black
Warrior Trust. In addition, Southwest Bank currently serves as the disbursing agent for
Westbrook-Thompson Royalty Trust.
Section 6.05 of the Trust Indenture requires that any successor trustee of the Trust shall
be a bank or trust company having a capital, surplus and undivided profits (as of the end
of its last fiscal year prior to its appointment) of at least $50,000,000. With a capital, surplus
and undivided profits of $236,590,000 as of December 31, 2015, Southwest Bank meets the
criteria established for a successor trustee under the Trust Indenture and is willing to
accept the nomination and serve as successor trustee of the Trust if such nomination and
appointment is approved at the Special Meeting.
Mr. Lansford currently serves as senior business development officer for Southwest Bank.
Mr. Lansford was the manager of the Personal Trust Department at Texas American
Bank/Fort Worth in 1980 when the Trust was created and Texas American Bank/Fort Worth
was appointed as the initial trustee. After 44 years in the trust business with Texas
American Bank/Fort Worth and its successors, Mr. Lansford joined Southwest Bank in
2009.
As of the date of this filing, the Participants may be deemed to beneficially own, in the
aggregate, 2,000 Units, constituting approximately 0.004% of the Units outstanding. All of
such Units are owned by Mr. Lansford either personally or through his IRA account.
Southwest Bank, as a member of a “group” with Mr. Lansford for the purposes of Section
13(d)(3) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”), may be deemed to
beneficially own the 2,000 Units owned by Mr. Lansford. Southwest Bank does not
exercise voting or dispositive power over the Units held by Mr. Lansford and specifically
disclaims beneficial ownership of the Units held by Mr. Lansford. Please see Annex I for all
transactions in the Units effected by the Participants in the last two years.
Except as set forth in this Solicitation Statement (including the Annexes hereto), (i) during
the past ten years, no Participant has been convicted in a criminal proceeding (excluding
traffic violations or similar misdemeanors); (ii) no Participant directly or indirectly
beneficially owns any securities of the Trust; (iii) no Participant owns any securities of the
Trust which are owned of record but not beneficially; (iv) no Participant has purchased or
sold any securities of the Trust during the past two years; (v) no part of the purchase price
or market value of the securities of the Trust owned by any Participant is represented by
funds borrowed or otherwise obtained for the purpose of acquiring or holding such
securities; (vi) no Participant is, or within the past year was, a party to any contracts,
arrangements or understandings with any person with respect to any securities of the
Trust, including, but not limited to, joint ventures, loan or option arrangements, puts or
calls, guarantees against loss or guarantees of profit, division of losses or profits, or the
giving or withholding of proxies; (vii) no associate of any Participant owns beneficially,
directly or indirectly, any securities of the Trust; (viii) no Participant owns beneficially,
directly or indirectly, any securities of any parent or subsidiary of the Trust; (ix) no
Participant or any of its associates was a party to any transaction, or series of similar
transactions, since the beginning of the Trust’s last fiscal year, or is a party to any
currently proposed transaction or series of similar transactions, to which the Trust or any
of its subsidiaries was or is to be party, in which the amount involved exceeds $120,000;
(x) no Participant or any of its associates has any arrangement or understanding with any
person with respect to any future employment by the Trust or its affiliates, or with respect
to any future transactions to which the Trust or any of its affiliates will or may be a party
and (xi) no person, including any of the Participants, who is a party to any arrangement or
understanding pursuant to which a trustee may be elected at the Special Meeting, has
special interests, direct or indirect, by securities holdings otherwise in any matter to be
acted upon as set forth this Solicitation Statement. There are no material proceedings to
which any Participant or any of its associates is a party adverse to the Trust or any of its
subsidiaries or has a material interest adverse to the Trust or any of its subsidiaries.
INTERESTS OF CERTAIN PERSONS IN THE MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON
If the Special Meeting is called and if the Proposals are approved, Southwest Bank will be
appointed as successor trustee of the Trust. If appointed as successor trustee, Southwest
Bank will receive compensation for its services as trustee of the Trust as provided in the
Trust Indenture. Under the Trust Indenture, the trustee is entitled to an administrative fee
for its administrative services and the preparation of quarterly and annual statements,
computed as (i) 1/20 of 1% of the first $100 million of the annual gross revenue of the Trust,
and 1/30 of 1% of the annual gross revenue of the Trust in excess of $100 million and (ii)
the trustee’s standard hourly rates for time in excess of 300 hours annually. The minimum
administrative fee due under items (i) and (ii) is $36,000. As reported in the Trust’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, the administrative fees paid to
the trustee were approximately $254,395, $310,150 and $259,959 for the years ended
December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
7
As reported above under “Information Concerning the Participants in This Solicitation,”
Mr. Lansford is employed by Southwest Bank.
INFORMATION CONCERNING THE TRUST
The Trust is required to file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and
other information with the SEC. You may read and copy any document the Trust files at
the SEC’s public reference room located at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington,
D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information on the public
reference room. The Trust’s SEC filings are also available to the public at the SEC’s
website at www.sec.gov.
Except as otherwise noted in this Solicitation Statement, the information in this Solicitation
Statement concerning the Trust has been taken from or is based upon documents and
records on file with the SEC and other publicly available information. We do not take
responsibility, except to the extent imposed by law, for the accuracy or completeness of
statements in public documents and records that were not prepared by or on behalf of the
Participants, or for any failure of the Trust to disclose in its public documents and records
any events that may affect the significance or accuracy of the information contained
herein. For information regarding the security ownership of certain beneficial owners of
the Trust, see Annex II.
PROXY SUBMISSION PROCEDURES
We are soliciting the unitholders to request that the trustee of the Trust call the Special
Meeting in accordance with the Trust Indenture and as described in this Solicitation
Statement. By executing a WHITE Request Card and authorizing us to request that the
trustee of the Trust call the Special Meeting, unitholders will be authorizing us to (i) submit
the Special Meeting Request Form on their behalf, and (ii) in our discretion, withdraw the
request for the Special Meeting after it has been submitted.
If your Units are registered in your own name, please complete, sign, date and return the
enclosed WHITE Request Card to our solicitation agent, Okapi Partners, in the postage-
paid envelope provided as soon as possible.
If any of your Units are held in the name of a brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other
institution, only the brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other institution can execute a
WHITE Request Card for your Units and will do so only upon receipt of specific
instructions from you. Accordingly, please contact the person responsible for your
account and give instructions for a written request to be signed representing your Units or
follow the instructions on the voting instruction form that may have been sent to you by
your brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other institution together with this Solicitation
Statement.
The WHITE Request Card to call the Special Meeting will not grant us the power to vote
your Units at the Special Meeting and will not commit you to cast any vote in favor or
against any proposal to be brought before the Special Meeting. To vote on the matters to
be brought before the Special Meeting, if called, you must vote by proxy or in person at the
Special Meeting.
Should you have any questions or require any assistance, please contact Okapi Partners
toll-free at (877) 279-2311.
Revocation
You may revoke your WHITE Request Card at any time prior to the date on which we
deliver the Special Meeting Request Form to the trustee of the Trust by delivering a written
revocation to us, care of Okapi Partners, at the address set forth on the last page of this
Solicitation Statement. Such a revocation must clearly state that your WHITE Request
Card is no longer effective. Any revocation of a WHITE Request Card will not affect any
action taken by us pursuant to the WHITE Request Card prior to such revocation.
Although a revocation is also effective if delivered to the trustee of the Trust or to such
other recipient as the trustee may designate as its agent, we request that either the original
or a copy of all revocations be mailed, faxed or e-mailed to us, care of Okapi Partners, at
the address set forth on the last page of this Solicitation Statement so that we will be aware
of all revocations and can more accurately determine if and when enough WHITE Request
Cards have been received from unitholders.
8
By completing and returning the WHITE Request Card, you will be agreeing to inform us if
you dispose of any of the Units with respect to which you are furnishing the WHITE
Request Card prior to ____________, 2016, which is the outside date by which we intend to
submit the Special Meeting Request Form to the Trust, assuming that we have received
the WHITE Request Card from holders of the Requisite Percentage. By completing and
returning the WHITE Request Card, you will not be entering into any agreement with us to
hold or dispose of your Units, which you are free to do in your sole discretion. However, if
you do dispose of your Units prior to _______________, 2016, you will be deemed to have
revoked your WHITE Request Card to the extent of the Units that you dispose of. If you do
not inform us that you have disposed of any Units with respect to which you have
furnished the WHITE Request Card, we will assume that you continue to own those Units
at least through _______________, 2016.
No Intention to Form a Group
We are soliciting your authorization to submit a Special Meeting Request Form in
accordance with Regulation 14A under the Exchange Act and your authorization will be
revocable until the Special Meeting Request Form is submitted to the trustee of the Trust
in accordance with the Trust Indenture. The Securities and Exchange Commission has
expressed the belief that a unitholder who is a passive recipient of soliciting activities,
without more, would not be deemed a member of a group under Rule 13d-5(b)(1) of the
Exchange Act with persons conducting the solicitation, even where the soliciting activities
result in the unitholder granting a revocable proxy. SEC Release No. 34-39538. We have
not sought the guidance of the SEC or its staff on the application of this position to our
solicitation pursuant to this Solicitation Statement. However, we believe that our
solicitation is of the type contemplated in the SEC Release.
EXPENSES
Southwest Bank has retained Okapi Partners LLC to act as our solicitation agent in
connection with this proxy solicitation. Okapi Partners has agreed in that capacity to
provide consulting and analytical services and solicitation services with respect to banks,
brokers, institutional investors and individual unitholders. Southwest Bank has agreed to
pay Okapi Partners an initial fee for its services estimated to be not more than $15,000 and
to reimburse Okapi Partners for its reasonable out-of-pocket expenses. Southwest Bank
has also agreed to indemnify Okapi Partners against certain liabilities and expenses in
connection with this proxy solicitation, including liabilities under federal securities laws.
Approximately 20 employees of Okapi Partners will engage in the solicitation. Consents
may be solicited by mail, advertisement, telephone, facsimile or in person. Solicitations
may also be made by persons employed by or affiliated with Southwest Bank. However, no
such person will receive additional compensation for such solicitation.
Banks, brokerage houses and other custodians, nominees and fiduciaries will be
requested to forward the solicitation materials to the beneficial owners of Units which they
hold of record, and Southwest Bank will reimburse them for their reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses.
The expenses related directly to this proxy solicitation are expected to be approximately
$_________ in the aggregate and will be borne by Southwest Bank. These expenses
include fees and expenses for attorneys, proxy solicitors, printing, postage, filing
expenses and other costs incidental to the solicitation. Of this estimated amount,
approximately $__________ has been spent to date. The actual costs and expenses could
be materially different than the estimated amounts. Southwest Bank does not intend to
seek reimbursement of such expenses from the Trust.
9
YOUR SUPPORT IS IMPORTANT
No matter how many or how few Units you own, we are seeking your support. If your Units
are registered in your own name, please complete, sign, date and return the enclosed
WHITE Request Card to Okapi Partners in the postage-paid envelope provided as soon as
possible.
If any of your Units are held in the name of a brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other
institution, only the brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other institution can execute a
WHITE Request Card for your Units and will do so only upon receipt of specific
instructions from you. Accordingly, please contact the person responsible for your
account and give instructions for a written request to be signed representing your Units or
follow the instructions on the voting instruction form that may have been sent to you by
your brokerage firm, bank, bank nominee or other institution together with this Solicitation
Statement.
WHOM YOU CAN CALL IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS
If you have any questions or require any assistance, please contact Okapi Partners, our
solicitation agent for this proxy solicitation, at the following address and phone number:
1212 Avenue of the Americas, 24th Floor
New York, New York 10036
(212) 297-0720 (Main)
Unitholders Call Toll-Free: (877) 279-2311
Email: info@okapipartners.com
We thank you in advance for your support.
SOUTHWEST BANK
  
 ROBERT LANSFORD
  
 __________, 2016
10
ANNEX I
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REGARDING PARTICIPANTS IN THE SOLICITATION
PURCHASES AND SALES IN THE TRUST’S UNITS DURING THE PAST TWO YEARS
Trade Date
Name
 
Robert Lansford April 5, 2015
 
Robert Lansford November 6, 2015 Buy
 
Robert Lansford March 18, 2016
Buy
Buy/Sell No. of Units
  
 Buy
50
  
 450
  
 500
11
ANNEX II
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
The following information is copied from and based solely on the Trust’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, as filed with the SEC on February 29,
2016.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners
The following table sets forth as of February 5, 2016 information with respect to the Unit
Holders who were known to the Trustee to be the beneficial owners of more than 5 percent
of the outstanding Units.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
First Eagle Investment Management, LLC
Number of Units
 
Beneficially Owned
Percent
1345 Avenue of the Americas
5,444,968
11.68 %
New York, NY 10105(1)
 
Seymour Schulich
20 Eglinton Avenue West, Suite 1900
3,600,000
7.29 %
Toronto ON, Canada M4R 1K8(2)
 
Beck, Mack & Oliver LLC
360 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10017(3)
2,585,335
5.55 %
(1)
This information was provided in a Schedule 13G/A filed with the SEC on February 5, 2016 by
First Eagle Investment Management, LLC, and which stated First Eagle Investment
Management, LLC beneficially holds such Units on behalf of its investment advisory clients
and is deemed to have sole voting power with respect to 5,323,031 of the Units and sole
power to dispose or to direct the disposition of 5,444,968 of the Units. The First Eagle Global
Fund, a registered investment Company for which First Eagle Investment Management, LLC
acts as investment adviser, may be deemed to beneficially own 3,908,035 of these 5,444,968
units, or 8.38% of the outstanding Units.
(2)This information was provided to the SEC and to the Trustee in a Schedule 13G filed with the
SEC on January 7, 2015, on behalf of Seymour Schulich.
(3)
This information was provided in a Schedule 13G/A filed with the SEC on February 1, 2016 by
Beck, Mack & Oliver LLC, and which stated Beck, Mack & Oliver LLC beneficially holds such
units on behalf of its investment advisory clients and is deemed to have sole voting power with
respect to 2,496,301 of the Units and shared power to dispose or to direct the disposition of
2,585,335 of the Units.
Security Ownership of Trustee
Compass Bank serves as agent and custodian for certain customer accounts. As of
February 5, 2016, Compass Bank could be deemed to beneficially own 27,012 Units related
to these accounts, or less than one percent of the outstanding Units. Compass Bank has
sole voting power over 5,000 of these Units and no voting power over the remaining
22,012, and has sole power to dispose of 5,000 of such Units. Compass Bank does not
have a pecuniary interest in any of these Units.
12
Exhibit A-1
SPECIAL MEETING REQUEST FORM
______________, 2016
Via Registered Mail
Compass Bank, Trust Department,
Trustee of San Juan Basin Royalty Trust
300 W. 7th Street, Suite B
Fort Worth, TX 76102
Re: Request for Special Meeting of Unitholders of San Juan Basin Royalty Trust (the
“Trust”)
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Pursuant to Section 8.02 of the San Juan Basin Amended and Restated Royalty Trust
Indenture (the “Trust Indenture”), this letter constitutes a request to call a special meeting
of the unitholders of the Trust (the “Special Meeting”) by the undersigned unitholder of the
Trust, on his own behalf as the owner of 2,000 units of beneficial interest of the Trust (the
“Units”) and on behalf of all other unitholders of the Trust submitting WHITE Request
Cards authorizing the undersigned to submit this Special Meeting Request Form on their
behalf in respect of their Units, and who collectively are entitled to cast in the aggregate
not less than 15% of the votes at the Special Meeting.
The proposals to be presented to the unitholders at the Special Meeting and the reasons
for presenting such proposals to the Special Meeting are as set forth in the Solicitation
Statement of Southwest Bank and the undersigned filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission on _____________, 2016, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Additional information concerning the persons on whose behalf this Special Meeting
Request Form is being submitted is contained in Annex A, which is incorporated in this
Special Meeting Request Form.
All further correspondence on this matter, including any contention that this Special
Meeting Request Form is in any way defective or deficient, should be addressed to the
undersigned at 2200 West 7th Street, Suite 210, Fort Worth, Texas 76107.
Very truly yours,
  
 Robert Lansford
13
Annex A
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
1.
The names and addresses of the requesting unitholders, as they appear on the Trust’s books,
and of the beneficial owners affiliated with the record holders who are participating in the
request to hold the Special Meeting (“beneficial holders”).
2.
The number of Units that are, directly or indirectly, owned beneficially and of record by such
unitholders and by such beneficial holders.
14
Exhibit A-2
PRELIMINARY COPY SUBJECT TO COMPLETION
DATED AUGUST 16, 2016
SOLICITATION OF WRITTEN REQUEST
TO CALL A SPECIAL MEETING OF UNITHOLDERS
OF
SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST
THIS SOLICITATION IS MADE BY SOUTHWEST BANK AND ROBERT LANSFORD AND
NOT ON BEHALF OF SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST OR COMPASS BANK,
TRUSTEE OF SAN JUAN BASIN ROYALTY TRUST
Please sign and date this WHITE Request Card and return it in the postage-paid envelope
provided or return it to Okapi Partners LLC, 1212 Avenue of the Americas, 24th Floor, New
York, N.Y. 10036, Attn: Teresa Huang.
If so indicated below on this WHITE Request Card, the undersigned unitholder hereby
appoints Southwest Bank and Robert Lansford, and each of them individually, as its
agent, with full power of substitution in each (such agent, together with each substitute
appointed, if any, collectively, the “Designated Agents”), to complete, execute and submit
the Special Meeting Request Form substantially in the form attached as Exhibit A-1 to the
Solicitation Statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission by Southwest
Bank and Robert Lansford on ___________, 2016, and any modifications, amendments or
updates not inconsistent therewith (the “Solicitation Statement”), to the trustee of San
Juan Basin Royalty Trust (which we refer to as the “Trust”) under Section 8.02 of the San
Juan Basin Amended and Restated Royalty Trust Indenture.
The Special Meeting Request Form requests that the trustee of the Trust call a Special
Meeting of unitholders to act on the proposals set forth in the Solicitation Statement.
These include Proposal 1 to remove Compass Bank as trustee of the Trust, Proposal 2 to
nominate Southwest Bank as successor trustee if Proposal 1 is approved, and Proposal 3
to appoint Southwest Bank as successor trustee if Proposals 1 and 2 are approved.
THIS WHITE REQUEST CARD, WHEN PROPERLY COMPLETED TO AUTHORIZE THE
EXECUTION OF THE SPECIAL MEETING REQUEST FORM AND EXECUTED, WILL
AUTHORIZE THE DESIGNATED AGENTS TO EXECUTE THE SPECIAL MEETING
REQUEST FORM ON BEHALF OF THE UNDERSIGNED, BUT WILL NOT GRANT ANY
AUTHORITY TO VOTE ON ANY MATTER PRESENTED AT THE SPECIAL MEETING. A
PROPERLY EXECUTED WHITE REQUEST CARD FOR WHICH NO INSTRUCTION IS
GIVEN WILL GRANT THE DESIGNATED AGENTS AUTHORITY TO EXECUTE THE
SPECIAL MEETING REQUEST FORM ON BEHALF OF THE UNDERSIGNED UNITHOLDER.
Please mark ONE of the boxes below:
The undersigned unitholder AUTHORIZES execution of the Special Meeting Request Form on
¨
behalf of the undersigned unitholder.
or
The undersigned unitholder DOES NOT AUTHORIZE execution of the Special Meeting
¨
Request Form on behalf of the undersigned unitholder.
Print Name: __________________________________
Signature: ____________________________________
Signature (if held jointly): ___________________________
Title (only if Units are held by an entity): ___________________________________
Dated: ______________________________
15
Please sign exactly as your Units are registered. When Units are held by joint tenants,
both should sign. When signing as an attorney, executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian, please give full title as such. If a corporation, partnership or other entity, please
sign in the full entity name buy a duly authorized person. This demand will represent all
Units held in all capacities.
PLEASE COMPLETE, SIGN, DATE AND MAIL
IN THE ENCLOSED POSTAGE-PAID ENVELOPE AS PROMPTLY AS POSSIBLE
16