
20-F 1 form20f.htm 20-F form20f.htm
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 20-F
REGISTRATION STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 12 (b) OR (g) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
OR
XXX      ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2015
OR
______  TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
OR
______ SHELL COMPANY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 or 15(d) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Date of event requiring this shell company report ……………
For the transition period from   ______  to   ______
Commission file number 0-17729
FEC RESOURCES INC.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Not Applicable
(Translation of Registrant’s Name into English)
Canada
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
203, 200 Barclay Parade S.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2P 4R5
(Address of principal executive offices)
Paul Wallace, (403) 290-1676, Fax (403) 770-8060, 203, 200 Barclay Parade S.W., Calgary,
(Name, Telephone, E-mail, and/or Facsimile number and Address of Company Contact Person)
Alberta, T2P 4R5
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12 (b) of the Act:  None
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12 (g) of the Act:
Common Stock, without par value
(Title of Class)
Securities for which there is a reporting obligation pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Act:
None
Indicate the number of outstanding shares of each of the issuer’s classes of capital or common
stock as of the close of the period covered by the annual report:  439,143,765 Common Stock.
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405,
of the Securities Act
Yes [ ]
No [X]
If this report is an annual or transition report, indicate by check mark if the registrant is not
required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes [ ]
No [X]
Note – Checking the box above will not relieve any registrant required to file reports pursuant to
Section 13 or 15 (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 from their obligations under those
Sections.
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15 (d) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months
(or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports) and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
Yes [X]
No [ ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its
corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted
pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
Yes [X]
No [ ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, and accelerated filer, or
a non accelerated filer.  See definition of “accelerated filer and large accelerated filer” in Rule
12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
 
Large accelerated
filer
Non-accelerated
filer
Accelerated filer
XXX
Indicate by check mark which basis if accounting the registrant has used to prepare the financial
statements included in this filing:
U.S. GAAP
International
Financial Reporting
Standards as issued
by the International
Accounting
Standards Board
XXX
Other
If “Other” has been checked in response to the previous question, indicate by check mark which
financial statement item the registrant has elected to follow:
Item 18        XXX
Item 17
If this is an annual report, indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as
defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act)
Yes [ ]
No [X]
(APPLICABLE ONLY TO ISSUERS INVOLVED IN BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS DURING
THE PAST FIVE YEARS)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed all documents and reports required to be
filed by Sections 12, 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 subsequent to the
distribution of securities under a plan confirmed by a court.
Not Applicable
2
FEC RESOURCES, INC.
FORM 20-F ANNUAL REPORT FISCAL YEAR 2015
Page
 
 
Item 1.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
Identity of Directors, Senior Management and
5
Item 2.
Item 3.
Item 4.
Item 4a.
Item 5.
Item 6.
Item 7.
Item 8.
Item 9.
Item 10.
Item 11.
Item 12.
 
 
 
Item 13.
Item 14.
Item 15.
Item 16A.
Item 16B.
Item 16C.
Item 16D.
Item 16E.
Item 16F.
Item 16G.
Item 16H.
 
 
 
Item 17.
Item 18.
Item 19.
 
Signatures
3
Advisers
Offer Statistics and Expected Timetable
5
Key Information
5
Information on the Company
14
Unresolved Staff Comments
18
Operating and Financial Review and Prospects
18
Directors, Senior Management and Employees
21
Major Shareholders and Related Party Transactions 25
26
Financial Information
The Offer and Listing
27
28
Additional Information
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market
29
Risk
Description of Securities other than Equity Securities 29
PART II
Defaults, Dividend Arrearages and Delinquencies
Material Modifications to the Rights of Security
Holders and Use of Proceeds
Controls and Procedures
Audit Committee Financial Expert
Code of Ethics
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
Exemption from the Listing Standards for Audit
Committee
Purchase of Equity Securities by the Issuer and
Affiliated Purchaser
Changes in Registrant’s Certifying Accountant
Corporate Governance
Mine Safety Disclosure
PART III
Financial Statements
Financial Statements
Exhibits
30
30
30
31
31
32
32
32
32
32
33
 
 
 
33
33
58
 
59
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Some of the information in this prospectus contains forward-looking statements.  Forward-looking
statements represent our current expectations or forecasts of future events and are based on our
management's beliefs, as well as assumptions made by and information currently available to
them.  You can identify these statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or
current  facts.    These  statements  may  include  the  words  "anticipate,"  "believe,"  "budget,"
"estimate," "expect," "intend," "objective," "plan," “probable” "possible," "potential," "project" and
other words and terms of similar meaning in connection with any discussion of future operating or
financial performances.  Any references to we, our, us, Company, Corporation, or FEC refer to
FEC Resources Inc,
inaccurate  assumptions,  or  by  known  or  unknown
Any or all of our forward-looking statements in this Form 20-F may turn out to be incorrect.  They
can  be  affected  by 
risks  and
uncertainties.  Many of these factors, including the risks outlined under "Risk Factors," will be
important  in  determining  our  actual  future  results,  which  may  differ  materially  from  those
contemplated  in  any  forward-looking  statements.    These  factors  include,  among  others,  the
following:
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
oil and natural gas price volatility;
uncertainties in the estimates of proved reserves, and in the projection of future
rates of production and timing of development expenditures;
our ability to find and acquire additional reserves;
risks associated with acquisitions, exploration, development and production;
operating hazards attendant to the oil and natural gas business;
potential constraints on our ability to market reserves due to limited transportation
space;
climatic conditions;
availability and cost of labor, material, equipment and capital;
ability to employ and retain key managerial and technical personnel;
international, national, regional or local political and economic uncertainties,
including the territorial dispute between the Republic of Philippines and the
People’s Republic of China, changes in energy policies, foreign exchange
restrictions and currency fluctuations;
adverse regulatory or legal decisions, including those under environmental laws
and regulations;
environmental risks;
the strength and financial resources of our competitors;
general economic conditions; and
our ability to continue as a “going concern”.
When you consider these forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind these risk factors
and other cautionary statements in this prospectus.  Our forward-looking statements speak only
as of the date made.
Although  we  believe  that  the  expectations  reflected  in  the  forward-looking  statements  are
reasonable, they are subject to a variety of variables which could cause actual results or trends to
differ  materially.    We  cannot  guarantee  future  results,  levels  of  activity,  performance  or
achievements.  Except as otherwise required by United States securities laws, we are under no
duty to update any of the forward looking statements after the date of this Form 20-F to conform
them  to  actual  results  or  to  changes  in  our  expectations.    All  forward-looking  statements
attributable to us are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing cautionary statement.
4
Table of Contents
CURRENCY
Unless otherwise stated, “$”, when used in this Form 20-F, refers to US dollars.
ITEM  1.   IDENTITY OF DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ADVISERS.
Not applicable to Form 20-F filed as annual report.
ITEM 2.  OFFER STATISTICS AND EXPECTED TIMETABLE.
Not applicable to Form 20-F filed as annual report.
ITEM 3.  KEY INFORMATION.
The following is a summary of key information about our financial condition, capitalization and
the risk factors pertaining to our business.
Currency Exchange Rates
Table No. 3(A)(1) below sets forth the rate of exchange for the Canadian Dollar at the end of
each of the five (5) most recent fiscal years ended December 31, the average rates for each year,
and the range of high and low rates for each year.  Table 3(A)(2) sets forth the high and low
exchange rates for each month during the previous six (6) months.  The rate of exchange means
the  noon  buying  rate  as  posted  by  the  Bank  of  Canada.    The  Tables  set  forth  the  number  of
Canadian Dollars required under that formula to buy one (1) US Dollar.  The average rate means
the average of the exchange rates on the last day of each month during the year.
Table No. 3(A)(1)
U.S. Dollar/Canadian Dollar
Currency Exchange Table No. 1
U.S. Dollar/Canadian Dollar
Fiscal Year Ended 12/31/15
Fiscal Year Ended 12/31/14
Average
1.28
1.10
High
1.40
1.16
Low
1.17
1.06
Close
1.38
1.25
Fiscal Year Ended 12/31/13
Fiscal Year Ended 12/31/12
Fiscal Year Ended 12/31/11
1.03
1.00
0.98
1.07
1.04
1.05
0.98
0.97
0.94
1.06
0.99
1.02
The current closing rate of exchange was 1.31 on August 3, 2016.
Table of Contents
5
Table No. 3(A)(2)
U.S. Dollar/Canadian Dollar
High
Low
2/15
1.40
1.35
3/15
1.35
1.30
4/15
1.32
1.25
5/15
1.31
1.25
6/16
1.31
1.27
7/16
1.32
1.28
A.  Selected Financial Data
The  following  financial  data  summarizes  selected  financial  data  for  our  company  prepared  in
accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  as  issued  by  the
International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”) for the five fiscal years ended December 31,
2015,  2014,  2013,  2012  and  2011.    The  information  presented  below  for  the  five  year  period
ended December 31, 2015, 2014, 2013, 2012 and 2011 is derived from our financial statements
which were examined by our independent auditors.  The information set forth below should be
read  in  conjunction  with  our  audited  annual  financial  statements  and  related  notes  thereto
included in this annual report, and with the information appearing under the heading “Item 5 –
Operating and Financial Review and Prospects”.
Year
Ended
12/31/15
(‘000) -
except
per share
Year
Ended
12/31/14
(‘000) -
except
per share
Year
Ended
12/31/13
(‘000) -
except
per share
Year
Ended
12/31/12
(‘000) -
except
per share
Year
Ended
12/31/11
(‘000) -
except
per share
data
$-
 $341
Revenue
Net Income (Loss)
Net Income (Loss) Per
Share
Diluted  Net Income
(Loss) Per Share
 $0.00
Dividends Per Share  $0.00
Weighted  Avg.
Shares O/S (‘000)
$0.00
data
$-
  $(290
data
$-
) $(367
data
data
$-
) $(5,138 ) $435
$-
$(0.00
) $(0.00
) $(0.01
) $0.00
$(0.00
  $0.00
) $(0.00
  $0.00
) $(0.01
  $0.00
) $0.00
  $0.00
439,144    439,144    439,144    439,144    439,144
$16,732   $16,732   $16,732   $16,732   $16,732
$1,242
  $-
  $-
  $5,965
$169
  $-
  $-
  $170
$458
  $-
  $-
  $460
$824
  $-
  $-
  $827
439,144    439,144    439,144    439,144    439,144 
 
 $572
$6,356
$212
$502
$510
 $-
 $-
Working Capital
Resource Properties
Long-Term Debt
Shareholders’ Equity  $511
Share Capital
Capital Stock
Shares  (‘000)
Total Assets
$902
6
Table of Contents
B. Capitalization and Indebtedness
This Form 20-F is being filed as an annual report under the U.S. Exchange Act and, as such,
there is no requirement to provide any information under this item.
C. Reason for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
This Form 20-F is being filed as an annual report under the U.S. Exchange Act and, as such,
there is no requirement to provide any information under this item.
D.  Risk Factors
General Business Risks
We  Have  Had  a  History  of  Operating  Losses  Which  May  Affect  Our  Ability  to  Continue
Operations.
We earned income of  $340,909 during the year ended December 31, 2015 as a result of the sale
of  shares  in  Forum  Energy  Plc  (2014  –  ($289,875);  2013  –  ($366,756)).    We  have  incurred
operating losses in the previous fiscal years with our accumulated deficit totaling $19,279,201 as
at December 31, 2015.   We also anticipate sustaining a loss from operations for the fiscal year
ended December 31, 2016.  We have no sources of revenue other than from the sale of shares in
Forum Energy Plc and, historically, have only shown net income as a result of accounting for our
equity share of profits in other companies in which we hold equity investments. As a result, we
may not be able to sustain operations in the future without additional debt or equity financing.
Unless We Are Able To Discover Economically  Recoverable Reserves in the Future, There is
Substantial  Doubt  We  Will  Be  Able  to  Continue  Operations  as  a  Going  Concern  in  the  Long
Term.
 
Our  business  success  is  dependent  upon  our  ability  to  indirectly  or  directly  discover
economically recoverable reserves, and to bring such reserves into profitable production, and is
subject to a number of risks, including environmental risks, contractual risks, legal and political
risks, fluctuations in the price of oil and gas, and other factors beyond our control.
 
The consolidated Financial Statements included herein have been prepared by management on
the basis of accounting principles applicable to a “going concern”.  Management believes the
“going concern” basis, which presumes the realization of assets and discharge of liabilities in the
normal  course  of  business  for  the  foreseeable  future,  is  appropriate.    We  have  experienced
significant operating losses and cash outflows from operations in the years ended December 31,
2015,  2014  and  2013  and  have  no  producing  properties.    Our  ability  to  continue  as  a  “going
concern” in the long term is dependent on achieving profitable operations and upon obtaining
additional financing.  The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted at this time.
Table of Contents
7
We Believe We Have Sufficient Working Capital to Support Our Business in 2016, We Will Need
Additional Funds in Order to Implement Our Intended Projects and There is No Assurance that
Such Funds Will Be Available As, If, and When, Needed.
Funds  used  in  operations  for  the  fiscal  years  ended  December  31,  2015  and  2014  were
$(266,369) and $(288,190), respectively.  We have been dependent upon the proceeds of equity
and debt financing in addition to the disposition of assets to fund operations.  No assurances can
be given that our actual cash requirements will not exceed our budget, that anticipated revenues
will be realized, that, when needed, lines of credit will be available if necessary or that additional
capital  will  be  available  to  us.    There  is  no  assurance  that  we  will  be  able  to  obtain  such
additional  funds  on  terms  and  conditions  we  may  deem  acceptable.    Failure  to  obtain  such
additional  funds  may  materially  and  adversely  affect  our  ability  to  acquire  interests  directly  or
indirectly in producing oil and gas and mineral properties.
We Do Not Intend to Pay Dividends In the Foreseeable Future, and thus, You Should Not Expect
to Receive Dividends.
We  have  paid  no  dividends  on  our  common  shares  since  inception,  and  do  not  plan  to  pay
dividends in the foreseeable future. See "Description of Common Shares."
The Market Price of Our Common Shares Has Been, and Will Likely Continue to Be, Volatile.
The market price of our common shares has fluctuated over a wide range, and it is likely that the
price  of  our  common  shares  will  fluctuate  in  the  future.    Further,  announcements  regarding
acquisitions, the status of corporate collaborations, regulatory approvals or other developments
by  us  or  our  competitors  could  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  market  price  of  our  common
shares.
The Value and Transferability of Our Shares May Be Adversely Impacted By the Limited Trading
Market For Our Shares and the Penny Stock Rules.
There  is  only  a  limited  trading  market  for  our  shares  on  the  Pink  Sheets.    There  can  be  no
assurance that (a) we will be able to be listed again on the OTCQB, due to enhanced listing
requirements that were implemented by OTC Markets in 2014, (b) this market will be sustained,
or  (c)  that  we  will  be  able  to  satisfy  any  future  trading  criteria  that  may  be  imposed  by  the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”).
In addition, holders of our common shares may experience substantial difficulty in selling their
securities as a result of the “penny stock rules” which apply to  our common shares.  Under the
penny stock rules, the Securities and Exchange Commission imposes additional sales practice
requirements  on  broker-dealers  who  sell  such  securities  to  persons  other  than  established
customers and accredited investors (generally institutions with assets in excess of $5,000,000 or
individuals  with  net  worth  in  excess  of  $1,000,000  or  annual  income  exceeding  $200,000  or
$300,000 jointly with their spouse). For transactions covered by the rules, a broker-dealer must
make  a  special  suitability  determination  for  the  purchaser  and  transaction  prior  to  the
sale.  Consequently, the rules may affect the ability of broker-dealers to sell our securities, and
also  may  affect  the  ability  of  purchasers  of  our  stock  to  sell  their  shares  in  the  secondary
market.  It may also cause fewer broker-dealers to make a market in our common shares.
Table of Contents
8
The Large Number of Shares Eligible For Future Sale By Existing Shareholders May Adversely
Affect the Market Price For Our Common Shares.
Future sales of substantial amounts of common shares in the public market, or the perception that
such  sales  could  occur,  could  adversely  affect  the  market  price  of  our  common  shares.    In
February 2016, an agreement was reached with a shareholder to cancel 30,000,000 common
shares which had been issued but held in escrow; thus at August 3, 2016 we had 409,143,765
common  shares  outstanding.    We  currently  have  229,117,879  shares  eligible  to  be  resold
pursuant  to  Rule  144.  We  intend  to  include  these  common  shares  in  a  future  Registration
Statement  to  be  filed  with  the  United  States  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (“SEC”)
pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933, registering the common shares for sale. No prediction can
be made as to the effect, if any, that sales of common shares or the availability of such shares for
sale  will  have  on  the  market  prices  of  our  common  shares  prevailing  from  time  to  time.    The
possibility that substantial amounts of our common shares may be sold under SEC Rule 144 into
the public market may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our common shares and could
impair our ability to raise capital in the future through the sale of equity securities.
Your vote may not affect the outcome of any shareholder vote since our principal stockholder
currently retains approximately 55% of our outstanding stock.
For instance, Philex Mining Corporation and its subsidiary Philex Petroleum Corporation may be
able to control the outcome of all stockholder votes, including votes concerning director elections,
charter  and  by-law  amendments  and  possible  mergers,  corporate  control  contests  and  other
significant corporate transactions which may not be in the interests of all shareholders.
Foreign Laws, Rules and Environmental Regulations to Which We Are Subject May Adversely
Affect Our Business Operations As Well As the Market Price For Our Stock.
The production of oil and gas and the extraction of minerals by companies we invest in or by
ourselves is generally subject to extensive laws, rules, orders and regulations governing a wide
variety  of  matters,  including  the  drilling  and  spacing  of  wells,  allowable  rates  of  production,
prevention  of  waste  and  pollution  and  protection  of  the  environment.    In  addition  to  the  direct
costs borne in complying with such regulations, operations and revenues may be impacted to the
extent  that  certain  regulations  limit  oil  and  gas  and  mineral  production  to  below  economic
levels.  Although the particular regulations applicable in each jurisdiction in which operations are
conducted vary, such regulations are generally designed to ensure that oil and gas operations
are carried out in a safe and efficient manner, and to ensure that similarly-situated operators are
provided with reasonable opportunities to produce their respective fair share of available crude
oil, natural gas, and mineral reserves.  However, since these regulations generally apply to all oil
and  gas  producers,  we  believe  that  these  regulations  should  not  put  us  at  a  material
disadvantage to other oil, gas and mineral producers.
Table of Contents
9
Operating Risks - Oil and Gas Exploration Activities
We Do Not Currently Directly Own Properties With Oil or Gas or Mineral Reserves.  Our Failure
to Find or Acquire Available Reserves May Adversely Impact Our Business Operations.
 
We  do  not  own  any  properties  or  investments    with  oil,  natural  gas  or  mineral  reserves.    Our
future oil, natural gas, or mineral reserves, production, and therefore, cash flow and income, as
well  as  our  success  are  highly  dependent  on  success  in  finding  or  acquiring  recoverable
reserves  by  ourselves  or  through  our  investments  and  obtaining  the  financing  necessary  to
acquire such reserves.  We cannot assure shareholders that we will be able to develop, exploit,
find or acquire reserves to replace future production, if any.
Exploring  For  and  Producing  Oil  and  Natural  Gas  and  Minerals  Are  High-Risk  Activities  With
Many Uncertainties That Could Adversely Affect Our Business, Financial Condition or Results of
Operations.
Exploration and development of oil and gas and mineral resources involve a high degree of risk,
and few properties which are explored are ultimately developed into producing properties.  There
is no assurance that our exploration and development activities or those of companies that we
invest in will result in any discoveries of commercial bodies of oil, gas or minerals.  The long-term
profitability  of  our  operations  will  be,  in  part,  directly  related  to  the  cost  and  success  of  our
exploration programs or those of companies we invest in which may be affected by a number of
factors.  Substantial expenditures are required to establish reserves through drilling, to develop
processes to extract the resources, and, in the case of new properties, to develop the extraction
and processing facilities and infrastructure at any site chosen for extraction.  Although substantial
benefits  may  be  derived  from  the  discovery  of  a  major  deposit  of  oil,  gas  or  minerals,  no
assurance can be given that natural resources will be discovered in sufficient quantities to justify
commercial operations or that the funds required for development can be obtained on a timely
basis.
If We Or Companies We Invest In Are Unable to Continue to Identify, Explore and Develop New
Properties, Our Business Operations May Be Adversely Affected.
We expect that to be successful in our oil and gas and mineral exploration activities, we must
continually acquire or explore for and develop new oil and gas reserves to replace those, if any,
being depleted by production by ourselves or by companies we invest in.  Without successful
drilling or acquisition ventures, our direct and indirect oil and gas assets, mineral assets and,
properties and the revenues derived there from, if any, will decline over time.  To the extent we
engage in drilling activities directly or indirectly, such activities carry the risk that no commercially
viable oil or gas production or mineral extraction will be obtained.  The cost of drilling, completing
and operating oil and gas wells is often uncertain.  Moreover, drilling for oil and gas and minerals
may  be  curtailed,  delayed  or  cancelled  as  a  result  of  many  factors,  including  shortage  of
available  working  capital, 
title  problems,  weather  conditions,  environmental  concerns,
government prohibitions, shortages of or delays in delivery of equipment, as well as the financial
instability  of  well  operators,  major  working  interest  owners,  and  drilling  and  well  servicing
companies.    The  availability  of  a  ready  market  for  oil  and  gas  and  minerals  will  depend  on
numerous factors beyond our control, including the demand for and supply of oil and gas and
minerals, the proximity of natural gas reserves to pipelines, the capacity of such pipelines, the
proximity  of  any  smelting  facilities  in  relation  to  any  minerals  found,  fluctuations  in  seasonal
demand, the effects of inclement weather, and government regulation.  New gas wells may be
“shut-in” for lack of a market until a gas pipeline or gathering system with available capacity is
extended into an area.
Table of Contents
10
The Exploration and Development of Oil and Gas and Mineral Properties are Subject to
Operating Hazards and Risks for Which We Will Be Uninsured.
Exploration for natural resources involves many risks, which even a combination of experience,
knowledge and careful evaluation may not be able to overcome.  Operations in which we expect
to  acquire  an  interest  will  be  subject  to  all  the  hazards  and  risks  normally  incidental  to
exploration,  development  and  production  of  resources,  any  of  which  could  result  in  work
stoppages, damage to persons or property and possible environmental damage.  These include
the  possibility  of  fires,  earthquake  activity,  coastal  erosion,  explosions,  blowouts,  oil  spills  or
seepage, gas leaks, discharge of toxic gas, over-pressurized formations, unusual or unexpected
geological  conditions  and  the  absence  of  economically  viable  reserves.    These  hazards  may
result  in  cost  overruns,  substantial  losses,  and/or  exposure  to  substantial  environmental  and
other liabilities.
Fluctuating  Resource 
Activities.
Impact  Our  Operations
Prices  May
Adversely
and
The price of natural resources has traditionally been subject to wide fluctuations, particularly in
recent  years,  and  is  affected  by  numerous  factors  beyond  our  control  including  international,
economic and political trends, expectations of inflation, currency exchange fluctuations, interest
rates, global or regional consumptive patterns, speculative activities and increased production
due  to  new  extraction  developments  and  improved  extraction  and  production  methods.    The
effect  of  these  factors  on  the  price  of  oil  and  gas  and  minerals,  and  therefore,  the  economic
viability  of  any  of  our  exploration  projects  or  those  of  our  investments,  cannot  accurately  be
predicted.
If We Fail to Fulfill Our Obligations Under Our Purchase Option and Joint Venture Agreements,
Not  Only  Will  Our  Operations  Be  Adversely  Affected,  But  We  May  Lose  Our  Interest  In  the
Property in Question.
We  may,  in  the  future,  be  unable  to  meet  our  share  of  costs  incurred  under  joint  venture
agreements or other option or joint venture agreements to which we are, or may become a party,
and we may have our interest in properties, in which we may acquire interests subject to such
agreements, reduced as a result. Furthermore, if other parties to such agreements do not meet
their  share  of  such  costs,  we  may  be  unable  to  finance  the  cost  required  to  complete
recommended  programs.    In  2012,  our  equity  interest  in  Lascogon  Mining  Corporation  was
diluted from 40% to 1.08% as we were unable to meet a capital call for a work program.  We
could be further diluted in the future should Lascogon issue more capital calls.
It Is Possible that Our Title for the Claims in Which We Have a Direct or Indirect Interest in Will Be
Challenged By Third Parties.
Although we will attempt to ascertain the status of the title for any projects in which we have or
will  acquire  a  material  direct  or  indirect  interest,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  title  to  such
concessions will not be challenged or impugned.  In some countries, the system for recording title
to the rights to explore, develop, and mine natural resources is such that a title opinion provides
only minimal comfort that the holder has title.  Also, in many countries, claims have been made
and new claims are being made by aboriginal peoples, and other countries claiming rights that
call into question the property rights granted by the governments of those countries.  An example
of this is the force majeure declared on SC72 because this contract area falls within the territorial
disputed area of the West Philippine Sea which was the subject of an United Nations arbitration
process between the Republic of Philippines and the People’s Republic of China.  On July12,
2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague ruled in favor of the Philippines against
China  over territorial  disputes  in  the  South  China  Sea.  China  has  rejected  the  ruling.  It  is
uncertain whether this ruling will resolve the dispute between the parties.
Table of Contents
11
Reserve Estimates for Resources That May Be Reported By Us Are Dependent On Many
Assumptions that May Ultimately Turn Out to Be Inaccurate.
Reserve  estimates  are  imprecise  and  may  be  expected  to  change  as  additional  information
becomes available.  Furthermore, estimates of reserves of natural resources, of necessity, are
projections based on engineering data and there are uncertainties inherent in the interpretation of
such data as well as the projection of future rates of production and the timing of development
expenditures.    Reserve  engineering  is  a  subjective  process  of  estimating  underground
accumulations  of  oil,  gas  and  minerals  that  cannot  be  measured  in  an  exact  way  and  the
accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available data of engineering and
geological  interpretation  and  judgment.    Accordingly,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  the
information  regarding  reserves  of  natural  resources,  if  any,  set  forth  herein  will  ultimately  be
produced.
Any Resource Production That We May Undertake and Marketing or That of Companies That we
Have Invested In May Be Adversely Affected By Factors Beyond Our Control.
The production and marketing of resources are affected by a number of competitive factors which
are beyond our control and the effect of which cannot be accurately predicted.  These factors
include crude oil and mineral imports, actions by foreign oil-producing nations and other mineral
producers, the availability of adequate pipeline and other transportation facilities, the availability
of  equipment  and  personnel,  the  marketing  of  competitive  fuels  and  minerals,  the  effect  of
governmental regulations, and other matters affecting the availability of a ready market such as
fluctuating supply and demand.
Our  Operations  Will  Be  Subject  to  Numerous  Environmental  Risks  If  We  Are  Successful  In
Obtaining  Properties  That  Have  Proven  Resources  Or  If  We  Undertake  Exploration  Activities
Ourselves.
Our  resource  operations  and  those  of  companies  we  invest  in,  if  any  will  be  subject  to
compliance  with  applicable  federal,  state,  and  local  laws  and  regulations  controlling  the
discharge  of  materials  into  the  environment,  or  otherwise  relating  to  the  protection  of  the
environment.    We  believe  that  there  is  a  trend  toward  stricter  standards  of  environmental
regulation which will in all probability continue.  Compliance with such laws and standards may
cause  substantial  delays  and  require  capital  outlays  in  excess  of  those  anticipated,  thereby
adversely affecting our earnings and competitive position in the future.
Since We May Acquire Holdings In Properties In Less Developed Countries and Have Indirectly
Acquired Holdings in Properties In Less Developed Countries, Our Operations May Be
Adversely Affected By Risks Associated With the Political, Economic and Social Climate of the
Countries In Which We Will Operate or Have Indirect Holdings .
Since  our  direct  and  indirect  exploration  and  development  activities  will  occur  primarily  in
countries other than Canada and the United States, we may be affected by possible political or
economic instability in those countries.  The risks include, but are not limited to, terrorism, military
repression, extreme fluctuations in currency exchange rates, and high rates of inflation.  Changes
in resource development or investment policies or shifts in political attitude in these countries
may  adversely  affect  our  business.  Operations  may  be  effected  in  varying  degrees  by
government regulations with respect to restrictions on production, price controls, export controls,
income taxes, expropriation of property, maintenance of claims, environmental legislation, land
use, land claims of local people, water use and mine safety. The effect of these factors cannot be
accurately predicted.  Exploration and production activities in areas outside of the United States
and Canada are also subject to the risks inherent in foreign operations, including loss of revenue,
property  and  equipment  as  a  result  of  hazards  such  as  expropriation,  nationalization,  war,
insurrection and other political risks.
We  Face  Competition  From  Larger  and  Better  Financed  Companies  Seeking  to  Acquire
Properties In Our Sphere of Operation.
The resource industry is highly competitive, and our business could be harmed by competition
from  other  companies.    Because  resources  are  fungible  commodities,  the  principal  form  of
competition is price competition.  We will strive to maintain the lowest exploration and production
costs  possible  to  maximize  profits  and  insure  that  any  companies  in  which  we  invest  do  the
same.    In  addition,  as  an  independent  resource  company,  we  frequently  compete  for  reserve
acquisitions,  exploration  leases,  licenses,  concessions  and  marketing  agreements  against
companies with financial and other resources substantially larger than we possess.  Many of our
competitors  have  established  strategic  long  term  positions  and  maintain  strong  governmental
relationships in countries in which we  may seek entry.
12
Table of Contents
We  Currently Do Not Maintain Insurance Against Potential Losses and Unexpected Liabilities.
As  previously  stated  herein,  exploration  for  and  production  of  resources  can  be  hazardous,
involving  natural  disasters  and  other  unforeseen  occurrences  such  as  “blowouts”,  “cratering”,
fires and loss of well control, which can damage or destroy wells or production facilities, injure or
kill  people,  and  damage  property  and  the  environment.    Although  we  intend  to  maintain
insurance against many potential losses or liabilities arising from our operations in accordance
with  customary  industry  practices  and  in  amounts  that  we  believe  to  be  prudent,  we  do  not
presently  have  such  insurance  coverage;  and,  even  if  we  were  to  obtain  such  insurance
coverage, there is no assurance that it will be adequate to protect against all operational risks, or
subject to defenses or exclusions against insurance coverage.
We Are Dependent On Retaining Our Senior Management and Key Personnel.
To  a  large  extent,  we  depend  on  the  services  of  our  senior  management  personnel.    These
individuals  have  critical  and  unique  knowledge  of  the  areas  of  operations  that  facilitate  the
evaluation and acquisition of potential properties in our intended sphere of operations.  The loss
of these experienced personnel, if that were to occur, could have a material adverse impact on
our ability to compete in this region of the world.  We do not maintain any insurance against the
loss of any management personnel.
Our  Directors  May  Face  Conflicts  of  Interest  In  Connection  With  Our  Participation  In  Certain
Ventures Because They Are Directors of Other Resource Companies.
Some of our directors participate in other resource companies and to the extent that such other
companies may participate in ventures in which we may participate, our directors may have a
conflict  of  interest  in  negotiating  and  concluding  terms  respecting  the  extent  of  such
participation.  It is possible that due to our directors’ conflicting interests, we may be precluded
from  participating  in  certain  projects  that  we  might  otherwise  have  participated  in  or  we  may
obtain less favorable terms on certain projects than we might have obtained if our directors were
not also the directors of other participating mineral resource companies.  In their effort to balance
their conflicting interests, our directors may approve terms that are equally favorable to all of their
companies as opposed to negotiating terms that may be more favorable to us, but adverse to
their  other  companies.    Additionally,  it  is  possible  that  we  may  not  be  afforded  certain
opportunities  to  participate  in  particular  projects  because  such  projects  are  assigned  to  our
directors’  other  companies  for  which  the  directors  may  deem  the  projects  to  have  a  greater
benefit.
Our Security Holders May Not Be Able to Enforce U.S. Civil Liabilities Claims Thereby Limiting
Their Ability to Collect on Claims Against Us.
We are incorporated in Canada and the majority of our directors and officers are nationals and/or
residents of countries other than the United States.  All or a substantial portion of the assets of
these persons are located outside the United States.  As a result, it may be difficult for you to
effect  service  of  process  within  the  United  States  upon  these  persons.    In  addition,  there  is
uncertainty as to whether the courts of Canada would recognize or enforce judgments of United
States courts obtained against us or such persons predicated upon the civil liability provisions of
the  securities  laws  of  the  United  States  or  any  state  thereof,  or  be  competent  to  hear  original
actions  brought  in  these  countries  against  us  or  such  persons  predicated  upon  the  securities
laws of the United States or any state thereof.
As a Foreign Private Issuer, We Are Exempt From a Number Of U.S. Securities Laws And Rules
Promulgated Thereunder And Are Permitted To File Less Information With The SEC Than U.S.
Companies Must. This Will Limit The Information Available To Holders Of Our Shares
 
We currently qualify as a “foreign private issuer,” as defined in the SEC’s rules and regulations
and,  consequently,  we  are  not  subject  to  all  of  the  disclosure  requirements  applicable  to
companies organized within the U.S. For example, we are exempt from certain rules under the
U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), that regulate disclosure
obligations  and  procedural  requirements  related  to  the  solicitation  of  proxies,  consents  or
authorizations applicable to a security registered under the Exchange Act. In addition, our officers
and  directors  are  exempt  from  the  reporting  and  “short-swing”  profit  recovery  provisions  of
Section 16 of the Exchange Act and related rules with respect to their purchases and sales of our
securities. Moreover, we are not required to file periodic reports and financial statements with the
SEC  as  frequently  or  as  promptly  as  U.S.  public  companies.  We  are  also  not  subject  to
Regulation  FD  under  the  Exchange  Act,  which  would  prohibit  us  from  selectively  disclosing
material  nonpublic  information  to  certain  persons  without  concurrently  making  a  widespread
public  disclosure  of  such  information.  Accordingly,  there  may  be  less  publicly  available
information concerning our company than there is for U.S. public companies.
Table of Contents
13
ITEM  4.  INFORMATION ON THE COMPANY
A.  Our Corporate History and Development.
We were incorporated on February 8, 1982 in British Columbia, Canada under the name Tylox
Corporation.  Our continuance under the Canada Business Corporation Act resulted in, among
other  things,  our  name  change,  first  in  December  1991,  to  Tracer  Petroleum  Corporation,
followed in July 2003, to Forum Energy Corporation.  On May 18, 2005, we changed our name to
FEC Resources, Inc.  We have no subsidiaries.  Prior to May 18, 2005, we owned 66 2/3% of
Forum Exploration, Inc. (“FEI”) a Philippine-based oil and gas company with rights to develop
certain concession areas as more fully described later in this document.  On May 18, 2005, we
sold our interest in FEI to Forum Energy Plc (“FEP”) for shares of FEP and cash as more fully
described later in this document.  We currently hold 18.42% of the issued and outstanding capital
of  FEP,  and  in  addition  we  hold  a  35%  interest  in  Metalore  Mining  Corporation  (“MMC”),  a
Philippine-based  company  that  holds  the  rights  to  a  64  hectare  license    which  has  been
abandoned.    We  also  own  a  1.08%  interest  in  Lascogon  Mining  Corporation  which  owns  the
Mineral Production and Sharing Agreement 148 (“MPSA 148”), a gold exploration projectin the
Philippines.
We are engaged in the acquisition, exploration, and, when warranted, development of natural
resource  and  mineral  properties.    Although  we  currently  are  not  the  operator  with  respect  to
interests we hold, we are actively seeking projects where our involvement would be more than
management and advisory.  We were focused on the development of one mineral license in the
Philippines  until  December  31,  2010,  however  the  project  was  determined  to  be  not  feasible
based on our findings and therefore was fully impaired.  The license is held by Lascogon Mining
Corporation  (“Lascogon  Mining”)  which  was  acquired  from  Philex  Gold  Philippines  Inc.,  a
subsidiary of Philex Mining Corporation, our then largest shareholder.  In 2012, we received a
capital  call  for  approximately  $2,400,000  for  future  work  programs  and  as  a  result  of  not
participating, we were diluted from 40% interest in Lascogon Mining to 1.08% interest.
Our  head  office  is  located  at  203,  200  Barclay  Parade  SW,  Calgary,  Alberta  T2P  4R5.    Our
phone number is (403) 290-1676.
B.  Business Overview
At this time, we do not have any significant revenue-generating assets, and as a result, rely upon
the sale of our assets to fund ongoing operations.  MMC had begun producing nominal quantities
of iron ore which were expected to provide cash flow to us, but operations were shut down in
2006 for environmental reasons. We have filed for a mineral production and sharing agreement
covering the current and surrounding area which we believed would be granted and would have
allowed production to resume.  To date the mineral production and sharing agreement has not
been granted and the operations of MMC are still dormant and have been abandoned.
 
Recent Developments
A final hearing on the merits and remaining issues of jurisdiction and admissibility was held from
November  24-30,  2015  in  The  Hague  regarding  the  area  covered  by  FEP’s  70%  interest  in
Service Contract 72 Reed Bank.   On July12, 2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the
Hague ruled in favor of the Philippines against China over territorial disputes in the South China
Sea.  China  has  rejected  the  ruling.  It  is  uncertain  whether  this  ruling  will  resolve  the  dispute
between the parties.
The Philippines
We are currently pursuing exploration and development opportunities for oil, natural gas, gold,
and  copper in the Philippines through various companies in which we hold interests. FEP, in
which  we  own  a  18.42%  equity  interest,  owns  the  oil  and  gas  rights  over  a  8,800  square-
kilometer block located in the West Philippine Sea. In addition FEP holds interests in various
other  concessions  located  in  the  Philippines.  This  block  is  subject  to  a  dispute  between  The
Republic of the Philippines and the Peoples Republic of China
We are involved in the exploration for gold and copper through our interest in Lascogon Mining
Corporation. The current mining exploration phase of the MPSA expired in January 2014. The
decision by the mining regulator to decline to allow an extension is being appealed however it is
uncertain when the result of this appeal will be known nor is it certain what the outcome will be.
Table of Contents
14
Forum Energy Plc. (“FEP”)
We currently own 18.42% of FEP. FEP was established through the consolidation in 2005 of the
Philippine assets of FEC Resources, Inc. of Canada, and Sterling Energy Plc of the UK, into one
corporate entity.  The current holdings of FEP are based mainly in the Philippines and include:
·  70% interest in Service Contract 72 Reed Bank (SC 72), an offshore license which contains the
Sampaguita Gas Field as well as several additional oil and gas leshare;
·  66.7% interest in Service Contract 40 North Cebu (SC 40), an onshore and offshore license
which  contains  the  onshore  Libertad  Gas  Field  and  Maya  discovery  and  several  other
prospects;  and
·  2.27% interest in Service Contract 14C1 Galoc (SC 14C1 Galoc), an offshore license which
contains the producing Galoc Field.
At  the  annual  general  meeting  of  Forum  Energy  on  June  17,  2015,  the  shareholders  passed
resolutions which approved the delisting of Forum Energy from the London Stock Exchange and
the conversion of FEP from a public company to a private company.
 
In connection with the delisting, FEP and Philex Petroleum announced an offer by Philex
Petroleum to acquire the minority interests in FEP's Ordinary Shares not held by First Pacific
Company Limited, Asia Link B.V., Philex Mining Corporation, FEC Resources Inc. and its
nominee Ferlim Nominees Limited, and FEP shareholders in restricted jurisdictions for a cash
consideration of 20 pence per Ordinary Share ("Offer").  A total of 2,383,777 shares were
purchased by Philex Petroleum representing 6.71 per cent of FEP.
SC 72 Reed Bank (formerly previously  Geophysical Survey and Exploration Contract No. 101
(“GSEC101))
The SC72 Reed Bank concession is located in the West Philippine Sea west of Palawan Island.
The license was awarded to Sterling Energy Plc in June 2002. Exploration in the area began in
1970 and in 1976 gas was discovered following the drilling of a well.  In total, four (4) wells have
been drilled to date, all located at the south west end of the license.  Two (2) of the wells tested
gas at rates of 3.6 mmcf/d and 3.2 mmcf/d.
 
In  2003,  Sterling  reprocessed  250  km  of  2D  seismic  and  completed  a  feasibility  study  on  a
GTL  (gas-to-liquid) development scenario for the gas field.  The seismic work and the GTL study
fulfilled the initial work commitments on the concession and Sterling was granted a twelve (12)
month extension in June 2004.  In 2005, Forum acquired new 250 square kilometers of new 3D
seismic data over the license area fulfilling its work commitments required under the twelve (12)
month extension.
 
In September 2006, results of the interpretation of the 3D seismic program at the Sampaguita gas
discovery indicated a significant gas accumulation.
 
In 2008,  FEP finalized farm-out of a 30% interest in the license to a local partner Monte Oro
Resources & Energy, Inc. (Monte Oro) in which FEP benefited from an immediate cash payment
of $1.7million, securing Monte Oro’s involvement and thereby qualifying the Joint Venture for the
Filipino Participation Incentive Allowance (FPIA) which entitles the Company to 7.5% of gross
revenues, prior to sharing revenues with the government.
 
In February 2010, the GSEC101 exploration license was converted into Service Contract 72. The
area of the block was reduced from 10,360 Km2 to 8,800 Km2 as part of this conversion.
In the first quarter of 2011, Forum completed 565 Km2 of 3D seismic acquisition over the
Sampaguita Gas Field and 2,202 Line-Km of 2D seismic data was also acquired over the block
in order to further define additional leshare.
The interpretation of the surveys was carried out by Weatherford Petroleum Consultants
(“Weatherford”).  Weatherford’s report identified a number of drilling locations.
15
Table of Contents
FEP was planning the execution of the second sub-phase work program at SC72 which was
expected to involve the drilling of up to two wells before August 14, 2013.  On January 17, 2013
FEP announced that it had applied for an extension to the second-sub phase of SC72 from the
Philippine Department of Energy.  On January 25, 2013 FEP announced that it was granted an
extension until August 14, 2015 to complete the second sub-phase of SC72.
SC 72 is located in an area which is subject to a maritime dispute between the Chinese and the
Philippine governments. There are discussions being held to try and find a commercial solution
but any such commercial solution would require the full support of the Philippine
government.   Recognizing that the delay in implement the drilling programme were for reasons
beyond the control of Forum Energy, the Philippine Department of Energy extended the end date
of Sub-Phase 2 from August 14, 2013 to August 14, 2016.
On  March  4,  2015  the  Philippine  Department  of  Energy  granted  a  force  majeure  on  SC72
because  this  contract  area  falls  within  the  territorial  disputed  area  of  the  West  Philippine  Sea
which is the subject of an United Nations arbitration process between the Republic of Philippines
and the People’s Republic of China.
Under the terms of the force majeure, all exploration work at SC72 is immediately suspended
(effective from 15 December 2014) until the DOE notifies the Company that it may commence
drilling.  As a result, the second sub-phase of SC72 was put on hold until further notice.
It is anticipated that the terms of the second sub-phase and all subsequent sub-phases will be
extended by the term of the force majeure.
On July12, 2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague ruled in favor of the Philippines
against China over territorial disputes in the South China Sea. China has rejected the ruling. It is
uncertain whether this ruling will resolve the dispute between the parties.
FEP is also continuing to discuss potential partnerships with regards to SC72 to assist and
augment in the successful acceleration of the development of the project.
SC 40 North Cebu
FEP holds a 66.7% interest in the SC 40 (Cebu) contract area is located in the Visayan Basin in
the  central  part  of  the  Philippines  archipelago.    The  license  area  covers  the  northern  area  of
Cebu Island and the adjacent offshore areas in the Central Tañon Strait and Visayan Sea.  Since
1994, a total of fifteen (15) wells have been drilled offshore in the Visayan Basin, thirteen (13) of
these on the acreage covered by SC 40 (Cebu).
The Libertad Gas Field is situated within SC40.  The field was discovered in the late 1950's, but
was not developed.  In 1993, a testing program was carried out on two (2) wells and during 1994
and 1995, five (5) additional wells were drilled on Libertad.  One of these wells tested gas and
subsequently was completed as a gas producer.
 
In 2004, FEP carried out a feasibility study to determine the most commercially viable option for
the  development  of  the  Libertad  Gas  Field.    The  results  of  this  work  recommended  a
development plan using three (3) GTE generators, with a maximum of 3.0 MW.
 
During December 2005, the Department of Energy formally granted a Declaration of
Commerciality for the development of the onshore Libertad Gas Field.  The Declaration of
Commerciality allowed the retention of the portion of SC40 which contains all the currently
identified prospects and discoveries.
During 2009 the Department of Energy approved the Gas Sale & Purchase Agreement in respect
of the development of the Libertad Gas Field for a 1 MW gas turbine power plant.  In February
2012, commercial production at the Libertad Field commenced and, as at 31 December 2013, the
field has produced 144 million cubic feet of gas gross. However these revenues are not material
to FEP’s cash flow. Having received a resource assessment from Petroleum Geo-Services Asia
Pacific Pte Ltd (PGS), an independent competent person, on 19 February 2013 the investment in
SC40 was impaired  in 2012 by US$25.4 million to US$3.25 million. An important factor in this
assessment  was  that  third  parties  had  experienced  a  dry  hole  while  drilling  within  the  Tañon
Straits which significantly reduced the likelihood of commercially viable hydrocarbon deposit in
the offshore part of SC40.
SC 14C1 Galoc
FEP’s largest producing asset is the Galoc oil field located offshore northwest Palawan  and has
an area of 163 square kilometres and contains the Galoc oil field which was first put in production
in 2008.  Production from the Galoc development reached 1.7 million barrels gross in 2013. FEP
has a 2.27% interest in the field and received US$2.1 million after deduction of share of operating
costs from crude sales from the field during the year. The second phase of development was
completed in November 2013 with the drilling of two additional production wells.  Total oil
production from the four wells was  2.8 million barrels in 2014 at and achieved an average selling
price of $105.80 per barrel. FEP secured US$2.58 million of financing from BNP Paribas in 2012
to help fund its share of development costs for this phase of the project , which was repaid in
June 2014. In 2015 production from the Galoc field was 2.43 million barrels which achieved an
average selling price of $53.8 per barrel.
FEP anticipates lower revenues from the Galoc oil field in 2016 due to lower oil prices and a
decline in production.  Gross production is forecast to decrease 2016.  Further development of
the Galoc field has been deferred until market conditions for oil improve.
Table of Contents
16
Basic Petroleum & Minerals Inc. (“BPMI”)
In  May  2005,  FEP  entered  into  an  agreement  with  Philippines-based  Basic  Consolidated  Inc.
(“BCI”),  whereby  the  parties  agreed  to  work  under  an  exclusivity  period  towards  finalizing  the
purchase by FEP of BCI’s petroleum interests in the Philippines, held through a wholly-owned
subsidiary,  BPMI.  This  culminated  in  February  2006  with  the  signing  of  a  Share  Purchase
Agreement whereby FEP agreed to acquire 100% of BPMI in exchange for 933,759 shares of
FEP and deferred consideration.
The acquisition was approved by BCI shareholders at the company’s Annual General Meeting
on March 29, 2006.
BPMI assets included interests in nine (9) Philippine offshore fields, specifically the Galoc Field
(2.27%  participating  interest)  which  commenced  production  in  the  fourth  quarter  2008  and  is
currently  in  full  production  with  2.5  million  barrels  gross  produced  in  2009,  and  2.69  million
barrels gross in 2010. FEP received net revenues of $0.8 million in 2010 and 2009.
FEP  also  had  nominal  production  from  the  SC6/14  Nido/Matinloc  fields,  which  are  contained
within this block.
Previously, FEP also reported that its interest in the West Linepacan oil discovery was farmed-
out for a 2.275% interest carried through development.
On May 10 2011, FEP announced that it had come to a settlement with Basic Energy Corporation
("BEC")  in  relation  to  certain  of  its  service  contracts  in  the  NW  Palawan  area,  offshore
Philippines.
In  the  course  of  an  arbitration  process,  on  10  May  2011,  BEC  and  FEP  signed  a  settlement
agreement (the "Agreement") in relation to disputes relating to BEC's share in the historical cost
recoveries arising from Service Contract 14 A and B (Nido-Matinloc Blocks), Service Contract 14-
C (Galoc Block), and other blocks of Service Contract 14 and Service Contract 6, pursuant to the
Sale and Purchase Agreement executed by BEC and FEP on 3 April 2006 (the "SPA").
In February 2012, FEP announced that the settlement agreement was not completed because
not all required third party consents were obtained within the agreed timeframe resulting in the
process going into arbitration.
On  June  21,  2012  FEP  has  disclosed  that  FEP  and  BEC  have  agreed  to  a  settlement  under
which  FEP  shall  pay  BEC  the  amount  of  $2,400,000,  which  is  the  remaining  balance  of  a
$10,000,000  payment  stipulated  in  the  Sales  and  Purchase  Agreement,  plus  an  additional
$2,000,000 with $1,000,000 of the $2,000,000 paid in December 2012 and the balance of the
$2,000,000 paid in December 2013.
Metalore Mining Corp.
MMC commenced preliminary mining operations at the beginning of October 2005, with iron ore
extraction mainly being recovered as strewn boulders and debris recovered from routing of the
mine  access  roshare  leading  to  the  main  iron  ore  body.    As  of  March,  2006,  Metalore  had
successfully completed and shipped its first iron ore contract.  Difficulties were encountered prior
to this with overburdens of pyrites, where iron ore had been anticipated, and with environmental
compliance.
Mining operations were suspended in September 2006 because of problems caused by six (6)
typhoons  which  hit  the  area  in  a  three  (3)  month  period  and  due  to  intervention  by  the  local
government of the Province of Bulacan who are in dispute with the central government (DENR)
about who has jurisdiction over the mining operations.
the
the  maximum  of
limitations  on  equipment,  namely
Metalore  also  decided  to  suspend  mining  operations  under  the  Small  Scale  Mining  Permits
because  of 
two  (2)  heavy
excavators/bulldozers per 20 hectares.
 
Metalore has filed an application for an Exploration Permit over a total of 841 hectares which
includes  the  small  scale  mining  areas  in  which  we  were  previously  operating.    Metalore
management    believed  this  would  be  approved  after  the  May  2007  political  elections  and  an
MPSA would be granted, which is the relevant permit for large scale mining.  To date there has
been no further developments and Metalore operations continue to be abandoned.
MPSA148 (Philex Gold Joint Venture)
The surface investigation and limited diamond drilling that started in mid-2005 have identified
gold-bearing jasperoid horizons in two (2) prospects, Lascogon and Danao, Philippines.
Starting in July 2006, some 3,000 meters of reverse circulation (RC) drilling over a 30 hectare
(approx. 75 acres) area was done covering four (4) prospects.  To date, we have spent in excess
of $1,000,000 evaluating the property.  Most of the effort has focused on the southern portion of
the  holding  and  has  encountered  numerous  positive  shows  of  gold  and  copper,  but  not  in
sufficient quantities to warrant entering commercial production.
In 2007, further trenching, drilling, sampling and assays were conducted  on MPSA 148. These
were  done  initially  on  the  Lascogon  and  Danua  areas,  then  later,  surveying,  drilling  and
sampling on the Nabago prospective area.
Exploration  during  fiscal  2009  on  the  Lascogon  Project  was  limited  to  trenching  activities  as
recommended  by  project  consultant  IRES  to  provide  additional  basis  for  resource  estimation.
Limited work was completed on the property during fiscal 2010.
Table of Contents
17
We received a technical report in respect of the Lascogon Project in 2010 prepared by Mr. Dexter
S. Ferriera (a senior geostatistician and mining engineer at Independent Resource Estimation or
IRES)  in  accordance  with  National  Instrument  43-101 Standards  of  Disclosure  for  Mineral
Projects.  We  evaluated  the  technical  report  and  determined  that  the  work  completed  on  the
Lascogon Project to date did not determine an economically viable gold reserve. Accordingly, we
have fully written down our investment in Lascogon.
In  May  2012,  we  received  a  capital  call  from  Lascogon  Mining  in  the  amount  of  100  million
Philippine Pesos or approximately $2,400,000.  The capital call was made to address Lascogon
Mining’s  current  deficit  and  to  fund  the  upcoming  work  program  and  exploration  budget.    We
were given until December 21, 2012 to forward the requested funds or have our 40% interest
diluted to 1.08%.  We did not forward funds and therefore our interest in Lascogon Mining was
diluted to 1.08 %.
The current mining exploration phase of the MPSA expired in January 2014.  The decision by the
mining regulator in 2015 to decline the granting of an extension has been appealed however it is
uncertain when the result of this appeal will be known nor is the outcome certain. .
C.  Organizational Structure
We are part of a group of companies with our parent company being Philex Petroleum
Corporation and the ultimate parent company of our group of companies is Philex Mining
Corporation. We have no subsidiaries.
ITEM  4A.  UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
N/A
ITEM 5.  OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW AND PROSPECTS.
We have experienced significant operating losses over the last few years, and as a result, our
ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern  is  dependent  on  achieving  profitable  operations  and/or
upon obtaining additional financing.
Our audited financial statements were prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB,
which are  different from US GAAP (refer to the Auditors’ Report dated August 30, 2016).
The  Company  is  exposed  to  foreign  currency  fluctuations  for  general  and  administrative
transactions denominated in Canadian Dollars. The majority of the Company’s cash is kept in
U.S. dollars.   Cash held in Canadian dollars  is subject to exchange rate fluctuations between
the Canadian dollars and the U.S. dollars.
The following discussion and analysis of financial results should be read in conjunction with our
Audited Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2015, together with the notes
related  thereto.    The  discussion  contains  forward-looking  statements  that  involve  risks  and
uncertainties.  Such information, although considered reasonable by our management at the time
of  preparation,  may  prove  to  be  inaccurate  and  actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  those
anticipated in the statements made.
Fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 versus December 31, 2014
Our consolidated accounts show income for the year ended December 31, 2015 of $340,909 or
$0.00 per share, versus a loss of $289,875 or $(0.00) per share for the year ended December 31,
2014.  During the year ended December 31, 2015, we sold 2,000,000 shares of Forum Energy
and  recorded  a  gain  of  $637,902  which  was  the  reason  we  reported  income.  General  and
Administration expenses were $297,041 for the year ended December 31, 2015 versus $289,980
for the same period in 2014. We recorded amortization of $365 for the year ended December 31,
2015 versus $522 for the same period in 2014.  For the year ended December 31, 2015 foreign
exchange loss was $5,684 versus a loss of $2,105 for the year ended December 31, 2014.
Interest income was $48 for the year ended December 31, 2015 versus $105 for the previous
year. The difference was a result of the interest earned on the higher cash balance in 2014.
Fiscal year ended December 31, 2014 versus December 31, 2013
Our  consolidated  accounts  show  loss  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2014  of  $289,875  or
$(0.00) per share, versus a loss of $366,756 or $0.00 per share for the year ended December 31,
2013.  General and Administration expense were $289,980 for the year ended December 31,
2014 versus $367,100 for the same period in 2013. We recorded amortization of $522 for the
year ended December 31, 2014 versus $745 for the same period in 2013.  For the year ended
December  31,  2014  foreign  exchange  loss  was  $2,105  versus  a  loss  of  $4,342  for  the  year
ended December 31, 2013.
Interest income was $105 for the year ended December 31, 2014 versus $344 for the previous
year. The difference was a result of the interest earned on the higher cash balance in 2013.
Table of Contents
18
Balance Sheet
Our current assets were $571,366 at December 31, 2015 versus $210,539 for the year ended
December 31, 2014. The difference is mainly a result of the higher cash balance on December
31,  2015.  Our    investment  in  FEP  is  reflected  at  a  carrying  value  of  $Nil  in  the  financial
statements as at December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our  working  capital  position  at  December  31,  2015  was  $510,407  versus  working  capital  of
$169,133 at December 31, 2014 and shareholders’ equity was $511,259 at December 31, 2015
(December 31, 2014 $170,350).
To meet our working capital needs in the short term, we were able to sell 2,000,000 shares of
FEP during the year ended December 31, 2015.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2015 was $266,369 versus
$288,190  for  the  same  period  in  2014  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  differences  described  in  the
results of operations above.
Cash  provided  by  financing  activities  was  $Nil  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2015  and
December 31, 2014.
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2015 was $637,902 from
the sale of Forum Energy shares and $Nil for the year ended December 31, 2014.
Capital Resources
In order to fully earn a 40% interest in the joint venture with Philex Gold Philippines Inc. (“PGPI”)
on the Lascogon Project, we were required to fund a total of $1 million of the work program by
October, 2006 which was completed. To maintain our 40% interest, we were required to pay for
40% of the ongoing work program or our position would be diluted.  In May 2012, we received a
capital call from Lascogon Mining in the amount of 100 million Philippine Pesos or approximately
$2,400,000.  The capital call was made to address Lascogon Mining’s current deficit and to fund
the upcoming work program and exploration budget.  We were given until December 21, 2012 to
forward the requested funds or have our 40% interest diluted to 1.08%.  We did not forward funds
and therefore our interest in Lascogon Mining was diluted to 1.08 %.
We currently own 35% of Metalore, 1.08% of Lascogon and 18.42% of FEP. All but FEP require
us to fund our share of any work programs in order to maintain our current equity share in each
company. If FEP is required to raise additional funds through equity issuances then we would
have to purchase our proportionate share of these equity issuances to maintain our current equity
position.
Should we be unable to meet our share of the work programs then our holdings would be diluted
down accordingly.  In 2007, we wrote off our investment in Metalore and in 2010, we wrote off our
investment in Lascogon.
We anticipate that we will require additional funds for working capital for the next twelve months
from  the  date  of  this  filing  and  we  are  evaluating  options  in  order  to  raise  the  additional
funds.  We may be able to sell our FEP shares should the need arise. If we are unable to raise
additional funds by way of selling our FEP shares in an orderly transaction, there is substantial
doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
None
 
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
 
Basis of preparation and accounting policies
 
The Company has prepared its consolidated financial statements in accordance with IFRS as
issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”). IFRS represents standards and
interpretations  approved  by  the  IASB  and  are  comprised  of  IFRS,  International  Accounting
Standards (“IAS’s”), and interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee (“IFRIC’s”)
and  the  former  Standing  Interpretations  Committee  (“SIC’s”)..  The  consolidated  financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS standards and interpretations effective
as of December 31, 2015.
Table of Contents
19
Critical Accounting Estimates
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  requires  management  to  make  certain  judgments  and
estimates.    Changes  in  these  judgments  and  estimates  could  have  a  material  impact  on  our
reported financial result and financial condition.
The  Company  makes  estimates  and  assumptions  about  the  future  that  affect  the  reported
amounts of assets and liabilities. Estimates and judgments are continually evaluated based on
historical experience and other factors, including expectations of future events that are believed
to be reasonable under the circumstances. In the future, actual experience may differ from these
estimates and assumptions.
Determination of natural resource reserves and natural resources estimates
The required process of estimating reserves of natural resources is critical to several accounting
estimates  that  appear  in  our  financial  disclosures.    It  requires  significant  judgments  based  on
available  geological,  geophysical,  engineering  and  economic  data.    These  estimates  may
change  substantially  as  data  from  ongoing  development  and  production  activities  becomes
available, and as economic conditions impacting oil and natural gas prices, operating costs, and
royalty  burdens  change.    Reserve  estimates  impact  net  income  through  depletion  and  the
application of an impairment test.  Revisions or changes in the reserve estimates can have either
a positive or negative impact on net income.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities
Significant judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes. There are many
transactions and calculations undertaken during the ordinary course of business for which the
ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We recognize liabilities and contingencies for anticipated
tax  audit  issues  based  on  our  current  understanding  of  the  tax  law.  For  matters  where  it  is
probable  that  an  adjustment  will  be  made,  we  record  our  best  estimate  of  the  tax  liability
including  the  related  interest  and  penalties  in  the  current  tax  provision.  We  believe  we  have
adequately provided for the probable outcome of these matters; however, the final outcome may
result in a materially different outcome than the amount included in the tax liabilities.
Determination of significant influence over investments
Judgment is required to determine whether significant influence exists over companies in which
we hold investments. Significant influence is presumed to exist if an entity holds 20 per cent or
more of the voting power of the investee unless it can be clearly demonstrated that this is not the
case. Conversely, if the entity holds less than 20 per cent of the voting power of the investee, it is
presumed that the entity does not have significant influence, unless such influence can be clearly
demonstrated. The existence of significant influence by an entity is usually evidenced by one or
more of the following:
(a)           representation on the board of directors or equivalent governing body of the investee;
(b)           participation in policy-making processes, including participation in decisions about
dividends or otherdistributions;
(c)           material transactions between the entity and its investee;
(d)           interchange of managerial personnel; or
(e)           provision of essential technical information.
We determined that, despite having its ownership of FEP reduced to 18.42% of the outstanding
shares of FEP by way of a sale of a portion of its shareholdings during the year ended December
31, 2015, we still maintained significant influence over the operations of FEP by virtue of our
CEO and CFO holding a seat on the board of FEP as well being the Finance Director of FEP.
Lascogon Contingent Consideration
There were 30,000,000 common shares of ours issued into escrow which are to be awarded to
the vendor of the investment in Lascogon upon the declaration of commerciality as full and final
consideration for the investment; these shares are considered contingent consideration. These
shares are to be released from escrow if the project is declared commercial and were deemed to
have  zero  value  when  they  were  issued.  Accordingly  no  liability  has  been  recognized.    At
December 31, 2015 and at the date of this report, it is was not considered likely that a declaration
of  commerciality  would  take  place.    In  February  2016,  we  paid  the  vendor  of  the  investment
$36,000 and by mutual consent the shares were canceled and returned to treasury pursuant to a
settlement agreement.
Functional Currency
We  evaluated  our  functional  currency  and  determined  that  the  United  States  Dollar  was  our
functional  currency.    All  accounts  and  transactions  were  converted  into  US  dollars  from  the
transition  date  to  IFRS.    We    determined  that  the  effective  date  of  the  change  in  functional
currency under IFRS was March 11, 2003.
 
Share capital and investments were converted from January 1, 2003 as a result of the conversion
to IFRS.
Table of Contents
20
Recent  Accounting Related Pronouncements
The  following  new  standards,  amendments  and  interpretations,  which  have  not  been  early
adopted in these financial statements, will or may have an effect on the Company’s future results
and financial position
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
IFRS 9, Financial Instruments (“IFRS 9”) was issued by the IASB in its final version in July 2014,
and will replace IAS 39, "Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement" (“IAS 39”). IFRS
9 replaces the multiple rules in IAS 39 with a single approach to determine whether a financial
asset is measured at amortized cost or fair value and a new mixed measurement model for debt
instruments having only two categories: amortized cost and fair value. The approach in IFRS 9 is
based on how an entity manages its financial instruments in the context of its business model
and  the  contractual  cash  flow  characteristics  of  the  financial  assets.  The  new  standard  also
requires a single impairment method to be used, replacing the multiple impairment methods in
IAS  39.  IFRS  9  is  effective  for  annual  periods  beginning  on  or  after  January  1,  2018.    The
Company anticipates that this standard will be adopted in the Company’s financial statements for
the period beginning January 1, 2018, and  has  not  yet  considered  the  potential  impact  of  the
adoption of IFRS 9.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers
IFRS 15, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“IFRS 15”) will replace IAS 18, "Revenue",
IAS 11 ”Construction Contracts and certain revenue related interpretations. IFRS 15 establishes
a new control-based revenue recognition model, changes the basis for the determination of when
revenue  is  recognized  and  improves  disclosures  about  revenue.  IFRS  15  also  includes  more
detailed guidance as to when to account separately for individual performance obligations in a
multiple element arrangement. The IASB has deferred the effective date of IFRS 15 to annual
periods beginning on or after January 1, 2018 with early adoption permitted. The Company has
not yet considered the potential impact of the adoption of IFRS 15.
IFRS 16 Leases
IFRS 16, Leases (“IFRS 16”) will replace IAS 17, "Leases". IFRS 16 eliminates the distinction
between operating and finance leases and requires most leases to be recorded on the balance
sheet for lessees under a single model unless the lease term is twelve months or less or the
underlying asset has low value. IFRS 16 has an effective date for annual periods beginning on or
after January 1, 2019 with early adoption permitted if IFRS 15 is also applied. The Company is
assessing the impact, if any, the adoption of IFRS 16 will have on its financial statements.
 
There are no other IFRSs or IFRIC interpretations that are not yet effective that would be
expected to have a material impact on the Company.
ITEM 6.  DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES.
 
A.  Directors and Senior Management
The following table lists, as of the date of this report, the names, ages, functions and areas of
experience  in  our  operations  of  all  our  directors  and  Senior  Management.    Each  Director  will
serve until the next Annual General Meeting or until his/her successor is duly elected, unless
his/her office is vacated in accordance with our charter documents.  Our executive officers serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Directors.
Name
Paul Wallace (1) (2)
Age Position/Area of Experience/Function
65 Director  since  November  2012,  President  and
CEO  since  August  2015  and  CFO  since  June
2015.
Claro Ramirez (1)
Lyle Brown (1) (3)
55 Director since October 2011
62 Director since October 2013
(1)  Member of Audit Committee in 2015.
 
(2)  Member of Compensation Committee in 2015
 
(3)  Member of the Corporate Governance Committee in 2015
21
Table of Contents
Information About our Directors and Officers
Mr. Paul Wallace Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer, and Chief Financial Officer
Mr. Paul Frederick Wallace is a Chartered Professional Accountant and member of the CPA
Canada.   He was appointed as the Chief Financial Officer of Hong Kong based First Pacific
Company Limited from 1995 to 1997between 2003 and 2004 and between 2014 and 2015.  He
was appointed Group Finance Director to the Sanctuary Group plc between 2005 and 2008. Mr.
Wallace was Chief Executive Officer of Blue Ocean Wireless Limited between 2009 and 2011,
and a Non-Executive Director of JPMorgan Global Emerging Markets Income Trust Plc between
2010 and 2015.  He is also the Finance Director of FEP, a Director of Pitkin Petroleum and Head
of Finance of Goodman Fielder Pty Limited.
Mr. Claro Ramirez
Mr. Ramirez is a resident of Richmond, British Columbia, Canada and has served as Senior Vice
President of Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company (“PLDT”) for the last eleven years.
Mr. Lyle Brown
Mr. Brown is a resident of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.  He is a Chartered Professional
Accountant and  Partner of Culver & Co., an accounting firm, since 1991.   Mr. Brown is also a
director of Northern Lion Gold Corp and New World Resources Corp which are both listed on the
TSX-V and Frankfurt stock exchanges.  Mr. Brown is also a director of Nano One Materials Corp
which is listed on the TSX-V.
None of our directors and/or executive officers, or those persons to be appointed, have been the
subject of any order, judgment, or decree of any governmental agency or administrator, or of any
court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  revoking  or  suspending  for  cause  any  license,  permit  or  other
authority of such person or of any corporation of which he or she is a director and/or executive
officer, to engage in the securities business or in the sale of a particular security or temporarily or
permanently restraining or enjoining any such person or any corporation of which he or she is an
officer  or  director  from  engaging  in  or  continuing  any  conduct,  practice,  or  employment  in
connection with the purchase or sale of securities, or convicting such person of any felony or
misdemeanor involving a security, or any aspect of the securities business, or of theft, or of any
felony.
There  are  no  arrangements  or  understandings  between  any  two  (2)  or  more  directors  or
executive  officers,  pursuant  to  which  he  or  she  was  selected  as  a  Director  or  Executive
Officer.    There  are  no  family  relationships  between  any  two  (2)  or  more  of  our  directors  or
executive officers.
Paul Wallace is also a director of FEP.
B.  Compensation.
We have recently agreed to pay our directors the following consulting fees or directors’ fees on a
monthly basis:
 
Lyle Brown                                              $2,000
Paul Wallace                                            $1,000
Claro Ramirez                                           $1,000
None of our executive officers or directors received other compensation in excess of the lesser of
US $25,000 or 10% of such Executive Officer's or Director’s cash compensation as reported in
the compensation table below and all Executive Officers and directors as a group did not receive
other compensation which exceeded US $25,000 times the number of persons in the group or
10% of the compensation reported in the compensation table below.
No funds were set aside or accrued by us during the year ending December 31, 2015 to provide
pension, retirement or similar benefits for our directors or Executive Officers.  Except for the stock
option program discussed below, we have no bonus or profit sharing plans pursuant to which
cash or non-cash compensation is or may be paid to the our directors or Executive Officers.
22
Table of Contents
The following tables detail the compensation paid during fiscal year ended December 31, 2015
and  2014  to  our  directors  and  members  of  our  administrative,  supervisory  or  management
bodies:
Director/Executive Officer Compensation
Director Compensation for Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2015
Directors/Officers
Option Exercise
Total
Salary
Net
Compensation
Claro Ramirez
Carlo Pablo*
Lyle Brown
Paul Wallace
Riaz Sumar*
Total
Market Value(1)
$12,000
$24,000
$24,000
$12,000
$38,500
$110,500
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$12,000
$24,000
$24,000
$12,000
$38,500
$110,500
(1). “Option Exercise Net Market Value” is defined as the aggregate difference between the
exercise price and the market value of the common stock on the date of exercise.
* Riaz Sumar resigned as CFO in June 2015 and Carlo Pablo resigned as President and CEO in
August 2015.
Director Compensation for Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2014
Directors/Officers
Option Exercise
Total
Salary
Net
Compensation
Riaz Sumar
$84,000
$0.00
$84,000
Market Value(1)
Claro Ramirez
Carlo Pablo
Paul Wallace
Lyle Brown
Total
$12,000
$36,000
$12,000
$24,000
$168,000
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$12,000
$36,000
$12,000
$24,000
$168,000
(1). “Option Exercise Net Market Value” is defined as the aggregate difference between the
exercise price and the market value of the common stock on the date of exercise.
Our Board may award special remuneration to any Director undertaking any special services on
our behalf other than services ordinarily required of a Director.  Other than indicated above no
Director received any additional compensation for his or her services including committee
participation and/or special assignments.
Except for the stock option program discussed below, we have no bonus or profit sharing plans
pursuant  to  which  cash  or  non-cash  compensation  is  or  may  be  paid  to  the  our  directors  or
Executive Officers.
Table of Contents
23
Options to Purchase Our Securities.
Options to purchase securities from us are granted to directors, officers and employees on terms
and  conditions  acceptable  to  the  relevant  regulatory  authorities.    We  adopted  a  formal  stock
option plan on June 19, 2000.  There were no stock options outstanding on December 31, 2015
and none were issued or exercised in 2015 or 2014.
C.  Board Practices
We  have  an  Audit  Committee,  a  Compensation  Committee  and  a  Corporate  Governance
Committee.  No committee members receive additional compensation for serving on a committee
and all committee members serve for a one year term.  All board members are elected at our
Annual General Meeting to serve for one year or until their successor is appointed.
Audit Committee. The Audit Committee oversees the retention, performance and compensation
of  our  independent  auditors,  and  the  establishment  and  oversight  of  our  systems  of  internal
accounting and auditing control.  Members of the Audit Committee in 2015 Lyle Brown, Claro
Ramirez, and Paul Wallace.  New members of our Audit Committee for 2016 will  be appointed
following our Annual and General Meeting of Shareholders.
Compensation Committee. The Compensation Committee reviews and makes recommendations
to  our  Board  concerning  the  terms  of  the  compensation  packages  provided  to  our  senior
executive officers, including salary, bonus and awards under our stock option plan and any other
compensation plans that we may adopt in the future.  Members of the Compensation Committee
in 2015 were Paul Wallace, Carlo Pablo until he resigned in August 2015, and Riaz Sumar until
he resigned in June 2015.  Members of our Compensation Committee for 2016 will  be appointed
following our Annual and General Meeting of Shareholders.
Corporate  Governance  Committee.  The  Corporate  Governance  Committee  meets  with  and
discusses current disclosure issuances with our management personnel, directors, and with both
our Canadian and United States counsel, to report to our Board any matters which should be the
subject  of  either  public  disclosure  or  remedial  action  and  to  assist  our  Board  in  establishing
reporting and disclosure procedures to ensure that we are in compliance with our disclosure and
compliance obligations under applicable laws, rules and obligations.  Members of our Corporate
Governance  Committee  in  2015  were  Claro  Ramirez,  Lyle  Brown,  and  Riaz  Sumar  until  he
resigned  in  June  2015.    Members  of  our  Corporate  Governance  Committee  for  2016  will    be
appointed following our Annual and General Meeting of Shareholders,
D. Employees
As of December 31, 2015, we had no employees.
E.  Share Ownership
The following table lists as of August 3, 2016, the share ownership of our directors and executive
officers.
The following table sets forth certain information as of August 3, 2016 regarding the ownership of
our common stock by (i) each of our directors, (ii) each of our named executive officers, and (iii)
all of our directors and executive officers as a group.  Except as otherwise indicated, the address
of  each  person  identified  below  is  c/o  FEC  Resources  Inc,  203,  200  Barclay  Parade  S.W.,
Calgary, Alberta, T2P 4R5.  We believe that ownership of the shares by the persons identified
below is both of record and beneficial and that such persons have sole voting and investment
power  with  respect  to  the  shares  indicated.    Percentage  of  class  in  the  following  table  is
calculated individually based on the following formula: (shares directly or indirectly controlled +
shares issuable on the exercise or conversion of various securities) / (total shares outstanding +
shares issuable on the exercise or conversion of various warrant, debentures and options by the
director or officer).  The total shares outstanding on August 3, 2016 was 409,143,765.
Name of Director and/or Officer and number
of shares held:
Paul Wallace *
Claro Ramirez
Lyle Brown
Number of shares held by all Directors and
Officers as a group:
Number of
Shares
Percent
of Class
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
* Paul Wallace and Claro Ramirez are nominees from Philex Mining Corporation and Philex
Petroleum Corporation.  Philex Mining Corporation is the ultimate parent company which controls
225,000,000 shares of FEC.
24
Table of Contents
The particulars of the stock options granted to officers and directors are set forth in the preceding
section entitled  “DIRECTORS,  SENIOR  MANAGEMENT  AND  EMPLOYEES.”  The particulars
regarding convertible debentures and warrants acquired by certain officers and directors are as
follows:
The following table lists the current directors, executive officers and employees to whom warrants
to purchase our shares were sold and the number of share purchase warrants so sold as of the
date of this report, as well as the number of share purchase warrants sold to directors and all
employees as a group.
Name
None
Warrants Held by Directors and Officers
Number of Share
Purchase Warrants
None
Exercise Price
Expiration
Date
We  are  a  publicly-owned  corporation,  the  shares  of  which  are  owned  by  Canadian  residents,
U.S.  residents,  and  residents  of  other  countries.    Currently,  we  are  not  controlled  directly  or
indirectly by any foreign government but are controlled by Philex Mining Corporation.
There are no arrangements, known to us, the operation of which may at a subsequent date result
in a change in our control other than as noted above.
The above listed organizations and individuals have no special or separate voting rights than
those rights held by our shareholders.
ITEM 7.  MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
A.  Major Shareholders
We  are  a  publicly-owned  corporation,  the  shares  of  which  are  owned  by  Canadian  residents,
U.S. residents, and residents of other countries.  We are controlled by Philex Mining Corporation
and its subsidiary Philex Petroleum Corporation.  The following table provides the names and
share ownership of those parties that have ownership of 5% or more of each class of our voting
securities as of August 3, 2016:
Name
Philex Petroleum
Corporation *
CDS&Co**
CEDE & Co**
Asian Coast
International
Number of Shares Owned
Percent of Class
225,000,000
49,975,191
38,775,155
67,740,000
54.99
12.21
9.48
16.56
* These shares are registered to Philex Petroleum Corporation.  Philex Mining purchased
200,000,000 shares in a private placement in December 2007 and 20,000,000 shares were
purchased in a private transaction at the same time.  In April 2010, Philex Mining Corporation
received a further 5,000,000 shares pursuant to a private placement at $0.50 per share.  In 2014
Philex Mining Corporation transferred the all of their shares to Philex Petroleum Corporation.  No
other significant changes in the ownership of our shares by Philex Mining Corporation or Philex
Petroleum Corporation has occurred during the past three (3) years.
**  Cede& Co. and CDS and Co. are clearing houses in Canada and the United States and
represent the interest of multiple shareholders and there is no way of knowing if any one in
particular beneficially holds over 10% of the voting rights attached to our shares.
25
Table of Contents
There are no arrangements, known to us, the effect of which may at a subsequent date result in a
change  in  our  control  other  than  as  noted  in Item  5  Operating  and  Financial  Review  and
Prospects.
As  at  August  3,  2016,  management  is  not  aware  of  any  person  holding  a  greater  than  5%
registered interest in any class of our voting securities other than as set forth above.  The above
listed organizations and individuals have no special or separate voting rights than those rights
held by our shareholders.
On August 3, 2016, the shareholders’ list showed 585 registered shareholders and 409,143,765
shares outstanding.  The number of shares held by U.S. residents was 44,721,585 representing
10.93% of the total issued and outstanding shares.  The total number of U.S. resident registered
shareholders was 523.
B.  Related Party Transactions
During the year ended December 31, 2015 general and administrative expenses included key
management personnel compensation totaling $110,500 (2014: $168,000; 2013: $196,500).
Included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities at December 31, 2015 is $Nil (2014; $59;
2013: $56) owed to directors, officers and companies controlled by them for unpaid consulting
fees and or expenses.
In addition, at December 31, 2015, the Company owed Lascogon Mining Corporation $18,895
(2014: $18,895; 2013: $18,895). Amounts owing are unsecured, non interest bearing and due on
demand.
On November 16, 2015 the Company sold 2,000,000 FEP shares to its parent company Philex
Petroleum Corporation (“Philex”) for 21 British pence per share. As a result of the sale of the
shares, the Company recorded a gain on sale of $637,902.
Related party transactions are measured at exchange value.
* Note Item 7.C not required for this Annual Report.
ITEM 8.  FINANCIAL INFORMATION
A.  Consolidated Financial Statements and Other Financial Information
We know of no pending legal or arbitration proceedings, including those relating to bankruptcy,
governmental receivership or similar proceeding and those involving any third party against it,
nor are we involved as a plaintiff in any material pending litigation.
We know of no pending proceedings to which any director, member of senior management, or
affiliate is either a party adverse to us, or our subsidiaries, or has a material interest adverse to
us. We have not declared any dividends for the last five (5) years, nor do we intend to declare
any dividends in the foreseeable future.
B.  Significant Changes/Developments
None
26
Table of Contents
ITEM 9.  THE OFFER AND LISTING
A.  Listing Details and Markets
Our  shares  have  traded  on  the  OTC  –  Bulletin  Board  (“OTC.BB”)  under  the  symbol  “FECOF”
since September 22, 1999 but in 2012 our shares were only listed on the Pink Sheets as a result
of a lack of market makers.
The table below lists the high/low bid/ask prices on OTC.BB/Pink Sheets for our shares for each
year within the five (5) most recent fiscal years.
NASDAQ Small Cap/OTC.BB/Pink Sheets Stock Annual Price History - Common Shares
Year Ended
12/31/15
12/31/14
12/31/13
12/31/12
12/31/11
(US Dollars)
High
$0.01
$0.02
$0.02
$0.05
$0.07
Low
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.01
$0.02
The table below lists the volume of trading and high/low bid/ask prices on Pink Sheets for our
shares for each full quarterly period within the two most recent fiscal years and any subsequent
periods.
Pinks Sheets Stock Trading Activity - Common Shares
Quarter Ended
12/31/15
9/30/15
6/30/15
3/31/15
12/31/14
9/30/14
6/30/14
3/31/14
(US Dollars)
Volume
1,439,354
975,173
1,857,410
3,854,448
4,426,200
2,275,000
459,000
3,055,600
High
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
Low
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
The table below highlights for the most recent six (6) months the high and low market prices for
each month of our common shares on the Pink Sheets.
Pink Sheets Stock Monthly Price History - Common Shares
(US Dollars)
Month Ended
7/31/16
6/30/16
5/31/16
4/30/16
3/31/16
2/29/16
High
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Low
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Volume
196,100
1,161,087
239,242
221,162
537,100
269,308
Our shares are issued in registered form and the following information is taken from the records
of Computershare Investor Services (located in Vancouver, British Columbia), the lead registrar
and transfer agent for our common shares.
27
Table of Contents
On August 3, 2016, the shareholders’ list showed 585 registered shareholders and 409,143,765
shares outstanding.  The number of shares held by U.S. residents was 44,721,585 representing
10.93% of the total issued and outstanding shares.  The total number of U.S. resident registered
shareholders was 523.
Our shares are not registered to trade in the U.S. in the form of American Depository Receipts
(ADR's) or similar certificates.
ITEM 10.  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.
A.  Share Capital
Not applicable
B.  Memorandum and Articles of Association
Reference is hereby made to our Certificate of Continuance, and to our Bylaws, each of which is
incorporated  herein  by  reference  to,  respectively,  Exhibit  3.1  and  3.2  to  our  Registration
Statement on Form F-1, file number 33-81290.
C.  Material Contracts.
See "Item 4. Information About the Company."
D.  Exchange Controls
Investment Canada Act
 
T h e Investment  Canada  Act  (the  “ICA”)  prohibits  the  acquisition  of  control  of  a  Canadian
business  enterprise  in  Canada  by  non-Canadians  without  the  prior  consent  of  Investment
Canada,  the  agency  that  administers  the  ICA,  unless  such  acquisition  is  exempt  under  the
provisions of the ICA.  Investment Canada must be notified of such exempt acquisitions.  The ICA
covers acquisitions of control of corporate enterprises, whether by purchase of assets, shares or
“voting  interests”  of  an  entity  that  controls,  directly  or  indirectly,  another  entity  carrying  on  a
Canadian business.
Apart from the ICA, there are no other limitations on the right of non-resident or foreign owners to
hold or vote securities imposed by Canadian law or our Certificate of Continuance.  There are no
other decrees or regulations in Canada which restrict the export or import of capital, including
foreign exchange controls, or that affect the remittance of dividends, interest or other payments to
non-resident holders of our securities except as discussed in “Taxation”, below.
E.  Taxation
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  principal  Canadian  federal  income  tax  considerations
generally applicable in respect of our common stock.  The tax consequences to any particular
holder of common stock will vary according to the status of that holder as an individual, trust,
corporation or member of a partnership, the jurisdiction in which that holder is subject to taxation,
the  place  where  that  holder  is  resident  and,  generally,  according  to  that  holder's  particular
circumstances.    This  summary  is  applicable  only  to  holders  who  are  resident  in  the  United
States; have never been resident in Canada; deal at arm's length with us; hold their common
stock  as  capital  property;  and  who  will  not  use  or  hold  the  common  stock  in  carrying  on  a
business in Canada.
This summary does not take into account provincial income tax consequences.  This summary
assumes that the publicly announced proposals will be enacted as proposed with the effective
dates set out therein; otherwise, this summary assumes that there will be no other changes in law
whether by judicial or legislative action.
If a non-resident were to dispose of common stock to another Canadian corporation which deals
(or is deemed to deal) on a non-arm's length basis with the non-resident, and which, immediately
after the disposition, is connected with us (i.e. which holds shares representing more than 10% of
the voting power and more than 10% of the market value of all of our issued and outstanding
shares), the excess of the proceeds over the paid-up capital of the common stock sold will be
deemed to be taxable as a dividend either immediately, or eventually, by means of a deduction in
computing the paid-up capital of the purchasing corporation.
Under the Canadian Tax Act, a gain from the sale of common stock by a non-resident will not be
subject  to  Canadian  tax,  provided  the  stockholder  (and/or  persons  who  do  not  deal  at  arm's
length with the stockholder) has not held a “substantial interest” in our shares (25% or more of the
shares  of  any  class  of  our  equity  securities)  at  any  time  in  the  five  (5)  years  preceding  the
disposition.  Generally, the Canadian-United States Tax Convention (the “Tax Convention”) will
exempt  from  Canadian  taxation  any  capital  gain  realized  by  a  resident  of  the  United  States,
provided that the value of the common stock is not derived principally from real property situated
in Canada.
In the case of any dividends paid to non-residents of Canada, the Canadian tax is withheld by us,
which remits only the net amount to the stockholder. By virtue of Article X of the Tax Convention,
the rate of tax on dividends paid to residents of the United States is generally limited to 15% of
the gross dividend (or 10% in the case of certain corporate stockholders owning at least 10% of
our voting shares).  In the absence of the treaty provisions, the rate of Canadian withholding tax
imposed  on  non-residents  is  25%  of  the  gross  dividend.    Stock  dividends  received  by  non-
residents of Canada from us are taxable by Canada as ordinary dividends.
This  summary  is  of  a  general  nature  only  and  is  not  exhaustive  of  all  possible  income  tax
consequences.  It is not intended as legal or tax advice to any particular holder of common stock,
and should not be so construed.  Each holder should consult his/her own tax advisor with respect
to the income tax consequences applicable to him/her in his/her own particular circumstances.
Table of Contents
28
F.  Dividends and Paying Agents
Not applicable
G.  Summary By Experts
Not applicable
 
H.  Documents on Display
The documents concerning us which are referred to in this Annual Report are either annexed
hereto as exhibits (see Item 19) or may be inspected at our principal executive offices in Calgary,
Alberta, Canada.
I.  Subsidiary Information
Not applicable
ITEM 11.  QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK.
Currency Exchange Rate Sensitivity
In  regards  to  transactional  risk,  our  functional  currency  is  the  United  States  dollar  and  our
activities are predominantly executed using both the U.S. and Canadian dollars.  We have done
a limited number of financings, and we are not subject to significant operational exposures due to
fluctuations in these currencies.  Our common shares are listed on the OTC.BB and are bought
and  sold  in  US  dollars.    We  have  not  entered  into  any  agreements,  or  purchased  any
instruments, to hedge any possible currency risks at this time.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
We currently have no significant short-term or long-term debt requiring interest payments.  This
does not require us to consider entering into any agreements or purchasing any instruments to
hedge against possible interest rate risks at this time.  Our interest-earning investments are short-
term.  Thus, any reductions in future income or carrying values due to future interest rate declines
are believed to be immaterial.
Commodity Price Sensitivity
Our future revenue and profitability will be dependant, to a significant extent, upon prevailing spot
market  prices  for  gold,  oil  and  gas.    In  the  past,  gold,  oil  and  gas  prices  have  been
volatile.  Prices are subject to wide fluctuations in response to changes in supply of, and demand
for, gold, oil and gas, market uncertainty, and a variety of additional factors that are beyond our
control.  We currently have no significant operating revenue.
ITEM 12.  DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES OTHER THAN EQUITY SECURITIES.
Not Applicable.
29
Table of Contents
PART II
ITEM 13.  DEFAULTS, DIVIDEND ARREARAGES AND DELINQUENCIES.
None.
ITEM 14.  MATERIAL MODIFICATIONS TO THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS AND
USE OF PROCEEDS.
None.
The  Board  discharges
to  shareholders  and  other  stakeholders.
ITEM 15. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES.
 
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
 
The Board has overall responsibility for reviewing our disclosure to ensure we provide full and
plain  disclosure 
its
responsibilities  through  its  committees,  specifically  with  respect  to  financial  disclosure.    The
Audit  Committee  is  responsible  for  reviewing  our  financial  reporting  procedures  and  internal
controls to ensure full and accurate disclosure of our financial position.
 
Our  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  are  responsible  for  designing  internal
controls over financial reporting or causing them to be designed under their supervision in order
to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the
preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  IFRS.  Our  Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls  and  procedures  (as  such  term  is  defined  in  Rules  13a-15  and  15d-15  under  the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act")) as of the end of the period
covered by this Annual Report (the "Evaluation Date") and concluded they are not effective as
discussed below.
 
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
 
The  management  of  the  Company  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate
internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in Rule 13a-15(f) and Rule 15d-
15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The Company’s internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed under the supervision of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer
and Chief Financial Officer to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  the  Company’s  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards.
 
As of December 31, 2015, management assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting based on the criteria for effective internal control over financial
reporting established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee
of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission  (“COSO”)  and  SEC  guidance  on
conducting such assessments. Based on that evaluation, they concluded that, during the period
covered by this report, such internal controls over financial reporting were not effective and that
there  were  material  weaknesses  in  our  internal  controls  over  financial  reporting.  The  material
weaknesses were an inability to detect the inappropriate application of IFRS guidance, as more
fully described below, as the result of deficiencies that existed in the design or operation of our
internal control over financial reporting.
 
The  matters  involving  internal  controls  and  procedures  that  the  Company’s  management
considered to be material weaknesses under COSO and SEC rules were: (1) lack of a majority of
independent directors on the Company’s board of directors, resulting in ineffective oversight in
the establishment and monitoring of required internal controls and procedures; (2) limited number
of staff, not allowing for complete segregation of incompatible duties; and (3) insufficient written
policies and procedures for accounting and financial reporting with respect to the requirements
and  application  of  IFRS  and  SEC  disclosure  requirements.  The  aforementioned  material
weaknesses  were  identified  by  the  Company’s  Chief  Financial  Officer  in  connection  with  the
preparation of our financial statements as of December 31, 2015 and communicated the matters
to our management and board of directors.
 
Management believes that the appointment of one or more independent directors, will remedy the
lack of a majority of outside directors on the Company’s Board. In addition, management believes
that  preparing  and  implementing  sufficient  written  policies  and  checklists  will  remedy  the
insufficient written policies and procedures for accounting and financial reporting with respect to
the  requirements  and  application  of  IFRS  and  SEC  disclosure  requirements.  Further,
management believes that the hiring of additional personnel who have the technical expertise
and knowledge will result in proper segregation of duties.
 
Any effort to increase the size of the Board of Directors, appoint independent directors or hire
additional personnel is conditional upon the Company raising additional capital.
 
We  will  continue  to  monitor  and  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  our  internal  controls  and
procedures  and  our  internal  controls  over  financial  reporting  on  an  ongoing  basis  and  are
committed to taking further action and implementing additional enhancements or improvements,
as necessary and as funds allow.
 
This  annual  report  does  not  include  an  attestation  report  of  the  Company’s  registered  public
accounting firm regarding internal control over financial reporting. Our management’s report was
not subject to attestation by the Company’s registered public accounting firm pursuant to rules of
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  that  permit  the  company  to  provide  only  the
management’s report in this annual report.
Table of Contents
30
Changes in Internal Control over financial reporting
 
During  the  year  ended  December  31,  2015,  and  subsequently  there  were  no  changes  in  our
internal  control  over  financial  reporting  (as  defined  in  Rules  13a-15(f)  and  15d-15(f)  of  the
Exchange  Act)  that  have  materially  affected,  or  are  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  our
internal control over financial reporting or that would require corrective action.
 
ITEM 16 .  (RESERVED)
 
ITEM 16A. AUDIT COMMITTEE FINANCIAL EXPERT
The  Audit  Committee  is  responsible  for  reviewing  our  financial  reporting  procedures,  internal
controls, the performance of our auditors.,  The Audit Committee is also responsible for reviewing
all disclosure with respect to financial matters prior to filing or release and quarterly and annual
Financial Statements prior to their approval by the full Board.  Members of the Audit Committee in
2015  were  Lyle  Brown,  Claro  Ramirez,  and  Paul  Wallace.    New  members  of  our  Audit
Committee  for  2016  will    be  appointed  following  our  Annual  and  General  Meeting  of
Shareholders.
Our Board has determined that it has at least one (1) financial expert serving on its Audit
Committee.  This individual is Lyle Brown.  Mr. Brown is a Chartered Professional  Accountant
and  Partner of Culver & Co., an accounting firm. Mr. Brown has significant experience in the
review of financial statements and related information.
Mr. Brown would be regarded as independent.
ITEM 16 B: CODE OF ETHICS.
We have adopted a formal “Code of Ethics” applicable to our principal executive officer, principal
financial  officer,  principal  accounting  officer  or  controller,  or  persons  performing  similar
functions.  We believe that the Code of Ethics is reasonably designed to deter wrongdoing and to
promote:
1.Honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical handling of actual or apparent conflicts of
interest between personal and professional relationships;
2.Full,  fair,  accurate,  timely,  and  understandable  disclosure  in  reports  and  documents  that  a
registrant  files  with,  or  submits  to,  regulatory  agencies  and  in  other  public  communications
made by the registrant;
3. Compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations;
 4.The prompt internal reporting of violations of the standards to an appropriate person or persons
identified in the standards; and
5. Accountability for adherence to the standards of the Code of Ethics.
The Code of Ethics (in hard copy) is available for inspection in our headquarters during regular
business hours and a copy can also be provided at no charge on request.
In  addition,  we  practice  corporate  governance  in  accordance  with  rules  and  regulations  in
Canada.
Corporate Governance relates to the activities of the Board who are elected by and accountable
to the shareholders, and takes into account the role of management who are appointed by the
Board  and  who  are  charged  with  our  on-going  management.    Our  Board  encourages  sound
corporate governance practices designed to promote our well being and on-going development,
having  always  as  its  ultimate  objective  our  best  long-term  interests  and  the  enhancement  of
value for all shareholders.  The Board also believes that sound corporate governance benefits
our employees and the communities in which we operate.  The Board believes that our corporate
governance policies and practices, outlined below, are appropriate and substantially consistent
with  the  guidelines  for  improved  corporate  governance  in  Canada  as  adopted  by  the  Toronto
Stock Exchange.
To better fulfill and implement the Board’s corporate governance policies, we have established a
Corporate  Governance  Committee.    The  Corporate  Governance  Committee  meets  with  and
discusses current disclosure issuances with our management personnel, directors, and with both
our Canadian and United States counsel, in order to not only report to the Board any matters
which should be the subject of either public disclosure or remedial action, but also to assist the
Board in establishing reporting and disclosure procedures to ensure that we are in compliance
with  our  disclosure  and  compliance  obligations  under  applicable 
rules  and
obligations.  The members of the Corporate Governance Committee are Claro Ramirez and Lyle
Brown.
laws,
Table of Contents
31
ITEM 16 C.  ACCOUNTANTS FEES AND SERVICES
Audit Fees
For  the  audit  of  the  annual  financial  statements  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2015,  an
amount of $15,896 was accrued as a best estimate of fees to be billed by our external auditors
BDO Canada LLP (“BDO”).  For 2014, BDO charged total fees of  $23,499 related to the audit of
our annual financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2014.
 
Audit Related Fees
We did not incur any audit related fees in either of the two fiscal years for assurance and related
services  by  BDO  that  are  related  to  the  performance  of  their  audit  or  review  of  our  financial
statements.
Tax Fees
We did not incur any fees in either of the last two fiscal years for professional services rendered
by BDO for tax compliance, tax advise and tax planning.
All other fees
We did not incur any other fees in either of the last two fiscal years for products and services
provided by BDO, other than the services reported above under this Item 16C.
 
Our engagement of BDO was approved by the Audit Committee
ITEM 16 D.  EXEMPTION FROM THE LISTING STANDARDS FOR AUDIT COMMITEE
Not Applicable.
ITEM 16 E.  PURCHASE OF EQUITY SECURITIES BY THE ISSUER AND AFFILIATED
PURCHASERS
Not Applicable.
ITEM 16 F.  CHANGE IN REGISTRANTS CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANT
None.
ITEM 16 G.  Corporate Governance
Not Applicable.
32
ITEM 16 H.  Mine Safety Disclosure
Not Applicable.
PART III
ITEM 17. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
We report under Item# 18.
ITEM 18. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
Table of Contents
The  Auditors’  Report,  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto,  schedules  thereto,  as  required
under Item 18 are found immediately below.
Financial Statements:
Report of Auditors, dated August 30, 2016
Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014
Consolidated Statements of Loss and Deficit for the Years ended December 31, 2015 and
December 31, 2014
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years ended December 31, 2015 and December
31, 2014
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
33
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
Financial Statements
For the year ended December 31, 2015
(Expressed in United States dollars)
34
Table of Contents
Tel: 604  688 5421
Fax: 604  688 5132
www.bdo.ca
BDO Canada LLP
600 Cathedral Place
925 West Georgia Street
Vancouver BC  V6C 3L2  Canada
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S REPORT
To the shareholders of FEC Resources Inc.
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of FEC Resources Inc., which comprise
the statements of financial position as at December 31, 2015 and 2014 and the statements of
comprehensive income (loss) changes in equity and cash flows for each of the years in the three
year period ended December 31, 2015, and a summary of significant accounting policies and
other explanatory information.
Management's Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements
in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as  issued  by  the  International
Accounting  Standards  Board,  and  for  such  internal  control  as  management  determines  is
necessary  to  enable  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  that  are  free  from  material
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditor's Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. We
conducted our audits in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards and
with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
standards require that we comply with ethical requirements and plan and perform the audit to
obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  from  material
misstatement.
An  audit  involves  performing  procedures  to  obtain  audit  evidence  about  the  amounts  and
disclosures  in  the  financial  statements.  The  procedures  selected  depend  on  the  auditor's
judgment,  including  the  assessment  of  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  financial
statements,  whether  due  to  fraud  or  error.  In  making  those  risk  assessments,  the  auditor
considers internal control relevant to the entity's preparation and fair presentation of the financial
statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not
for  the  purpose  of  expressing  an  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  entity's  internal  control.
Accordingly, we express no such opinion.  An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness
of  accounting  policies  used  and  the  reasonableness  of  accounting  estimates  made  by
management, as well as evaluating the presentation of the financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained in our audits is sufficient and appropriate to
provide a basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
In  our  opinion,  the  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial
position of FEC Resources Inc. as at December 31, 2015 and 2014 and its financial performance
and its cash flows for each of the years in the three year period ended December 31, 2015, in
accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as  issued  by  the  International
Accounting Standards Board.
Chartered Professional Accountants
Vancouver, Canada
August 30, 2016
35
ASSETS
Current assets
Cash (Note 6)
Receivables
Prepaid expenses
 
 
Non-current assets
FEC RESOURCES INC.
Statements of Financial Position
Expressed in United States Dollars
Table of Contents
December
31, 2014
December
31, 2013
$563,724    $192,191  
     1,444
   1,165
 
   6,477
     16,904  
   571,366      210,539
Property, plant and equipment (Note 7)
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities
Trade and accrued payables (Note 10)
Shareholders’ Equity
Share capital (Note 9)
Contributed surplus (Note 9)
Deficit
852
 
 $572,218    $211,756
1,217
$60,959    $41,406  
   60,959      41,406
16,732,397      16,732,397  
   3,058,063      3,058,063  
   (19,279,201)    (19,620,110)
 
   511,259
 $572,218
170,350
   $211,756
SIGNED ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS BY:
“Paul Wallace”                                           “Lyle Brown”                                                      
Director                                                                                           Director
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements
36
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Expressed in United States Dollars
General and administrative expenses
General and administration (Note 11)
Operating loss
Year ended
December 31,
2015
$297,041
   (297,041
Year ended
December
31, 2014
$289,980
)   (289,980
Year ended
December
31, 2013
$367,100
)   (367,100
)
Gain on sale of shares in FEP (Note 8)
Interest income
Net income (loss) and total comprehensive
income (loss) for the year
 
Earnings / (loss) per common share
- Basic and diluted
Weighted average number of shares outstanding,
basic and diluted
637,902
   48
$340,909
    
    
 $0.00
-
    105
-
    344
$(289,875
     
     
  $(0.00
) $(366,756
     
     
) $(0.00
)
 
 
)
439,143,765    439,143,765    439,143,765
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements
37
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
Expressed In United States Dollars
For the years ended December 31, 2015, December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2013
Share
capital
Contributed
Balance January 1, 2015
Total comprehensive income for the year    -
Balance December 31, 2015
$16,732,397   $3,058,063    $(19,620,110)  $170,350  
     340,909  
 $16,732,397   $3,058,063    $(19,279,201)  $511,259
340,909
surplus
Deficit
Total
-
Contributed
Deficit
surplus
Share capital 
  
 
 $16,732,397  $3,058,063   $(19,330,235) $460,225  
   -
)   (289,875)
 $16,732,397  $3,058,063   $(19,620,110) $170,350
(289,875
Total
-
Balance January 1, 2014
Total comprehensive loss for the year
Balance December 31, 2014
Balance January 1, 2013
Total comprehensive loss for the year
Share
capital
Contributed
Deficit
surplus
$16,732,397  $3,058,063   $(18,963,479) $826,981  
   -
)   (366,756)
 $16,732,397  $3,058,063   $(19,330,235) $460,225
(366,756
Total
-
Balance December 31, 2013
 
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements
38
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Expressed In United States Dollars
Year
ended
Year
ended
Year
ended
Cash used in
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net income (loss) for the year
 
Non-cash items included in income (loss)
Amortization (Note 7)
Gain on sale of shares in FEP
 
Changes in working capital related to operating activities
Receivables
Prepaid expenses
Trade and accrued payables
Net cash used in operating activities
INVESTING ACTIVITY
Proceeds from sale of shares in FEP
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash
Cash – beginning of the year
Cash – end of the year
December
31, 2015
December
31, 2014
December
31, 2013  
 
 
  
  
 
 $340,909   $(289,875 ) $(366,756 )
 
    
 
    
   365
 
   (637,902 )   -
 
   (296,628 )   (289,353 )   (366,011 )
522
745
    -
(7
)   1,054
   279
    174
 
   10,427     1,533
   19,553     (363
)   (32,869 )
   (266,369)   (288,190)   (397,652)
-
     -
637,902      -
 
   637,902      -
    
 
     
   371,533      (288,190)    (397,652)
   192,191      480,381      878,033  
 $563,724    $192,191    $480,381
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements
39
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 1                      Corporate Information
FEC  Resources  Inc.  (“FEC”  or  the  “Company”)  was  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  Alberta,
Canada and is engaged primarily in the business of exploration and development of oil and gas
and other mineral related opportunities, either directly or indirectly through companies in which
the  Company  invests.    The  Company  is  not  currently  directly  involved  in  any  oil  and  gas  or
mineral related exploration activities.  The Company is listed in the United States on the Over-
The-Counter Bulletin Board (“OTCBB”), having the symbol FECOF.
At December 31, 2015, the Company held an investment in Metalore Mining Corporation in the
Philippines which is accounted for using the equity method.  The Company also has an 18.42%
interest Forum Energy plc (“FEP”) in the United Kingdom.  The Company has concluded that it
still  has  significant  influence  over  FEP  and  has  continued  to  account  for  it  using  the  equity
method.  (Note 8).  In addition, at December 31, 2015, the Company held a 1.08% interest in
Lascogon Mining Corporation (“Lascogon”) classified as available-for-sale investment.
The principal address of the Company is 203, 200 Barclay Parade S.W. Calgary, Alberta T2P
4R5.  The Company’s parent company is Philex Petroleum Corporation (“Philex”).
Note 2                      Basis of Preparation and Going Concern
a) Statement of Compliance
These financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with International
Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  as  issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards
Board (“IASB”).
The financial statements were authorized for issue by the Board of Directors on August 30, 2016.
b) Basis of Measurement
The  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  on  a  historical  cost  basis  and  are  presented  in
United States dollars, which is also the Company’s functional currency.
The preparation of financial statements in compliance with IFRS requires management to make
certain  critical  accounting  estimates.    It  also  requires  management  to  exercise  judgment  in
applying the Company’s accounting policies.  The areas involving a higher degree of judgment
or  complexity,  or  areas  where  assumptions  and  estimates  are  significant  to  the  financial
statements are disclosed in Note 5.
40
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 2                      Basis of Preparation (continued)
c) Nature of Operations
The exploration and development of oil and gas reserves and the pursuit of other energy and
mineral reserves involves significant financial risks. The success of the Company is dependent
upon  the  success  of  its  investments  and  their  ability  to  discover  economically  recoverable
reserves and to bring such reserves into profitable production, and is subject to a number of risks,
including environmental risks, contractual risks, legal risks and political risks, fluctuations in the
price  of  oil  and  gas  and  other  factors  beyond  the  Company’s  control.  The  Company  has  not
generated revenue from operations. The Company had net income of $340,909 during the twelve
months-ended  December  31,  2015  and  has  an  accumulated  deficit  since  inception  of
$19,279,201. As of December 31, 2015, the Company has cash resources of $563,724 which is
considered  sufficient  to  meet  its  obligations  for  at  least  twelve  months  from  the  end  of  the
reporting period.
Management considers that the current economic environment is difficult and the outlook for oil
and gas exploration companies presents significant challenges in terms of raising funds through
issuance of shares. To the extent necessary, the Company has relied on its ability to raise funds
via dispositions of quantities of its shareholdings in Forum Energy plc (“FEP”) to Philex under
terms that are consistent with the best interests of shareholders, in order to finance its operations.
The  Company  has  been  successful  in  disposing  quantities  of  its  shareholdings  in  FEP  in
previous fiscal years. However, there can be no assurance the Company will continue to be able
to dispose of quantities of its shares in FEP under suitable terms. In addition, management has
instituted measures to preserve cash through significantly decreasing its corporate costs.
Note 3                      Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all years presented in
these financial statements.
a)      Investment in associates
Investments  in  companies  over  which  the  Company  has  the  power  to  exercise  significant
influence (but not control) are accounted for  using  the  equity  method.  The  equity  method  is  a
basis of accounting whereby the investment is initially recorded at cost and the carrying value is
adjusted  thereafter  to  include  the  Company’s  pro-rata  share  of  post-acquisition  income  or
loss.  The amount of the adjustment is included in the determination of net income (loss) by the
Company and the investment account of the Company is also increased or decreased to reflect
the Company’s share of capital transactions and changes in accounting policies and corrections
of errors.  Profit distributions received or receivable from the investments will reduce the carrying
value  of  the  investment.    Any  premium  paid  for  an  associate  above  the  fair  value  of  the
Company's  share  of  the  identifiable  assets,  liabilities  and  contingent  liabilities  acquired  is
capitalized and included in the carrying amount of the associate.
41
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 3                      Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
Impairment
Investments accounted for on the equity basis are assessed at each reporting date to determine
whether there is any objective evidence that it is impaired. A financial asset is considered to be
impaired if objective evidence indicates that one or more events have had a negative effect on
the estimated future cash flows of that asset, with the result that they have a loss in value that is
other than a temporary decline.
An impairment loss is calculated as the difference between the investment’s carrying amount and
the present value of the estimated future cash flows expected to be generated by the investment.
All  impairment  losses  are  recognized  in  profit  or  loss.  In  the  event  the  recoverable  amount
subsequently  increases  to  a  value  greater  than  the  carrying  amount,  an  impairment  gain  is
recognized up to the original pre-impaired value.
During the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 the Company did not recognize any
write-down or impairment reversal of its investments.
b)      Property, plant and equipment
Recognition and Measurement
On initial recognition, property, plant, and equipment are recorded at cost, being the purchase
price and directly attributable cost of acquisition or construction required to bring the asset to the
location  and  condition  necessary  to  be  capable  of  operating  in  the  manner  intended  by  the
Company. This includes the appropriate borrowing costs and the estimated present value of any
future  unavoidable  costs  of  dismantling  and  removing  items.    The  corresponding  liability  is
recognized within provisions.
Property, plant and equipment is subsequently measured at cost less accumulated depreciation
less any impairment losses.
When  parts  of  an  item  of  property,  plant  and  equipment  have  different  useful  lives,  they  are
accounted for as separate items (major components) of property, plant and equipment.
Gains and Losses
Gains  and  losses  on  disposal  of  an  item  of  property,  plant  and  equipment  are  determined  by
comparing the proceeds from disposal with the carrying amount, and are recognized net within
other income in profit or loss.
42
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 3                      Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
Depreciation
Property, plant and equipment is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation. The Company
depreciates its computer equipment at the rate of 30% per annum utilizing the declining balance
method.
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each financial year end
and adjusted if appropriate.
Impairment
The  carrying  amounts  of  the  Company’s  non-financial  assets  are  reviewed  at  each  reporting
date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment. If any such indication exists,
then the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated.
c) Foreign Currency Translation
The  functional  currency  of  the  Company  is  the  United  States  dollar.  The  Company  and  its
investments accounted for by the equity method operate in Canada, the United Kingdom and the
Philippines.
For  the  Company  and  any  of  its  investee  companies  with  a  United  States  dollar  functional
currency, at the transaction date, each asset, liability, revenue and expense denominated in a
foreign currency is translated into United States dollars by the use of the exchange rate in effect
at that date. At the year-end date, unsettled monetary assets and liabilities are translated into
United States dollars by using the exchange rate in effect at the year-end date and the related
translation differences are recognized in comprehensive income/loss.
Exchange gains and losses arising on the retranslation of monetary available-for-sale financial
assets  are  treated  as  a  separate  component  of  the  change  in  fair  value  and  recognized  in
comprehensive  income/loss.  Exchange  gains  and  losses  on  non-monetary  available-for-sale
financial  assets  form  part  of  the  overall  gain  or  loss  recognized  in  respect  of  that  financial
instrument.
Non-monetary assets and liabilities that are measured at historical cost are translated into United
States dollars by using the exchange rate in effect at the date of the initial transaction and are not
subsequently restated. Non-monetary assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value or a
revalued amount are translated into United States dollars by using the exchange rate in effect at
the  date  the  value  is  determined  and  the  related  translation  differences  are  recognized  in  net
income/loss or other comprehensive loss/income consistent with where the gain or loss on the
underlying non-monetary asset or liability has been recognized.
43
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 3                      Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
c) Foreign Currency Translation (continued)
For  the  Company’s  investee  companies  with  a  functional  currency  other  than  Unites  States
Dollars,  any  cumulative  translation  adjustments  would  be  included  in  Accumulated  other
comprehensive  income  (‘‘AOCI’’)  if  material  and  would  represent  unrealized  translation  gains
and losses on the Company’s net investment in equity-accounted investees that are translated
using  the  current  rate  method.  The  exchange  gains  and  losses  would  become  realized  in
earnings  upon  the  disposition,  liquidation  or  dilution  of  the  investment  that  gave  rise  to  such
amounts.
Income Taxes
d)
Income  tax  expense  comprises  current  and  deferred  tax.  Current  tax  and  deferred  tax  are
recognized in net income except to the extent that it relates to a business combination or items
recognized directly in equity or in other comprehensive loss/income.
Current income taxes are recognized for the estimated income taxes payable or receivable on
taxable  income  or  loss  for  the  current  year  and  any  adjustment  to  income  taxes  payable  in
respect of previous years. Current income taxes are determined using tax rates and tax laws that
have been enacted or substantively enacted by the year-end date.
Deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  recognized  where  the  carrying  amount  of  an  asset  or
liability differs from its tax basis, except for taxable temporary differences arising on the initial
recognition of goodwill and temporary differences arising on the initial recognition of an asset or
liability in a transaction which is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction
affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
Recognition of deferred tax assets for unused tax losses, tax credits and deductible temporary
differences is restricted to those instances where it is probable that future taxable profit will be
available against which the deferred tax asset can be utilized. At the end of each reporting year
the  Company  reassesses  unrecognized  deferred  tax  assets.  The  Company  recognizes  a
previously unrecognized deferred tax asset to the extent that it has become probable that future
taxable profit will allow the deferred tax asset to be recovered.
 
                                 e) Earnings / Loss Per Share
Basic  earnings/loss  per  share  is  computed  by  dividing  the  net  income  or  loss  applicable  to
common  shares  of  the  Company  by  the  weighted  average  number  of  common  shares
outstanding for the relevant year.
44
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 3                      Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
e) Earnings / Loss Per Share (continued)
Diluted  earnings/loss  per  common  share  is  computed  by  dividing  the  net  income  or  loss
applicable to common shares by the sum of the weighted average number of common shares
issued and outstanding and all additional common shares that would have been outstanding, if
potentially dilutive instruments were converted.
There were no dilutive instruments (consisting of shares issuable on the exercise of options and
warrants)  outstanding  during  the  years  ended  December  31,  2015,  December  31,  2014  and
December 31, 2013.  Accordingly, there is no difference in the amounts presented for basic and
diluted loss per share.
 
                                 f) Financial Instruments
Financial Assets
Financial  assets  and  liabilities  are  recognized  when  the  Company  becomes  a  party  to  the
contractual provisions of the instrument. Financial assets are derecognized when the rights to
receive cash flows from the assets have expired or have been transferred and the Company has
transferred substantially all risks and rewards of ownership.
Non-derivative  financial  assets  that  do  not  meet  the  definition  of  loans  and  receivables  are
classified as available-for-sale and comprise principally the Company’s investments in entities
not  qualifying  as  subsidiaries  or  associates.  Available-for-sale  investments  are  carried  at  fair
value with changes in fair value recognized in other comprehensive income/loss. If there is no
quoted  market  price  in  an  active  market  and  fair  value  cannot  be  readily  determined,  then
available-for sale investments are carried at cost.
The Company has designated cash as loans and receivables, which is measured at amortized
cost.
Impairment on Financial Assets
At each reporting date the Company assesses whether there is any objective evidence that a
financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired. A financial asset or group of financial
assets is deemed to be impaired, if, and only if, there is objective evidence of impairment as a
result of one or more events that has occurred after the initial recognition of the asset and that
event  has  an  impact  on  the  estimated  future  cash  flows  of  the  financial  asset  or  the  group  of
financial assets.
With  the  exception  of  equity  instruments  classified  as  available  for  sale,  if,  in  a  subsequent
period,  the  amount  of  the  impairment  loss  decreases  and  the  decrease  relates  to  an  event
occurring  after  the  impairment  was  recognized;  the  previously  recognized  impairment  loss  is
reversed through profit or loss. On the date of impairment reversal, the carrying amount of the
financial asset cannot exceed its amortized cost had impairment not been recognized.
45
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 3                       Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
                                 f) Financial Instruments (continued)
Financial Liabilities
Financial liabilities are classified as other financial liabilities, based on the purpose for which the
liability was incurred, and comprise of trade payables and accrued liabilities. These liabilities are
initially recognized at fair value net of any transaction costs directly attributable to the issuance of
the  instrument  and  subsequently  carried  at  amortized  cost  using  the  effective  interest  rate
method.  This ensures that any interest expense over the period to repayment is at a constant
rate on the balance of the liability carried in the statement of financial position. Interest expense
in this context includes initial transaction costs and premiums payable on redemption, as well as
any  interest  or  coupon  payable  while  the  liability  is  outstanding.  Trade  and  other  payables
represent liabilities for goods and services provided to the Company prior to the end of the period
which are unpaid.
g) Share capital
Equity instruments are contracts that give a residual interest in the net assets of the Company.
Financial instruments issued by the Company are classified as equity only to the extent that they
do  not  meet  the  definition  of  a  financial  liability  or  financial  asset.  The  Company’s  common
shares are classified as equity instruments.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity
as a deduction, net of tax, from the proceeds.
 
                                 h) Finance income and expenses
Finance  expense  comprises  interest  expense  on  borrowings,  accretion  of  the  discount  on
provisions and impairment losses recognized on financial assets.
Interest income is recognized as it accrues in profit or loss, using the effective interest method.
Foreign currency gains and losses, reported under finance income and expenses, are reported
on a net basis.
Note 4                      Standards, Amendments and Interpretations
The Company has prepared its consolidated financial statements in accordance with IFRS as
issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“IASB”).  IFRS  represents  standards
and interpretations approved by the IASB and are comprised of IFRS, International Accounting
Standards (“IAS’s”), and interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee (“IFRIC’s”)
and  the  former  Standing  Interpretations  Committee  (“SIC’s”).  The  consolidated  financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS standards and interpretations effective
as of December 31, 2015.
46
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 4
Standards, Amendments and Interpretations (continued)
The  following  new  standards,  amendments  and  interpretations,  which  have  not  been  early
adopted in these financial statements, will or may have an effect on the Company’s future results
and financial position:
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
IFRS 9, Financial Instruments (“IFRS 9”) was issued by the IASB in its final version in July 2014,
and will replace IAS 39, "Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement" (“IAS 39”). IFRS
9 replaces the multiple rules in IAS 39 with a single approach to determine whether a financial
asset is measured at amortized cost or fair value and a new mixed measurement model for debt
instruments having only two categories: amortized cost and fair value. The approach in IFRS 9 is
based on how an entity manages its financial instruments in the context of its business model
and  the  contractual  cash  flow  characteristics  of  the  financial  assets.  The  new  standard  also
requires a single impairment method to be used, replacing the multiple impairment methods in
IAS  39.  IFRS  9  is  effective  for  annual  periods  beginning  on  or  after  January  1,  2018.    The
Company anticipates that this standard will be adopted in the Company’s financial statements for
the period beginning January 1, 2018, and  has  not  yet  considered  the  potential  impact  of  the
adoption of IFRS 9.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers
IFRS 15, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“IFRS 15”) will replace IAS 18, "Revenue",
IAS 11 ”Construction Contracts and certain revenue related interpretations. IFRS 15 establishes
a new control-based revenue recognition model, changes the basis for the determination of when
revenue  is  recognized  and  improves  disclosures  about  revenue.  IFRS  15  also  includes  more
detailed guidance as to when to account separately for individual performance obligations in a
multiple element arrangement. The IASB has deferred the effective date of IFRS 15 to annual
periods beginning on or after January 1, 2018 with early adoption permitted. The Company has
not yet considered the potential impact of the adoption of IFRS 15.
IFRS 16 Leases
IFRS 16, Leases (“IFRS 16”) will replace IAS 17, "Leases". IFRS 16 eliminates the distinction
between operating and finance leases and requires most leases to be recorded on the balance
sheet for lessees under a single model unless the lease term is twelve months or less or the
underlying asset has low value. IFRS 16 has an effective date for annual periods beginning on or
after January 1, 2019 with early adoption permitted if IFRS 15 is also applied. The Company is
assessing the impact, if any, the adoption of IFRS 16 will have on its financial statements.
47
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 5                     Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments
The  Company  makes  estimates  and  assumptions  about  the  future  that  affect  the  reported
amounts of assets and liabilities. Estimates and judgments are continually evaluated based on
historical experience and other factors, including expectations of future events that are believed
to be reasonable under the circumstances. In the future, actual experience may differ from these
estimates and assumptions.
The effect of a change in an accounting estimate is recognized prospectively by including it in
comprehensive income/loss in the period of the change, if the change affects that period only, or
in the period of the change and future periods, if the change affects both.
Information about critical judgments in applying accounting policies that have the most significant
risk of causing material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities recognized in
the financial statements within the next financial year are discussed below:
i)  Lascogon Contingent Consideration – Note 8 (iii)
There  were  30,000,000  common  shares  of  the  Company  issued  into  escrow  which  are  to  be
awarded  to  Indexa  Corp.,  the  vendor  of  the  investment  in  Lascogon,  upon  the  declaration  of
commerciality of the mining project as full and final consideration for the investment; these shares
are considered contingent consideration. These shares were to be released from escrow if the
project was declared commercial and were deemed to have zero value when they were issued
as  the  likelihood  of  the  Lascogon  being  in  a  position  to  declare  commerciality  was  remote.
Accordingly  no  liability  was  recognized.    Subsequent  to  year  end,  a  settlement  was  reached
whereby the shares were cancelled and returned to treasury for a payment of $36,000 to Indexa
Corp.
ii)  Investments in Associates
The  Company  periodically  or  when  circumstances  change,  reviews  its  investments  in  its
associates to ascertain whether it has maintained significant influence over these investments
and  also,  reviews  whether  there  exists  any  evidence  that  the  investments  in  associates  are
required to be impaired.
 
iii)  Deferred tax assets and liabilities
 
Significant judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes. There are many
transactions and calculations undertaken during the ordinary course of business for which the
ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We recognize liabilities and contingencies for anticipated
tax  audit  issues  based  on  our  current  understanding  of  the  tax  law.  For  matters  where  it  is
probable  that  an  adjustment  will  be  made,  we  record  our  best  estimate  of  the  tax  liability
including  the  related  interest  and  penalties  in  the  current  tax  provision.  We  believe  we  have
adequately provided for the probable outcome of these matters; however, the final outcome may
result in a materially different outcome than the amount included in the tax liabilities.
Table of Contents
48
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 5                      Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments (continued)
iv)  Determination of natural resource reserves and natural resources estimates
The required process of estimating reserves of natural resources is critical to several accounting
estimates  that  appear  in  our  financial  disclosures.    It  requires  significant  judgments  based  on
available  geological,  geophysical,  engineering  and  economic  data.    These  estimates  may
change  substantially  as  data  from  ongoing  development  and  production  activities  becomes
available, and as economic conditions impacting oil and natural gas prices, operating costs, and
royalty  burdens  change.    Reserve  estimates  impact  net  income  through  depletion  and  the
application of an impairment test.  Revisions or changes in the reserve estimates can have either
a positive or negative impact on net income.
 
Note 6                      Cash
Cash held at banks earns interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates.
Note 7                      Property, Plant and Equipment
Computer Equipment
Cost
Opening Cost
Additions
Ending Cost
 
Accumulated Depreciation
Opening Accumulated Depreciation
Charge for the year
Ending Accumulated Depreciation
 
Carrying Value
December
)   (522
)   (745
31 2014
31 2015
December
December
31 2013 
 
  
 
 $15,543   $15,543   $15,543  
   -
 
   15,543     15,543     15,543  
 
    
    
 
 $(14,326 )   (13,804 )   (13,059 )
   (365
)
   (14,691 )   (14,326 )   (13,804 )
 
    
 $852
$1,739
$1,217
-
-
Note 8                     Investment in associates and available for sale investment
Investments in Associates
The Company has the following investments accounted for using the equity method:
December
Metalore Mining Corporation
$
31, 2015  December 31, 2014
$
-
 
-
-
 
-
49
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 8                     Investment in associates and available for sale investment (continued)
i)  Investment in Metalore Mining Corporation (“Metalore”)
The Company holds a 35% interest in Metalore with its cumulative cost being  $789,569 offset by
equity  share  of  losses  totaling  $24,894  and  an  impairment  write-down  of  $764,675  leaving  a
carrying value of $Nil. Metalore’s project has been abandoned and it has no other operations.
ii)  Investment in FEP
The investment in FEP is summarized as follows:
Number of
Balance, December 31, 2013 and 2014
Disposition
 
Balance December  31, 2015
shares
held
8,550,200    
  (2,000,000)  
   
   
  6,550,200   $
Amount
-
-
 
-
As at December 31, 2015 the Company’s interest in FEP was 18.42% (2014 – 24.05%).
During the year ended December 31, 2012, FEP wrote down $25,400,000 of its investment in
Service Contract 40 “SC40” as a result of receiving a resource estimate from an independent
consultant.  The Company’s equity share of the losses incurred by FEP was in excess of the
carrying  value  of  the  investment  prior  to  recording  the  loss.  However,  in  accordance  with  the
guidance of IFRS, the Company discontinued recording losses once the carrying value of the
equity  investment  was  reduced  to  zero.  As  result,  the  Company’s  investment  in  FEP  was
reduced to $Nil.
 
At the annual general meeting of FEP on June 17, 2015, the shareholders passed resolutions
which approved the delisting of FEP from the London Stock Exchange and the conversion of
FEP from a public company to a private company.
 
On November 16, 2015 the Company sold 2,000,000 FEP shares to its parent company Philex
Petroleum Corporation (“Philex”) for 21 British pence per share.  As a result of the sale of the
shares, the Company recorded a gain on sale of $637,902.
At December 31, 2015, the Company held 6,550,200 shares of FEP.
50
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 8                     Investment in associates and available for sale investment (continued)
Investment in available-for-sale investment
iii)  Investment in Lascogon Mining Corporation (“Lascogon”)
30,000,000  common  shares  of  the  Company    were  issued  into  escrow,  which  were  to  be
awarded to the vendor of the investment in Lascogon upon the declaration of commerciality as
full  and  final  consideration  for  the  assignment  of  its  rights  to  the  Company,  were  considered
contingent consideration and were to be recorded as an additional cost of the investment, at fair
value,  should  Lascogon  reach  commerciality.  Subsequent  to  year  end,  a  settlement  was
reached whereby the shares were cancelled and returned to treasury for a payment of $36,000.
In May 2012, the Company received a capital call from Lascogon in the amount of 100 million
Philippine  Pesos  or  approximately  $2,400,000.    The  capital  call  was  made  to  address
Lascogon’s current deficit and to fund the upcoming work program and exploration budget.  The
Company was given until December 21, 2012 to forward the requested funds or have its 40%
interest  diluted  to  1.08%.    The  Company  did  not  forward  funds  and  therefore  its  interest  in
Lascogon  has  been  diluted  to  1.08%  with  the  result  being  that  Lascogon  was  no  longer
considered an associate of the Company as the Company no longer exerts significant influence.
Upon the dilution of its interest in Lascogon, the investment was reclassified to an available for
sale  investment  having  a  fair  value  of  $Nil  as  at  December  31,  2014  and  2013.  The  current
exploration phase under the Mineral Production Sharing Agreement (“MPSA”) expired in January
2014 and it remains uncertain whether a further 2 year extension will be granted.
The  Company’s  cumulative  cost  in  its  investment  in  Lascogon  is  $2,635,254  offset  by  equity
share of losses totaling $27,640 and an impairment write-down of $2,607,614 leaving a carrying
value of $Nil.
Note 9                     Share Capital
a)  Authorized:
The Company is authorized to issue an unlimited number of common shares without par value;
and
The  Company  is  authorized  to  issue  an  unlimited  number  of  Class  A  and  Class  B  preferred
convertible redeemable voting shares without par value.
Issued:
Common Shares
 
Balance, January 1, 2013
 
Balance December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Amount
Number
 
  
 
  439,143,765  $16,732,397 
   
 
  439,143,765  $16,732,397
No preferred shares have been issued since the Company’s inception.
51
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 9                      Share Capital - (continued)
b) Contributed Surplus
Balance December 31, 2015, 2014 and, 2013
$3,058,063
c)   Nature and Purpose of Equity and Reserves
The  reserves  recorded  in  equity  on  the  Company’s  statements  of  financial  position  include
Contributed Surplus and Deficit.
Contributed Surplus is used to recognize the value of stock option grants prior to exercise.
Deficit is used to record the Company’s change in deficit from earnings and losses from period to
period.
d)  Share based payments:
The  Company  has  established  a  stock  option  plan  whereby  options  may  be  granted  to  its
directors, officers, consultants, and employees.  The exercise price of each option equals the
market price of the Company’s stock on the date of the grant and an option’s maximum term is
five years.  The options vest immediately.
There were no stock options outstanding on December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014 and
none were issued between January 1, 2013 and December 31, 2015.
 
Note 10                                Related Party Transactions and Balances
During the year ended December 31, 2015 general and administrative expenses included key
management  personnel  compensation  totaling  $110,500  (2014:  $168,000;  2013:  $196,500)
(Note 11).
Included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities at December 31, 2015 is $Nil (2014; $59;
2013: $56) owed to directors, officers and companies controlled by them for unpaid consulting
fees and or expenses.
In addition, at December 31, 2015, the Company owed Lascogon Mining Corporation $18,895
(2014: $18,895; 2013: $18,895). Amounts owing are unsecured, non interest bearing and due on
demand.
Related party transactions are measured at their exchange value.
52
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 11
Nature of Expenses
General and administration expenses
include
Professional fees
Bank charges
Listing and filing fees
Office and miscellaneous
Consulting (Note 10)
Engineering and geological expenses
Amortization
Foreign exchange
Note 12                   Income Taxes
December
2,703
3,844
31, 2015
31, 2014
December
December
 
31, 2013 
 $37,205   $38,544   $74,397  
   2,961
 
   23,479     19,985     27,553  
   33,552     51,673     54,330  
   187,042     168,000     196,500  
   6,753
 
 
   365
   5,684
 
 $297,041   $289,980   $367,100
6,448
    522
    2,105
5,389
    745
    4,342
Reconciliation of accounting and taxable income, for the years ended December 31        are as
follows:
Income (loss before income taxes)
 
Tax expense (recovery) based on
statutory rate of 26.0% (2014: 25%,
2013: 25.0%)
Impact of disallowed capital losses
Impact of foreign exchange on tax
assets as a difference in functional
currency
Foreign currency adjustment on non-
monetary items
Effect of reduction in statutory rate
Non-taxable portion of capital gains
Expiry of loss carry forward
Changes  in unrecognized deferred tax
assets
Total income tax expense (recovery)
December
December
31, 2015
December
31, 2013 
  
   
 
  340,909    (289,875 )  (366,756 )
31, 2014
89,000
  268,000    -
(72,000
)  (92,000
   -
)
-
94,000
114,000
552,000    172,000    139,000  
 
   -
  (249,000 )  -
 
  (86,000
   -
)  -
  332,000    270,000    -
(906,000 )  (464,000 )  (161,000 )
  -
-
-
Effective July 1, 2015, the Canadian Federal Corporate tax rate and the Alberta provincial tax
rate were 15% and 11.01%, respectively.
53
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 12                   Income Taxes (continued)
The nature and tax effect of the temporary differences giving rise to the deferred tax assets and
liabilities at December 31, 2015 and 2014 are summarized as follows:
Non-capital losses
December
December
31, 2014 
 
 
  
 $1,067,000   $1,465,000
31, 2015
Capital assets and other
Investments
Unrecognized deferred tax assets
41,000
37,000
 
   1,394,000     1,898,000  
   (2,498,000)   (3,404,000)
 
 $-
$-
As  at  December  31,  2015,  the  Company  had  estimated  non-capital  losses  for  Canadian  tax
purposes of $3,951,000 which may be carried forward to offset future years’ taxable income.
The potential benefit of these carry-forward non-capital losses has not been recognized in these
financial statements as it is not considered probable that sufficient future taxable profit will allow
the deferred tax asset to be recovered.
54
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 13                   Financial Instruments and Risk Management
The Company is exposed through its operations to the following financial risks:
-  Market Risk
-  Credit Risk
-  Liquidity Risk
In common with all other businesses, the Company is exposed to risks that arise from its use of
financial instruments. This note describes the Company’s objectives, policies and processes for
managing those risks and the methods used to measure them. Further quantitative information in
respect of these risks is presented throughout these financial statements.
There  have  been  no  substantive  changes  in  the  Company’s  exposure  to  financial  instrument
risks,  its  objectives,  polices  and  processes  for  managing  those  risks  or  the  methods  used  to
measure them from previous years unless otherwise stated in the note.
General Objectives, Policies and Procedures
The  Board  of  Directors  has  overall  responsibility  for  the  determination  of  the  Company’s  risk
management objectives and policies and, whilst retaining ultimate responsibility for them, it has
delegated  the  authority  for  designing  and  operating  processes  that  ensure  the  effective
implementation of the objectives and policies to the Company’s finance function. The Board of
Directors receive quarterly reports from the Company’s Chief Financial Officer through which it
reviews the effectiveness of the processes put in place and the appropriateness of the objectives
and policies it sets.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible
without unduly affecting the Company’s competitiveness and flexibility. Further details regarding
these policies are set out below.
a) Market Risk
Market risk is the risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate
because  of  changes  in  market  prices.  Market  prices  are  comprised  of  foreign  currency  risk,
interest rate risk and equity and commodity price risk.
Foreign currency exchange risk
The  Company  is  exposed  to  foreign  currency  fluctuations  for  general  and  administrative
transactions denominated in Canadian Dollars. The majority of the Company’s cash is kept in
U.S.  dollars.    As  at  December  31,  2015,  the  Company  had  an  insignificant  amount  of  cash
denominated in Canadian dollars that was subject to exchange rate fluctuations between the
Canadian  dollar  and  the  U.S.  dollar.  As  at  December  31,  2015,  the  Company  held  an
insignificant  amount  of  financial  liabilities  denominated  in  Canadian  dollars  that  would  be
subject to exchange rate fluctuations between Canadian dollars and U.S. dollars.
55
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 13                      Financial Instruments and Risk Management (continued)
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair values and future cash flows of the Company will fluctuate
because of changes in market interest rates. The Company is exposed to interest rate risk on its
cash. The Company did not have any borrowings outstanding as at December 31, 2015.
Equity and Commodity Price Risk
Equity  risk  is  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  valuation  of  assets  arising  from  changes  in
equity markets.  The Company is exposed to this risk through its equity holdings. The investment
in FEP is monitored by Management with decisions on sale taken at Board level.  The Company
is exposed to Commodity Price Risk as FEP is actively involved in exploration for oil and gas.  A
significant  increase  or  decrease  in  commodity  prices  will  likely  have  a  resultant  effect  on  the
Company’s share price.
b) Credit risk
The Company maintains cash deposits in one chartered Canadian bank which, from time to time,
exceed the amount of depositors insurance available in each respective account.  Management
assesses the financial condition of this bank and believes that the possibility of any credit loss is
minimal.
c) Liquidity risk
Liquidity  risk  is  the  risk  that  the  Company  will  not  be  able  to  meet  its  obligations  as  they  fall
due.  The Company does not generate cash from operations but rather, the Company will, from
time  to  time,  issue  shares  via  equity  placements,  borrow  funds  from  an  affiliated  company  or
undertake to sell a portion of its investment in the shares of FEP should it be necessary to raise
funds.  The  Company  manages  liquidity  by  maintaining  cash  balances  available  to  meet  its
anticipated operational needs. Liquidity requirements are managed based on expected cash flow
to  ensure  that  there  is  adequate  capital  to  meet  short-term  and  long-term  obligations.  The
Company has in place a planning and budgeting process to help determine the funds required to
support the Company’s normal operating requirements on an ongoing basis and its growth plans.
At December 31, 2015 the Company’s accounts payable and accrued liabilities were $60,959, all
of which fall due for payment within twelve months of the balance sheet date.  The Company has
minimal long-term commitments.
The carrying values of accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values due
to the relatively short periods to maturity of the instruments.
56
Table of Contents
FEC RESOURCES INC.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2015
(Stated in United States Dollars)
Note 14
Capital Management
The Company’s objectives when managing capital are to safeguard its ability to continue as a
going  concern,  to  provide  an  adequate  return  to  shareholders,  to  meet  external  capital
requirements on credit facilities and to support any growth plans.
The capital of the Company consists of the items included in shareholders’ equity and cash net of
debt obligations. The Company monitors capital based on the debt to debt-plus-equity ratio. Debt
is total debt shown on the balance sheet, less cash. Debt-plus-equity is calculated as debt shown
on  the  balance  sheet,  plus  total  shareholders’  equity  which  includes  share  capital,  warrants,
contributed surplus and deficit. Currently the Company has no debt. The Company’s Board of
Directors approves management’s annual capital expenditures plans and reviews and approves
any material debt borrowing plans proposed by the Company’s management.
As at December 31, 2015, the company had no externally imposed capital requirements nor were
there any changes in the company’s approach to capital management during the year.
Note 15                   Segmental Reporting
The  Company  has  one  reportable  operating  segment  which  is  primarily  the  business  of
exploration  and  development  of  oil  and  gas  and  other  mineral  related  opportunities,  through
companies in which the Company invests.
Table of Contents
57
ITEM 19.  EXHIBITS
1.1
1.2
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
11.
12.1
Certificate of Continuance of the Registrant (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 3.1 to the Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form F-1, File No.
33-81290 (the “Registration”)
By-Laws of the Registrant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the
Registration Statement)
Consulting Agreement dated March 1, 2004 between the Company and
David Robinson
Consulting Agreement dated March 1, 2004 between the Company and
Barry Stansfield
Consulting Agreement dated November 23, 2003 between the Company
and Larry Youell
Consulting Agreement dated March 1, 2004 between the Company and
David Wilson
Consulting Agreement dated March 1, 2004 between the Company and
David
Exchange and Release Agreement between Tracer Petroleum Corporation
and Transmeridian Exploration, Inc., dated March 16, 2001
Share Purchase Agreement dated March 11, 2003, as amended by
agreements dated March 21, and April 2, 2003
Amendment dated March 21, 2003 to Share Purchase Agreement dated
March 11, 2003 as amended by an agreement dated April 2, 2003
Amendment dated April 2, 2003 to Share Purchase Agreement dated
March 11, 2003 as amended by agreement dated March 21, 2003
Code of Ethics
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
(filed
13.1
pursuant to section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer
pursuant to section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
herewith)
(filed
herewith)
* Previously filed.
58
Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
The registrant hereby certifies that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form 20-F and that
it has duly caused and authorized the undersigned to sign this Annual Report on its behalf.
FEC Resources Inc.
(Registrant)
 
By:/s/Paul Wallace
  Paul Wallace
  President and Chief Executive
Date: September 6, 2016
Officer
59
Table of Contents