
EX-99.3 4 exhibit99-3.htm FORM 52-109F2 CERTIFICATION OF INTERIM FILINGS - CFO
Exhibit 99.3
Exhibit 99.3
FORM 52-109F2
CERTIFICATION OF INTERIM FILINGS
FULL CERTIFICATE OF RICHMONT MINES INC.
I, Nicole Veilleux, Vice-President, Finance of Richmont Mines Inc., in capacity of “Chief Financial
Officer”, certify the following:
1.     Review: I  have  reviewed  the  interim  financial  report  and  interim  MD&A  (together,  the
“interim filings”) of Richmont Mines Inc. (the “issuer”) for the interim period ended June 30,
2016.
2.     No misrepresentations: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence,
the interim filings do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a
material fact required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in
light of the circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by
the interim filings.
3.     Fair  presentation: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
interim financial report together with the other financial information included in the interim
filings  fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition,  financial  performance
and cash flows of the issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the interim
filings.
4.     Responsibility: The issuer’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing
and  maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (DC&P)  and  internal  control  over
financial  reporting  (ICFR),  as  those  terms  are  defined  in  Regulation  52-109  respecting
Certification  of  Disclosure  in  Issuers’  Annual  and  Interim  Filings  (c.  V-1.1,  r.  27),  for  the
issuer.
5.     Design: Subject to the limitations, if any, described in paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3, the issuer’s
other certifying officer and I have, as at the end of the period covered by the interim filings
 
(a)     designed  DC&P,  or  caused  it  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide
reasonable assurance that
(i)      material  information  relating  to  the  issuer  is  made  known  to  us  by  others,
particularly during the period in which the interim filings are being prepared; and
(ii)     information required to be disclosed by the issuer in its annual filings, interim filings
or  other  reports  filed  or  submitted  by  it  under  securities  legislation  is  recorded,
processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in securities
legislation; and
(b)     designed  ICFR,  or  caused  it  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer’s GAAP.
5.1     Control framework: The control framework the issuer’s other certifying officer and I used
to design the issuer’s ICFR is « Integrated Framework (COSO Framework) published by
The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) ».
1
5.2 ICFR – material weakness relating to design: N/A
5.3 Limitation on scope of design: N/A
6. Reporting changes in ICFR: The issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A any change in
the issuer’s ICFR that occurred during the period beginning on April 1st, 2016 and ended on
June 30, 2016 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
issuer’s ICFR.
Date: August 8, 2016
Nicole Veilleux (signed)
Nicole Veilleux 
Vice-President, Finance
2