
Yandal Gold Project
Cockburn Update - 1 September 2016
Highlights






Independent Resource and Optimisation studies completed on the Cockburn prospect. 
The Cockburn prospect has been on care and maintenance since mining was terminated 
in March 2013.  A significant resource still remains. 
 
A global Indicated and Inferred Resource at Cockburn to a maximum depth of 370 vertical 
meters was calculated to contain 5.59 Mt @ 1.94 g/t Au for 349,000 oz.
o 
o
Indicated Resources 2.26 Mt @ 2.41 g/t Au  
Inferred Resources 3.33 Mt @ 1.62 g/t Au 
Total Resources 5.59 Mt @ 1.94 g/t Au
A whittle optimisation using a gold price of AUD $1,500 indicated that a 220m deep pit 
from the surface which incorporates the current 120m pit, returns a positive cash flow. 
The optimisation demonstrated that 1.92Mt @ 1.89 g/t Au could be mined for 108,000 oz 
of  recovered  gold  (93%)  with  a  7.8:1  strip  ratio.  Despite  this  outcome  MKO  regards 
Cockburn cutback as being a high risk scenario.  
 
However, a more promising resource target at Cockburn is the 5-15m wide Orelia lode 
which is exposed on the western pit floor (400m RL) and would be mineable without  a 
cutback.    It  is  estimated  that  the  current  pit  could  be  deepened  another  40m  –  50m. 
Pivotal  to  this  is  further  resource  and  grade  control  drilling  from  the  pit  floor.  Any 
additional gold ore discovered would further enhance the Orelia (open cut) economics.
MKO  has  also  reviewed  the  underground  exploration  and  mining  history  at  Cockburn 
and noted that Newmont  Australia completed a detailed Pre-Feasibility Study (PFS) on 
Cockburn Underground Resources in 2002.
An  initial  2500m  in-pit  RC  drilling  program  has  been  approved  by  the  MKO  Board  to 
validate  the  historic  drilling  and  better  define  and  expand  the  Orelia  mineralisation. 
Drilling  will  commence  once  approvals  are  in  place.  Historic  intercepts  that  will  be 
followed up include ARLMM2666D (60m @ 11.81 g/t Au) and ARLMM2688D (35m @ 8.91 
g/t Au).
159 Stirling Highway, Nedlands  WA  6009 
PO Box 1104, Nedlands  WA  6909 
Tel: +61 8 9386 9527 
Fax: +61 8 9386 9473 
E: admin@metaliko.com.au 
ACN 120 974 567
Cautionary Statement
There is a low level of geological confidence associated with inferred mineral resources and there is no certainty 
that further exploration work will result in the determination of indicated mineral resources or that the production 
target itself will be realised. 
 
The  Scoping  Study  referred  to  in  this  announcement  is  based  on  lower-level  technical  and  economic 
assessments and is insufficient to support estimation of Ore Reserves, or to provide assurance of an economic 
 
development case at this stage, or to provide certainty that the conclusions of the Scoping Study will be realised. 
Further,  the Company  cautions  that there  is  no  certainty  that  the  forecast  financial  information derived  from 
 
production targets will be realised. All material assumptions underpinning the production targets and forecast 
financial  information  derived  from  the  production  targets  are  set  out  in  this  announcement.  The  estimated 
 
mineral  resources  underpinning  the  Scoping  Study  production  targets  have  been  prepared  by  competent 
 
persons in accordance with the current JORC Code 2012 Edition and the current ASX Listing Rules. 
 
 
 
Metaliko has concluded it has a reasonable basis for providing the forward looking statement included in this 
announcement (also see Forward Looking Statement Cautionary Statement provided as an Appendix to this 
 
Announcement).  
 
 
 
1.0 Cockburn Background 
 
The Cockburn deposit (formerly Mt McClure) comprises 3 mineralised systems, namely Orelia, Calista 
and Cumberland. Orelia is essentially the northern extension of Calista, whereas Cumberland is a 
mineralised  zone  parallel  to  Orelia  and  Calista,  80-100m  to  the  east.  The  Orelia  ore  shoots  are 
characterised by intense fracturing and development of irregular stockworks of quartz  sulphide and 
quartz-carbonate  sulphide veins with a variably developed carbonate-chlorite-biotite metasomatic 
alteration assemblage.  
 
Gold mineralisation at Orelia is controlled by the NNW striking, subvertical Orelia Fault Zone and its 
moderately SW dipping splay structures. Mineralization forms southerly plunging ore shoots in basalts 
above and below the Orelia Dolerite (Figure 1 overleaf). In the northern part of the Orelia zone the  
ore shoots are located near the hinge of a local antiform. As a result, they are sub-horizontal  with 
shapes mimicking the hinge of the antiform.  
 
The Cockburn deposit has been mined by several companies during the past 20 years with reconciled 
tonnages and grades listed in Table1. The current pit floor sits around 120m deep on the 400m RL. 
There  were  plans  by  Navigator  Resources  Ltd  to  mine  to  240m  depth  (280m  RL),  but  operations 
ceased in March 2013.
Table 1: Production records for the Cockburn Gold Deposit from 1996-2013
Period
Company
Tonnes
Grade
Ounces
(g/t)
(Au)
June 1996 - March 2001
ARL/Arimco
4,374,054
1.91
268,201
April 2007 -  January 2008
View Resources (Calista UG)
118,964
2.18
8,352
June 2011 - March 2013
Navigator Resources
2,560,799
1.35
111,198
7,053,817
1.71
276,553
Figure 1: Schematic Cross-section from Newmont showing the Orelia and Cumberland mineralised zones
Since 2007, the mining operations encountered challenging grade control conditions with both View 
Resources  (Calista  underground  decline)  and  Navigator  (Orelia  -  Cumberland  open  cut)  reporting 
variable  and  negative  outcomes  when  attempting  to  reconcile  the  production  figures  with  the 
resource/reserve estimates. Cockburn has been on care and maintenance since mining ceased. 
 
With  the  current  gold  price  being  well  in  excess  of  $1,500  AUD/oz,  Metaliko  views  the  Cockburn 
deposit as a prospective satellite ore source that could significantly contribute ore to the BZW plant 
and underpin a recommencement of mining and milling activities. Cockburn already has established 
infrastructure  in  place,  such  as  offices,  workshops,  wash  bays,  magazine  storage,  110KL  diesel 
storage tank, waste dumps and haul roads. 
 
MKO acknowledges the reconciliation difficulties between reserves and recovered gold since 2007 
and  that  this  needs  to  be  addressed  prior  to  any  recommencement  of  mining.  Structural 
complexities,difficult visual control and  the need to to produce adequate feed to sustain the treatment  
plant have all contributed to the  chequered production history over this period. MKO has undertaken 
several core reviews, pit inspections, ore character sampling and gold deportment work, plus create 
a new ore block model (OBM).  The OBM lies at the heart of all resource work. 
 
2.0 Cockburn Open Cut Resource 
 
As  a  result  of  the  recent  gold  price  improvements  ($1,600+  AUD/oz)  and  a  number  of  geological 
reviews, MKO considers that there is potential to develop a significant resource within the Cockburn 
pit confines without additional cutbacks. The focus being on ultimately establishing a “measured” and 
accessible economic resource within the Orelia mineralisation.  The length of the Cockburn pit floor 
is about 450m and the width is 200m. This area would allow a resource to be mined to an additional 
40-50m vertical depth without expensive pit modifications.
An  independent  consulting  company  (Coxrocks  Pty  Ltd)  was  commissioned  to  undertake  a  total 
review of previous work and produce a new OBM with input from MKO geologists.  The 2016 OBM is 
consistent  with  earlier  models.  The  detailed  QA/QC  accompanying  these  earlier  models  is  still 
relevant to bringing this resource to a JORC 2012 standard. The 2016 resource is summarised below 
in Table 2. The OBM  was completed on a bulk mining basis and not specifically targeting  narrow, 
underground ore. A bottom cut of 0.9 g/t outline was used.
Table 2: Metaliko’s Cockburn 2016 Mineral Resource Estimate*
Indicated
Inferred
Total
Location
Tonnes
20 g/t Au 
cut grade
Tonnes
20 g/t Au 
cut grade
Tonnes
20 g/t Au 
cut grade
Oz Au
Previously Mined 
(1996-2013)
Between Mined 
surface and 2011 
FPD16
Beneath and along 
strike from FPD16
2,600,000
2.05
3,830,000
1.44
6,430,000
1.69
(349,400)
1,270,500
2.41
1,231,000
1.48
2,501,500
1.95
156,846
992,000
2.41
2,100,000
1.71
3,092,000
1.93
192,338
Total Insitu Resource  2,262,500
2.41
3,331,000
1.48
5,593,500
1.94
349,185
*See notes for explanation of resource calculation details. FPD is the Navigator Final Pit Design (275m RL) 
 
As a crosscheck of the resource figures, CoxRocks also modeled up a “theoretical” orebody; one that 
would have been mined from the Cockburn open cut from the surface to the current pit using the same 
geological cross sections and data. The back calculated resource was estimated to be 6.43Mt @ 1.69 
g/t which compares favorably (within 10%) to the actual production record of 7.05Mt @ 1.71 g/t and 
lends credibility to the 2016 estimate.  
 
The block model encompasses near surface mineralisation to the north and south of the Cockburn pit 
and to a maximum vertical depth of 370m. The current pit floor is about 120m deep. The bulk of the 
Resource is contained in the Calista and Orelia shoots that are located  beneath the open cut  and 
plunge south. Navigator planned to mine the Orelia and Cumberland ore via a 240m deep pit. Much 
of the Calista resource remains as most of the mined underground ore was derived from development 
drives  with  only  minor  stoping.  There  are  no  remaining  portals  or  access  to  the  underground,  the 
Calista pit has since been partially backfilled.
Figure 2: MKO Cockburn Block Model Oblique View
South Plunging Orelia Structure
Figure 3: Cockburn Long Section looking East
MKO’s modeling highlights many gaps in the resource model data. Further drilling is likely to delineate 
additional ore. An RC drilling program has been designed to test specific areas for high grade gold 
mineralisation. Many of the  early historic holes have been drilled to the west  and down dip on the 
Orelia ore shoots and as a result many of these intersections show bias towards high grade, whilst 
some show bias towards low grade or waste rock. Photo 1 below provides a good example of the 
gold variability within an ore shoot and the potential ramifications (poor definition of ore boundaries) 
of  drilling  down  dip  along  these  particular  zones.  Although  these  down  dip  drill  holes  are  not  the 
majority, they have created some uncertainty in a number of inferred ore interpretations.
22.08
6.47
17.62
0.97
0.21
1.18
18.27
65.5
Photo 1: Core photo of hole MM2688D showing variability of grades within part of a 35m @ 8.91g/t Au
intersection
The OBM was optimized by Intermine Engineering Consultants using industry standard mining and 
milling  costs.  Several  (potentially)  economic  shells  were  generated  using  a  gold  price  of  $1,500 
AUD/oz. Key results of the optimisation include: 
 

Shell 36 producing 1.92 Mt @ 1.89 g/t of mostly fresh ore for 108,000 oz recovered ounces of 
gold. Shell 36 extends to a maximum 220m vertical depth. It also encompasses ore that could 
only be derived from a cutback on the western side and northern extension. 
Positive cashflow resulting in a profit of AUD $37.3m with a (average) mining and processing 
cost of $1,156/oz.  
Assuming the ore is treated at the  Bronzewing plant 10km away, a metallurgical recovery of 
93% was used. The strip ratio would be 7.8 with an overall pit slope angle of 40°. 
To a certain extent shell 36 mimics much of Navigators (stage 2) final pit design (vertical depth 
of 240m).  This design was only partially mined. Much of the planned ore still remains.



MKO’s approach is to investigate whether an in pit mining operation (stage 1) of the Orelia lode could 
be  successfull.  The  Orelia  lode  is  exposed  on  the  pit  floor  and  is  5-15m  width.  Sampling  of  2013 
blastholes have returned assays from 0.25  – 7.52 g/t in areas where the OBM  was designated  as 
waste rock.  It is estimated that the pit could be mined for another 40-50m vertical depth given the 
large area available. There are many (shallow) high grade zones that could be mined in this manner 
e.g.  ARLMM2032D 13m @ 10.26 g/t (24m below pit floor) and ARLMM3624D 7m @ 7.48 g/t (35m 
below pit floor).   
 
Further RC drilling is required to upgrade the current OBM and further improve the economics. The 
key  is  in  delineating  the  high grade  ore. There  appears  to  be  a  number of  opportunities to  do  this 
based  on  historical  drilling.    Should  the  drilling  be  successful,  a  new  optimisation  study  would  be 
completed. MKO sees advantages in having a source of high grade ore (+ 3.0 g/t) close to the plant 
to potentially compliment the Corboys ore feed.
3.0 Cockburn Deep Resource 
 
In addition to developing an open pit resource that  could be mined  at  Cockburn, there are several 
high  grade  drill  intercepts  located  approximately  60-100m  below  the  pit  floor,  examples  being 
ARLMM2666D (60m @ 11.81 g/t Au) and ARLMM2688D (35m @ 8.91 g/t Au) as shown in Figure 4, 
which are too deep for the current open pit to access without a western cutback. Underground mining 
is the logical consideration.  
 
In 2002, Newmont Australia Ltd completed a detailed Pre-Feasibility Study for mining of the Cockburn 
underground mineralisation. A JORC compliant (1999) resource was estimated (Table 3). The down 
dip high grade assays were not included in their resource calculation. This conservative approach is 
warranted for mining but has potential to under estimate the bulk grade by neglecting high grade ore 
shoots.  Recent  modeling  and  interpolation  techniques,  comparisons  and  geostatistics  are  now 
routinely  used  to  assist  in  incorporating  down  dip  assay  data.  Newmont  ceased  operations  at 
Bronzewing in late 2003 and did not undertake any underground mining at Cockburn, focusing their 
efforts on underground mining at the nearby Lotus deposit.
Table 3: Newmont (2002) Underground Resources (>3g/t, extracted from unpublished PFS report)
Structure 
Calista 
 
 
Cumberland 
 
 
Orelia 
 
 
Total Tonnes 
g/t Au 
Total Oz
Data 
Tonnes 
g/t Au 
oz 
Tonnes 
g/t Au 
oz 
Tonnes 
g/t Au 
oz
Indicated 
252,559 
4.26 
34,597 
78,361 
4.68 
11,778 
661,626 
5.80 
123,343 
1,019,497 
5.28 
173,085
Inferred 
118,160 
4.89 
18,559 
901,906 
4.87 
141,146 
285,730 
4.86 
44,665 
1,305,796 
4.87 
204,369
Total 
370,719 
4.46 
53,156 
980,267 
4.85 
152,924 
947,356 
5.51 
168,008 
2,325,293 
5.05 
377,454
Key  Newmont  inputs  used  included  a  gold  price  of  AUD  $545/oz  and  90%  metallurgical  recovery. 
Capital  Expenditure,  Operating  Expenditure  and  Life  of  Mine  Expenditure  were  quoted  for  all  3 
deposits  but  amount  to  $30m,  $68m  and  $98m  respectively.  A  project  breakeven  of  5.8  g/t  was 
projected. Costs and gold prices have changed substantially since 2002. 
 
View Resources Ltd purchased the Bronzewing assets in 2004 and undertook a detailed review of 
the Cockburn underground and completed a new resource calculation but based on a 0.7 g/t bottom 
cut  rather than a 3 g/t cut  as did Newmont. View  estimated that  Cockburn (specifically the Calista 
lode) contained an Indicated 1.38Mt @ 3.3 g/t diluted resource (refer Annual report 2006). View went 
on  to  mine  118,964  tonnes  @  2.18  g/t  mostly  from  development  drives  before  operations  were 
terminated in 2008.   
 
The Calista resource should mostly be intact with just 120,000 tonnes of ore extracted. A dedicated 
and detailed review of Calista will be made in due course. However now that the pit floor has been 
deepened to 120m and the fresh Orelia ore exposed, there  appears to be an opportunity to define 
and develop this shoot from around 50m down to 200m below the current pit floor.  
 
MKO plans to RC drill the Orelia shoots, testing both the shallow ore (0-50m) and deep ore (50-200m) 
horizons. Several sections showing the proposed holes and existing intercepts is shown in figures 4 
to 6. Approximately 30 holes for 2,500m have been planned. All holes are accessible within the pit 
confines following some work on the pit ramp. A proposed work program has been submitted to the 
Department of Mines and Petroleum for approval.
The  RC  program  will  be  drilled  east  across  the  west  dipping  mineralisation.  The  holes  will  have 
variable  dips  in  order  to  hit  specific  targets.  The  drilling  will  not  only  provide  benefits  in  terms  of 
improving  the  ore  interpretation  and  expanding  the  resource,  but  a  125mm  RC  hammer  size  will 
collect a larger (more representative) sample than would a HQ (63mm) diamond hole as much of the 
historical deep drilling was completed using this technique. MKO metallurgical work has demonstrated 
that  the  ore  is  free  milling.  Some  twin  holes  comparing  the  RC  to  the  historic  diamond  holes  are 
planned.  Down  hole  surveying  will  be  standard  procedure.  This  due  diligence  is  important  for 
confirming the tenor and, most importantly, the location of key high grade shoots.  
 
Given the shallow depths from the pit floor to the high grade Orelia ore, and potentially a significant 
resource as indicated by Newmont, underground mining, whether by decline or vertical shaft, may 
offer a viable (stage 2) mining scenario.  Cockburn is a large gold system with numerous high grade 
hits (e.g. ARLMM2754D - 20m @ 20.89 g/t Au, ARLMM3609D – 8m @ 13.60 g/t Au) in both the Orelia 
and Cumberland lodes. The Cumberland zone lacks much of the deep drilling that was assigned to 
Calista/Orelia and may be a worthwhile exploration target in its own right. Orelia is open at depth as 
shown by ARLMM3626D 26m @ 11.11 g/t from the 170m RL, ARLMM3625D 1m @ 133.4 g/t from 
154m RL and ARLMM3619D 5m @ 12.50 g/t from the 92m RL.
Figure 4: Cockburn section A-A’ across ARLMM2666D (60m @ 11.81 g/t)
Figure 5: Cockburn section B-B’’ across ARLCD21 (33m @ 4.60 g/t)
Figure 6: Cockburn section C-C’ across ARLCD08 (8m @ 10.82 g/t)
Figure 7: Cockburn image showing location of sections, Orelia and Cumberland ore zone
4.0 Woorana and MKO Yandal Resource 
 
At Woorana, a small indicated resource has been calculated for the two areas drilled by MKO and are 
summarised  in  Table  4  below.  Woorana  remains  open  along  strike  but  with  diminishing  grades. 
Several new targets in the area have been identified and will be tested in due course.
Table 4. Yandal Project Global Resource Summary 23 August 2016 (JORC 2012)
Location
Indicated
Inferred
Total
Tonnes
Au g/t
Tonnes
Au g/t
Tonnes
Au g/t
Corboys1
1,676,000
Woorana North2
255,700
Woorana South2
37,000
1.80
1.68
2.63
468,000
1.91
2,144,000
255,700
37,000
2,262,500
2.41
3,331,000
1.62
5,593,500
Cockburn3
Total Insitu 
Resource
Contained
Oz Au4
125,745
13,813
3,129
349,185
1.82
1.68
2.63
1.94
4,231,200
2.12 
   3. 0.9 g/t bottom cut;   4. All resources 20g/t top cut
8,030,200
3,799,000
1.65
1.81
491,872
1. 1.0 g/t bottom cut;   2. 0.5 g/t bottom cut;
For further information, please contact: 
 
Michael Ruane, Director 
admin@metaliko.com.au 
Office Phone +61 8 9386 9527
Figure 8: Yandal Project Location Diagram
5.0 Cost estimates and Optimisation results for Cockburn Shell 36 
 
The key results from the Whittle optimisation, in particular shell 36, indicated:
  Net profit of $35m based on a AUD$1,500/oz gold price including capital costs (see below).  
  1.92Mt of ore could be mined at an average grade of 1.89 g/t Au for 108,396 oz of recovered
gold.
  A production (mining/processing) cash cost of $1,156/oz Au. 
  The average production cost would be $65.20/tonne of milled ore.  
  A strip ratio of 7.8:1. 
  Depending upon external factors such as third party toll treatment or leasing the  plant (see 
ASX announcement 30 June 2016); MKO tentatively suggests Cockburn could be treated at 
a rate of 300,000 – 500,000 tpa.
  The percentage breakdown of Indicated ore and Inferred ore is shown below.
RL
520-400
400-280
280-150
Indicated Ore
Inferred Ore
100%
100%
0%
0%
0%
100%
The capital costs are estimated to be around $2.3M with the main items being:
  Mobilisation of  Earthmoving Equipment $0.5M 
  Haul Road Upgrade (10km) $0.3M 
  Site Infrastructure (Workshops, Offices, Crib, Power) $1.0M 
  Working Capital $0.5M
Note Information Sheet 214 Funding Discussion: Based on anticipated expenditures before first production, 
additional funding will be required to bring the Cockburn Gold Project into production.  The Company’s current 
market capitalisation of approximately $30 million is  significantly  greater than the total capital required.  As a 
result, the entity believes there are reasonable grounds for concluding that funding will become available to the 
entity as and when it is required by the Project’s development or production schedules. 
 
No  village  will  be  required  at  Cockburn  as  personnel  are  housed  in  the  Bronzewing  Village 
approximately 10km east of Cockburn and will commute daily. Contractor yards, sheds, diesel storage 
tanks, offices and various facilites are also available at the Bronzewing Plant. 
 
Whittle optimisation evaluations parameters included.
  Gold price of AUD $1,500/oz 
  Metallurgical recovery of 93% 
  Royalties of 5.5% including 2.5% to the State of WA 
  Mining recovery of 95% and 5% dilution of ore 
  Haulage and treatment cost of $28-$32/t ore depending on the ore type. 
  Load/Haul and Drill/Blast costs were assigned from the surface at variable rates and in line
with industry standards
  Rehabilitation,  Grade  Control,  Dewatering,  Dayworks  and  Administration  Costs  were  all
included. 
Shell slope 40°
the  Company  activities  can  be
found  on
6.0 Forward Looking Statements and Disclosures 
 
Investor Coverage 
 
Recent  news  on 
http://www.metaliko.com.au/ 
 
About Metaliko Resources Limited 
 
Metaliko acquired the Yandal Project in 2014 which included the Bronzewing 2.3mtpa capacity CIP/CIL plant, associated 
infrastructure,  historic  open  pit  and  underground  mines,  numerous  historic  resources/prospects,  an  extensive  geological 
database  and  Yandal    exploration  tenements.  The  Yandal tenements  have  produced  >3.5  million ounces  of gold  from a 
number of deposits with processing at the Bronzewing plant in the period 1988 – 2013. 
 
Strong potential remains at the Yandal Project to extend existing resources and make new economic disoveries. Metaliko’s 
immediate focus is:
the  Metaliko  Resources  Limited  website
 
 
 
 
 

An extensive reassessment of the historical data base. 
Consolidate tenement holdings - Third Parties. 
Commence targeted exploration programs. 
Exploration will be aimed at making new significant gold discoveriest. 
Assess resources close to surface for potential early cash flow opportunities. 
Assess current plant inventory and identify items that are surplus to requirements.
In the period 2010-2013 the Bronzewing plant operated at nameplate capacity when ore was available – treating 5.3Mt of 
hard ore.  The plant is on care and maintenance and remains in excellent condition. 
 
Competent Person Statement 
 
The information in this report that relates to Exploration Targets, Exploration Results, Mineral Resources or Ore Reserves 
is based on information compiled by Mr David O’Farrell, a Competent Person who is a Member of The Australasian Institute 
of Mining and Metallurgy.  Mr O’Farrell is a consultant to Metaliko Resources Limited. Mr O’Farrell has sufficient experience 
that is relevant to the style of mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity being undertaken to 
qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition of the ‘Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, 
Mineral  Resources  and  Ore  Reserves’.  Mr  O’Farrell  consents  to  the  inclusion  in  the  report  of  the  matters  based  on  his 
information in the form and context in which it appears. 
 
Metaliko Resources Limited advises that resource parameters for the Cockburn Deposit  (2016) in this report are based on 
information compiled by Mr Simon Coxhell of CoxsRocks. Mr Coxhell is a Member of the  Australasian Institute of Mining 
and  Metallurgy  and  is a  consultant  Metaliko  Resources  Limited.  This  information  was prepared and disclosed  under  the 
JORC Code 2012. Mr Coxhell has sufficient experience that is relevant to the style of mineralisation, type of deposit under 
consideration and to the activity that he is undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 edition of 
the  ‘Australasian  Code  for  Reporting  of  Exploration,    Mineral  Resource  and  Ore  Reserves’.  Mr  Coxhell  consents  to  the 
inclusion in this report of the matters based on this information in the form and context in which they appear. 
 
Forward Looking Statements 
 
No representation or warranty is made as to the accuracy, completeness or reliability of the information contained in this 
release. Any forward looking statements in this release are prepared on the basis of a number of assumptions which may 
prove  to  be  incorrect  and  the  current  intention,  plans,  expectations  and  beliefs  about  future  events  are  subject  to  risks, 
uncertainties and other factors, many of which are outside of Metaliko Resoures Limited’s control. Important factors that 
could  cause actual  results  to differ  materially  from  the  assumptions or  expectations  expressed  or  implied  in this  release 
include known and  unknown  risks.  Because  actual  results  could  differ  materially to  the assumptions  made and  Metailko 
Resources Limited’s current intention, plans, expectations and beliefs about the future, you are urged to view all forward 
looking statements contained in this release with caution. The release should not be relied upon as a recommendation or 
forecast by Metaliko Resources Limited. Nothing in this release should be construed as either an offer to sell or a solicitation 
of an offer to buy or sell shares in any jurisdiction.
Summary Notes on Cockburn Resource Calculation 
 
1.
The  Resource  is  categorised  as  being  JORC  2012  compliant.  Resource  is  based  principally  on  data  density, 
representativeness of sampling, geological confidence criteria and grade distribution. The drilling and grade control 
is historic with several reports detailing due diligence, QA/QC, mine reconciliations. It is considered by CoxRocks to 
be of a standard suitable for JORC 2012. 
Resource calculated for a 20 g/t maximum cut for Au. 
The Resource is on granted Mining Lease (M36/146) and is located 9km from the Bronzewing Mill. An MGA 94, Zone 
51 grid system was used for the work. 
Wireframes were produced for 5m based flitch interpretation and were applied for the 3 main gold zones at Cockburn 
(455-275m RL). 
A first pass modelling run using an unconstrained ID2 interpolation pass with a 80m x 40m x 6m  (X, Y, Z) search 
ellipse orientated at 325 degrees and dipping 65 degrees to the west. 
Parent Ore Block Model (OBM) size was 5m (East) x 5m (North) x 5m (RL). 
Subset all blocks above 0.9 g/t Au. 
All assay intervals lying within the wireframes were subset and interpolated with a range of search ellipses parallel 
to the dominant trend. 
Subset  data  within  flitch  based  wireframes  and  interpolate  using  a  search  ellipse  half  of  the  Pass  unconstrained 
model. 
All blocks within the flitch interpretations are classified as Indicated, all other blocks are classified as Inferred.
10. 
11.  Merge assay values from the flitch grades to the unconstrained model. 
12. 
13. 
14.
Assign topographic DTM to the model to trim any ore blocks above natural RL 
Assign BTM of mined (Cockburn20130401.str) and final pit design (Cockburnfinaldesign13May.str) into the model. 
Assign oxidation surfaces (BOX, TOFR) into the model, an ISBD of 2.0, 2.4 and 2.7 were used respectively for oxide, 
transitional and fresh material. 
The proximity to a gold processing facility at Bronzewing provides potential for a near term open pit gold mine to be 
developed for very low capital outlay. 
FPD = 2011 Final Pit Design compiled by Navigator Resources and reached the 275mRL. Surface RL is about 520m. 
Comparison to the Navigator resource remaining between the current pit and FPD16, using Navigator’s block model 
(cocmar11_mik_client.dm) is calculated to be 2.248Mt  @ 1.83 g/t Au, which correlates closely with the CoxRocks 
estimation.
2. 
3.
4.
5.
6. 
7. 
8.
9.
15.
16. 
17.
2. 
3.
4. 
5.
6. 
7. 
8.
9.
10.
11. 
12.
13.
Summary Notes on the Woorana Resource Calculation 
 
1.
The  Resource  is  categorised  as  being  JORC  2012  compliant.  Resource  is  based  principally  on  data  density, 
representativeness of sampling, geological confidence criteria and grade distribution. The drilling and grade control 
is historic with several reports detailing due diligence, QA/QC, mine reconciliations. It is considered by CoxRocks to 
be of a standard suitable for JORC 2012. 
Resource calculated for a 20 g/t maximum cut for Au. 
The Resource is on granted Exploration Licence (E37/847, E37/848) and is located 25km from the Bronzewing Mill. 
An MGA 94, Zone 51 grid system was used for the work. 
Wireframes were produced for 10m cross sections. 
A first pass modelling run using an unconstrained ID2 interpolation pass with a 20m x 40m x 10m  (X, Y, Z) search 
ellipse orientated at 360 degrees and dipping 35 degrees to the east. 
Parent Ore Block Model (OBM) size was 5m (East) x 5m (North) x 5m (RL). 
Subset all blocks above 0.3 g/t Au. 
All assay intervals lying within the wireframes were subset and interpolated with a range of search ellipses parallel 
to the dominant trend. 
Subset data within section based wireframes and interpolate using a search ellipse half of the Pass unconstrained 
model. 
All blocks within the section interpretations are classified as Indicated given the consistency of the mineralisation and 
high drilling density (10m x 10-20m). 
Assign topographic DTM to the model to trim any ore blocks above natural RL 
Assign oxidation surfaces (BOX, TOFR) into the model, an ISBD of 1.8, 2.2 and 2.6 were used respectively for oxide, 
transitional and fresh material. 
The proximity to a gold processing facility at Bronzewing provides potential for a near term open pit gold mine to be 
developed for very low capital outlay.
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Sampling 
techniques
Drilling 
techniques
Drill sample 
recovery
  Nature and quality of sampling (e.g. cut channels, random 
chips,  or  specific  specialised 
industry  standard 
measurement  tools  appropriate  to  the  minerals  under 
investigation,  such  as  down  hole  gamma  sondes,  or 
handheld XRF instruments, etc). These examples should 
not be taken as limiting the broad meaning of sampling. 
Include  reference  to  measures  taken  to  ensure  sample 
representivity  and  the  appropriate  calibration  of  any 
measurement tools or systems used.

  Resource based on historical drilling and sampling - mostly being RC chips and diamond core. At
Woorana MKO drilling was incorporated into the resource calculation.
  Regular air & manual cleaning of cyclone or RC Drilling to remove hung up clays. 
  Standards & replicate assays taken by the laboratory.
  Aspects  of  the  determination  of  mineralisation  that  are
  RC chips and diamond core were geologically logged and sampled.

Material to the Public Report. 
In  cases  where  ‘industry  standard’  work  has  been  done 
this  would  be  relatively  simple  (e.g.  ‘reverse  circulation 
drilling was used to obtain 1 m samples from which 3 kg 
was pulverised to produce a 30 g charge for fire assay’). 
In  other  cases  more  explanation  may  be  required,  such 
as where there is coarse gold that has inherent sampling 
problems.  Unusual  commodities  or  mineralisation  types 
(e.g.  submarine  nodules)  may  warrant  disclosure  of 
detailed information.
  Drill  type  (e.g.  core,  reverse  circulation,  open-hole 
hammer, rotary air blast, auger, Bangka, sonic, etc) and 
details (e.g. core diameter, triple or standard tube, depth 
of diamond tails, face-sampling bit or other type, whether 
core is oriented and if so, by what method, etc).
  Method of recording and assessing core and chip sample
recoveries and results assessed.
  Measures taken to maximise sample recovery and ensure
  Drilling of mainly quartz/sulphide veins and shears within greenstone hosted mineralisation.
  Reverse Circulation Drilling, Diamond Core Drilling.
  Based  on  historic  reports,  but  appears  that  the  RC  recovery  and  meterage  was  assessed  by 
comparing drill chip volumes (sample bags) for individual meters. Good recoveries were recorded. 
Routine check for correct sample depths are undertaken every rod (6m).
representative nature of the samples.
  RC sample recoveries were visually checked for recovery, moisture and contamination. The cyclone
  Whether  a  relationship  exists  between  sample  recovery 
and grade and whether sample bias may have occurred 
due to preferential loss/gain of fine/coarse material.
was routinely cleaned ensuring no material build up.
  Due  to  the  good  drilling  conditions  (dry,  competent)  the  geologist  believes  the  samples  are 
homogenous and representative, some bias would occur in the advent of poor, wet, sample recovery 
(which was noted). Diamond drilling was used for deeper sampling requirements.
159 Stirling Highway, Nedlands  WA  6009 
PO Box 1104, Nedlands  WA  6909 
Tel: +61 8 9386 9527 
Fax: +61 8 9386 9473 
E: admin@metaliko.com.au 
ACN 120 974 567
Criteria
Logging
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
  Whether  core  and  chip  samples  have  been  geologically 
and  geotechnically  logged  to  a  level  of  detail  to  support 
appropriate Mineral Resource estimation, mining studies 
and metallurgical studies.
  Whether  logging  is  qualitative  or  quantitative  in  nature.
  Drill chip logging was completed on one metre intervals at the rig by the geologist. The log was made 
to standard logging descriptive sheets, and transferred into the Surpac computer once back at the 
office.
  Logging was qualitative in nature.  
  100% of all meterages were geologically logged.
Core (or costean, channel, etc) photography.
  The
total
length  and  percentage  of
the  relevant
Sub-sampling 
techniques and 
sample 
preparation


intersections logged. 
If core, whether cut or sawn and whether quarter, half or 
all core taken. 
If non-core, whether riffled, tube sampled, rotary split, etc 
and whether sampled wet or dry.
  For  all  sample
types,
the  nature,  quality  and
appropriateness of the sample preparation technique.
  Quality  control  procedures  adopted  for  all  sub-sampling
stages to maximise representivity of samples.
  Complete one metre section RC samples were collected in a plastic bag fitted to the base of the rig 
cyclone.  An internal splitter provided a 1-2kg single metre split which was collected in a calico bag.
  One metre split samples were generally dry and of consistent 1.5-2.0kg in weight.
  Measures
taken
to  ensure
that
is 
representative  of  the in  situ  material  collected,  including 
for 
field  duplicate/second-half 
sampling.
the  sampling
instance
results
for
Quality of 
assay data and 
laboratory tests
Verification of 
sampling and 
assaying
Location of 
data points
  Whether sample sizes are appropriate to the grain size of
the material being sampled.
  The nature, quality and appropriateness of the assaying 
the
laboratory  procedures  used  and  whether
and 
technique is considered partial or total.
  For  geophysical  tools,  spectrometers,  handheld  XRF 
instruments, etc, the parameters used in determining the 
analysis  including  instrument  make  and  model,  reading 
times, calibrations factors applied and their derivation, etc. 
  Nature  of  quality  control  procedures  adopted  (e.g. 
standards, blanks, duplicates, external laboratory checks) 
and whether acceptable levels of accuracy (ie lack of bias) 
and precision have been established.
  Samples were submitted to a variety of Perth laboratories over the years.
  Laboratory  QA/QC  involves  the  use  of  internal  lab  standards  using  certified  reference  material,
blanks, splits and replicates as part of the in-house procedures.
  QC results (blanks, duplicates, standards) were in line with commercial procedures, reproducibility
and accuracy. Aqua regia digestion and Fire Assay techniques were used.
  The  verification  of  significant  intersections  by  either
  Analytical work was supervised by senior lab staff experienced in metals assaying.  QC data reports
independent or alternative company personnel.
confirming the sample quality are supplied.
  The use of twinned holes. 
  Documentation  of  primary  data,  data  entry  procedures, 
data  verification,  data  storage  (physical  and  electronic) 
protocols.
  Discuss any adjustment to assay data. 
  Accuracy and quality of surveys used to locate drill holes 
(collar and down-hole surveys), trenches, mine workings 
and other locations used in Mineral Resource estimation.
  Data storage as Access/PDF/XL files on company PC in Perth office. 
  No adjustment to assay data.
  All drill collar locations were surveyed by the Mine Surveyor and are accurate. Holes were drilled on 
an approximate 10m x 20m grid. The grid system used is MGA94, Zone 51. All reported coordinates 
are referenced to this grid.
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
  Specification of the grid system used. 
  Quality and adequacy of topographic control.
  Topography outside the Cockburn pit is fairly flat in the resource area. Small differences in elevation
between drill holes will have little effect on mineralisation widths on initial interpretation.
Data spacing 
and distribution
Orientation of 
data in relation 
to geological 
structure
Sample 
security
Audits or 
reviews
  Data spacing for reporting of Exploration Results. 
  Whether the data spacing and distribution is sufficient to 
establish  the  degree  of  geological  and  grade  continuity 
appropriate  for  the  Mineral  Resource  and  Ore  Reserve 
estimation procedure(s) and classifications applied.
  Whether sample compositing has been applied.
  Whether  the  orientation  of  sampling  achieves  unbiased 
sampling  of  possible  structures  and  the  extent  to  which 
this is known, considering the deposit type. 
If the relationship between the drilling orientation and the 
orientation of key mineralised structures is considered to 
have introduced a sampling bias, this should be assessed 
and reported if material.

  The measures taken to ensure sample security.
  Cockburn  is  drilled  on  an  average  10-20m  x  20m  to  an  average  depth  of  100-300m,  spacing 
sufficient  for  the  Indicated/Inferred  resource.  Woorana  is  mostly  drilled  on  a  tight  10m  x  10-20m 
pattern.
  Yes, as discussed previously.
  Only single meter intervals and diamond core were used in the resource calculation. 
  No, drilling 60 degree angle holes is routine in the eastern goldfields, true widths are often calculated
depending upon the geometry. In this case the intercept width is close to the true width.
  Samples were collected on site under supervision of the responsible geologist. The work site is on 
pastoral station. Visitors need permission to visit site. Once collected samples were transported to 
Leinster for loading and sent to Perth laboratories. Some historical assay work was also done on 
site.
  The  results  of  any  audits  or  reviews  of  sampling
  No  new  Audits  have  been  commissioned  by  MKO.  Reports  detailing  the  QA/QC  of  the  historical
techniques and data.
work has been viewed.
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Mineral 
tenement and 
land tenure 
status
Exploration 
done by other 
parties
  Type,  reference  name/number,  location  and  ownership 
including agreements or material issues with third parties 
such as joint ventures, partnerships, overriding royalties, 
native  title  interests,  historical  sites,  wilderness  or 
national park and environmental settings.
  The  security  of  the  tenure  held  at  the  time  of  reporting 
along with any known impediments to obtaining a licence 
to operate in the area.
  Mining Lease M53/15. No third party JV partners involved. Royalties totalling 5.5% are payable.
  The tenements are in good standing and no known impediments exist.
  Acknowledgment  and  appraisal  of  exploration  by  other
  Previous  workers  in  the  area  include  Great  Central  Mines,  Normandy  Mining,  Newmont,  View
parties.
Resources and Navigator Mining.
Geology
  Deposit
type,  geological  setting  and  style  of
mineralisation.
Drill hole 
Information
Data 
aggregation 
methods
  A  summary  of  all
to
information  material
the 
understanding  of  the  exploration  results  including  a 
tabulation of the following information for all Material drill 
holes: 
o  easting and northing of the drill hole collar 
o  elevation  or  RL  (Reduced  Level  –  elevation  above
sea level in metres) of the drill hole collar
o  dip and azimuth of the hole 
o  down hole length and interception depth 
o  hole length. 
If the exclusion of this information is justified on the basis 
that  the  information  is  not  Material  and  this  exclusion 
does not detract from the understanding of the report, the 
Competent Person should clearly explain why this is the 
case. 
In  reporting  Exploration  Results,  weighting  averaging 
techniques,  maximum 
grade 
truncations  (e.g.  cutting  of  high  grades)  and  cut-off 
grades are usually Material and should be stated.
and/or  minimum


  Where aggregate intercepts incorporate short lengths of 
high  grade  results  and  longer  lengths  of  low  grade 
results, the procedure used for such aggregation should 
be  stated  and  some 
typical  examples  of  such 
aggregations should be shown in detail.
  The  assumptions  used  for  any  reporting  of  metal
equivalent values should be clearly stated.
  Archaean greenstones where a series of quartz veins and shears lie close to lithological contacts. 
The veins dip to the west at about 30-850. The mineralised intervals can be up to 20m width, with 
internal higher grade zones (+3 g/t Au). The resource is open in all directions.
  Not applicable. Cockburn Resource calculated from 2,434 drill holes and 255,520m of sampling was
used to assist in the estimation.
  No information is excluded.
  No weighting or averaging calculations were made, assays reported and compiled on the “first assay
received” basis.
  Cut off grades were routinely applied and was incorporated in the resource calculation.
  No metal equivalent calculations were applied.
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Relationship 
between 
mineralisation 
widths and 
intercept lengths
Diagrams
Balanced 
reporting
Other 
substantive 
exploration data
Further work
  These  relationships  are  particularly  important  in  the
  Drill intercepts and true width appear to be very close to each other, or within  reason allowing for


reporting of Exploration Results. 
If the geometry of the mineralisation with respect to the 
drill hole angle is known, its nature should be reported. 
If  it  is  not  known  and  only  the  down  hole  lengths  are 
reported, there should be a clear statement to this effect 
(e.g. ‘down hole length, true width not known’).
  Appropriate  maps  and  sections  (with  scales)  and 
tabulations  of  intercepts  should  be  included  for  any 
significant  discovery  being  reported  These  should 
include, but not be limited to a plan view of drill hole collar 
locations and appropriate sectional views.
  Where  comprehensive  reporting  of  all  Exploration 
Results  is  not  practicable,  representative  reporting  of 
both  low  and  high  grades  and/or  widths  should  be 
practiced  to  avoid  misleading  reporting  of  Exploration 
Results.
  Other  exploration  data,  if  meaningful  and  material, 
should  be  reported  including  (but  not  limited  to): 
geological  observations;  geophysical  survey  results; 
geochemical  survey  results;  bulk  samples  –  size  and 
method  of  treatment;  metallurgical  test  results;  bulk 
density, 
rock 
characteristics;  potential  deleterious  or  contaminating 
substances.
groundwater,
geotechnical
and
the minimum intercept width of 1m.
  Given the nature of RC drilling, the minimum width and assay is 1m. Diamond core is best used to
determine cm scale mineralisation widths.
  Not  applicable.  Cockburn  is  not  a  new  discovery,  but  has  been  detailed  by  several  previous
operators including View Resources (2004-2008) and Navigator Resources (2010-2013).
  Not  Applicable.  Drill  intercept grades mentioned in  this  announcement are included in this  JORC
resource. Further drilling is required.
  Abundant  Cockburn  mining  and  geology  reports  have  been  reviewed,  these  have  been  from 
consultants  and  staff  from  different  companies.  Newmont,  View  and  Navigator  all  undertook 
appropriate documentation via a PFS or scoping study.
  The nature and scale of planned further work (e.g. tests 
for lateral extensions or depth extensions or large-scale 
step-out drilling).
  Diagrams  clearly  highlighting  the  areas  of  possible 
extensions, including the main geological interpretations 
and future drilling areas, provided this information is not 
commercially sensitive.
  Further resource calculations and pit optimization studies are scheduled. Additional drilling will be
completed in due course.
  Not applicable, commercially sensitive.
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Database 
Integrity
  Measures  taken  to  ensure  that  data  has  not  been 
corrupted by, for example, transcription or keying errors, 
between  its  initial  collection  and  its  use  for  Mineral 
Resource estimation purposes.
  Data validation procedures used.
Site visits
  Comment  on  any  site  visits  undertaken  by 
Competent Person and the outcome of those visits.
the
Geological 
interpretation

If no site visits have been undertaken indicate why this is 
the case.
  Confidence  in  (or  conversely,  the  uncertainty  of)  the
geological interpretation of the mineral deposit.
  Historical drilling data has been captured from historical logs.
  The data is verified by company geologists and consultants. The resource is based on a reasonable 
level  of  accuracy  in  the  historical  work,  there  have  been  several  reports  and  independent  due 
diligence and QA/QC studies that have lent credibility to the previous work.
  MKO Mine Geologists have visited the Cockburn Deposit several times to map, sample and review 
diamond  core.  The  results  were  as  expected.  Relevant  reports  from  previous  workers  were 
reviewed.
  Not applicable.
  The confidence in the geological interpretation is reasonable, gold mineralisation is associated with 
quartz veins in stock works and fracture zones. The mineralisation zones are typically defined by a 
0.3 g/t Au mineralised envelope which was then flitched (5m) and wireframed. Below the 275m RL 
sectional interpretations were used.
  Nature  of  the  data  used  and  any  of  the  assumptions
  The  data  used  to  construct  the  geological  model  included  was  based  on  historic  assay  and
made.
geological data. This was imported into Micromine.
  The effect, if any, of alternative interpretations on Mineral
  CoxRocks resource estimation was similar to the Navigator Resource (2010).
Resource estimation.
  The  use  of  geology  in  guiding  and  controlling  Mineral

Resource estimation.
It was difficult to consistently rely upon geology observations as many geologists had worked on the 
project, each having their own interpretation. Sometimes quartz was observed, sometimes it wasn’t.  
The geology was useful for weathering profiles and the getting a feel of where the gold was located.
  The  factors  affecting  continuity  both  of  grade  and
  Faulting, stoping by intrusives such as porphyry, coarse gold and pinching out.
Dimensions
geology.
  The  extent  and  variability  of  the  mineral  resource 
expressed  as  length  (along  strike  or  otherwise),  plan 
width, and depth below surface to the upper and lower 
limits of the Mineral Resource.
  The Ore Body Model strikes intermittently and spans 1900m, dipping at 45-85 degrees to the west. 
The  mineralisation  is  contained  within  multiple  lodes  from  between  5-40m  thick.  The  extent  of 
mineralisation is 1,900m long, up to 350m in width (of all domains) and to a depth of 370m. 
 
The deposit remains open at depth with strike potential. Other potential gold lenses have not been 
tested adequately.
Estimation and 
modelling 
techniques
  The  nature  and  appropriateness  of  the  estimation 
technique(s)  applied  and  key  assumptions,  including 
treatment  of  extreme  grade  values,  domaining, 
interpolation  parameters  and  maximum  distance  of 
extrapolation  from  data  points.  If  a  computer  assisted 
estimation method was chosen include a description of
  Grade estimation using and Inverse Distance Squared (ID2) was completed using Micromine v16. 
Drill grid spacing ranges is typically 20 metres. ID2 is an industry standard technique, often used to 
smooth deposits with high grade nuggety gold. A first pass unconstrained interpolation with an 80m 
x 40m x 6m (Y, X, Z) search ellipse orientated 325 degrees and dipping 65 degrees west.
  Drillhole  sample  data  was  flagged  using  domain  codes  generated  from  three  dimensional 
mineralisation  domains  and  then  used  to  create  the  composite  files.  1m  assay  composites  were
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
,
computer software and parameters used.
  The  availability  of  check  estimates,  previous  estimates 
and/or mine production records and whether the Mineral 
Resource  estimate  takes  appropriate  account  of  such 
data.
used.  The  influence  of  extreme  grade  outliers  was  reduced  by  top-cutting.  The  top  cut  was 
determined  by  using  a  combination  of  grade  histograms  and  log  probability  plots.  Wireframe 
domains were based on a 0.3g/t Au mineralised envelope. Block size was 5m x 5m x 5m.
  The  Navigator  Resource  BM  was  completed  to  a professional standard.  Ore  interpretation  is not 
subjective and can vary according to geologists interpretations and experience. Given the previous 
history of Bronzewing, MKO consider a conservative approach the best, hence our interpretation 
ignores many of the single or isolated grade intercepts. In accordance with JORC 2012 guidelines, 
the ore must have a fairly reasonable correlation between sections. If this was not observed, the 
ore was ignored, and mention made that further drilling is required in that instance.
  The  assumptions  made  regarding  recovery  of  by-
  No by-products were considered.
products.
  Estimation  of  deleterious  elements  or  other  non-grade 
variables  of  economic  significance  (eg  sulphur  for  acid 
mine drainage characterisation). 
In the case of block model interpolation, the block size in 
relation  to  the  average sample  spacing  and  the search 
employed.

  No deleterious elements are present.
  Block size was 5m x 5m x 5m. A 20g/t cut was universally applied, regardless of the domain.
  Any  assumptions  behind  modelling  of  selective  mining
  No selective mining units were assumed in this estimate.
units.
  Any assumptions about correlation between variables.
  There was no correlation between variables (only gold estimated).
  Description  of  how  the  geological  interpretation  was
used to control the resource estimates.
  Geological  interpretations  were  completed  on  20m  sections,  using  historic  resource  drilling.  3D 
wireframes  were  then  constructed  around  these  interpretations,  creating  multiple  domains.  In 
addition to these mineralised domains, a base of oxidation and top of fresh rock was also used.
  Discussion of basis for using or not using grade cutting
or capping.
  The  process  of  validation,  the  checking  process  used, 
the comparison of model data to drill hole data, and use 
of reconciliation data if available.
  The  grade cut  of  20  g/t  Au  was based  on  the grade  distribution  characteristics of the  single  split 
assays.  Log-probability  graphs  revealed  an  inflection  point  around  20g/t  where  the  high  grade 
samples deviated. Consultants to Navigator used top cuts ranging from 10-30 g/t depending upon 
the ore type.
  The MKO block model was compared against the historic resource/block model from Navigator and 
its  consultants.  Where  the  block  models  overlapped,  there  was  generally  a  reasonable  level  of 
comparison and hence confidence. The MKO Block Model was also compared with the untrimmed 
block  model  (i.e.  ore  blocks  within  and  outside  the  wireframes),  with  the  results  looking  to  be  in 
agreement with the 3D observations.
Moisture
Cut-off 
parameters
  Whether  the  tonnages  are  estimated  on  a  dry  basis  or 
with natural moisture, and the method of determination 
of the moisture content.
  The resource tonnage is reported using in situ dry bulk density and is based on typical values seen 
elsewhere in the eastern goldfields. Metaliko used 2.0, 2.4 and 2.7 for oxide, transitional and fresh 
rock respectively.
  The  basis  of  the  adopted  cut-off  grade(s)  or  quality
  The  Gold  Mineral  Resources  has  been  reported  inside  the  mineralisation  wireframe  that  was
parameters applied.
constructed at a 0.3g/t Au cut-off. Upto 3m internal dilution (<0.3 g/t) was incorporated.
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Mining factors or 
assumptions
Metallurgical 
factors or 
assumptions
Environmental 
factors or 
assumptions
Bulk Density
(or,
  No definitive mining method has been proposed.  Both open cut and underground mining options
will be further studied.
It
internal
  Assumptions made regarding possible mining methods, 
if 
minimum  mining  dimensions  and 
applicable,  external)  mining  dilution. 
is  always 
necessary  as  part  of  the  process  of  determining 
reasonable  prospects  for  eventual  economic  extraction 
to  consider  potential  mining  methods,  but 
the 
assumptions  made  regarding  mining  methods  and 
parameters when estimating Mineral Resources may not 
always be rigorous. Where this is the case, this should 
be reported with an explanation of the basis of the mining 
assumptions made.
  The  basis  for  assumptions  or  predictions  regarding 
metallurgical amenability. It is always necessary as part 
of the process of determining reasonable prospects for 
eventual  economic  extraction  to  consider  potential 
metallurgical  methods,  but  the  assumptions  regarding 
metallurgical treatment processes and parameters made 
when  reporting  Mineral  Resources  may  not  always  be 
rigorous. Where this is the case, this should be reported 
with  an  explanation  of  the  basis  of  the  metallurgical 
assumptions made.
  Sighter metallurgical testwork has been conducted by MKO and previous operators with satisfactory
results. Reference was made to the possibility of treating the ore at the Bronzewing CIL plant.
  Ore would be mined from Cockburn and transported to the Bronzewing plant 9km away. An existing 
tailings  storage  facility  is  located  in  close  proximity  to  the  mill.  The  Cockburn  mining  lease  has 
adequate room to build a waste dump.
  Assumptions  made  regarding  possible  waste  and 
process residue disposal options. It is always necessary 
as  part  of  the  process  of  determining  reasonable 
prospects  for  eventual  economic  extraction  to  consider 
the  potential  environmental  impacts  of  the  mining  and 
the 
processing  operation.  While  at 
determination  of  potential  environmental 
impacts, 
particularly for a Greenfields project, may not always be 
well advanced, the status of early consideration of these 
potential  environmental  impacts  should  be  reported. 
Where  these  aspects  have  not  been  considered  this 
should  be 
the 
environmental assumptions made.
reported  with  an  explanation  of
this  stage
  Whether assumed or determined. If assumed, the basis 
for  the  assumptions.  If  determined,  the  method  used, 
whether wet or dry, the frequency of the measurements, 
the nature, size and representativeness of the samples. 
  The  bulk  density  for  bulk  material  must  have  been 
measured by methods that adequately account for void 
spaces  (vugs,  porosity,  etc),  moisture  and  differences 
between rock and alteration zones within the deposit.
  Assumed.
  Not Applicable.
  Discuss assumptions for bulk density estimates used in
  Values for the ore categories as determined are:
the evaluation process of the different materials.
-  Oxide 2.2 t/m3
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Classification
  The basis for the classification of the Mineral Resources
into varying confidence categories.
- 
-
Transitional 2.4 t/m3 
Fresh 2.7 t/m3
  Mineral  Resources  have  been  classified  on  the  basis  of  confidence  in  the  geological  and  grade 
continuity using the drilling density, geological model, pass in which the gold was estimated and the 
distance to sample selections. 
 
All blocks within the flitch interpretations are classified as Indicated, all other blocks are classified 
as Inferred.
  As described above the Mineral Resource classification has been based on the quality of the data 
collected  (geology,  survey  and  assay  data)  the  density  of  the  data,  grade  estimation  quality  and 
geological/ mineralisation model.
Audits or 
reviews
Discussion of 
relative 
accuracy/ 
confidence
  Whether  appropriate  account  has  been  taken  of  all 
relevant factors (ie relative confidence in tonnage/grade 
estimations,  reliability  of  input  data,  confidence  in 
continuity of geology and metal values, quality, quantity 
and distribution of the data).
  Whether the result appropriately reflects the Competent
  The reported resource is consistent with the view of the deposit by the Competent Person.
Person’s view of the deposit.
  The results of any audits or reviews of Mineral Resource
  An internal review has been carried out by MKO, where outliers of “inferred ore” (beneath the 150m
estimates.
RL) have been dropped from the resource.
  Where appropriate a statement of the relative accuracy 
and  confidence  level  in  the  Mineral  Resource  estimate 
using an approach or procedure deemed appropriate by 
the Competent Person. For example, the application of 
statistical  or  geostatistical  procedures  to  quantify  the 
relative  accuracy  of 
resource  within  stated 
confidence limits, or, if such an approach is not deemed 
appropriate,  a  qualitative  discussion  of  the  factors  that 
could affect the relative accuracy and confidence of the 
estimate.
the
  The statement should specify whether it relates to global 
or  local  estimates,  and,  if  local,  state  the  relevant 
tonnages,  which  should  be  relevant  to  technical  and 
economic  evaluation.  Documentation  should  include 
assumptions made and the procedures used.
  These statements of relative accuracy and confidence of 
the estimate should be compared with production data, 
where available.
  The relative accuracy of the Mineral Resource Estimate is reflected in the reporting of the Mineral 
Resource as per the guideline of the 2012 JORC code. The classification is supported by a sound 
understanding  of  the  geology  of  the  deposit,  the  drill  hole  spacing,  historic  mining  data  and  a 
reasonable  dataset  supporting  the  density  used  in  the  resource  model.  Both  competent  persons 
have over 20 years experience, with several years working in the region.
  The statement relates to the global estimate of tonnes and grade.
  As shown in Table 1 and 2.