
AVALON MINERALS LTD
ACN 123 184  412
PROSPECTUS
For the offer of:
(a)
(b)
(c)
130,775,000 Quoted Options (exercisable at $0.03 each on or before 31  August 
2019) to participants in the Placement (Placement Offer);
10,000,000 Quoted Options (exercisable at $0.03 each on or before 31  August 
2019) to the Lead Manager of the Placement (Lead Manager Offer); and
1,562,500 Quoted Options (exercisable at $0.03 each on or before 31  August 
2019) to two Directors of the Company (Director Offer),
(together, the Offers).
IMPORTANT NOTICE
This document is important and should be read in its entirety.   If after reading  this Prospectus you 
have any questions about the Quoted  Options  being  offered  under  this Prospectus or  any other 
matter, then you should consult  your stockbroker, accountant  or other professional adviser.
The Quoted Options offered under this Prospectus should be considered speculative.
TA B L E  O F C O N TE N TS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
CORPORATE DIRECTORY ................................................................................................ 1
TIMETABLE AND IMPORTANT NOTES ............................................................................... 2
DETAILS OF THE OFFER .................................................................................................... 4
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFERS ............................................................................ 8
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO  SECURITIES .................................................... 11
RISK FACTORS ............................................................................................................... 14
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ......................................................................................... 20
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION ....................................................................................... 27
DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................. 28
1.
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Directors 
Graham Ascough – Non-Executive Chairman 
Malcolm Norris – CEO/Managing Director 
Crispin Henderson – Non-Executive Director 
Don Hyma - Non-Executive Director 
 
Company Secretary 
Gavin Leicht 
 
Securities Exchange Listing 
Avalon Minerals Limited shares are listed on the 
Australian Securities Exchange 
Ordinary fully paid shares (ASX Code: AVI) 
 
Share Registry* 
Computershare Investor Services Pty Ltd 
117 Victoria Street 
West End Qld 4101 
Telephone: +61 7 3237 2100 
Facsimile: +61 7 9473 2555 
Website:  www.computershare.com.au 
Investor Enquiries:  1300 850 505 
 
Registered Office and principal place of 
business 
Australia 
9 Gardner Close 
Milton Qld 4064 
Telephone: 07 3368 9888 
Facsimile: 07 3368 9899 
Web site:  www.avalonminerals.com.au 
Email:   info@avalonminerals.com.au
Solicitors 
O’Loughlins Lawyers 
Level 2, 99 Frome Street 
Adelaide SA 5000
Auditor* 
BDO Audit Pty Ltd 
Level 10/12 Creek Street 
Brisbane Qld 4000
Sweden 
Fasadvagen 43 
981 41 Kiruna 
Sweden 
Telephone: +46 920 52 00 00
*  These  entities have  not  been  involved  in  the  preparation  of this Prospectus and  have 
not consented to being named in this Prospectus. Their names are included for information 
purposes only.
1
2.
TIMETABLE AND IMPORTANT NOTES
2.1
Timetable
Action
Lodgement of Prospectus with the ASIC and ASX
Opening Date
Closing Date*
Expected date of Official Quotation of the  Quoted 
Options
Date
24 August 2016
24 August 2016
12:00pm AEST  on 
29 August 2016
29 August 2016
*  The Directors reserve the right to  extend the Closing Date at any time without notice.  As 
such, the date the Quoted Options are expected to commence trading on ASX may vary 
with any change in  the Closing Date.
2.2
Important Notes
This Prospectus is dated 24 August 2016 and was lodged with ASIC on that  date. 
ASIC  and  its  officers  take  no  responsibility  for  the  contents  of  this Prospectus or 
the merits of the investment to which this Prospectus relates.
No Quoted  Options may  be issued  on  the basis of this Prospectus later than 13 
months after the date of this Prospectus.
Each of the Offers  is only available to those persons who are personally invited to 
participate in the Offers.  Applications for Quoted Options offered pursuant  to this 
Prospectus  can  only  be  submitted  on  an  original  Application  Form  which 
accompanies this Prospectus. The Company will provide an Application Form to 
the  designated  persons  who  may  participate  in  the  Offers.  The  Offers  are  not 
made available to the general public.
This  Prospectus  is  a  transaction  specific  prospectus  for  an  offer  of  options  to 
acquire continuously quoted securities (as defined in the Corporations Act) and 
has been prepared in accordance with section 713 of the Corporations Act. It 
does  not  contain  the  same  level  of  disclosure  as  an  initial  public  offering 
prospectus. In making representations in this Prospectus regard has been had 
to  the  fact  that  the  Company  is  a  disclosing  entity  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Corporations  Act  and  certain  matters  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  be 
known  to  investors  and  professional  advisers  whom  potential  investors  may 
consult.
2.3
Web Site – Electronic Prospectus
A copy of this Prospectus can be downloaded from the website of  the Company 
at www.avalonminerals.com.au. If you are accessing the electronic version of this 
Prospectus for the purpose of making an investment in  the Company, you must 
be  an  Australian  resident  and  must  only  access  this  Prospectus  from  within 
Australia.
The  Corporations  Act  prohibits  any  person  passing  onto  another  person  an 
Application  Form  unless  it  is  attached  to  a  hard  copy  of  this  Prospectus  or  it 
accompanies the complete and unaltered version of this Prospectus. Any person 
may  obtain  a  hard  copy  of  this  Prospectus  free  of  charge  by  contacting  the 
Company.
2
The Company reserves the right not to accept an Application Form  from a person 
if  it  has  reason  to  believe  that  when  that  person  was  given  access  to  the 
electronic  Application  Form,  it  was  not  provided  together  with  the  electronic 
Prospectus and  any  relevant  supplementary or replacement prospectus or any 
of those documents were incomplete or altered.
2.4
Risk Factors
Potential  investors  should  be  aware  that  subscribing  for Quoted  Options  in  the 
Company involves a number of risks. The key risk factors of which investors should 
be  aware  are  set  out  in  Section  6  of  this  Prospectus.  These  risks together  with 
other general risks applicable to all investments in listed securities  not specifically 
referred to, may affect the value of the Quoted Options in the future. Accordingly, 
an investment in the Company should be considered highly speculative. Investors 
should consider consulting their professional  advisers before deciding whether to 
apply for Quoted Options pursuant to  this Prospectus.
2.5
Overseas  Investors
The distribution of this Prospectus in jurisdictions outside Australia may be restricted 
by law and therefore persons into whose possession this document comes should 
seek  advice  on  and  observe  any  such  restrictions.  Any  failure to comply with 
these  restrictions  constitutes  a  violation  of  those laws.    This  Prospectus  does  not 
constitute an offer of Quoted Options in any  jurisdiction where, or  to any person 
to whom, it would be unlawful to issue this Prospectus.
2.6
Disclaimer
No person is authorised to give any information or to make any representation in 
connection with the Offers described in this Prospectus which is not contained in 
this  Prospectus.  Any  information  not  so  contained  may  not  be  relied  upon  as 
having been authorised by the Company or any other person in connection with 
the Offers.   You should rely only on information in this  Prospectus.
3
3.
DETAILS OF THE OFFER
3.1
The Placement Offer
On  6  July  2016,  the  Company  completed  a  placement  of  94,525,000  Shares  at 
$0.016 per Share to raise $1,512,400 (before costs), issued within the Company’s 
available  capacity  under  ASX  Listing  Rules  7.1  and  7.1A  (the  Tranche  1 
Placement).  
 
A  further  placement  of  36,250,000  Shares  on  the  same  terms  was  subject  to 
shareholder approval to issue additional shares, which was obtained at a General 
Meeting of the Company held on 23 August 2016 (the Tranche 2 Placement). The 
Company  also  obtained  Shareholder  approval  for the  ratification  of  previously 
issued Shares at the General Meeting of the Company held on 23 August 2016, 
which will enable the Company to issue further securities under ASX Listing Rules 
7.1 and 7.1A. 
 
Investors  who  subscribed  to  Shares  pursuant  to  the  Tranche  1  Placement  and 
Tranche  2  Placement  (together  Placement)  were  offered  one  (1)  attaching 
Quoted Option for each Share subscribed in the Placement,  with these Quoted 
Options  being  subject  to  Shareholder  approval,  which  was  obtained  at  the 
General Meeting of the Company held on 23 August 2016.
The Company  is required  to issue  this  Prospectus to allow  for secondary trading 
on the ASX  of the Quoted Options and resultant Shares that may be issued in the 
future if any of these Quoted Options are exercised.
The Company  is  now  inviting  investors  in  the  Placement  to  submit  applications 
under  the  Placement  Offer 
for  130,775,000  Quoted  Options  for  nil  cash 
consideration.
The Placement Offer is open only to persons who participated in the  Placement. 
Application  Forms  under  the  Placement  Offer  will  only  be  provided  by  the 
Company to these persons.
The terms of the  Quoted Options are set out in Section 5.1 of this  Prospectus.
3.2
The Lead Manager  Offer
The  Company  is  inviting  applications  under  the  Lead  Manager  Offer 
10,000,000 Quoted Options for nil cash  consideration.
for
The Lead  Manager  Offer is open  only  to  the  Lead  Manager  (or  its nominee)  in 
consideration for professional services provided to the  Company.  An Application 
Form under  the  Lead Manager Offer will only be  provided by  the Company to 
the Lead Manager (or its  nominee).
The terms of the Quoted Options are set out in Section 5.1 of this  Prospectus.
4
3.3
The Director Offer
The  Company  is  inviting  applications  under  the  Director  Offer  for  1,562,500 
Quoted Options for nil cash  consideration.
Shareholder approval for director participation in the Placement was obtained at 
the General Meeting of the Company held on 23 August 2016. 
 
The  Director  Offer  is  open  only  to  Mr  Malcolm  Norris  (or  his  nominee)  and  Mr 
Graham Ascough (or his nominee). Application Forms under the Director Offer will 
only  be  provided  by  the  Company  to  Messrs  Norris  and  Ascough  (or  their 
respective nominee).
The terms of the  Quoted Options are set out in Section 5.1 of this  Prospectus.
3.4
Objective 
 
(a)
(b)
Making of the Offers 
 
The  primary  purpose  of  this  Prospectus  is  to  make  the  Offers  with  the 
information and disclosure required for an offer of securities under Chapter 
6D of the Corporations Act. 
 
Removal of secondary trading restrictions
By  offering  the  Quoted  Options  under  this  Prospectus,  the  secondary 
trading  restrictions  that  would  otherwise  be  applicable  in  respect  of  the 
Quoted  Options  will  be  removed.  Specifically,  the  offer  of  the  Quoted 
Options under this Prospectus will have the following effects: 
 
(i)
the on-sale of the Quoted Options within 12 months of their issue 
will not require disclosure under Part 6D.2 of the Corporations Act; 
and 
 
the on-sale of any Shares issued on the exercise of the Quoted 
Options  within  12  months  of  their  issue  will  likewise  not  require 
disclosure under Part 6D.2 of the Corporations Act, by virtue of 
the relief provided by ASIC Corporations (Sale Offers That Do Not 
Need Disclosure) Instrument 2016/80.
(ii)
While  the  issue  of  the  Quoted  Options  and  any  Shares  issued  pursuant  to  the 
exercise of any Quoted Options is not being undertaken by the Company for the 
purpose of any Quoted Optionholders selling or transferring the Quoted Options 
or underlying Shares, the Directors consider that the persons who are issued the 
Quoted Options and underlying Shares should be entitled, if they wish, to on-sell 
their securities prior to the expiry of 12 months after their issue without the need for 
disclosure under Part 6D.2 of the Corporations Act. 
 
The Shares issued under the Placement were or will be issued without disclosure in 
reliance on exceptions from disclosure in section 708 of the Corporations Act. The 
issue of cleansing notices under section 708A(5) of the Corporations Act will allow 
the on-sale of the Shares issued under the Placement without disclosure.
5
3.5
Application for Quoted Options
Applications for Quoted Options under the Offers must only be made by investors 
designated  by  the  Company  and  must  be  made  using  the  Application  Form 
accompanying this Prospectus.
By completing an Application Form, you will be taken to have declared that  all 
details and statements made by you are complete and accurate and that you 
have  received  personally  the Application  Form together with  a  complete and 
unaltered copy of the Prospectus.
Completed  Application  Forms must be mailed or delivered  to the Company as 
follows:
Delivery by hand
Delivery by post
9 Gardner Close, Milton, QLD 4064
PO Box 1565, Milton, QLD 4064
Completed Application Forms must reach the address set out above by no later 
than the Closing Date.
3.6
Defects in Applications
If  an  Application  Form  is  not  completed  correctly,  the  Company  may,  in  its 
discretion, still treat the Application Form to be valid. The Company’s decision to 
treat an application as valid, or how to construe, amend or complete it, will  be 
final.
3.7
Minimum subscription
There is no minimum  subscription.
3.8
Oversubscriptions
No oversubscriptions will be accepted by the Company under the  Offers.
3.9
Not underwritten
The Offers are not underwritten.
3.10
Issue of Quoted Options
The  issue  of  Quoted  Options  under  the  Offers  will  take  place  as  soon  as 
practicable after the Closing Date.
The Directors will determine the recipients of all the Quoted Options. The Directors 
reserve the  right  to  reject  any  application  or  to  allocate  any  Applicant  fewer 
Quoted Options than the number applied  for.
6
3.11
ASX listing
Application for Official Quotation of the Quoted Options offered pursuant to this 
Prospectus will be made within 7 days of the date of this Prospectus. If ASX does 
not  grant  Official  Quotation  of  the  Quoted  Options  offered  pursuant  to  this 
Prospectus  before  the  expiration  of  3  months  after  the  date  of  issue  of  this 
Prospectus, (or such period as varied by ASIC), the Company will not  issue any 
Quoted Options under this Prospectus.
The fact  that  ASX  may  grant  Official  Quotation  to the  Quoted  Options is not to 
be taken in any way as an indication of the merits of the Company or the Quoted 
Options now offered for  subscription.
3.12
3.13
No exposure period 
 
No exposure period applies to the Quoted Options offered under this Prospectus 
due  to  the  relief  granted  by  ASIC  Corporations  (Exposure  Period)  Instrument 
2016/74. 
 
Restrictions on the distribution of the  Prospectus
The distribution of this Prospectus outside the Commonwealth of Australia may be 
restricted by law.
The Offers do not,  and  are  not  intended  to,  constitute an  offer in  any  place or 
jurisdiction  in  which,  or to any  person  to whom,  it  would not be lawful to make 
such an offer or to issue this Prospectus.
Residents of countries outside Australia should consult their professional  advisers 
as to whether any government or other consents are required, or whether  any 
formalities need to be observed should they wish to make an application to take 
up Quoted Options on the basis of this Prospectus. The return of a  duly completed 
Application Form will be taken to constitute a representation  and warranty that 
there has been no breach of such laws and that all approvals and consents have 
been obtained.
3.14
Enquiries
Any  questions  concerning  the  Offers  should  be  directed  to  Gavin  Leicht, 
Company Secretary, on 07 3368  9888.
7
4.
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFERS
4.1
Purpose of the  Offers
(a)
(b)
Making of the Offers 
 
The  primary  purpose  of  this  Prospectus  is  to  make  the  Offers  with  the 
information and disclosure required for an offer of securities under Chapter 
6D of the Corporations Act. 
 
Removal of secondary trading restrictions
By offering the Quoted Options under this Prospectus, the secondary trading 
restrictions  that  would  otherwise  be  applicable  in  respect  of  the  Quoted 
Options will be removed. Specifically, the offer of the Quoted Options under 
this Prospectus will have the following effects: 
 
(i)
the on-sale of the Quoted Options within 12 months of their issue 
will not require disclosure under Part 6D.2 of the Corporations Act; 
and 
 
the  on-sale  of  any  Shares  issued  on  the  exercise  of  the  Quoted 
Options  within  12  months  of  their  issue  will  likewise  not  require 
disclosure under Part 6D.2 of the Corporations Act, by virtue of the 
relief  provided  by  ASIC  Corporations  (Sale  Offers  That  Do  Not 
Need Disclosure) Instrument 2016/80.
(ii)
As the Quoted Options are issued for nil cash consideration, no funds will be raised 
by the issue of the Quoted Options.
4.2
Effect of the Offers on capital  structure
The effect of the Offers on the Company’s capital structure is set out below.
Shares1, 2
Shares currently on issue
Shares to be issued as approved at the General Meeting of the 
Company on 23 August 2016
Total Shares on issue on completion of the Offers
Number
477,626,936
42,812,500
520,439,436
Notes:
1.  The rights and liabilities attaching to the Shares are summarised in Section 5.2 of this
Prospectus.
2.  This assumes the Offers are fully subscribed and no Options are exercised.
8
Options1
Unlisted Options on issue as at the date of this Prospectus 
exercisable at between $0.06 and $0.08 each on or before 
between 3 November 2017 and 29 May 2020
Total unlisted Options
Options offered under this Prospectus
Total Quoted Options on issue on completion of the Offers
Total Options on issue on completion of the Offers
Notes:
1.
The terms of the Quoted Options are set out in Section 5.1 of this Prospectus.
Performance Rights
Unlisted Performance Rights on issue as at the date of this 
Prospectus with vesting subject to TSR hurdles and share 
price hurdles between $0.08 and $0.12 each on or before 
14 December 2018
Performance Rights to be issued to Managing Director as 
approved at the General Meeting of the Company on 23 August 
2016
Unlisted Performance Rights to be issued to other 
employees under the same terms and conditions as those 
to be issued to the Managing Director above, with vesting 
subject to TSR hurdles and share price hurdles between 
$0.045 and $0.07 each on or before 30 June  2019
Number
10,800,000
10,800,000
142,337,500
142,337,500
153,137,500
Number
6,804,000
2,089,000
6,431,000
Total unlisted Performance Rights
15,324,000
4.3
Financial effect of the Offers
The Quoted Options will be issued for nil cash consideration and accordingly  no 
funds will be raised by the issue of the Quoted Options. However, as announced 
on ASX on 6 July 2016, the Company did raise approximately $1.9 million after fees 
from  the Placement pursuant to which these Quoted Options are being  offered.
The  expenses  of  the  Offers  (of  approximately  $21,505)  will  be  met  from  the 
Company’s existing cash  reserves.
As such, the Offers will have a negative effect on the Company’s cash  reserves of 
approximately  $21,505.
9
4.4
Statement of Financial  Position
Set out below is the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position of the Company 
as  at  31  July  2016  (unaudited)  and  the  Consolidated  Pro-Forma  Statement  of 
Financial  Position  following  completion  of  the  Offers  on  the  basis  of  the 
assumptions  detailed  further  below.  The  significant  accounting  policies  upon 
which  the  Statement  of  Financial  Position  and  the  Pro-Forma  Statement  of 
Financial Position are based are contained in the audited Annual Report for  the 
12 month period ended 30 June 2016 as announced on  ASX.
Current Assets
Cash and cash  equivalents
Trade and other receivables
Total current assets
Non-Current Assets
Exploration and evaluation expenditure
Plant & equipment
Total non-current assets
Total Assets
Current Liabilities
Trade and other payables
Employee provisions
Total current liabilities
Total Liabilities
Net Assets
Equity
Issued capital
Reserves
Retained losses
Total Equity
Consolidated
Management
Consolidated
Pro-Forma
Accounts
Management
31 July 2016
(unaudited)
$
Accounts
31 July 2016 
(unaudited) 
$
1,951,901
54,225
2,006,126
38,348,656
137,687
38,485,343
40,491,469
207,802
87,547
295,349
295,349
1,930,396
54,225
1,984,621
38,348,656
137,687
38,485,343
40,469,964
207,802
87,547
295,349
295,349
40,196,120
40,174,615
66,563,291
2,510,425
66,451,786
2,510,425
(28,877,596)
(28,877,596)
40,196,120
40,174,615
Assumptions for Unaudited Pro forma Statement of Financial Position
The  pro  forma  Statement  of  Financial  Position  has  been prepared  on  the  basis  that 
there have been no material movements in the assets and liabilities of the Company 
between  the  unaudited  management accounts as at 31 July  2016 and the close  of 
the Offers other than cash of approximately $21,505 in costs associated  with the Offers.
10
5.
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO  SECURITIES
The  following  sets  out  the  terms  of  the  Quoted  Options to be issued  under this 
Prospectus and a summary of the more significant rights and liabilities attaching 
to Shares to be issued on exercise of the Quoted Options.
This summary is not exhaustive and does not constitute a definitive statement  of 
the  rights  and  liabilities  of  Shareholders.  To  obtain  such  a  statement,  persons 
should seek independent legal  advice.
5.1
Terms and conditions of the Quoted Options
The following are the terms and conditions of the Quoted Options being  offered 
pursuant to this Prospectus.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Each Option entitles the holder to one ordinary share in the Company. 
 
Each Option exercisable at $0.03 (3 cents) per option, expiry 3 years after 
issue. 
 
Options are exercisable by notice in writing to the Board delivered to the 
registered office of the Company and payment of the exercise price per 
Option in cleared funds. 
 
The Company will apply to ASX for official quotation of the Options. 
 
The Company will make application for official  quotation on  ASX  of new 
shares  allotted  on  exercise  of  the  Options.  Those  shares  will  participate 
equally in all respects with existing issued ordinary shares, and in particular 
new  shares  allotted  on  exercise  of  the  Options  will  qualify  for  dividends 
declared after the date of their allotment. 
 
An optionholder may only participate in new issues of securities to holders 
of ordinary shares in the Company if the Option has been exercised and 
shares  allotted  in  respect  of  the  Option  before  the  record  date  for 
determining entitlements to the issue. The Company must give prior notice 
to  the  optionholder  of  any  new  issue  before  the  record  date  for 
determining  entitlements  to  the  issue  in  accordance  with  the  ASX  Listing 
Rules. 
 
If there is a bonus issue to the holders of ordinary shares in the capital of the 
Company,  the  number  of  ordinary  shares  over  which  the  Option  is 
exercisable will be increased by the number of ordinary shares which the 
holder  of  the  Option  would  have  received  if  the  Option  had  been 
exercised before the record date for the bonus issue.
11
(h)
If the Company makes a rights issue (other than a bonus issue), the exercise 
price  of  Options  on  issue  will  be  reduced  according  to  the  following 
formula:
A  = 
 
O  = 
 
E  =
P   =
S   = 
 
D  =
N  =
A = O – E [P – (S + D)]
(N + 1)
the new exercise price of the Option;
the old exercise price of the Option;
the number of underlying ordinary shares into which one Option is 
exercisable;
the  average  closing  sale  price  per  ordinary  share  (weighted  by 
reference to volume) recorded on the stock market of ASX during 
the five trading days immediately preceding the ex-rights date or 
ex  entitlements  date  (excluding  special  crossings  and  overnight 
sales and exchange traded Option exercises);
the subscription price for a security under the pro rata issue;
the dividend due but not yet paid on existing underlying securities 
(except those to be issued under the pro rata issue); and
the  number  of  securities  with  rights  or  entitlements  that  must  be 
held to receive a right to one new security.
(i)
If, during the currency of the Options the issued capital of the Company is 
reorganised, those Options will be reorganised to the extent necessary to 
comply with ASX Listing Rules.
5.2
Rights attaching to Shares
Full  details  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to  Shares  are  set  out  in  the 
Constitution,  a  copy  of  which  is  available  for  inspection  at  the  Company’s 
registered office during normal business hours.
(a)
Voting Rights
Subject to the Constitution of the Company and any rights or restrictions 
at the time being attached to a class of Shares, at a general meeting of 
the Company every  Shareholder present in person, or by proxy, attorney 
or representative has one vote on a show of hands, and upon a poll, one 
vote for each Share held by the Shareholder. In the case of  an equality 
of votes, the chairperson has a casting vote.
(b)
Dividends
Subject to the Corporations Act, the  ASX Listing Rules and  any  rights  or 
restrictions  attached  to  a  class  of  Shares,  the  Company  may  pay 
dividends as the Directors resolve but only out of profits of  the Company. 
The Directors may determine the method and time  for payment of the 
dividend.
12
(c)
Winding up
Subject  to  the  Corporations  Act, the  ASX Listing  Rules  and  any  rights or 
restrictions  attached  to  a  class  of  Shares,  on  a  winding  up  of  the 
Company  any  surplus may  be  divided  among  the  shareholders of  the 
Company.
(d)
Transfer of Shares
the 
Generally,  Shares  are  freely  transferable,  subject  to  satisfying 
requirements of the ASX Listing Rules, ASX Settlement Operating Rules and 
the Corporations Act. The Directors may decline to register  any transfer of 
Shares  but  only  where permitted  to  do  so by  the Corporations  Act, the 
ASX  Listing  Rules,  the  ASX  Settlement  Operating  Rules,  or  under  the 
Company’s Constitution.
(e)
Further Increases in Capital
Subject to the Corporations Act, the ASX Listing Rules, the   ASX Settlement 
Operating  Rules  and  any  rights  attached  to  a  class  of  Shares,  the 
Company (under the control of the Directors) may allot and issue Shares 
and  grant  options over  Shares,  on  any  terms,  at  any  time  and  for  any 
consideration, as the Directors resolve. 
 
Variation of Rights
(f)
Subject to the Corporations Act, the ASX Listing Rules, the ASX Settlement 
Operating Rules and the terms of issue of Shares in a particular class, the 
Company may vary or cancel rights attached  to Shares in that class by 
either  special  resolution  passed  at  a  general meeting of  the  holders  of 
the Shares in that class, or with the  written consent of the holders of at 
least 75% of the votes in that class.
(g)
Meetings and Notices
Each  Shareholder  will  be  entitled  to  receive  notice  of,  and  to  attend 
and vote at, general meetings of the Company and to receive  notices, 
accounts and other documents required to be furnished to Shareholders 
under  the  Company’s  Constitution,  the  Corporations  Act and  the  ASX 
Listing Rules.
13
6.
RISK FACTORS
An  investment  in  the  Company  is not  risk  free and  investors should consider the 
risk  factors  described  below,  together  with  information  contained  elsewhere  in 
this Prospectus, before deciding whether to apply for Quoted Options.  Potential 
investors should consider that the investment in the Company is speculative and 
should consult their professional advisers before  deciding  whether  to apply  for 
Quoted Options.
The risks included in this Section are key risks identified by the Board as being specific to the 
Company and its operations as at the date of this Prospectus and reasonably anticipated 
by the Board.  It is important to note that the risks listed in this Section are not an exhaustive 
list of the risks relevant to the Company.
6.1
Research and  Development
6.2
In February 2016, Innovation Australia found that the Company’s R&D activities for 
the years ended 30 June 2013 and 30 June 2014 were deemed to not be core or 
supporting activities under the Industry Research and Development Act 1986 (Cth) 
(Act). The Company requested a review of this decision under Division 5 of the Act 
in March 2016, and hosted representatives of Innovation Australia to further discuss 
Avalon’s R&D activities. 
 
As  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus  the  final  results  of  this  review  are  yet  to  be 
announced by Innovation Australia. It is the view of the Company that the review 
will  recommend  that  the  activities  performed  in  those  years  are  classified  as 
supporting  activities,  and  the  claims  are  valid.  The  Company  has  received 
independent advice that supports this view. 
 
A negative result in relation to the review by AusIndustry may result  in some or all 
of the research and development tax offset ($2,765,114 net of fees), and accrued 
interest if applicable, becoming repayable. 
 
Avalon’s Claim for $1 million from Hannans Limited
The  Company  believes  it  is  due  a  refund  of  $1  million  from  Hannans  Limited 
(Hannans)  in  respect  of  the  Heads  of  Agreement  between  the  Company  and 
Hannans signed in May 2013, whereby the Company was to acquire certain permits 
and concessions from Hannans for an initial payment of $1 million (which was paid 
by the Company in October 2013), and a second payment of $3 million due after 
ongoing  environmental  assessments  and  approval  by  the  Swedish  Mines 
Inspectorate of an exploration concession. 
 
Given the concession was not granted within 2 years of the first payment date (being 
8 October 2015) or a later date agreed by the parties, it is the Company’s view that 
Hannans is required to refund the $1 million already paid by the Company.  
 
The Company has filed proceedings in the WA Supreme Court seeking to recover all 
sums due under the Heads of Agreement.  
 
Hannans  have  filed  a  defence  and  counterclaim.  Hannans  has  also  applied  for 
summary judgment. 
 
The Company will pursue its claim and vigorously defend the counterclaim. 
 
It  is  uncertain  whether  the  Company  will  recoup  the  $1  million  deposit  it  paid  to 
Hannans.
14
6.3
Viscaria Project 
 
(a)
Drilling programs 
 
Additional drilling programs at A Zone, B Zone and D Zone of the Viscaria 
Copper  Project  are  required  to  increase  the  scale  of  the  project  and 
confidence in the Mineral Resource by converting more of the Inferred 
Resources to a Measured and Indicated category.
(b)
(c)
Further  funds will  be  required  to  undertake  this  additional  drilling  at  the 
Viscaria Copper Project.
Mining 
 
Further Mineral Resources, in addition to those already defined, would be 
required to extend the projected life of the operations to 10 years which is 
presently considered the minimum requirement for an operation of this type.  
There is a risk that such Mineral Resources are never defined or not defined 
to  a  level  great  enough  to  increase  the  mine  life  to  that  required  to 
commence operations based solely on the Viscaria Project.
Mining Exploitation Concessions (MEC) 
 
The  MECs  for  Viscaria  K3,  Viscaria  K4  and  Viscaria  K7  covering  A  Zone,  B 
Zone and D Zone of the Viscaria Project have been approved and granted
The  granting  of  the  MECs  for  Viscaria  are  subject  to  several  conditions 
including: 
 
(i)
consultation  with  the  local  Sami  reindeer  herding  groups  and 
protection of reindeer during the annual migration; 
 
cooperation  with  neighbouring  mining  companies,  principally 
LKAB, on land use; 
 
payment  of  performance  bonds 
totalling  700,000  SEK 
(approximately A$107,000) prior to mining commencement; and 
 
protection  of  infrastructure  (principally  the  E10  highway  and 
railway) which are adjacent to the granted MECs.
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
However, the granting of the MEC for Viscaria K7 is currently the subject of 
an appeal by the Laevas Sami. MEC Viscaria K7 affects the northern parts 
of A Zone and B Zone. 
 
The approved, but under appeal, K7 Exploitation Concession at Viscaria has 
been returned to the Swedish Mines Inspectorate for further review as part 
of an industry wide review of appealed exploitation concessions in Sweden. 
Approved Exploitation Concessions K3 and K4 which cover the main areas 
of Viscaria copper mineralisation remain in force and are not affected by 
this development. 
 
Until the appeal process is finalised, there is a risk that the MEC for Viscaria 
K7 will be rejected or that it will be granted on conditions unacceptable to 
the Company.
15
(d)
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
In  the  event  the  Company  wishes  to  undertake  a  mining  operation  at 
Viscaria, it will need to submit a Viscaria ESIA for consideration and pay the 
appropriate application fee. The Company has appointed a consultant to 
manage  the  ESIA  process.  There  is  a  risk  that  if  insufficient  funding  is 
available, the ESIA process may be slowed or stopped which may ultimately 
delay the commencement of any mining operation at Viscaria.
The  Viscaria  Project  is  close  to  the  city  of  Kiruna  and  there  is  some 
infrastructure  that  may  be  affected  if  mining  is  carried  out.    Whilst  the 
community of Kiruna is largely dependent on mining, particularly the large 
Kirunavarra  magnetite  mine,  social  as  well  as  pure  environmental 
considerations need to be taken into account when planning exploration, 
mine dewatering and development.
In addition to being close to the city of Kiruna, the Sami people also have 
communities  nearby  and  use  areas  near  the  Viscaria  Project  for  herding 
their reindeer.  Exploration and development needs to be undertaken in a 
manner that minimises interference with the Sami’s way of life and could be 
a factor in obtaining approvals and more likely the conditions attached to 
future approvals.
6.4
Economic Risks
General  economic  conditions,  movements  in  interest  and  inflation  rates  and 
currency  exchange  rates  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  Company's 
exploration, development and future production activities, as well as on its ability 
to fund those  activities.
6.5
Market conditions
The market price of Quoted Options and Shares can fall as well as rise and  may 
be subject to varied and unpredictable influences on the market for equities and 
in particular, resources stocks. Neither the Company nor the Directors warrant the 
future  performance  of  the  Company  or  any  return  on  an  investment  in  the 
Company.
6.6
Security Investments
Applicants should be aware that there are risks associated with any  investment 
in  securities.  Securities listed  on  the  stock market,  and  in  particular  securities  of 
mining and exploration companies have experienced extreme price and volume 
fluctuations  that have  often been unrelated to the  operating performances of 
such  companies.  These  factors  may  materially  affect  the  market  price  of  the 
Company’s securities regardless of the Company's performance.
Mineral  exploration  and  mining  are  speculative  operations  that  may  be 
hampered  by  circumstances  beyond  the  control  of  the  Company.  Profitability 
depends  on  successful  exploration  and/or  acquisition  of  reserves,  design  and 
construction  of  efficient  processing 
facilities,  competent  operation  and 
management and proficient financial  management.
Exploration in itself is a speculative endeavour,  while  mining  operations can be 
hampered  by  force  majeure  circumstances  and  cost  overruns  for  unforeseen 
events.
16
6.7
Exploration and Evaluation Risks
The  success  of  the  Company  depends  on  the  delineation  of  economically 
minable  reserves  and  resources,  access  to  required  development  capital, 
movement  in  the  price  of  commodities,  securing  and  maintaining  title  to  the 
Company's  exploration  and  mining  tenements  and  obtaining  all consents and 
approvals necessary for the conduct of its exploration  activities.
Exploration  on  the  Company's existing exploration  and  mining tenements may 
be  unsuccessful,  resulting  in  a  reduction  of  the  value  of  those  tenements, 
diminution  in  the  cash  reserves of the  Company  and possible relinquishment of 
the exploration and mining tenements.
In the case of exploration targets, it should be noted that these are conceptual 
in nature, there has been insufficient exploration to define a mineral  resource and 
that it is uncertain if further exploration will result in the determination of a mineral 
resource.
6.8
Commodity Price and Exchange Rate Risks
To the extent the Company is involved in mineral production the revenue derived 
through  the  sale  of  commodities  may  expose  the  potential  income  of  the 
Company  to  commodity  price  and  exchange  rate  risks.  Commodity  prices 
fluctuate and are affected by many factors beyond the control of the Company. 
Such  factors  include  supply  and  demand  fluctuations  for precious  and  base 
metals,  technological  advancements, 
forward  selling  activities  and other 
macro-economic factors.
Furthermore,  international  prices  of  various  commodities  are  denominated  in 
United States dollars, whereas the income and expenditure of the Company are 
and will be taken into account in Australian currency, exposing the Company to 
the fluctuations and volatility of the rate of exchange between the United States 
dollar and the Australian dollar as determined in international markets.
6.9
Environmental  Risks
The operations and proposed activities of the Company are subject to relevant 
laws  and  regulation  concerning  the  environment.  As  with  most  exploration 
projects and  mining operations,  the Company's activities are expected to have 
an  impact  on  the  environment,  particularly  if  advanced  exploration  or  mine 
development proceeds. The Company attempts to conduct  its  activities  to  the 
highest  standard  of  environmental management, including compliance with all 
environmental  laws.
6.10
Title Risks
Interests  in  tenements  in  Sweden  and  Finland  are  governed  by  the  respective 
legislation and are evidenced by the granting of licences or concessions.  Each 
licence or concession is for a specific term and carries with it annual expenditure 
and reporting  commitments,  as  well  as  other  conditions  requiring  compliance. 
Consequently,  the  Company  could  lose  title  to  or  its  interest  in  tenements  if 
licence  conditions  are  not  met  or  if  insufficient  funds  are  available  to  meet 
expenditure commitments.
17
6.11
Joint Venture Parties, Agents and  Contractors
The  Directors  are  unable  to  predict  the  risk  of  financial  failure  or  default  by  a 
participant in any joint venture to which the Company is or may become a party 
or  the  insolvency  or managerial failure  by  any  of  the  contractors  used  by  the 
Company  in  any  of its activities or the insolvency  or other managerial  failure by 
any of the other service providers used by the Company for any  activity.
6.12
Future Capital  Requirements
The  Company's  activities  will  require  substantial  expenditure.  There  can  be  no 
assurances  that  the  Company  will  have  sufficient  capital  resources  for  that 
purpose, or other purposes, or that it will be able to obtain additional  resources 
on  terms  acceptable  to  the  Company  or  at  all.  Any equity  financing  may  be 
dilutive  to  Shareholders  and  any  debt  financing  if  available  may 
involve 
restrictive covenants, which limit the Company's operations and business strategy.
The  Company's  failure  to  raise  capital  if  and  when  needed  could  delay  or 
suspend  the  Company's  business  strategy  and  could  have  a  material  adverse 
effect on the Company's activities.
6.13
Potential Acquisitions
As  part  of  its  business  strategy,  the  Company  may  make  acquisitions  of,  or 
significant investments in, companies, products, technologies or resource projects. 
Any  such  future  transactions  would  be  accompanied  by  the  risks  commonly 
encountered  in  making  acquisitions  of  companies,  products,  technologies  or 
resource projects.
6.14
Legislative changes and Government policy  risk
Changes  in  government  regulations  and  policies  may  adversely  affect  the 
financial performance of the Company. The Company's capacity to explore and 
mine,  in  particular  the Company' ability  to explore and mine any  reserves, may 
be affected by changes in government policy, which are beyond the control of 
the Company. 
 
Resource Estimations
6.15
Resource  estimates  are  expressions  of 
judgment  based  on  knowledge, 
experience  and  resource  modelling.  As such,  resource  estimates  are  inherently 
imprecise and  rely to some extent on interpretations made. Despite  employing 
qualified  professionals  to  prepare  resource  estimates,  such  estimates  may 
nevertheless  prove  to  be  inaccurate.  Furthermore,  resource  estimates  may 
change over time as new information becomes available. Should the Company 
encounter mineralisation or geological formations different from those predicted 
by past drilling, sampling and interpretations, resource estimates may need  to be 
altered in a way that could adversely affect the Company’s operations.
6.16
Reliance on Key Personnel
The  Company’s  success  depends  largely  on  the  core  competencies  of  its 
directors and management, and their familiarisation with, and ability to operate, 
in  the  metals  and  mining  industry  and  the  Company’s  ability  to  retain  its key 
executives.
18
6.17
Speculative investment
The above list of risk factors ought not to be taken as exhaustive of the risks faced 
by the Company or by investors in the Company. The above factors, and others 
not specifically referred to above, may in the future materially affect the financial 
performance  of  the  Company  and  the  value  of  the  Quoted  Options  offered 
under this Prospectus.
Therefore, the Quoted Options to be issued pursuant to this Prospectus, and  the 
Shares to be issued  upon  their exercise,  carry  no guarantee with respect to the 
payment  of  dividends,  returns of  capital  or  the  market  value  of  those  Quoted 
Options.
is 
Potential  investors  should  consider  that  the  investment  in  the  Company 
speculative  and  should  consult  their  professional  advisers  before  deciding 
whether to apply for Quoted Options pursuant to this Prospectus.
19
7.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
7.1
Litigation
Other than the legal proceedings disclosed in Section 6.2 of this Prospectus, as at the date 
of this Prospectus the Company is not involved in any  other  legal proceedings, 
and  the  Directors  are  not  aware  of  any  other  legal  proceedings  pending  or 
threatened against the  Company.
7.2
Continuous disclosure obligations
The  Company  is  a  ’disclosing  entity’  (as  defined  in  section  111AC  of  the 
Corporations Act) for the purposes of section 713 of the Corporations Act and, as 
such, is subject to regular reporting and  disclosure obligations.   Specifically, like 
all  listed  companies,  the  Company  is  required  to  continuously  disclose  any 
information it has to the market which a reasonable person would expect to have 
a material effect on the price or the value of the Company’s securities.
This  Prospectus  is  a  ’transaction  specific  prospectus’.  In  general  terms  a 
’transaction specific prospectus’ is only required to contain information in relation 
to the effect of the issue of securities on the Company and the  rights attaching 
to the securities. It is not necessary to include general information  in relation to all 
of the assets and liabilities, financial position, profits and losses or prospects of the 
issuing company.
This Prospectus is intended to be read in conjunction with the publicly available 
information in relation to the Company which has been notified to ASX  and does 
not include all of the information that would be included in a prospectus for  an 
initial public offering of securities in an entity that is not already listed on a stock 
exchange. Investors should therefore have regard to the other publicly available 
information in relation to the Company before making a  decision whether or not 
to invest.
Having  taken  such  precautions  and  having  made  such  enquires  as  are 
reasonable,  the  Company believes that  it has  complied with  the  general  and 
specific  requirements of  ASX as  applicable  from time to  time throughout  the  3 
months before the issue of this Prospectus which required the Company to notify 
ASX of information about specified events or matters as they arise for the purpose 
of ASX making that information available to the stock market conducted by  ASX.
Information  that  is  already  in  the  public  domain  has  not  been  reported  in  this 
Prospectus other than that which is considered necessary to make this Prospectus 
complete.
The Company, as a disclosing entity under the Corporations Act states  that:
(a)
it is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations;
(b)
(c)
copies of documents lodged  with  ASIC in  relation  to the Company (not 
being  documents  referred  to  in  section  1274(2)(a)  of  the  Corporations 
Act) may be obtained from, or inspected at, the offices of the ASIC; and
it will provide a copy of each of the following documents, free of charge, 
to  any  person on  request  between  the  date  of  issue of  this  Prospectus 
and the Closing Date:
20
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the  annual  financial  report  most  recently  lodged  by  the 
Company with ASIC;
any half-year financial report lodged by the Company with ASIC 
after the lodgement of the annual financial report referred to in 
(i) and before the lodgement of this Prospectus with  ASIC;  and
any continuous disclosure documents given by the Company to 
ASX  in  accordance  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  as  referred  to  in 
section  674(1)  of  the  Corporations  Act after  the  lodgement  of 
the  annual  financial  report  referred  to  in  (i)  and  before  the 
lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC.
Copies of all  documents lodged with  ASIC in  relation  to  the  Company  can be 
inspected at the registered office of the Company or an ASIC office during normal 
office hours.
Details  of  documents  lodged  with  ASX  since  the  date  of  lodgement  of  the 
Company’s  latest  annual  financial  report  and  before  the  lodgement  of  this 
Prospectus with ASIC are set out in the table  below:
Date
23-Aug-16
23-Aug-16
17-Aug-16
16-Aug-16
Description of Announcement
Appendix 3B
Results of Meeting
Drilling Commenced at High Grade Kietyonmaki Lithium Project
Appendix 4G
ASX  maintains  files  containing  publicly  available  information  for  all  listed 
companies. The Company’s file is available for inspection at ASX during  normal 
office hours.
The  announcements  are  also  available  through  the  Company’s  website  at 
www.avalonminerals.com.au.
7.3
Market price of Shares
The Company is a disclosing entity for the purposes of the Corporations Act  and 
its Shares are enhanced disclosure securities quoted on  ASX.
The highest, lowest and  last market sale prices of the  Shares on ASX during  the 
three months immediately preceding the date of lodgement of this  Prospectus 
with ASIC and the most recent dates of those sales were:
Highest
Lowest
Last
Price
$0.057
$0.015
$0.044
Date
12 August 2016
8 June 2016 and 21 June 2016
23 August 2016
21
7.4
Details of substantial holders
Based  on  publicly  available  information  as  at  23  August  2016,  the  following 
details the persons which (together with their associates) have a relevant interest 
in  5% or more of the Shares on issue:
Person
Valbonne II
Tan Sri Abu Sahid Bin Mohamed1
Marilei International
Potezna Gromadka
Shares
64,739,601
43,446,047
42,410,000
37,040,000
Interest
12.44%
8.35%
8.15%
7.12%
1.
The shareholding of Tan Sri Abu Sahid Mohamed stands at 33,552,414 Shares 6.45%) and is 
combined with an associate Mr Lim Heng Suan 9,893,633 Shares.
7.5
Directors’ Interests
Other  than  as  set  out  below  or  elsewhere  in  this  Prospectus,  no  Director  or 
proposed Director holds, or has held within the 2 years preceding lodgement of 
this Prospectus with the ASIC, any interest in:
(a)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
(b)
property  acquired  or  proposed  to  be  acquired  by  the  Company  in 
connection with its formation or promotion or the Offers pursuant to  this 
Prospectus; or
(c)
the Offers,
and  no amounts have been  paid  or agreed  to be paid  and  no benefits have 
been given or agreed to be given to a Director or proposed Director:
(d)
as an inducement to become, or to qualify as, a Director;  or
(e)
for services provided in connection  with:
(i)
(ii)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
the Offers.
22
Security holdings
The relevant interest of each of the Directors in the securities of the Company  as 
at the date of this Prospectus is set out in the table below.
Director
Shares
Performance Rights
Options
Graham Ascough
6,131,3131
Malcolm Norris
Crispin Henderson
7,500,8721
2,199,969
Don Hyma
NIL
NIL
937,5003
4,083,0002
4,625,0003,4
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
Notes:
1.
2.
3.
Includes 937,500 Shares to be issued to Graham Ascough and 625,000 Shares to be issued to 
Malcolm Norris as approved at the General Meeting of the Company on 23 August 2016.
Includes 2,089,000 Performance Rights to be issued to Malcolm Norris as approved at the 
General Meeting of the Company on 23 August 2016.
Includes 937,500 Quoted Options to be issued to Graham Ascough and 625,000 Quoted Options 
to be issued to Malcolm Norris as approved at the General Meeting of the Company on 
23 August 2016.
4.
Includes 1,500,000 Unlisted Options exercisable  at $0.06 each on or before 3 November 2017, and 
2,500,000 Unlisted Options exercisable at $0.08 each on or before 3 November 2019.
Remuneration
The remuneration of an executive Director is decided by the Board, without  the 
affected executive Director participating in that decision-making process.   
 
Fees and payments to non-executive Directors are structured to reflect the demands 
which  are  made  on,  and  the  responsibilities  of,  the  Directors.    Non-executive 
Directors’ fees and payments are reviewed annually by the Board.   The Chairman’s 
fees are determined independently to the fees of non-executive Directors based on 
comparative  roles  in  the  external  market.    The  Chairman  is  not  present  at  any 
discussions relating to the determination of his own remuneration.  
 
Non-executive  Directors’  fees  are  determined  within  an  aggregate  Directors’  fee 
pool  limit,  which  is  periodically  recommended  for  approval  by  shareholders.    The 
total maximum currently stands at $300,000 per  annum.
A  Director  may  be  paid  fees  or  other  amounts  (ie  non-cash  performance 
incentives such  as Options,  subject  to  any  necessary  Shareholder  approval) as 
the  other  Directors  determine  where  a  Director  performs  special  duties  or 
otherwise performs services outside the scope of the ordinary duties of  a Director. 
In addition, Directors are also entitled to be paid reasonable travelling, hotel and 
other expenses incurred by them respectively in or about the performance of their 
duties as Director.
23
The following table shows the total (and proposed) annual remuneration paid to 
both executive and non-executive directors.
Director
2016/17
2015/16
2014/15
Graham Ascough
Malcolm Norris
Crispin Henderson
Don Hyma
$75,000
$295,650
$45,000
$45,000
$37,500
$238,619
$22,500
$22,500
$62,500
$295,650
$37,500
$37,500
Non-Executive Directors elected to voluntarily defer their fees from 1 January 2016, 
while  the  Managing  Director  took  a  voluntary  50%  reduction  in  salary  from  1 
February 2016 until 30 June 2016.
7.6
Interests of experts and  advisers
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus,  no:
(a)
(b)
(c)
person  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  performing  a  function  in  a 
professional,  advisory  or  other  capacity 
the 
preparation or distribution of this Prospectus;  
 
promoter of the Company; or
in  connection  with
underwriter (but not a sub-underwriter) to the issue or  a financial services 
licensee  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  a  financial  services  licensee 
involved in the issue,
holds, or has held within the 2 years preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with 
the ASIC, any interest  in:
(d)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
(e)
any property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company  in 
connection with:
(i) 
(ii)
its formation or promotion; or 
the Offers; or
(f)
the Offers,
and  no amounts have been  paid  or agreed  to be paid  and  no benefits have 
been  given  or agreed  to be given  to any of these persons for services provided 
in connection  with:
(g)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
(h)
the Offers.
O’Loughlins Lawyers has acted as the solicitors to the Company in relation to the 
Offers.  The  Company estimates it will pay O’Loughlins Lawyers $5,000 (excluding 
GST  and  disbursements)  for  these  services.  During  the  24  months  preceding 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC, O’Loughlins Lawyers has been  paid 
fees  totalling  $79,882  (excluding  GST  and  disbursements)  for  legal  services 
provided to the  Company.
24
7.7
Consents
Each of the parties referred to in this  Section:
(a)
(b)
does not make, or purport to make, any statement in this  Prospectus 
other than those referred to in this Section; and
to the maximum extent permitted by law, expressly disclaims and  takes 
no responsibility for any part of this Prospectus other than a reference to 
its name and a statement included in this Prospectus with the consent of 
that party as specified in this Section.
O’Loughlins Lawyers has given its written consent to being named as the solicitors 
to  the  Company  in  this  Prospectus.  O’Loughlins  Lawyers  has  not  withdrawn  its 
consent prior to the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC.
7.8
Estimated expenses of Offers
The total  expenses  of  the  Offers are estimated  to  be  approximately  $21,505  as 
follows:
Expense
ASIC  Fees
ASX Fees
Legal Fees
Miscellaneous, printing and  other 
expenses
Total
($)
2,350
12,155
5,000
2,000
21,505
The estimated expenses will be paid out of the Company’s existing cash reserves.
7.9
Electronic Prospectus
ASIC has exempted  compliance with  certain  provisions of  the Corporations Act 
to allow distribution of an electronic prospectus and electronic application form 
on the basis of a paper prospectus lodged with the ASIC, and the publication of 
notices  referring  to  an  electronic  prospectus  or  electronic  application  form, 
subject to compliance with certain  conditions.
If you have received this Prospectus as an electronic Prospectus, please  ensure 
that you have received the entire Prospectus accompanied by the  Application 
Form.  If  you  have  not,  please  phone  the  Company  on  07  3368  9888  and  the 
Company will send you, for free, either a hard copy or a further electronic  copy 
of the Prospectus, or both.
The Company reserves the right not to accept an Application Form from a person 
if  it  has  reason  to  believe  that  when  that  person  was  given  access  to  the 
electronic  Application  Form,  it  was  not  provided  together  with  the  electronic 
Prospectus  and  any  relevant  supplementary  or  Prospectus  or  any  of  those 
documents were incomplete or altered.
25
7.10
Financial forecasts
The Directors have considered the matters set out in ASIC Regulatory Guide  170 
and believe that they do not have a reasonable basis to forecast future earnings 
on  the  basis  that  the  operations  of  the  Company  are  inherently  uncertain. 
Accordingly, any forecast or projection information would contain such a broad 
range of potential outcomes and possibilities that it is not possible to prepare  a 
reliable best estimate forecast or  projection.
7.11
Clearing House Electronic Sub-Register System (CHESS) and Issuer Sponsorship
The  Company  will  not  be  issuing Quoted Option  certificates. The Company is a 
participant in CHESS, for those investors who have, or wish to have, a  sponsoring 
stockbroker. Investors who do not wish to participate through CHESS will be issuer 
sponsored by the Company. Because the sub-registers are electronic, ownership 
of  securities  can  be 
rely  upon  paper 
documentation.
transferred  without  having
to
Electronic  registers  mean  that  the  Company  will  not  be  issuing  certificates  to 
investors. Instead, investors will  be  provided with  a statement (similar to a  bank 
account statement) that sets out the number of Quoted Options issued to  them 
under  this  Prospectus.  The  notice  will  also  advise  holders  of  their  Holder 
Identification Number or Security Holder Reference Number and explain, for future 
reference,  the  sale  and  purchase  procedures  under  CHESS  and 
issuer 
sponsorship.
Further  monthly  statements will  be  provided  to  holders if there  have  been  any 
changes in their security holding in the Company during the preceding  month.
7.12
Privacy Act
If  you  complete  an  application  for  Quoted  Options,  you  will  be  providing 
personal information to the Company.  The Company collects, holds and will use 
that information to assess your application, service your needs as a Shareholder, 
facilitate  distribution  payments  and  corporate  communications  to  you as  a 
Shareholder and carry out  administration.
The  information  may  also  be  used  from time  to  time  and  disclosed  to  persons 
inspecting  the  register,  bidders  for  your  securities  in  the  context  of  takeovers, 
regulatory bodies, including the Australian Taxation Office, authorised  securities 
brokers, print service providers, mail houses and the Company’s Share  Registry.
You can access, correct and update the personal information that we hold about 
you. Please contact  the Company  if you  wish  to do so at  the relevant contact 
numbers set out in this  Prospectus.
Collection,  maintenance  and  disclosure  of  certain  personal  information 
is 
governed by legislation including the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (as amended), the 
Corporations Act and  certain rules such as  the  ASX Settlement Operating Rules. 
You  should  note  that  if  you  do  not  provide  the  information  required  on  the 
application  for Quoted  Options,  the  Company  may  not  be  able  to accept  or 
process your Application.
26
8.
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION
This Prospectus is issued by the Company and its issue has been authorised by  a 
resolution of the Directors.
In  accordance  with  section  720  of  the  Corporations  Act,  each  Director  has 
consented to the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC.
Graham Ascough 
Chairman 
For and on behalf of 
AVALON MINERALS LTD
27
9.
DEFINITIONS
$ means Australian dollars.
AEST means Australian Eastern Standard Time as observed in Queensland.
Applicant means an investor who applies for Quoted Options pursuant to any  of the 
Offers.
Application Form means an application form either attached to or accompanying 
this Prospectus.
ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
ASX means ASX Limited (ACN 008 624 691) or the financial market operated by it, as 
the context requires.
ASX Listing Rules means the listing rules of the ASX.
ASX Settlement Operating Rules  means the settlement rules of the securities clearing 
house which operates CHESS.
Board means the board of Directors unless the context indicates otherwise.
Business  Day  means  Monday  to  Friday  inclusive,  except  New  Year’s  Day,  Good 
Friday,  Easter  Monday,  Christmas  Day,  Boxing  Day  and  any  other  day  that  ASX 
declares is not a business day.
Closing  Date  means  the  date  specified  in  the  timetable  in  Section  2.1  of  this 
Prospectus (unless extended or brought forward).
Company means Avalon Minerals Ltd (ACN 123 184 412).
Constitution  means  the  constitution  of  the  Company  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001  (Cth).
Director  Offer  means  the  offer  of  Quoted  Options  described  in  Section  3.3  of  this 
Prospectus.
Directors means the directors of the Company as at the date of this Prospectus.
Lead  Manager  means Hartleys  Limited  ABN    33  104  195  057(Australian  Financial 
Services Licence Number 230052).
Lead Manager Offer means the offer of Quoted Options described in Section 3.2  of 
this Prospectus.
Offers means the Placement Offer, the Lead Manager Offer, and the Director Offer.
Official Quotation means official quotation on ASX.
Opening Date means the opening date of the Offers as specified in the  timetable 
set out in Section 2.1 of this Prospectus (unless  varied).
Option means an option to acquire a  Share.
28
Optionholder means a holder of an Option.
Placement Offer means the offer of Quoted Options described in Section 3.1 of  this 
Prospectus.
Prospectus means this  prospectus.
Quoted Option means an Option exercisable at $0.03 and expiring 31 August 2019.
Section means a section of this Prospectus.
Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.  
 
Share Registry means Computershare Investor Services Pty Ltd (ACN 078 279 277).  
 
Shareholder  means a shareholder of the Company.
29