
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
Form 10-K
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D)
OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012
Commission file number: 000-30586
Ivanhoe Energy Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Yukon, Canada
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
98-0372413
(IRS Employer
Identification No.)
654-999 Canada Place
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6C 3E1
(604) 688-8323
(Address and telephone number of the registrant’s principal executive offices)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Common Shares, No Par Value
Name of each exchange on which registered
Toronto Stock Exchange
The NASDAQ Capital Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
 Yes    No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.  
 
 
Indicate  by  check  mark  if  the  registrant  is  not  required  to  file  reports  pursuant  to  Section  13  or  Section  15(d)  of  the 
 Yes   No  
Exchange Act. 
 
Indicate  by  check mark  whether  the  registrant  (1)  has  filed  all  reports  required  to be filed  by  Section  13  or  15(d)  of  the 
Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934  during  the  preceding  12  months  (or  for  such  shorter  period  that  the  registrant  was 
  Yes   No  
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.  
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and  posted  on its corporate Web site,  if any, 
every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this 
chapter)  during the preceding  12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant  was required to submit and post 
      Yes   No 
such files). 
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§ 229.405 of this chapter) 
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information 
statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.                      


Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a 
smaller reporting company. See definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” 
in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer             
Non-accelerated filer               
Accelerated filer                    
Smaller reporting company   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). 
 
 
As of June 30, 2012, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant 
was $153,410,090 based on the Toronto Stock Exchange closing price on that date. At March 7, 2013, the registrant had 
344,472,761 common shares outstanding.
 Yes   No
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
ITEMS 1 AND 2:  Business and Properties………………………..………….………………………….………………………….….……  4
ITEM 1A:  Risk Factors…………………….…………………..….………………………………………….…..….………………..………  13
ITEM 1B:  Unresolved Staff Comments….…………………..….………………………………………….…..….………………..………  18
ITEM 3:  Legal Proceedings ……………………….…………………..….……………………………………………………….…...……  18
ITEM 4:  Mine Safety Disclosures………………….…………………..….……………………………………………………….…...……  19
PART II
ITEM 5:  Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters
and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities ………………………………………………………………………………………  19
ITEM 6:  Selected Financial Data…………………….…………………..….…………….……………………………….……….……….  22
ITEM 7:  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations…………………………….…  23
ITEM 7A:  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.……………………………………………….……….……….  33
ITEM 8:  Financial Statements and Supplementary Data…………….…………………………………………………………….……..  34
ITEM 9:  Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure…..….……..…..…….………  71
ITEM 9A:  Controls and Procedures..………………………………………………………….…………………..….……….…….………  71
ITEM 9B:  Other Information…….....………………………………………………………….…………………..….……….…….………  73
PART III
ITEM 10:  Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance…………………………………………………………..…………  73
ITEM 11:  Executive Compensation.…………………………………………………………………….…………………………….….....  79
ITEM 12:  Security and Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters….…….…  96
ITEM 13:  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence …………………………………...…….…  98
ITEM 14:  Principal Accounting Fees and Services….…………………………………………………………………………………..…  99
PART IV
ITEM 15:  Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules……………………………………….…………………….……………………  100
ABBREVIATIONS
As  generally  used  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry  and  in  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  (“Annual  Report”),  the  following 
terms have the following meanings:
bbl 
bbls/d 
boe 
boe/d 
mbbls
=   barrel 
=   barrels per day 
=   barrel of oil equivalent 
=   barrels of oil equivalent per day 
=   thousand barrels
mbbls/d 
mboe 
mboe/d 
mmbbls 
mmbbls/d  =   million barrels per day
=   thousand barrels per day 
=   thousands of barrels of oil equivalent 
=   thousands of barrels of oil equivalent per day 
=   million barrels
Oil equivalents compare quantities of oil with quantities of gas or express these different commodities in a common unit. A 
boe  is  derived  by  converting  six  thousand  cubic  feet  of  gas  to  one  barrel  of  oil  (6 mcf/1  bbl).  Boes  may  be  misleading, 
particularly  if  used  in  isolation.  The  conversion  ratio  is  based  on  an  energy  equivalent  conversion  method  primarily 
applicable at the burner tip and does not represent a value equivalency at the wellhead. 
 
CURRENCY AND EXCHANGE RATES
Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  reference  to  “dollars”  or  to  “$”  are  to  US  dollars  and  all  references  to  “Cdn$”  are  to 
Canadian dollars. The noon-day exchange rates for Cdn$1.00, as reported by the Bank of Canada, were:
(US$)
Closing 
High 
Low 
Average noon
On March 7, 2013, the noon-day exchange rate was US$0.97 for Cdn$1.00.
2
2012
1.01 
1.03 
0.96 
1.00
2011
0.98 
1.06 
0.94 
1.01
2010
1.01 
1.01 
0.93 
0.97
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
With the exception of historical information, certain matters discussed in this Annual Report, including those appearing in 
Items 1 and 2 – Business and Properties and Item 7 – Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and 
Results of Operations (“MD&A”), are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.  
 
Statements  that  contain  words  such  as  “could”,  “should”,  “can”,  “anticipate”,  “estimate”,  “propose”,  “plan”,  “expect”, 
“believe”,  “will”,  “may”  and  similar  expressions  and  statements  relating  to  matters  that  are  not  historical  facts  constitute 
“forward-looking  statements”  within  the  meaning  of  the  “safe  harbor”  provisions  of  the  United  States  Private  Securities 
Litigation Reform  Act  of  1995.  In particular,  forward-looking statements  contained in this  Annual  Report  include, but  are 
not limited to statements relating to or associated with individual wells, regions or projects. Any statements as to possible 
future crude oil prices; future production levels; future royalty and tax levels; future capital expenditures, their timing and 
their  allocation  to  exploration  and  development  activities;  future  asset  acquisitions  or  dispositions;  future  sources  of 
funding for the Company’s capital programs; future debt levels; availability of future credit facilities; possible commerciality 
of the Company’s projects; development plans or capacity expansions; future ability to execute dispositions of assets or 
businesses; future formation of joint ventures and other business relationships with third parties; future sources of liquidity, 
cash  flows  and  their  uses;  future  drilling  of  new  wells;  ultimate  recoverability  of  current  and  long  term  assets;  ultimate 
recoverability of reserves or resources; expected operating costs; estimates on a per share basis; future foreign currency 
exchange rates, future expenditures and future allowances relating to environmental matters and the Company’s ability to 
comply therewith; dates by which certain areas will be developed, come on-stream or reach expected operating capacity; 
and changes in any of the foregoing are forward-looking statements.  
 
Statements  relating  to  “reserves”  are  forward-looking  statements,  as  they  involve  the  implied  assessment,  based  on 
estimates and assumptions that the reserves described exist in the quantities predicted or estimated and can be profitably 
produced in the future. 
 
The forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report are based on certain assumptions and analyses made by 
the  Company  in  light  of  its  experience  and  its  perception  of  historical  trends,  current  conditions  and  expected  future 
developments  as  well  as  other  factors  it  believes  are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances.  By  their  nature,  forward-looking 
statements  involve  inherent  risks  and  uncertainties,  including  the  risk  that  the  outcome  that  they  predict  will  not  be 
achieved.  Undue  reliance  should  not  be  placed  on  forward-looking  statements  as  a  number  of  important  factors  could 
cause the actual  results  to  differ materially  from  the  beliefs,  plans,  objectives,  expectations  and  anticipations,  estimates 
and intentions expressed in the forward-looking statements, including those set out below and those detailed in Item 1A, 
“Risk  Factors,”  and  Item  7A,  “Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Disclosures  About  Market  Risk,”  in  this  Annual  Report.  Such 
factors include, but are not limited to:  the Company’s short history of limited revenue, losses and negative cash flow from 
its  current  exploration  and  development  activities  in  Canada,  Ecuador,  Mongolia  and  the United  States;  the  Company’s 
limited cash resources and consequent need for additional financing; the ability to raise capital as and when required, or 
to raise capital on acceptable terms; the timing and extent of changes in prices for oil and gas; competition for oil and gas 
exploration  properties  from  larger,  better  financed  oil  and  gas  companies;  environmental  risks;  title  matters;  drilling  and 
operating risks; uncertainties about the estimates of reserves and the potential success of the Company’s Heavy-to-light 
(“HTL™”) technology; the potential success of the Company’s oil and gas properties in Canada, Ecuador and Mongolia; 
the  prices  of  goods  and  services;  the  availability  of  drilling  rigs  and  other  support  services;  legislative  and  government 
regulations;  political  and  economic  factors  in  countries  in  which  the  Company  operates;  and  implementation  of  the 
Company’s capital investment program. 
 
The  forward-looking  statements  contained  in  this  Annual  Report  are  made  as  of  the  date  hereof  and  the  Company 
undertakes  no  obligation  to  update  publicly  or  revise  any  forward-looking  statements,  whether  as  a  result  of  new 
information,  future  events  or  otherwise,  unless  required  by  applicable  securities  laws.  The  forward-looking  statements 
contained herein are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement.
3
ITEMS 1  AND 2:  BUSINESS  AND PROPERTIES
GENERAL
PART I
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. (“Ivanhoe,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) is an independent international heavy oil development 
and  production  company  focused  on  pursuing  long  term  growth  in  its  reserve  base  and  production  using  advanced 
technologies, including its  HTL™ technology.  Core  operations  are  in Canada and  Ecuador,  with business development 
opportunities worldwide.   
 
The Company was incorporated pursuant to the laws of the Yukon Territory of Canada, on February 21, 1995, under the 
name  888  China  Holdings  Limited.  On  June  3,  1996,  the  Company  changed  its  name  to  Black  Sea  Energy  Ltd.  On     
June  24,  1999,  Black  Sea  Energy  Ltd.  merged  with  Sunwing  Energy  Ltd.  (“Sunwing”),  and  the  name  was  changed  to 
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
 
In  2005,  Ivanhoe  completed  a  merger  with  Ensyn  Group  Inc.  (“Ensyn”)  acquiring  the  proprietary,  patented  heavy  oil 
upgrading  process  called  HTL™.  In  July  2008,  the  Company  acquired  from  Talisman  Energy  Canada  (“Talisman”)  oil 
sand  interests,  including  certain  oil  sand  leases  in  the  Athabasca  region  of  Canada  (“Tamarack”  or  the  “Tamarack 
Project”).  Later  in  2008,  the  Company  signed  a  contract  with  the  Ecuador  state  oil  companies  to  explore  and  develop 
Ecuador’s  Pungarayacu  heavy  oil  field  in  Block 20.  In  2009,  Ivanhoe  sold  its  wholly  owned  subsidiary,  Ivanhoe  Energy 
(USA) Inc., disposing of its oil and gas exploration and production operations in the United States (“US”). Also in 2009, the 
Company acquired a production sharing contract for the Nyalga Block XVI in Mongolia, through the takeover of PanAsian 
Petroleum  Inc.,  a  privately-owned  corporation.  In  2012,  the  Company  sold  its  wholly  owned  subsidiary,  Pan-China 
Resources  Ltd,  and  assigned  100%  of  its  participating  interest  in  the  Contract  for  Exploration,  Development  and 
Production  in  the  Zitong  Block,  in  both  cases  to  third  parties,  disposing  of  its  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production 
operations in China.   
 
CORPORATE STRATEGY
Ivanhoe continues to pursue its core strategies, which are:
  Seek  out  heavy  oil  development  projects  globally  that  have  operational  needs  that  can  benefit  from  our
proprietary HTL™ technology;
  Bias new country entry and business development to projects that, because of their remote setting, geo-political 
status or operational needs, have been overlooked by the broader industry, subsequently expanding efforts in the 
new locations to more conventional oil and gas industry activities; and
  Maximize the value of existing assets through strategic investment, development and partnerships.
Importance of the Heavy Oil Segment of the Oil and Gas Industry
The global oil and gas industry is being impacted by the declining availability of low cost replacement reserves. This has 
resulted  in marked  shifts  in the demand and supply  landscape.  Ivanhoe believes  that,  despite  the recent  emergence of 
light  shale  oils,  the  long  term  supply  and  demand  for  oil  globally  will  require  the  development  of  higher  cost  and  lower 
value resources, including heavy oil. 
 
Heavy oil developments can be segregated into two types: conventional heavy oil that flows to the surface without thermal 
enhancement and non-conventional heavy  oil and  bitumen. While the Company focuses on the non-conventional heavy 
oil, both types of oil play an important role in our corporate strategy.   
 
Production of conventional heavy oil has been steadily increasing worldwide, led by Canada and Latin America but with 
significant contributions from most other oil basins, including the Middle East and the Far East. Even without the impact of 
the  large  non-conventional  heavy  oil  projects  in  Canada  and  Venezuela,  world  heavy  oil  production  has  become 
increasingly more common.  
 
With regard to non-conventional heavy oil and bitumen, key advances in technology, including improved remote sensing, 
horizontal drilling and new thermal techniques have led to sustained increases in project activity.  
 
These newer technologies have generated increased interest in heavy oil resources.  Nevertheless, remaining challenges 
for  profitable  exploitation  include:  i)  the  requirement  for  steam  and  electricity  to  help  extract  heavy  oil;  ii)  the  need  for 
diluent to move the oil once it is at the surface; iii) the heavy versus light oil price differentials that the producer is faced 
with  when  the  product  gets  to market;  and  iv)  conventional  upgrading  technologies  are  limited  to  very  large  scale,  high
4
capital  cost  facilities.  These  challenges  can  lead  to  “distressed”  assets,  where  economics  are  poor,  or  to  “stranded” 
assets, where the resource cannot be economically produced and lies fallow. 
 
Ivanhoe’s Value Proposition
With the application of the HTL™ process, Ivanhoe seeks to address the key heavy oil development challenges and do so 
at a relatively small minimum economic scale.   
 
Ivanhoe’s HTL™ technology is a partial upgrading process that is designed to operate economically in facilities as small 
as 10,000 to 30,000 bbls/d. This is substantially smaller than the minimum economic scale for conventional stand-alone 
upgraders such as delayed cokers, which typically operate at scales of over 100,000 bbls/d. The HTL™ process is based 
on  carbon  rejection,  a  tried  and  tested  concept  in  heavy  oil  processing.  The  key  advantage  of  HTL™  is  the  short 
resonance  time,  with  processing  times  typically  under  a  few  seconds.  This  results  in  smaller,  less  costly  facilities  and 
eliminates  the  need  for  hydrogen  addition,  an  expensive,  large  minimum  scale  step  typically  required  in  conventional 
upgrading. HTL™ has the added advantage of converting the by-products from the upgrading process into onsite energy, 
rather than generating large volumes of low value coke.   
 
The  HTL™  process  offers  significant  advantages  as  a  field  located  upgrading  alternative,  integrated  with  the  upstream 
heavy oil production operation.  HTL™ provides four key benefits to the producer:

virtual elimination of external energy requirements for steam generation and/or power for upstream operations;
  elimination of the need for diluent or blend oils for transport;


capture of the majority of the heavy versus light oil value differential; and
relatively  small  minimum  economic  scale  of  operations  suited  for  field  upgrading  and  for  smaller  field 
developments.
The  economics  of  a  project  can  be  enhanced  by  the  advantages  that  HTL™  can  bring  to  a  particular  opportunity.  The 
more  stranded  the  resource  and  the  fewer  monetization  alternatives  that  the  resource  owner  has,  the  greater  the 
opportunity Ivanhoe will have to establish its unique value proposition. 
 
Implementation Strategy
Ivanhoe is an oil and gas company with a unique technology which addresses several major problems confronting the oil 
and gas industry today. In addition, with Ivanhoe’s experience in thermal recovery schemes, the Company is in a position 
to add value and leverage its technology advantage by working with partners on stranded heavy oil resources around the 
world.
The Company’s continuing strategy is as follows:
  Advance its two key heavy oil projects – in Canada and Ecuador. Continue to deploy personnel and financial
resources in support of the Company’s goal to become a significant heavy oil producer.
  Advance the HTL™ process. Additional development work will continue to advance the HTL™ process through
the commercial application of HTL™ upgrading in Canada, Ecuador and beyond.
  Enhance  the  Company’s  financial  position  to  support  its  major  projects.  Implementation  of  large  projects 
requires significant capital  outlays. The Company is  working on  various financing initiatives and  establishing the 
relationships required for future development activities.
  Build  internal  capabilities.  The  Company  continues  to  seek  to  build  its  internal  leadership  and  technical 
capabilities  by  maintaining  key  personnel  associated  with  each  major  project  and  additional  critical  technical 
capabilities as needed. In 2012, Carlos Cabrera completed  his first full  year as  Executive Chairman of Ivanhoe. 
Previously,  Mr.  Cabrera  spent  35  years  with  UOP  LLC,  a  Honeywell  company,  where  he  has  held  several 
managerial and technology positions. His experience and leadership in the refining industry adds a key capability 
to the Company’s HTL™ commercialization efforts.
  Continue  to  deploy  the  personnel  and  the  financial  resources  to  capture  additional  opportunities  for 
development  projects  utilizing  the  Company’s  HTL™  process.  Commercialization  of  the  Company’s 
upgrading process requires close alignment with partners, suppliers, host governments and financiers.
5
PROPERTY DESCRIPTIONS
Our core oil and gas operations are located in two geographic areas: Canada and Ecuador. The Technology Development 
operation  captures  costs  incurred  to  develop,  enhance  and  identify  improvements  in  the  application  of  the  HTL™ 
technology. The Company also has an exploration project in Mongolia. Net income, capital expenditures and identifiable 
assets  for  these  segments  appear  in  Note  19  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements  and  in  the  MD&A  in  this  Annual 
Report.  
  
Canada
Tamarack,  acquired  from  Talisman  in  2008,  is  a  6,880  acre  lease  located  approximately  10  miles  northeast  of  Fort 
McMurray, Alberta, Canada. The Tamarack Project envisages a two-phased 40,000 bbl/d steam-assisted gravity drainage 
thermal  recovery  (“SAGD”)  and  HTL™  facility.  Our  independent  reserve  evaluator,  GLJ  Petroleum  Consultants  Ltd. 
(“GLJ”), has assigned net probable reserves of 139 mmbbls of bitumen to Tamarack. Talisman held a 20% back-in right 
which expired in July 2011. Additionally, in 2011, Ivanhoe repaid a $40 million promissory note to Talisman that was part 
of the initial purchase price.  
 
Ivanhoe filed  an  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  for  the  Tamarack  Project  in November  2010. Regulators  completed 
their initial review of the Company’s application and, as is customary, provided an initial set of Supplemental Information 
Requests (“SIRs”) in the third quarter of 2011. The Company submitted the supplemental information to the regulators in 
the fourth quarter of 2011.   
 
The Company received additional SIRs in the second and fourth quarters of 2012 and responded to the SIRs in July and 
November 2012, respectively. Subsequent to December 31, 2012, the Company received a Completeness Determination 
from  Alberta  Environment  and  Sustainable  Resource  Development  pursuant  to  Section  53  of  the  Environmental 
Protection Act following its review of the Tamarack Environmental Impact Assessment.  
 
The  Company  is  currently  in  discussions  with  local  stakeholders  to  address  any  statements  of  concern  as  part  of  the 
regulatory process. Successful completion of these discussions, followed by an Order in Council from the Government of 
Alberta, will allow the Company to move forward with the implementation phase of the Tamarack Project. The Company 
anticipates  completing  these  remaining  milestones  in  the  second  quarter  2013.  Project  advancement,  as  currently 
envisaged, is subject to receiving an Order in Council from the Alberta Government and financing.  
  
Ecuador
In October  2008, Ivanhoe  Energy  Ecuador  Inc.,  an  indirect  wholly  owned  subsidiary,  signed  a  30  year  specific  services 
contract  with  the  Ecuadorian  state  oil  companies  Petroecuador  and  Petroproduccion.  The  contract  (which  was 
subsequently assigned to another Ecuadorian state oil company, Petroamazonas) gives Ivanhoe the right to explore and 
develop the Pungarayacu heavy oil field in Block 20, an area of 426 square miles, approximately 125 miles southeast of 
Quito, Ecuador’s capital city. The specific services contract provides for the Ecuadorian Government to pay a fee for each 
barrel of oil produced from the field. This fee varies  with three well known producer price indices and, in  management’s 
opinion, tracks West Texas Instrument oil price movements. The Company anticipates using HTL™ technology, as well as 
providing  advanced  oilfield  technology,  expertise  and  capital  to  develop,  produce  and  upgrade  heavy  oil  from  the 
Pungarayacu field. The Company may  also explore for lighter oil in the contract area and  blend  any light  oil discoveries 
with the heavy oil for delivery to Petroamazonas.  
 
In 2010, Ivanhoe drilled  its  first  two appraisal  wells  in  the  Pungarayacu field.    The  second, IP-5b,  well  was  successfully 
drilled,  cored  and  logged  to  a  total  depth  of  1,080  feet.  The  well  was  perforated  in  the  Hollin  oil  sands  and  steam  was 
successfully injected into the reservoir resulting in production of heated heavy oil.  In 2011, the heavy crude oil extracted 
from  the  IP-5b  well  was  successfully  upgraded  to  local  pipeline  specifications  using  Ivanhoe’s  proprietary  HTL™ 
upgrading process.  Later in 2011, the Company completed a 190-kilometre 2-D seismic survey over the southern portion 
of Block 20. Following the analysis of the seismic program, Ivanhoe began preparing to drill one exploration well into the 
deeper Hollin and pre-cretaceous horizons in the southern part of the Pungarayacu Block to test the potential of lighter oil 
resources, which would prove beneficial for blending purposes and overall project economics. 
 
In  2012,  the  Company  drilled  well  IP-17  in  the  pre-cretaceous  zone  in  the  Southern  portion  of  the  Block  to  test  the 
formations in this area. It was successfully drilled to a depth of 13,594 feet, where it was cased and suspended.  The well 
confirmed the presence of hydrocarbons in the Hollin and Napo formations and evaluated the potential of the deeper, pre-
cretaceous structures. While hydrocarbons were found in the Hollin and Napo formations, the reservoir  in the immediate 
vicinity of the well was not suitable for commercial exploitation.
6
The Company has engaged in discussions with a third party respecting the possibility of jointly investing and participating 
in  the  development  and  operation  of  Block  20.  During  the  course  of  these  discussions,  the  parties  have  developed  a 
framework of commercial terms intended to form the basis for separate discussions with the Government of Ecuador. The 
ultimate  objective  of  discussions  with the  Government  is  the  establishment  of mutually  acceptable terms  and  conditions 
allowing for the formation of a consortium between the Company and the third party to jointly participate in Block 20. The 
formation of the consortium is contingent upon the successful negotiation of definitive and legally binding agreements that 
reflect  the  achievement  of  this  objective.  There  is  no  assurance  that  this  objective  can  be  achieved,  or  achieved  in  a 
timely manner. 
 
Asia
Mongolia
Through a merger  with  PanAsian Petroleum Inc. in November 2009,  we acquired a production sharing contract (“PSC”) 
for  the  Nyalga  Block  XVI  in  the  Khenti,  Govi  Sumber  and  Tov  provinces  in  Mongolia.  The  project  is  operated  by  a 
Mongolian registered company Shaman LLC (“Shaman”) which is an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Panasian Energy 
Ltd. The block covers an area of approximately 9,239 square kilometers, after a 25% area relinquishment in 2010 and an 
additional  20%  area  relinquishment  in  2012.  The  five  year  exploration  period  is  divided  into  three  consecutive  phases, 
consisting of  two  years  (“Phase I”),  one  year  (“Phase  II”)  and two  years  (“Phase  III”),  with  the ability  to  nominate a  two 
year extension following Phase I or Phase II.
During  the  initial  seismic  program,  approximately  16%  of  the  block  in  the  Delgerkhaan  area  was  declared  by  the 
Mongolian  government  to  be  a  historical  site  and  operations  in  this  area  were  suspended.  A  letter  from  the  Mineral 
Resources and Petroleum Authority of Mongolia (“MRPAM”) stated that the obligations under year one of Phase I would 
be extended for one year from the time the Company is allowed to re-enter the suspended area. To date, access has not 
been  granted  and  discussions  with  MRPAM  are  ongoing.  As  a  result,  the  government  adjusted  the  dates  on  which  the 
project year begins. Phase II is now considered to have commenced on July 20, 2010.
From  late  2009  through  the  first  quarter  of  2010,  the  Company  acquired  an  additional  465  kilometres  of  2-D  seismic 
across Block XVI, for a total of 925 kilometres of 2-D seismic data over the Kherulen sub-basin. The seismic was used to 
drill two wells in 2011. The first exploration well, N16-1E-1A, was drilled and abandoned as the well did not encounter oil 
shows in the reservoir. The Company observed oil staining, fluorescence and increases in background gas at its second 
exploration  well  site  at  N16-2E-B.  After  extensive  laboratory  testing  of  the  drill  cuttings  from  the  second  well  it  was 
determined that the oil was not of a mobile nature and the decision was made to forego any completion operations. Well 
site reclamation work has been completed and the local government has signed off on the acceptance of the reclamation 
works. 
 
The project is in the final year of the five year initial term of the exploration license expiring July 19, 2013. According to the 
PSC, provided that minimum expenditures have been met, the exploration license can be extended for an additional two 
years by giving written notice to the Mongolian Government 30 days prior to the expiry of the initial 5 year term. There is 
also  provision  for  an  additional  two  year  extension.  Although  2011  costs  under  audit  have  not  been  finalized,  Shaman 
expects to exceed minimum expenditure requirements by a significant margin. 
 
Subsequent to December 31, 2012, the Company completed acquisition of a 106 kilometer 2-D seismic program and will 
process that data seeking exploration prospects. 
 
RESERVES, PRODUCTION AND RELATED INFORMATION
In  addition  to  the  information  provided  below,  please  refer  to  the  “Supplementary  Disclosures  About  Oil  and  Gas 
Production Activities (Unaudited)” set forth in Item 8 in this Annual Report for certain details regarding the Company’s oil 
and gas proved reserves, the estimation process and production by country. We have not filed with nor included in reports 
to any other US federal authority or agency, any estimates of total proved oil reserves since the beginning of the last fiscal 
year.
7
The  following  table  presents  estimated  probable  and  possible  oil  reserves  as  of  December 31,  2012.  The  Company 
previously reported proved reserves associated with its Dagang project in China which was sold in 2012.    
 
Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves Using Average 2012 Prices
(mbbl)
Probable
Developed 
Undeveloped
Possible
Developed 
Undeveloped
Canada
Canada 
Bitumen
Tamarack
– 
138,857
– 
32,929
Probable and Possible Reserves
No  additional  reserves  were  assigned  to  Tamarack  in  2012  as  further  reserve  development  is  subject  to  regulatory 
approval of the Company’s application for the project, sanctioning by the Board of Directors and further delineation drilling. 
 
Possible reserves are within the Tamarack Project application area, but have a lower degree of certainty compared to our 
probable  reserves  due  to  lower  quality  reservoir  characteristics  or  decreased  certainty  based  on  the  level  of  reservoir 
delineation. 
 
Basis of Reserves Estimates
Recovery estimates for Tamarack are based on a combination of reservoir simulation, detailed reservoir characterization 
and analogue project performance.
Internal Control over Reserve Estimation
Management is responsible for the estimates of oil and gas reserves and for preparing related disclosures. Estimates and 
related disclosures in this Annual Report are prepared in accordance with SEC requirements, generally accepted industry 
practices  in  the  US  and  the  standards  of  the  Canadian  Oil  and  Gas  Evaluation  Handbook  (the  “COGE  Handbook”) 
modified to reflect SEC requirements. As a Canadian public company, we are also subject to the disclosure requirements 
of  National  Instrument  51-101  (‘‘NI  51-101’’)  of  the  CSA,  which  requires  us  to  disclose  reserves  and  other  oil  and  gas 
information in accordance with the prescribed standards of NI 51-101. The prescribed standards differ, in certain respects, 
from SEC requirements. See the Special Note to Canadian Investors on page 10.  
 
The  process  of  estimating  reserves  requires  complex  judgments  and  decision  making  based  on  available  geological, 
geophysical, engineering and economic data. To estimate the economically recoverable oil and gas reserves and related 
future net cash flows, we consider many factors and make various assumptions including:
  expected reservoir characteristics based on geological, geophysical and engineering assessments;


future production rates based on historical performance and expected future operating and investment activities;
future oil and gas prices and quality differentials;
  assumed effects of regulation by governmental agencies; and
future development and operating costs.

We  believe  these  factors  and  assumptions  are  reasonable  based  on  the  information  available  to  us  at  the  time  we 
prepared  our  estimates.  However,  these  estimates  may  change  substantially  as  additional  data  from  ongoing 
development activities and production performance becomes available and as economic conditions impacting oil and gas 
prices and costs change. 
  
Reserve estimates are categorized by the level of confidence that they will be economically recoverable.  Proved reserves 
are  those  quantities  of  oil  and  gas,  which  by  analysis  of  geoscience  and  engineering  data,  can  be  estimated  with 
reasonable  certainty  to  be  economically  producible  in  future  years  from  known  reservoirs  under  existing  economic 
conditions,  operating  methods  and  government  regulations.    The  term  “reasonable  certainty”  implies  a  high  degree  of
8
confidence that the quantities of oil and gas actually recovered will equal or exceed the estimate. To achieve reasonable 
certainty, the technologies used in the estimation process have been demonstrated to yield results with consistency and 
repeatability.   
 
Probable  reserves  are  those  additional  reserves  that  are  less  certain  to  be  recovered  than  proved  reserves  but  which, 
together with proved reserves, are as likely as not to be recovered. Therefore, probable reserves have a higher degree of 
uncertainty  than proved reserves.   Possible reserves  are those additional reserves that are less certain to be recovered 
than  probable  reserves.  Although  possible  reserve  locations  are  found  by  “stepping  out”  from  proved reserve  locations, 
estimates of probable and possible reserves are, by their nature, more speculative than estimates of proved reserves and, 
accordingly, are subject to substantially greater risk of being realized.  
 
Our reserve estimates were prepared by GLJ and reviewed by our in-house Senior Engineering Advisor (“SEA”). Our SEA 
is a professional engineer (P.Eng.) in Alberta, with over 33 years of broad petroleum engineering experience in the oil and 
gas industry in Canada. His past experience includes reserves estimations for government filings, reservoir development 
engineering  for  both  oil  and  gas  projects,  economic  evaluations  for  potential  acquisitions  and  dispositions,  production 
operations, project management, budgeting and corporate planning. 
 
All reserve information in this Annual Report is based on estimates prepared by GLJ. The technical personnel responsible 
for preparing the reserve estimates at GLJ meet the requirements regarding qualifications, independence, objectivity and 
confidentiality  set  forth  in  the  Standards  Pertaining  to  the  Estimating  and  Auditing  of  Oil  and  Gas  by  the  Society  of 
Petroleum Engineers. GLJ is an independent firm of petroleum engineers, geologists, geophysicists and petrophysicists; 
they do not own an interest in our properties and are not employed on a contingent fee basis. 
 
Our  Board  of  Directors  reviews  the  current  reserve  estimates  and  related  disclosures  as  presented  by  the  independent 
qualified  reserves  evaluators  in  their  reserve  report.  Our  Board  of  Directors  has  approved  the  reserve  estimates  and 
related disclosures.  
 
Special Note to Canadian Investors
Ivanhoe is an SEC registrant and files annual reports on Form 10-K; accordingly, our reserves estimates and  regulatory 
securities disclosures are  prepared based on  SEC disclosure requirements. In 2003,  the CSA adopted NI 51-101  which 
prescribes  standards  that  Canadian  public  companies  engaged  in  oil  and  gas  activities  are  required  to  follow  in  the 
preparation and disclosure of reserves and related information.  
 
Until  2010,  we  had  an  exemption  from  certain  requirements  of  NI  51-101  which  permitted  us  to  substitute  disclosures 
based  on  SEC  requirements  for  some  of  the  annual  disclosure  required  by  NI  51-101  and  to  prepare  our  reserve 
estimates and related disclosures in accordance with SEC requirements, generally accepted industry practices in the US 
as  promulgated  by  the  Society  of  Petroleum  Engineers  and  the  standards  of  the  COGE  Handbook,  modified  to  reflect 
SEC requirements. This exemption is no longer available to us for reserve reporting in Canada. 
 
We have, however, received another exemption from the CSA which, among other things, allows us to disclose reserves 
and related information in accordance with applicable US disclosure requirements provided that we also make disclosure 
of  our  reserves  and  other  oil  and  gas  information  in  accordance  with  applicable  NI  51-101  requirements.  We  disclose 
reserve  information  in  accordance  with  applicable  US  disclosure  requirements  in  this  Annual  Report.  We  disclose 
reserves and other oil and gas information in accordance with applicable NI 51-101 requirements in our Form 51-101F1, 
Statement  of  Reserves  Data  and  Other  Oil  and  Gas  Information,  which  is  filed  with  the  CSA  and  available  at 
www.sedar.com. 
 
The  reserve  quantities  disclosed  in  this  Annual  Report  represent  reserves  calculated  on  an  average,  first-day-of-the-
month price  during  the 12  month period  preceding  the end  of  the  year  for  2012,  using  the  standards  contained  in  SEC 
Regulations  S-X  and  S-K  and  Accounting  Standards  Codification  932  Extractive  Activities  –  Oil  and  Gas  (section  235), 
formerly Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 69, “Disclosures About Oil and Gas Producing Activities”. Such 
information differs from the corresponding information prepared in accordance with Canadian disclosure standards under 
NI  51-101.  The  primary  differences  between  the  current  SEC  requirements  and  the  NI  51-101  requirements  are  as 
follows:
  SEC  registrants  apply  SEC  reserves  definitions  and  prepare  their  reserves  estimates  in  accordance  with  SEC 
requirements and generally accepted industry practices in the US, whereas NI 51-101 requires adherence to the 
definitions and standards promulgated by the COGE Handbook;

the SEC mandates disclosure of proved reserves calculated using an average, first-day-of-the-month price during 
the  12  month  period  preceding  and  existing  costs  only,  whereas  NI  51-101  requires  disclosure  of  reserves  and 
related future net revenues using forecasted prices, with additional constant pricing disclosure being optional; and
9

the  SEC  leaves  the  engagement  of  independent  qualified  reserves  evaluators  to  the  discretion  of  a  company’s 
board of directors, whereas NI 51-101 requires issuers to engage such evaluators.
The  foregoing  is  a  general  and  non-exhaustive  description  of  the  principal  differences  between  SEC  disclosure 
requirements  and  NI  51-101  requirements.  Please  note  that  the  differences  between  SEC  and  NI  51-101  requirements 
may be material. 
 
Production, Sales Prices and Production Costs
Oil production (bbls/d) 
Average sales price ($/bbl)
Average operating cost (2) ($/bbl)
2012(1)
850 
114.28 
42.90
2011
967 
105.93 
44.10
2010
788 
75.52 
33.05
(1)  2012 production information relates to the Company’s project in Dagang which was sold in December 2012 and includes eleven months of results. 
(2)  Average operating costs per unit of production, based on net interest after royalties, represent lifting costs, including a windfall gain levy.  According to the 
“Administrative  Measures  on  Collection  of  Windfall  Gain  Levy  on  Oil  Exploitation  Business,”  enterprises  exploiting  and  selling  oil 
in  
China are subject to a windfall gain levy (the “Windfall Levy”) if the monthly weighted average price of oil exceeds a certain threshold.  Average operating 
costs exclude depletion and depreciation, income taxes, interest, selling and general administrative expenses.
Ivanhoe’s  oil  production  originated  in  Asia,  specifically  the  Dagang  and  Daqing  fields  in  China.  The  majority  of  our 
production  came  from  Dagang  and  was  sold  to  the  Chinese  national  petroleum  company.  In  December  2012,  the 
Company sold the productive oil wells that were associated with its properties in China.
Acreage
Asia – Mongolia 
Canada 
Latin America
Developed Acres 
Net
Gross
Undeveloped Acres(1) 
 Net  
 Gross
– 
– 
–
– 
– 
–
2,283,234 
7,520 
272,639
2,283,324 
7,520 
272,639
(1)  Undeveloped  acreage  is  considered  to  be  those  acres  on  which  wells  have  not  been  drilled  or  completed  to  a  point  that  would  permit  production  of
commercial quantities of oil and gas regardless of whether or not such acreage contains proved reserves.
The  Tamarack  lease  in  Canada  will  expire  in  October  2016,  but  Ivanhoe  has  sufficient  drill  density  to  be  granted  a 
continuation by the Alberta Department of Energy one year prior to expiry or upon first production, whichever comes first.  
 
We signed a specific services contract with the Ecuadorian state oil companies in October 2008 that allows us to develop 
and operate Block 20 for a term of 30 years, extendable by mutual agreement of the parties, for two additional periods of 
five years each, depending on the interests of the State and in conformity with local laws.  
 
Acreage  in  Mongolia  is  subject  to  periodic  relinquishments  up  to  the  end  of  the  exploration  period  and  the  remaining 
acreage, if any, designated for appraisal and development will expire 20 years after the final commercial discovery on the 
Nyalga block. 
 
Drilling Activity
(net wells)(1)
Asia
2012(2) 
2011(3)
Net Exploratory
Productive
Dry Holes
Total
– 
–
1.0 
1.0
1.0 
1.0
Productive
Net Development 
Dry Holes
1.0 
2.5
– 
–
Total
1.0 
2.5
Total
Wells Drilled
2.0 
3.5
(1)  Net wells are the sum of fractional working interests owned in gross wells. 
(2)  At December 31, 2012 we were not actively drilling wells.  
(3)  At  December  31,  2010,  we  were  actively  drilling  the  Zitong-1  and  Yixin-2  wells  in  our  Zitong  project  and  one  well  in  our  Dagang  field.  No  wells  were
completed in 2010.
10
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
The Company’s Technology Development segment captures HTL™ activities.  In April 2005, Ivanhoe merged with Ensyn 
and thereby obtained an exclusive, irrevocable license to the HTL™ process for all applications other than biomass. The 
Company  has  since  continued  to  expand  patent  coverage  to  protect  innovations  to  the  HTL™  technology  and  to 
significantly extend Ivanhoe’s portfolio of HTL™ intellectual property. Ivanhoe is the  assignee  of six granted US patents 
and currently  has  five  US  patent applications  pending. In  other  countries,  the  Company  has  44  patents  granted and 32 
patents are pending. In addition, Ivanhoe owns exclusive, irrevocable licenses to 17 global patents for the rapid thermal 
processing process as it pertains to petroleum. The expiration date for Ivanhoe’s key patents is 2028.   
 
Ivanhoe  Energy  is  in  the  process  of  commercializing  HTL™;  a  proprietary  and  patented  process  that  is  intended  to 
significantly  increase the economic viability  of heavy  oil by partially  upgrading it  at the well site and creating a synthetic 
crude oil (“SCO”) that is more valuable to international refineries.  
 
The  world-wide  production  of  heavy  oil  has  to  overcome  currently  embraced  conventional  methods  of  extraction, 
transportation  and  refining  which  are  too  capital  intensive  and  often  uneconomic.  HTL™  is  designed  to  be  a  low-cost, 
efficient and environmentally sound way to create greater economic value from heavy oil. It can be used at the well site to 
partially  upgrade  and  significantly  improve  the  properties  of  heavy  oil  by  reducing  viscosity,  increasing  gravity  and 
removing contaminants.   
 
When processing heavy crude oils with an 8° to 10° API gravity, HTL™ produces a synthetic crude oil of 18° to 20° API.  
The process substantially reduces the viscosity and converts the residual oil to high value synthetic crude oil, which  can 
be processed by most modern refineries. The HTL™ synthetic crude oil, when priced at the refinery gate and blended with 
a typical crude diet, has been valued by a third party engineering firm at close to Brent pricing.  
 
The technology is ready to be built. Engineering has been done, including sizing vessels and it has been modularized so 
that it can be transported and built it in remote locations. The company intends to commercialize the technology through 
two  different  models.  The  field  integrated  model,  such  as  the  Tamarack  project,  integrates  an  HTL™  facility  with 
production operations and the resulting synthetic crude oil  is sold to downstream customers. Ivanhoe is also developing 
midstream  projects  in  which  resource  owners  deliver  heavy  crude  to  a  centralized  HTL™  facility  that  would  partially 
upgrade the heavy oil for a fee.  
 
Ivanhoe has a feedstock test facility (“FTF”) located at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas.  The FTF 
has  the  functionality  of  a  full-scale  commercial  facility,  but  at  a  size  that  allows  for  multi-run  optimization  and  testing  of 
third party crude oils from around the world. It provides an accurate estimate of the commercial processing characteristics 
of  target  crudes  and  facilitate  the  generation  of  intellectual  property,  including  the  development  of  new  patents  and 
operational know-how. In 2010, the FTF supported basic and front-end engineering for a commercial-scale HTL™ plant 
for  the  Tamarack  Project  in  Canada.  In  2011,  activities  at  the  FTF  focused  on  the  assay  and  analyses  related  to  the 
successful upgrading of the heavy oil recovered from the Pungarayacu IP-5b well in Ecuador. In 2012, Ivanhoe continued 
to exploit the unit to further technology development, process improvement as well as commercial engineering of HTLTM 
plants.
CERTAIN FACTORS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS
Competition
The oil and gas industry is highly competitive. Our position in the oil and gas industry, which includes the search for and 
development of new sources of supply, is particularly competitive. Our competitors include major, intermediate and junior 
oil and gas companies and other  individual producers and operators, many of  which have substantially greater financial 
and  human  resources  and  more  developed and extensive  infrastructure. Our  larger  competitors,  by  reason  of  their  size 
and  relative  financial  strength,  can  more  easily  access  capital  markets  and  may  enjoy  a  competitive  advantage  in  the 
recruitment  of  qualified  personnel.  They  may  be  able  to  more  easily  absorb  the  burden  of  any  changes  in  laws  and 
regulations in the jurisdictions in which we do business, adversely affecting our competitive position. Our competitors may 
be  able  to  pay  more  for  producing  oil  and  gas  properties  and  may  be  able  to  define,  evaluate,  bid  for,  and  purchase  a 
greater number of properties and prospects. Further, these companies may enjoy technological advantages and may be 
able  to  implement  new  technologies  more  rapidly.  Our  ability  to  acquire  additional  properties  in  the  future  will  depend 
upon our ability to conduct efficient operations, evaluate and select suitable properties, implement advanced technologies, 
and  consummate  transactions  in  a  highly  competitive  environment.  The  oil  and  gas  industry  also  competes  with  other 
industries in supplying energy, fuel and other needs of consumers.
11
Environmental Regulations
Our oil and gas and HTL™ operations are subject to various levels of government regulation relating to the protection of 
the environment in the countries in which we operate. We believe that our operations comply in all material respects with 
applicable environmental laws.  
 
Environmental  legislation  imposes,  among  other  things,  restrictions,  liabilities  and  obligations  in  connection  with  the 
generation,  handling,  storage,  transportation,  treatment  and  disposal  of  hazardous  substances  and  waste  and  in 
connection  with  spills,  releases  and  emissions  of  various  substances  to  the  environment.  As  well,  environmental  laws 
regulate  the  qualities  and  compositions  of  the  products  sold  and  imported.  Environmental  legislation  also  requires  that 
wells,  facility  sites  and  other  properties  associated  with  our  operations  be  operated,  maintained,  abandoned  and 
reclaimed  to  the  satisfaction  of  applicable  regulatory  authorities.  In  addition,  certain  types  of  operations,  including 
exploration and development projects and significant changes to certain existing projects, may require the submission and 
approval  of  environmental  impact  assessments.  Compliance  with  environmental  legislation  can  require  significant 
expenditures and failure to comply  with environmental legislation may result in the imposition of fines and penalties and 
liability  for  clean-up  costs  and  damages.  We  anticipate  that  changes  in  environmental  legislation  may  require,  among 
other things, increased air quality standards for our operations and may result in increased capital expenditures.  
 
Operations  in  Canada  are  governed  by  comprehensive  federal,  provincial  and  municipal  regulations.  We  submitted  the 
Regulatory  Application/Environmental  Impact  Assessment  for  the  Tamarack  Project  to  the  Government  of  Alberta  in 
November 2010. The regulatory process is expected to conclude in the second quarter of 2013. In addition, the Company 
will  be  required  to  obtain  numerous  ancillary  approvals  prior  to  commencing  operations  and  will  be  subject  to  ongoing 
environmental monitoring and auditing requirements.  
 
Ecuador  and  Mongolia  continue  to  develop  and  implement  more  stringent  environmental  protection  regulations  and 
standards for industry. Projects are currently monitored by governments based on the approved standards specified in the 
environmental impact statements prepared for individual projects, located on the Company’s website.  
 
Government Regulations
Our  business  is  subject  to  certain  federal,  state,  provincial  and  local  laws  and  regulations  in  the  regions  in  which  we 
operate  relating  to  the  exploration  for,  and  development,  production  and  marketing  of,  crude  oil  and  gas,  as  well  as 
environmental  and  safety  matters.  In  addition,  the  Ecuadorian  and  Mongolian  governments  regulate  various  aspects  of 
foreign  company  operations  in  their  respective  countries.  Such  laws  and  regulations  have  generally  become,  globally, 
more  stringent  in  recent  years,  often  imposing  greater  liability  on  a  larger  number  of  potentially  responsible  parties. 
Because the requirements imposed by such laws and regulations are frequently changed, we are not able to predict the 
ultimate cost of compliance.  
 
EMPLOYEES
As at December 31, 2012, we had 89 employees. None of our employees are unionized.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
The  principal  corporate  office  of  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  is  located  at  999  Canada  Place,  Suite  654,  Vancouver,  British 
Columbia, V6C 3E1. Our registered and records office is located at 300-204 Black Street, Whitehorse, Yukon, Y1A 2M9 
and our operational headquarters are located at 101-6th Avenue SW, 21st Floor, Calgary, Alberta, T2P 3P4. 
 
Electronic copies of the Company’s filings with the  United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and 
the  Canadian  Securities  Administrators 
through  our  website 
(www.ivanhoeenergy.com)  or,  upon  request,  by  contacting  our  investor  relations  department  at  (403)  817-1108.  The 
information on our website is not, and shall not be, deemed to be part of this Annual Report. 
 
Each  of  the  SEC  (www.sec.gov)  and  the  CSA  (www.sedar.com)  maintains  a  website  from  which  you  can  access  our 
reports, proxy and information statements and other published information that have been filed or furnished with the SEC 
and  the  CSA.  A  copy  of  this  Annual  Report  is  located  at  the  SEC’s  Public  Reference  Room  at  100  F  Street,  NE, 
Washington, D.C. 20549. Information on the operation of the Public Reference Room can be obtained by calling the SEC 
at 1-800-SEC-0330.
“CSA”)  are  available,
(the
free  of  charge,
12
ITEM 1A:  RISK FACTORS
We are exposed to various risks, some of which are common to other companies in the oil and gas industry and some of 
which are unique to our business. Certain risks set out below constitute “forward-looking statements” and readers should 
refer to the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” on page 4. 
 
If we are unable to adequately fund our substantial capital and operating requirements our ability to continue as 
a going concern could be adversely affected
Our business is capital intensive and the advancement of our projects in Canada, Ecuador and Mongolia and our HTL™ 
technology commercialization initiatives require significant funding. We have a history of operating losses and our current 
exploration  and  development  activities  do  not  generate  cash  flow  sufficient  to  meet  our  funding  obligations  and  capital 
expenditure plans. Historically, we have relied upon equity capital as our principal source of funding. The sustainability of  
our  business  is  dependent  upon  our  having  reliable  access  to  additional  capital  in  order  to  meet  obligations  associated 
with our existing projects and capitalize upon potentially valuable opportunities to acquire and develop future projects. We 
may seek financing from a combination of strategic investors and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at 
the  parent  company  level  or  at  a  project  level.  There  is  no  assurance  that  we  will  be  able  to  obtain  such  financing  or 
obtain it on favorable terms and any future equity issuances may be dilutive to our existing shareholders.  
 
Our  access  to  financing  may  be  limited  by  an  inability  to  attract  strategic  partners  willing  to  invest  in  our  projects  on 
acceptable  terms,  ongoing  volatility  in  equity  and  debt  markets  and  a  sustained  downturn  in  the  market  price  of  our 
common  shares.    Without  access  to  sufficient  amounts  of  financing  or  the  ability  to  undertake  other  cash  generating 
activities, we may have to delay or forego potentially valuable project acquisition and development opportunities or default 
on  existing  funding  commitments  to  third  parties.  This  could  result  in  the  dilution  or  forfeiture  of  our  rights  in  existing 
projects, which would cast substantial doubt that the Company would be able to continue as a going concern.   
 
Talisman’s security interest in our Tamarack project assets could impede our ability to secure third party debt
When we acquired our Tamarack project in 2008, we incurred a series of debt obligations in favor of Talisman secured by 
a  first  fixed  charge  and  security  interest  in  the  Tamarack  oil  sands  leases  and  a  general  security  interest  in  all  of  our 
present and after acquired property, other than our equity interests in our subsidiaries (through which we hold our HTL™ 
technology  and our  projects  in  Ecuador  and  Mongolia).  Although  we  have  satisfied  substantially  all  of  the  material  debt 
obligations we owed to Talisman, we remain subject to a contingent payment obligation of up to Cdn$15.0 million, which 
is  also  secured  by  Talisman’s  security  interest.  This  contingent  obligation  becomes  due  and  payable  if  and  when  we 
obtain the requisite government and other approvals necessary to develop the northern border of one of the leases. We 
are  obliged  to  use  commercially  reasonable  efforts  to  obtain  these  approvals.  However,  despite  our  efforts,  the  risks 
inherent  in  oil  field  development,  including  potential  environmental  considerations,  create  significant  uncertainty  as  to 
when, if ever, we will be able to obtain these approvals and, consequently, we cannot predict when, if ever, this contingent 
obligation will become due and payable or when Talisman’s security interest will be released and discharged. 
 
The  Talisman  security  interest  restricts  our  ability  to  grant  security  over  our  Tamarack  project  assets  to  secure  debt 
obligations to third parties that we may create in the future. Assets unencumbered by the Talisman security interest may 
be insufficient as collateral to secure these obligations. This could adversely affect our ability to obtain debt financing or to 
obtain  it  on  favorable  terms.  Since  Talisman’s  security  interest  secures  a  contingent  obligation  of  potentially  indefinite 
duration, we cannot predict when, and on what terms, we will be able to mitigate this risk. 
 
The volatility of oil prices may affect the commercial viability of our projects
The commercial viability of our exploration and development projects is highly dependent on the price of oil. Prices also 
affect our ability to borrow money or raise additional capital. Even relatively modest changes in oil prices may significantly 
change  an  oil  and  gas  company’s  revenues,  results  of  operations,  cash  flows  and  proved  reserves.  Historically,  the 
market for oil has been volatile and is likely to continue to be volatile in the future. 
 
Oil prices may fluctuate widely in response to relatively minor changes in supply and demand, market uncertainty and a 
variety of additional factors that are beyond our control, such as weather conditions; overall global economic conditions; 
terrorist attacks or military conflicts; political and economic conditions in oil producing countries; the ability of members of 
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to agree to and maintain oil price and production controls; the level of 
demand  and  the  price  and  availability  of  alternative  fuels;  speculation  in  the  commodity  futures  markets;  technological 
advances  affecting  energy  consumption;  governmental  regulations  and  approvals;  and  proximity  and  capacity  of  oil 
pipelines  and  other  transportation  facilities.  These  factors  and  the  volatility  of  the  energy  markets  make  it  extremely 
difficult to predict future oil price movements with any certainty.
13
We may  be required  to  take write-downs if  oil prices decline,  our  estimated  development  costs  increase or  our 
exploration results deteriorate
We  may  be  required  to  write-down  the  carrying  value  of  our  properties  if  oil  prices  decline  or  if  we  have  substantial 
downward  adjustments  to  our  estimated  proved  reserves,  increases  in  our  estimates  of  development  costs  or 
deterioration in our exploration results. See “Critical Accounting Principles and Estimates – Impairment” in Item 7, MD&A, 
of this Annual Report.
Estimates of reserves and future net revenue may change if the assumptions on which such estimates are based 
prove to be inaccurate
Reserve  estimates  are  based  on  many  assumptions  that  may  turn  out  to  be  inaccurate.  The  accuracy  of  any  reserve 
estimate  is  a  function  of  the  quality  of  available  data,  engineering  and  geological  interpretation  and  judgment,  the 
assumptions  used  regarding  prices  for  oil  and  gas,  production  volumes,  required  levels  of  operating  and  capital 
expenditures and quantities of recoverable oil reserves. Any significant variance from the assumptions used could result 
in  the  actual  quantity  of  reserves  and  future  net  cash  flow  being  materially  different  from  those  estimated.  In  addition, 
actual results of drilling, testing and production and changes in oil and gas prices after the date of the estimate may result 
in revisions to reserve estimates. Revisions to prior estimates may be material. 
 
We may incur significant costs on exploration or development which may prove unsuccessful or unprofitable
There  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  costs  we  incur  on  exploration  or  development  will  result  in  an  acceptable  level  of 
economic  return.  We  may  misinterpret  geological  or  engineering  data,  which  may  result  in  material  losses  from 
unsuccessful  exploration  or  development  drilling  efforts.  We  bear  the  risks  of  project  delays  and  cost  overruns  due  to 
unexpected geologic conditions; equipment failures; equipment delivery delays; accidents; adverse weather; government 
and  joint  venture  partner  approval  delays;  construction  or  start-up  delays;  and  other  associated  risks.  Such  risks  may 
delay expected production and/or increase production costs.
We compete for oil and gas properties and personnel with many other exploration and development companies 
throughout the world who have access to greater resources
We operate in a highly competitive environment and compete with oil and gas companies and other individual producers 
and  operators,  many  of  which  have  longer  operating  histories  and  substantially  greater  financial  and  other  resources. 
Many of these companies not only explore for and produce oil and gas, but also carry on refining operations and market 
petroleum  and  other  products  on  a  worldwide  basis.  We  also  compete  with  companies  in  other  industries  supplying 
energy,  fuel  and  other  commodities  to  consumers.  Our  larger  competitors,  by  reason  of  their  size  and  relative  financial 
strength, can more easily  access capital markets and may enjoy  a competitive advantage in the recruitment of qualified 
personnel. They may be able to absorb the burden of any changes in laws and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we 
do business and more readily endure longer periods of reduced oil and gas prices. Our competitors may be able to pay 
more for productive oil and gas properties and may be able to define, evaluate, bid for and purchase a greater number of 
properties and prospects.  
 
We compete with other companies to recruit and retain the limited number of individuals who possess the requisite skills 
and  experience  that  are  relevant  to  our  business.  This  competition  exposes  us  to  the  risk  that  we  will  have  to  pay  
increased compensation to such employees or increase the Company’s reliance on, and associated costs from partnering 
or outsourcing arrangements. There can be no assurance that employees with the abilities and expertise we require will 
be available. 
 
Changes to laws, regulations  and government policies in the jurisdictions  in which we operate  could adversely 
affect our ability to develop our projects
Our projects in Canada, Ecuador and Mongolia are subject to various international, federal, state, provincial, territorial and 
local laws and regulations relating to the exploration for and the development, production, upgrading, marketing, pricing, 
taxation  and  transportation  of  heavy  oil,  bitumen  and  related  products  and  other  matters,  including  environmental 
protection. 
 
The  exercise  of  discretion  by  governmental  authorities  under  existing  legislation  and  regulations,  the  amendment  of 
existing  legislation  and  regulations  or  the  implementation  of  new  legislation  or  regulations,  affecting  the  oil  and  gas 
industry  could  materially  increase  the  cost  of  developing  and  operating  our  projects  and  could  have  a  material  adverse 
impact  on  our  business.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  laws,  regulations  and  government  policies  relevant  to  our 
projects will not be changed in a manner which may adversely affect our ability to develop and operate them. Failure to 
obtain  all  necessary  permits,  leases,  licenses  and  approvals,  or  failure  to  obtain  them  on  a  timely  basis,  could result  in
14
delays  or  restructuring  of  our  projects  and  increase  costs,  all  of  which  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our 
business.  
 
Construction, operation and decommissioning of these projects will be conditional upon the receipt of necessary permits, 
leases,  licenses  and  other  approvals  from  applicable  government  and  regulatory  authorities.  The  approval  process  can 
involve stakeholder consultation, environmental impact assessments, public hearings and appeals to tribunals and courts, 
among other things. An inability to secure local and regional community support could result in the necessary approvals 
being delayed or denied. There is no assurance that such approvals will be issued or, if granted, will not be appealed or 
cancelled or that they will be renewed upon expiry or will not contain terms and conditions that adversely affect the final 
design or economics of our projects.
Complying with environmental and other government regulations could be costly and could negatively impact 
our operations
Our operations are governed by various international, federal, state,  provincial, territorial and local laws and regulations. 
Oil, gas, oil sands and heavy  oil extraction, upgrading and transportation operations are subject to extensive regulation.  
Various  approvals  are  required  before  such  activities  may  be  undertaken.  We  are  subject  to  laws  and  regulations  that 
govern  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  our  facilities,  the  discharge  of  materials  into  the  environment  and  other 
environmental protection issues. These laws and regulations may, among other potential consequences,  require that we 
acquire permits before commencing drilling; restrict the substances that can be released into the environment with drilling 
and production activities; limit or prohibit drilling activities in protected areas such as wetlands or wilderness areas; require 
that  reclamation  measures  be  taken  to  prevent  pollution  from  former  operations;  require  remedial  measures  to  mitigate 
pollution from former operations, such as plugging abandoned wells and remediating contaminated soil and groundwater; 
and require remedial measures be taken with respect to property designated as contaminated. 
 
The costs of complying with environmental laws and regulations in the future may harm our business. Furthermore, future 
changes in environmental laws and regulations may result in stricter standards and enforcement, larger fines and liability, 
and increased capital expenditures and operating costs, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our financial 
condition or results of operations.  
 
No assurance can be given with respect to the impact of future environmental laws or the approvals, processes or other 
requirements  mandated  by  such  laws  on  our  ability  to  develop  or  operate  our  projects  in  a  manner  consistent  with  our 
current expectations. No assurance can be given that environmental laws will not limit project development or materially 
increase the cost of production, development or exploration activities or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition, 
results of operations or prospects.  
 
Our  business  involves  many  operating  risks  that  can  cause  substantial  losses;  insurance  may  not  protect  us 
against all these risks
Our operations are subject to many risks inherent in the oil and gas industry. In the course of carrying out our operations, 
we  may  encounter  unexpected  and  materially  adverse  circumstances  or  events,  including  fires,  natural  disasters, 
catastrophic  weather  conditions,  explosions,  unusual  or  unexpected  geological  formations  including  formations  with 
abnormal  pressures,  blowouts,  cratering,  equipment  malfunctions,  pipeline  ruptures,  spills  or  discharges  of  hazardous 
substances,  or  title  problems.  Any  such  unexpected  and  materially  adverse  circumstances  or  events  could  cause  us  to 
experience material losses.  
 
We  are  insured  against  some,  but  not  all,  of  the  hazards  associated  with  our  business,  so  we  may  sustain  losses  that 
could  be  substantial  if  we  experience  events  or  circumstances  for  which  we  are  not  insured  or  are  underinsured.  The 
occurrence  of  an  uninsured  or  underinsured  event  could  have  a  material  adverse  impact  on  our  financial  condition  and 
results  of  operations.  We  do  not  carry  business  interruption  insurance  and,  therefore,  we  bear  the  risk  of  any  loss  or 
deferral of revenues resulting from a curtailment of future production. 
 
Under environmental laws and regulations, we could be liable for personal injury, clean-up costs and other environmental 
and property damages, as well as administrative, civil and criminal penalties. We maintain limited insurance coverage for 
sudden and accidental environmental damages as well as environmental damage that occurs over time. However, we do 
not  believe  that  insurance  coverage  for  the  full  potential  liability  for  environmental  damage  is  available  at  a  reasonable 
cost. Accordingly, we could be exposed to potentially significant losses and liabilities if environmental damage occurs.
15
SAGD technologies for in-situ recovery of heavy oil and bitumen are energy intensive and may be unsustainable
We  intend  to  integrate  established  SAGD  thermal  recovery  techniques  with  our  patented  HTL™  upgrading  process. 
Heavy oil recovery using the SAGD process is subject to technical and financial uncertainty. Current SAGD technologies 
for  in-situ  recovery  of  heavy  oil  and  bitumen  are  energy  intensive,  requiring  significant  consumption  of  natural  gas  and 
other  fuels  for  the  production  of  steam  used  in  the  recovery  process.  The  amount  of  steam  required  in  the  production 
process can vary and any material variance can impact costs. The performance of the reservoir can also affect the timing 
and  levels  of  production  using  SAGD  technology.  Although  SAGD  technology  is  now  being  used  by  several  producers, 
commercial application of the technology is still in its early stages relative to other methods of production. In the absence 
of  an  extended  and  demonstrated  operating  history,  there  can  be  no  assurances  with  respect  to  the  sustainability  of 
SAGD operations. 
 
We may not successfully commercialize our HTL™ technology
Successful commercialization of our HTL™ technology in the oil and gas industry is contingent upon our ability to identify 
and  acquire  appropriate  sources  of  feedstock  for,  and  economically  design,  construct  and  operate,  commercial-scale 
plants and a variety of other factors, many of which are outside our control. To date, commercial-scale HTL™ plants have 
only been constructed and operated in the bio-mass industry. 
 
Technological advances could render our HTL™ technology obsolete
We expect that technological advances in competing processes and procedures for upgrading heavy oil and bitumen into 
lighter,  less  viscous  products  will  continue  to  be  made.  It  is  possible  that  these  competing  processes  and  procedures 
could cause our HTL™ technology to become uncompetitive or obsolete. 
 
Alternate sources  of energy  could lower the demand for the products that our HTL™ technology is intended to 
produce
Alternative sources of energy are continually under development. If reliance upon petroleum based fuels decreases, the 
demand  for  products  that  our  HTL™  technology  is  intended  to  produce  may  decline.  It  is  possible  that  technological 
advances in engine design and performance could reduce the use of petroleum based fuels, which would also lower the 
demand for products that our HTL™ technology is intended to produce. 
 
Efforts to commercialize our HTL™ technology may give rise to claims of infringement upon the patents or other 
proprietary rights of others
We own licenses to use the HTL™ technology that we are seeking to commercialize, but we may not become aware of 
claims of infringement upon the patents or other rights of others in this technology until after we have made a substantial 
investment in the development and commercialization of projects utilizing the technology. Third parties may claim that the 
technology  infringes  upon  past, present or  future patented technologies.  Legal  actions  could  be  brought against  us  and 
our  licensors  claiming  damages  and  seeking  an  injunction  that  would  prevent  us  from  testing  or  commercializing  the 
technology.  If an infringement action  were successful, in addition to potential liability for damages, we and our licensors 
could  be  required  to  obtain  a  claiming  party’s  license  in  order  to  continue  to  test  or  commercialize  the  technology.  Any 
required license might not be made available or, if available, might not be available on acceptable terms, and we could be 
prevented  entirely  from  testing  or  commercializing  the  technology.  We  may  have  to  expend  substantial  resources  in 
litigation  defending  against  the  infringement  claims  of  others.  Many  possible  claimants,  such  as  the  major  energy 
companies that have or may be developing proprietary heavy oil upgrading technologies competitive with our technology, 
may have significantly more resources to spend on litigation. 
 
A breach of confidentiality obligations could put us at competitive risk and potentially damage our business
While  discussing  potential  business  relationships  with  third  parties,  we  may  disclose  confidential  information  respecting 
operating  results  or  proprietary  intellectual  property.  Although  we  regularly  require  third  parties  to  sign  confidentiality 
agreements prior to the disclosure of any confidential  information, an unauthorized disclosure of confidential information 
could  put  us  at  competitive  risk  and  may  cause  significant  damage  to  our  business.  The  harm  to  our  business  from  a 
breach of confidentiality cannot presently  be  quantified, but may be material  and may not be compensable in damages. 
There is no assurance that, in the event of a breach of confidentiality, we will be able to obtain equitable remedies, such 
as injunctive relief, from a court of competent jurisdiction in a timely manner, if at all, in order to prevent or mitigate any 
damage to our business that such a breach of confidentiality may cause.  
 
Certain projects are at a very early stage of development
Our  projects  are  at  varying  stages  of  development.  We  are  in  the  midst  of  a  regulatory  approval  process  with  the 
Government  of  Alberta  in  respect  of  our  Tamarack  Project.  Although  we  believe  that  we  will  successfully  complete  the
16
regulatory approval process sometime during the second quarter of 2013, there is no assurance that the process will be 
successfully completed, or completed on a timely basis. If the regulatory approval process becomes more protracted than 
anticipated, construction of the Tamarack Project could be significantly delayed. There is also a risk that the Government 
of  Alberta  may  not  approve  the  project  as  proposed  or  that  it  may  impose  conditions  upon  its  approval  which  could 
significantly  impair  the  economics  of  the  project.  Our  projects  in  Ecuador  and  Mongolia  are  at  a  very  early  stage  of 
development;  no  reserves  have  yet  been  established  and  no  detailed  feasibility  or  engineering  studies  have  yet  been 
produced. 
 
There  can  be  no  assurances  that  any  of  our  projects  will  be  completed  within  any  anticipated  time  frame  or  within  the 
parameters  of  any  anticipated  capital  cost.  We  have  yet  to  establish  a  definitive  schedule  for  financing  and  fully 
developing these projects. Other factors, in addition to lack of financing, may hinder our ability to develop and operate our 
projects  on  a  timely  basis.  These  include  breakdowns  or  failures  of  equipment  or  processes;  construction  performance 
falling  below  expected  levels  of  output  or  efficiency;  design  errors;  challenges  to  proprietary  technology;  contractor  or 
operator  errors;  non-performance  by  third  party  contractors;  labor  disputes;  disruptions  or  declines  in  productivity; 
increases  in  materials  or  labor  costs;  inability  to  attract  sufficient  numbers  of  qualified  workers;  delays  in  obtaining,  or 
conditions  imposed  upon,  regulatory  approvals;  violation  of  permit  requirements;  disruption  in the  supply  of  energy;  and 
catastrophic events such as fires, earthquakes, storms or explosions. 
 
Our Tamarack Project may be exposed to title risks and aboriginal claims
We hold our interest in the Tamarack Project through leases granted by the Government of Alberta, which we purchased 
from Talisman. There is a risk that the land covered by these leases may be subject to prior unregistered agreements or 
interests  or  undetected  claims  or  interests  that  could  impair  our  leasehold  title.  Any  such  impairment  could  adversely 
affect our ability to construct and operate the Tamarack Project on the basis presently contemplated, which could have a 
material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and ability to execute our current business plan in 
a timely manner. 
  
Aboriginal  peoples  have  claimed  aboriginal  title  and  rights  to  large  areas  of  land  in  western  Canada  where  oil  and  gas 
operations are conducted, including claims that, if successful, could delay  or otherwise adversely affect the construction 
and operation of the Tamarack Project, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
Our Block 20 Project in Ecuador may be at risk if the agreement through which we hold our interest is challenged 
or cannot be enforced
We hold our interest in the Block 20 Project in Ecuador through a specific services agreement with an Ecuadorian national 
oil  company.  The  agreement  is  governed  by  the  laws  of  Ecuador.  Although  the  agreement  has  been  translated  into 
English,  the  official  and  governing  language  of  the  agreement  is  Spanish  and,  if  any  discrepancy  exists  between  the 
official Spanish version of the agreement and the English translation, the official Spanish version prevails. There may be 
ambiguities,  inconsistencies  and  anomalies  between  the  official  Spanish  version  of  the  agreement  and  the  English 
translation  that  could  materially  affect  how  our  rights  and  obligations  under  the  agreement  are  conclusively  interpreted 
and such interpretations may be materially adverse to our interests. 
 
The dispute resolution provisions of the Block 20 agreement stipulate that disputes involving industrial property, including 
intellectual property, and technical or economic issues are subject to international arbitration. Other disputes are subject 
to  resolution  through  mediation  or  arbitration  in  Ecuador.  There  is  a  risk  that  we  will  be  unable  to  agree  with  the 
Ecuadorian  national  oil  company  as  to  whether  a  dispute  should  be  referred  to  international  arbitration  or  mediation  or 
arbitration  in  Ecuador.  There  can  also  be  no  assurance  that  the  Ecuadorian  national  oil  company  will  comply  with  the 
dispute resolution provisions or otherwise voluntarily submit to arbitration. 
 
Government  policy  in  Ecuador  may  change  to  discourage  foreign  investment  or  legal  requirements  pertinent  to  foreign 
investment in Ecuador may change in unforeseen ways. There can be no assurance that our investments and assets in 
Ecuador  will  not  be  subject  to  nationalization,  requisition  or  confiscation,  whether  legitimate  or  not,  by  any  authority  or 
body. While the  Block  20  agreement  contains  provisions  for  compensation  and  reimbursement  of  losses  we  may  suffer 
under such circumstances, there is  no  assurance that such provisions  would effectively restore the  value of our original 
investment.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  Ecuadorian  laws  protecting  foreign  investments  will  not  be  amended  or 
abolished or that the existing laws will be enforced or interpreted to provide adequate protection against any or all of the 
risks  described  above.  There  can  also  be  no  assurance  that  the  Block  20  agreement  will  prove  to  be  enforceable  or 
provide adequate protection against any or all of the risks described above.
17
Our business may be harmed if we are unable to retain our interests in licenses, leases and contracts
The  interests  we  hold  in  our  projects  are  derived  from  licenses,  leases  and  contracts.  If  we  fail  to  meet  the  specific 
requirements of the instrument through which we hold our interest in a particular project, it may terminate or expire. We 
may  not  be  able  to  meet  any  or  all  of  the  obligations  required  to  maintain  our  interest  in  each  such  license,  lease  or 
contract.  Some of  our  project  interests  will  terminate  unless  we  fulfill  such  obligations.  If  we  are unable  to  satisfy  these 
obligations on a timely basis, we may lose our rights in these projects. The termination of our interests in these projects 
may harm our business. 
 
Our principal shareholder may significantly influence our business
As  at  the  date  of  this  Annual  Report,  our  largest  shareholder,  Robert  M.  Friedland,  owned  approximately  17%  of  our 
common shares and held the position of Executive Co-Chairman and is a member of our Board of Directors. As a result, 
he  has  the  voting  power  to  significantly  influence  our  policies,  business  and  affairs  and  the  outcome  of  any  corporate 
transaction  or  other  matter,  including  mergers,  consolidations  and  the  sale  of  all,  or  substantially  all,  of  our  assets.  In 
addition, the concentration of our ownership may have the effect of delaying, deterring or preventing a change in control 
that otherwise could result in a premium in the price of our common shares.  
 
If we lose our key management and technical personnel, our business may suffer
We  rely  upon  a  relatively  small  group  of  key  management  personnel.  In  respect  of  the  technological  aspect  of  our 
business, we also rely heavily upon our scientific and technical personnel. Our ability to implement our business strategy 
may  be  constrained  and  the  timing  of  implementation  may  be  impacted  if  we  are  unable  to  attract  and  retain  sufficient 
personnel. We do not maintain any key man insurance. Although we have employment agreements with each of our key 
management and technical personnel, there is no assurance that these individuals will remain in our employ in the future. 
An unexpected partial or total loss of their services would harm our business. 
 
Information regarding our future plans reflects our current intent and is subject to change
We describe our current exploration and development plans in this Annual Report. Whether we ultimately implement our 
plans  will  depend  on  a  number  of  factors  including  the  availability  and  cost  of  capital;  our  ability  to  demonstrate  the 
commerciality  of  the  HTL™  technology;  favorable  exploration  results;  current  and  projected  oil  or  gas  prices;  costs  and 
availability  of  drilling  rigs  and  other  equipment;  supplies;  personnel;  timeliness  of  regulatory  and  third  party  approvals; 
reliability of project development cost estimates; and our ability to attract other industry partners to participate with us  in 
our projects in order to reduce costs and exposure to risks. 
 
We assess and gather data about our projects on an ongoing basis and it is possible that additional information will cause 
us to alter our schedule for the development of a particular project or determine that the project should not be pursued at 
all. Our plans regarding our projects might change.
ITEM 1B:  UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
ITEM 3:  LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
On July 12, 2012, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed the dismissal of a lawsuit against the 
Company and related parties that had been filed on November 20, 2008 in the United States District Court for the District 
of  Colorado.  The  plaintiffs  in  the  case  are  Jack  J.  Grynberg  and  three  affiliated  companies.  The  ruling  from  the  Tenth 
Circuit affirms the district court’s judgment dismissing the case without prejudice. The Court of Appeals denied plaintiffs’ 
request for rehearing and issued a mandate.  Following the conclusion of that appeal, the plaintiffs filed a petition for a writ 
of certiorari from the United States Supreme Court, which was denied on January 14, 2013.  The Supreme Court's denial 
finally concludes the appellate proceedings.   
 
The  suit  alleged  bribery  and  other  misconduct  and  challenged  the  propriety  of  a  contract  awarded  to  the  Company’s 
wholly-owned  subsidiary  Ivanhoe  Energy  Ecuador  Inc.  to  develop  Ecuador’s  Pungarayacu  heavy  oil  field.  The  plaintiffs’ 
claims were for unspecified damages or ownership of the Company’s interest in the Pungarayacu field. The Company and 
related  defendants  filed  motions  to  dismiss  the  lawsuit  for  lack  of  jurisdiction.  The  district  court  granted  the  motion  and 
dismissed the case without prejudice. The district court also granted Mr. Robert Friedland’s request to sanction plaintiffs 
and plaintiffs’ counsel for their conduct related to bringing the suit by awarding Mr. Friedland fees and costs. The Ivanhoe 
corporate defendants, including the Company, also have been awarded costs and fees as the prevailing parties in the trial 
court.
18
The Court of Appeals’ July 12, 2012 order affirmed the district court’s judgment and related orders. The Court of Appeals 
also  concluded  that  the  Ivanhoe  Corporate  defendants,  including  the  Company,  are  entitled  to  fees  and  costs  they 
incurred on appeal. The Court of Appeals remanded the case to the district court for the limited purpose of computing a 
proper award of appellate fees and costs. Following remand, the plaintiffs and the Ivanhoe Corporate defendants engaged 
in negotiations and reached an agreement to fully dispose of the Ivanhoe Corporate defendants’ claim for appellate fees 
and costs. After the agreement was reached, the district court closed the case in its entirety on September 26, 2012. The 
Company recovered approximately $0.5 million in costs.   
 
On December  30,  2010,  the Company  received  a  demand for  arbitration from GAR  Energy  and  Associates,  Inc.  (“GAR 
Energy”)  and  Gonzalo  A.  Ruiz  and  Janis  S.  Ruiz  as  successors  in  interest  to,  and  assignees  of,  GAR  Energy.  GAR 
Energy  subsequently  abandoned  its  demand  for  arbitration  and  filed  suit  against  the  Company  and  subsidiaries  in  the 
Superior  Court  for  Kern  County,  California  on  March  11,  2011.  The  lawsuit  alleges  breach  of  contract,  fraud  and  other 
misconduct arising from a consulting agreement and various other agreements between GAR Energy and the Company 
relating  to  the  Pungarayacu  heavy  oil  field.  The  plaintiffs  seek  actual  damages  of  $250,000  and  a  portion  of  the 
Company’s  interest  in  the  Pungarayacu  field.  The  plaintiffs  seek  other  miscellaneous  relief,  including  requests  for  a 
declaration  of  some  of  the  parties’  rights  and  legal  relations  under  a  consulting  agreement,  attorneys'  fees  and  certain 
litigation  costs  and  expenses,  disgorgement  of  the  Company's  past,  current  and/or  future  profits  attributable  to  the 
Pungarayacu field and certain other fields in Ecuador, tort damages and exemplary and punitive damages, the imposition 
of  constructive  trusts  over  certain  amounts  and  profits  requested  by  the  plaintiffs,  and  pre-judgment  and  post-judgment 
interest. The Company removed the case to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California and all of 
the  defendants  have  answered  and  filed  counterclaims  for  attorneys’  fees.  Defendants  filed  a  motion  to  dismiss  certain 
claims and to compel arbitration of others. Plaintiffs’ filed a motion to remand the case to state court. On December 23, 
2011, the Magistrate Judge denied plaintiffs’ motion to remand and issued findings and recommendations that would send 
all  of the parties and all  of the claims to arbitration should the  district court Judge assigned to the case adopt them. On 
January 19, 2012 the district court Judge adopted the Magistrate Judge’s findings and recommendations in full, ordered 
the  parties  to  arbitration  and  stayed  the  district  court  proceedings  to  allow  for  the  completion  of  the  arbitration.  The 
arbitration hearing is set for September 2013 and the parties are currently engaged in discovery. The likelihood of loss or 
gain  resulting  from  this  dispute,  and  the  estimated  amount  of  ultimate  loss  or  gain,  are  not  determinable  or  reasonably 
estimable at this time. The Company believes that the plaintiff’s claims have no merit.
ITEM 4:  MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
PART II
ITEM  5:    MARKET  FOR  REGISTRANT’S  COMMON  EQUITY,  REL ATED  STOCKHOLDER
MATTERS  AND ISSUER PURCHASES  OF EQUITY SECURITIES
Our  common  shares  trade  on  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (the  “TSX”)  and  The  NASDAQ  Capital  Market  (“NASDAQ”) 
under the symbols “IE” and “IVAN” respectively. The trading range of our common shares is as follows:
2012
2011
2010
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4
TSX (Cdn$)
High
1.34 
1.15 
0.76 
0.89 
3.58 
2.84 
1.96 
1.47 
3.90 
3.36 
2.19 
2.89
Low
0.82 
0.44 
0.50 
0.40 
2.67 
1.58 
1.02 
0.75 
2.90 
1.97 
1.59 
2.15
NASDAQ (US$)
High
1.33 
1.15 
0.76 
0.91 
3.67 
2.97 
2.03 
1.46 
3.79 
3.37 
2.08 
2.88
Low
0.83 
0.44 
0.52 
0.41 
2.75 
1.60 
0.99 
0.72 
2.75 
1.87 
1.50 
2.10
On December 31, 2012, the closing price of our common shares was Cdn$0.71 on the TSX and $0.7051 on NASDAQ.
19
As at March 7, 2013, a total of 344,472,761 of our common shares were issued and outstanding and held by 187 holders 
of record with an estimated 22,500 additional shareholders whose common shares were held for them in street name or 
nominee accounts. 
 
The  Company  received a  notification  from  the  Listing  Qualifications  Department  of  the  NASDAQ  notifying the  Company 
that the Company did not meet the minimum bid price requirements set forth in the NASDAQ Listing Rules. The Company 
could regain compliance if at any time prior to November 20,  2012  the closing bid price of the  Ivanhoe’s common stock 
was at least $1.00 for a minimum of 10 consecutive business days. On November 1, 2012, the Company applied to the 
NASDAQ for an additional compliance period of 180 days which was granted and will expire on May 20, 2013.  
 
The Company intends to seek approval of its shareholders to effect a reverse stock-split of its common shares in order to 
regain compliance with the minimum bid price requirements set forth in the NASDAQ Listing Rules. Reducing the number 
of  issued  and  outstanding  common  shares  through  a  common  share  consolidation  is  intended,  absent  other  factors,  to 
increase the per share market price of the common shares. However, the market price of the common shares will also be 
affected  by  the  Company’s  financial  and  operational  results,  its  financial  position,  including  its  liquidity  and  capital 
resources,  the  development  of  its  projects,  industry  conditions,  the  market’s  perception of  the Company’s  business  and 
other factors, which are unrelated to the number of common shares outstanding.  
 
While  a  reverse  stock-split  will  result  in  an  initial  trading  price  above  the  NASDAQ  minimum  bid  price,  the  market 
considerations mentioned above will be the ultimate arbiter of the Company’s share price. The ability of the Company to 
remain above the minimum bid price and maintain a NASDAQ listing will be determined by the markets. 
 
DIVIDENDS
We have not paid any dividends on our outstanding common shares since we were incorporated and we do not anticipate 
that  we  will  do  so  in  the  foreseeable  future.  The  declaration  of  dividends  on  our  common  shares  is,  subject  to  certain 
statutory restrictions described below, within the discretion of our Board of Directors based on their assessment of, among 
other  factors,  our  earnings  or  lack  thereof,  our  capital  and  operating  expenditure  requirements  and  our  overall  financial 
condition.  Under  the  Yukon  Business  Corporations  Act,  our  Board  of  Directors  has  no  discretion  to  declare  or  pay  a 
dividend  on  our  common  shares  if  they  have  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  we  are,  or  after  payment  of  the 
dividend would be, unable to pay our liabilities as they become due or that the realizable value of our assets would, as a 
result of the dividend, be less than the aggregate sum of our liabilities and the stated capital of our common shares. 
 
EXEMPTIONS FROM CERTAIN NASDAQ MARKETPLACE RULES
As a Canadian issuer listed on NASDAQ, we are not required to comply with certain of NASDAQ’s Marketplace Rules and 
instead may comply  with applicable Canadian requirements. As a foreign private  issuer, we are only required to comply 
with  the  following  NASDAQ  rules:  (i)  we  must  have  an  audit  committee that  satisfies  applicable NASDAQ  requirements 
and  that  is  composed  of  directors  each  of  whom  satisfy  NASDAQ’s  prescribed  independence  standards;  (ii)  we  must 
provide NASDAQ with prompt notification after an executive officer of the Company becomes aware of any material non-
compliance by  us  with any applicable NASDAQ Marketplace Rule; (iii) our common shares must be eligible for a Direct 
Registration Program operated by a clearing agency registered under Section 17A of the Exchange Act; and (iv) we must 
provide a brief description of any significant differences between our corporate governance practices and those followed 
by US companies quoted on NASDAQ.  
 
Applicable Canadian rules pertaining to corporate governance require us to disclose in our management proxy circular, on 
an  annual  basis,  our  corporate  governance  practices,  including  whether  or  not  our  independent  directors  hold  regularly 
scheduled  meetings  at  which  only  independent  directors  are  present,  but  there  is  no  legal  requirement  in  Canada  for 
independent directors to hold regularly scheduled meetings at which only independent directors are present. 
 
Although our independent directors hold meetings from time to time, as and when considered necessary or desirable by 
the independent lead director or by any other independent director, such meetings are not regularly scheduled. Our non-
management directors hold regularly scheduled meetings but not all of our non-management directors are independent. 
 
ENFORCEABILITY OF CIVIL LIABILITIES
We  are  a  company  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  Yukon,  Canada.  Some  of  our  directors,  controlling  shareholders, 
officers and representatives of the experts named in this Annual Report reside outside the US and a substantial portion of 
their assets and our assets are located outside the US. As a result, it may be difficult to effect service of process within the 
US upon the directors, controlling shareholders, officers and representatives of experts who are not residents of the US or 
to enforce against them judgments obtained in the courts of the US based upon the civil liability provisions of the federal
20
securities laws or other laws of the US. There is doubt as to the enforceability in Canada, against us or against any of our 
directors, controlling shareholders, officers or experts who are not residents of the  US, in original actions or in actions for 
enforcement of judgments of US courts, of liabilities based solely upon civil liability provisions of the US federal securities 
laws. Therefore, it may not be possible to enforce those actions against us, our directors, officers, controlling shareholders 
or experts named in this Annual Report.  
 
EXCHANGE CONTROLS AND TAXATION
There is no law or governmental decree or regulation in Canada that restricts the export or import of capital, or affects the 
remittance of dividends, interest or other payments to a non-resident holder of our common shares, other than withholding 
tax requirements. 
 
There is no limitation imposed by the laws of Canada, the laws of the Yukon Territory, or our constating documents on the 
right  of  a  non-resident  to  hold  or  vote  our  common  shares,  other  than  as  provided  in  the  Investment  Canada  Act  (the 
“Investment Act”), which generally prohibits a reviewable investment by an investor that is not a “Canadian”, as defined, 
unless  after  review,  the  minister  responsible  for  the  Investment  Act  is  satisfied  that  the  investment  is  likely  to  be  of  net 
benefit to Canada. An investment in our common shares by a non-Canadian who is not a “WTO investor” (which includes 
governments of, or individuals who are nationals of, member states of the World Trade Organization and corporations and 
other entities which are controlled by them), at a time when we were not already controlled by a WTO investor, would be 
reviewable under the Investment Act under two circumstances. First, if it was an investment to acquire control (within the 
meaning of the Investment Act) and the value of our assets, as determined under Investment Act regulations, was Cdn$5 
million or more. Second, the investment would also be reviewable if an order for review was made by the federal cabinet 
of the Canadian government on the grounds that the investment related to Canada’s cultural heritage or national identity 
(as  prescribed  under  the  Investment  Act),  regardless  of  asset  value  (a “Cultural  Business”).  Currently,  an  investment  in 
our  common  shares  by  a  WTO  investor,  or  by  a  non-Canadian  at  a  time  when  we  were  already  controlled  by  a  WTO 
investor,  would  be  reviewable  under  the  Investment  Act  if  it  was  an  investment  to  acquire  control  and  the  value  of  our 
assets,  as  determined  under  Investment  Act  regulations,  was  not  less  than  a  specified  amount,  which  for  2013  is 
Cdn$344 million. The Investment Act provides detailed rules to determine if there has been an acquisition of control. For 
example, a non-Canadian would acquire control of us for the purposes of the Investment Act if the non-Canadian acquired 
a  majority  of  our  outstanding  common  shares.  The  acquisition  of  less  than  a  majority,  but  one-third  or  more,  of  our 
common  shares  would  be  presumed  to  be  an  acquisition  of  control  of  us  unless  it  could  be  established  that,  on  the 
acquisition,  we  were  not  controlled  in  fact  by  the  acquirer  through  the  ownership  of  common  shares.  An  acquisition  of 
control for the purposes of the Investment Act could also occur as a result of the acquisition by a non-Canadian of all or 
substantially all of our assets.  
 
The  Canadian  Federal  Government  has  announced  certain  forthcoming  amendments  (the  “Amendments”)  to  the 
Investment  Act.  Once  they  come  into  force,  the  Amendments  would  generally  raise  the  thresholds  that  trigger 
governmental  review.  Specifically,  with  respect  to  WTO  investors,  the  Amendments  would  see  the  thresholds  for  the 
review of direct acquisitions of control of a business which is not a Cultural Business increase from the current Cdn$344 
million (based on book value) to Cdn$600 million (to be based on the “enterprise value” of the Canadian business) for the 
two years after the Amendments come into force, to Cdn$800 million in the following two years and then to Cdn$1 billion 
for the next two years. Thereafter, the threshold is to be adjusted to account for inflation. The Amendments will come into 
force when the government enacts regulations which, among other things, will provide how the “enterprise value” is to be 
determined.  
 
The Investment Act also provides that the Minister of Industry may initiate a review of any acquisition by a non-Canadian 
of  our  common  shares  or  assets  if  the  Minister  considers  that  the  acquisition  “could  be  injurious  to  (Canada’s)  national 
security”.  
 
Amounts that we may, in the future, pay or credit, or be deemed to have paid or credited, to shareholders as dividends in 
respect of the common shares held at a time when the beneficial owner is not a resident of Canada within the meaning of 
the  Income  Tax  Act  (Canada),  will  generally  be  subject  to Canadian non-resident  withholding  tax  of  25%  of  the  amount 
paid  or  credited,  which  may  be  reduced  under  the  Canada-US  Income  Tax  Convention  (1980),  as  amended,  (the 
“Convention”). Currently, under the Convention, the rate of Canadian non-resident withholding tax on the gross amount of 
dividends paid or credited to a US resident that is entitled to the benefits of the Convention is generally 15%. However, if 
the beneficial owner of such dividends is a US resident corporation that is entitled to the benefits of the Convention and 
owns 10% or more of our voting stock, the withholding rate is reduced to 5%. In the case of certain tax-exempt entities, 
which are residents of the US for the purpose of the Convention, the withholding tax on dividends may be reduced to 0%.
21
SECURITIES AUTHORIZED FOR ISSUANCE UNDER EQUITY COMPENSATION PLANS
See  table  under  “Security  Ownership  of  Certain  Beneficial  Owners  and  Management  and  Related  Stockholder  Matters” 
set forth in Item 12 in this Annual Report.  
 
PERFORMANCE GRAPH
See table under “Executive Compensation” set forth in Item 11 in this Annual Report. 
 
SALES OF UNREGISTERED SECURITIES
All securities we issued during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, which were not registered under the 
Act, have been detailed in previously filed Form 10-Qs and Form 8-Ks.
ITEM 6.  SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
SUMMARY OF SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
The  following  table  presents  selected  financial  data  based  on  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  as 
issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“IASB”)  and  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  our 
accompanying  “Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of  Operations”  included  in 
Item 7 of this report and with the audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in Item 
8 of this report. Results of operations are shown for continuing operations, which exclude the operations discontinued in 
China, for the fiscal years presented.
2012
(64,018) 
(0.19) 
 
 
  402,057 
 
65,214 
 
181 
 
3,157
2011
2010
(26,761) 
(0.08)
413,710 
61,892 
1,617 
1,919
(22,258) 
(0.07)
394,418 
– 
– 
3,008
($000s, except per share amounts)
Results of Operations
Net loss from continuing operations 
Net loss from continuing operations per share – basic and diluted
Financial Position
Total assets  
Long term debt
Long term derivative instruments
Long term provisions
22
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
 
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  of  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  and  subsidiaries  (the 
“Company”),  which  comprise  the  consolidated  statements  of  financial  position  as  at  December  31,  2012  and        
December 31,  2011, and the consolidated statements of loss and comprehensive loss, statements of changes  in equity 
and statements of cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2012, and a summary of 
significant accounting policies and other explanatory information. 
 
Management’s Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements
Management  is  responsible  for  the  preparation  and  fair  presentation  of  these  consolidated  financial  statements  in 
accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board, 
and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated financial 
statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
 
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We conducted 
our audits in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards and the standards of the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we comply with ethical requirements and plan 
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free from 
material misstatement. 
 
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated 
financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgment, including the assessment of the risks of 
material  misstatement  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements,  whether  due  to  fraud  or  error.  In  making  those  risk 
assessments,  the  auditor  considers  internal  control  relevant  to  the  entity's  preparation  and  fair  presentation  of  the 
consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances. An audit 
also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates 
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. 
 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained in our audits is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
audit opinion.  
 
Opinion
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  position  of  the 
Company as at December 31, 2012 and 2011 and their financial performance and cash flows for each of the years in the 
three-year period ended December 31, 2012, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by 
the International Accounting Standards Board. 
 
Other Matter
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United 
States),  the  Company's  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of  December  31,  2012,  based  on  the  criteria 
established  in  Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the 
Treadway Commission and our report dated March 18, 2013 expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company’s internal 
control over financial reporting. 
 
 
 
/s/ Deloitte LLP
Independent Registered Chartered Accountants 
March 18, 2013 
Calgary, Canada
35
PART I   FINANCIAL INFORMATION
ITEM 1.  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
 
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.  
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
(US$000s)
Assets 
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents  
Restricted cash 
Accounts receivable 
Note receivable 
Prepaid and other  
Assets held for sale
Intangible assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Long term receivables
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity 
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities  
Derivative instruments 
Income taxes
Long term debt  
Long term derivative instruments 
Long term provisions 
Deferred income taxes
Shareholders’ Equity
Share capital 
Contributed surplus 
Accumulated deficit
Nature of operations and going concern
Note
5 
6, 25 
7,11 
 
 
7 
 
 
8 
9 
11 
 
 
 
 
22 
11 
7,14 
 
 
10 
11, 12 
13 
14 
 
 
 
16 
16
1
December 31,
2012
62,819 
20,500 
14,848 
230 
1,593 
– 
99,990 
 
285,311 
10,205 
6,551 
402,057 
 
 
 
14,436 
– 
1,720 
16,156 
 
65,214 
181 
3,157 
14,351 
99,059 
 
 
586,108 
29,759 
(312,869) 
302,998 
402,057
December 31,
2011
16,890 
20,500 
7,859 
227 
1,411 
41,902 
88,789 
 
273,986 
46,979 
3,956 
413,710 
 
 
 
15,548 
183 
641 
16,372
61,892 
1,617 
1,919 
17,773 
99,573 
 
 
586,108 
26,524 
(298,495) 
314,137 
413,710
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
36
IVANHOE ENERGY INC. 
Consolidated Statements of Loss and Comprehensive Loss
(US$000s, except share and per share amounts)
Note
Interest income                                                                         
 
Expenses and other 
Operating  
General and administrative  
Exploration and evaluation 
Depreciation 
Foreign currency exchange loss (gain) 
Derivative instruments gain 
Finance 
Gain on derecognition of long term provision 
Loss on debt repayment 
                               
 
Net loss before income taxes 
 
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes  
   Current 
   Deferred  
 
 
Net loss and total comprehensive loss from continuing operations 
Net income (loss) and total comprehensive income (loss) from discontinued 
operations 
Net loss and total comprehensive loss 
 
Net (loss) income per common share, basic and diluted 
From continuing operations 
From discontinued operations 
From net loss 
 
Weighted average number of common shares
Basic and diluted (000s)
8 
9 
 
11 
10 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
14
7
Year Ended December 31,
2012
28
4,252  
 31,149  
 22,994  
 961  
 1,247  
 (1,430) 
 4,328  
– 
 2,977  
66,478 
 
(66,450)
–
2,432 
2,432
(64,018)
49,644 
(14,374) 
 
 
(0.19) 
0.14 
(0.05)
344,139
2011
2010
572
4,561  
 38,579  
 2,774  
 1,014  
 (534) 
 (13,148) 
 361  
 (1,900) 
–    
 31,707  
 
(31,135) 
 
 
(7) 
4,381 
4,374
(26,761)
1,485 
(25,276) 
 
 
(0.08) 
0.01 
(0.07)
342,678
202
4,086 
36,153 
4,934 
259 
(3,269) 
(18,571) 
24 
– 
– 
23,616 
 
(23,414) 
 
 
(15) 
 1,171 
1,156
(22,258)
(4,324) 
(26,582) 
 
 
(0.07) 
(0.01) 
(0.08)
327,442
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
37
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.  
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity
Share Capital
Note
Shares 
(000s)
282,559 
– 
50,000 
280 
1,524 
2 
– 
334,365
Amount
422,322 
– 
121,697 
799 
5,735 
9 
– 
550,562
Share Capital
Shares 
(000s)
334,365 
– 
169 
985 
8,620 
– 
344,139
Amount
550,562 
– 
335 
4,164 
31,047 
– 
  586,108
Share Capital
Amount
586,108 
– 
– 
– 
586,108
Shares 
(000s)
344,139 
– 
– 
– 
344,139
Contributed
Surplus
18,724 
– 
– 
– 
(3,940) 
– 
8,357 
23,141
Contributed
Surplus
23,141 
– 
– 
(2,231) 
– 
5,614 
26,524
Accumulated
Deficit
(246,637) 
(26,582) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
(273,219)
Accumulated
Deficit
(273,219) 
(25,276) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(298,495)
Contributed
Accumulated
Surplus
Deficit
26,524 
– 
(54) 
3,289 
29,759
(298,495) 
(14,374) 
– 
– 
(312,869)
Total
194,409 
(26,582) 
121,697 
799 
1,795 
9 
8,357 
300,484
Total
300,484 
(25,276) 
335 
1,933 
31,047 
5,614 
314,137
Total
314,137 
(14,374) 
(54) 
3,289 
302,998
(US$000s, except share amounts)
Balance January 1, 2010 
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
Shares issued for cash, net of share issue costs  
Shares issued for services 
Exercise of stock options 
Exercise of purchase warrants 
Share-based compensation expense 
Balance December 31, 2010
(US$000s, except share amounts)
Balance December 31, 2010 
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
Shares issued for services 
Exercise of stock options 
Exercise of purchase warrants 
Share-based compensation expense 
Balance December 31, 2011
(US$000s, except share amounts)
Balance December 31, 2011 
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
Funding of equity-settled share-based awards 
Share-based compensation expense 
Balance December 31, 2012
16
17
17
Note
17 
16 
17
Note
17
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
38
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.  
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(US$000s)
Operating Activities 
Net loss 
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to cash from operating activities
Depletion and depreciation 
Exploration and evaluation expense 
Share-based compensation expense 
Unrealized foreign currency exchange loss (gain) 
Unrealized derivative instruments gain 
Current income tax expense 
Deferred income tax recovery 
Finance expense 
Financing costs 
Derecognition of long term provision 
Pre-tax gain on disposal of discontinued operations 
Loss on debt repayment 
Other
Current income tax paid 
Interest paid 
Share-based payments 
Decommissioning costs settled 
Changes in non-cash working capital items 
Net cash used in operating activities 
 
Investing Activities 
Intangible expenditures 
Property, plant and equipment expenditures 
Proceeds  on disposal of discontinued operations 
Restricted cash 
Long term receivables  
Interest paid 
Changes in non-cash working capital items 
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities                             
 
Financing Activities 
Shares and warrants issued on private placements, net of share issue costs 
Debt proceeds, net of transaction costs 
Repayment of debt 
Proceeds from exercise of options and warrants 
Changes in non-cash working capital items 
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities                             
 
Foreign exchange gain (loss) on cash and cash equivalents held in a foreign currency 
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents, for the year 
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of year
2012
Note
Year Ended December 31,
(14,374) 
 
7,642 
22,994 
3,502 
800 
(1,613) 
1,720 
(3,422) 
4,328 
– 
– 
(57,007) 
2,977 
39 
(641) 
(3,428)  
(166) 
– 
9,589 
(27,060)
(40,112) 
(7,332) 
131,755 
– 
(2,606) 
(5,693) 
1,650 
77,662
– 
64,644 
(70,000) 
– 
(32) 
(5,388) 
 
715 
45,929 
16,890 
62,819
9 
8 
17 
 
11 
7,14 
 
 
 
13 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
21
2011
2010
(25,276) 
 
8,030 
– 
5,883 
(446) 
(12,965) 
2,122 
(3,392) 
361 
269 
(1,900) 
– 
– 
50 
(1,481) 
(333) 
– 
– 
2,833 
(26,245)
(37,390) 
(13,670) 
– 
(20,500) 
(1,536) 
(4,011) 
(8,315) 
(85,422)
– 
72,914 
(41,421) 
29,873 
57 
61,423 
 
(1,183) 
(51,427) 
68,317 
16,890
(26,582) 
 
6,524 
3,537 
7,557 
(3,523) 
(18,571) 
126 
(1,171) 
24 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(38) 
(656) 
– 
– 
(179) 
1,662 
(31,290) 
 
 
(65,347) 
(5,633) 
– 
– 
(1,558) 
(1,610) 
5,464 
(68,684) 
 
 
135,696 
– 
– 
2,600 
(10) 
138,286 
 
5,643 
43,955 
24,362 
68,317
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
39
IVANHOE ENERGY INC. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
(tabular amounts in US$000s, except share and per share amounts) 
 
1. NATURE OF OPERATIONS
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. (the “Company” or “Ivanhoe”) is a publicly listed limited liability company incorporated under the laws 
of Yukon, Canada. Ivanhoe’s common shares are listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) and the NASDAQ Stock 
Market  (“NASDAQ”).  The  principal  corporate  office  of  Ivanhoe  is  located  at  999  Canada  Place,  Suite  654,  Vancouver, 
British Columbia, V6C 3E1. Our registered and records office is located at 300-204 Black Street, Whitehorse, Yukon, Y1A 
2M9 and our operational headquarters are located at 101-6th Avenue SW, 21st Floor, Calgary, Alberta, T2P 3P4. 
 
Ivanhoe  is  an  independent  international  heavy  oil  development  and production  company  focused  on  pursuing  long  term 
growth in its reserves and production. Ivanhoe plans to utilize advanced technologies, such as its HTL™ technology, that 
are designed to improve recovery of heavy oil resources. In addition, the Company seeks to expand its reserve base and 
production through conventional exploration and production of oil and gas.  
 
The  December  31,  2012  consolidated  financial  statements  (“Financial  Statements”)  have  been  prepared  using 
International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”). 
 
The  December  31,  2012  Financial  Statements  were  approved  by  the  Board  of  Directors  and  authorized  for  issue  on 
March 1, 2013. 
 
The Financial Statements are presented in US dollars and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand dollars except 
where otherwise indicated. 
 
2. BASIS OF PRESENTATION
2.1 Statement of Compliance
The Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB. The Financial Statements 
are not subject to qualification relating to the application of IFRS as issued by the IASB. 
 
2.2 Basis of Presentation
The  Financial  Statements  have  been  prepared  on  an  historical  cost  basis,  except  derivative  instruments,  which  are 
measured at fair value as explained in accounting policies set out in Note 3.  
 
3. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
3.1 Basis of Consolidation
The  Financial  Statements  incorporate  the  financial  statements  of  the  Company,  its  subsidiaries,  all  of  which  are  wholly 
owned,  and  special  purpose  entities  that  are  controlled  by  the  Company.  All  intercompany  balances,  transactions, 
revenue  and  expenses  are  eliminated  on  consolidation.  The  consolidated  accounts  are  prepared  using  uniform 
accounting policies. 
 
3.2 Foreign Currency Translation
The Company and its subsidiaries’ reporting currency and the functional currency of its operations is the US dollar as this 
is the principal currency of the economic environments in which they operate. 
 
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate in effect on the date 
of the statement of financial position. Non-monetary assets and liabilities, as well as operating transactions, are translated 
at the exchange rate prevailing at the time of the transaction. Translation gains and losses are reflected in earnings.
40
3.3 Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash  and  cash  equivalents  includes  cash  on  hand,  deposits  at  banks,  restricted  cash  and  short  term  highly  liquid 
investments with original maturities of three months or less. 
 
3.4 Restricted Cash
Restricted cash balances that are  not expected to be released within three months or less are reported separately from 
restricted cash balances included in cash and cash equivalents. 
 
3.5 Intangible Assets
i. Exploration and Evaluation Assets
Costs  of  exploring  for,  and  evaluating,  oil  and  gas  properties  are  initially  capitalized  as  intangible  exploration  and 
evaluation assets (“E&E assets”). Costs may include license fees, technical studies, seismic programs, exploratory drilling 
and directly attributable general and administrative costs. Interest on borrowings incurred to finance qualifying E&E assets 
is capitalized. 
 
If  E&E  assets  result  in  sufficient  proved  reserves  to  justify  commercial  production  and  technical  feasibility  can  be 
established, the assets will be tested for impairment and  reclassified as property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”). If E&E 
assets result in sufficient reserves to justify commercial production, but those reserves cannot be classified as proved, the 
assets will be tested for impairment and continue to be capitalized as intangible assets as long as progress is being made 
to  assess  the  reserves  and  economic  viability  of  the  well  and/or  related  project.  If  sufficient  reserves  cannot  be 
established, the corresponding E&E assets are charged to exploration and evaluation expense (“E&E expense”).   
 
E&E  assets  which  may  be  attributable  to  a  broad  exploration  area,  such  as  license  fees,  technical  studies  or  seismic 
programs, will be reclassified to PP&E or charged to E&E expense to best reflect the nature of the assets. Costs incurred 
prior to establishing the legal right to explore an area are charged to E&E expense as incurred. 
 
ii. Technology Assets
The Company’s HTL™ technology license (“Technology Assets”) consist of an exclusive, irrevocable license to deploy its 
HTL™  technology.  Technology  Assets  are  measured  at  cost  and  classified  as  an  intangible  asset.  Amortization  of  the 
Technology Assets will commence when the technology is available for use in field operations.  
 
iii. Derecognition
An intangible asset is derecognized on disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected from use or disposal. 
Gains  or  losses  arising  from  derecognition  are  measured  as  the  difference  between  the  net  disposal  proceeds  and  the 
carrying amount of the asset and are recognized in profit or loss when the intangible asset is derecognized. 
 
3.6 Property, Plant and Equipment
i. Oil and Gas Property and Equipment
PP&E  is  reported  at  cost  less  accumulated  depletion,  depreciation  and  accumulated  impairment  losses.  PP&E  may 
include the purchase price, reclassified E&E assets, any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and 
condition necessary for its intended use and decommissioning costs. Interest on borrowings incurred to finance qualifying 
PP&E is capitalized until the asset is capable of fulfilling its intended use. 
 
PP&E  is  depleted  using  the  unit-of-production  method  based  on  proved  plus  probable  reserves,  taking  into  account 
associated  future  development  costs.  For  purposes  of  these  calculations,  production  and  reserves  of  natural  gas  are 
converted to barrels on an energy equivalent basis at a ratio of six thousand cubic feet of natural gas for one barrel of oil. 
Depletion  rates  are  updated  annually  unless  there  is  a  material  change  in  circumstances,  in  which  case  they  would  be 
updated more frequently. 
 
ii. Other Assets
Furniture and equipment are depreciated on a straight-line basis  over the estimated useful life of the respective assets, 
ranging from three to five years. The Feedstock Test Facility (“FTF”) is depreciated over its expected economic life of 20 
years.
41
3.7 Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations
Non-current  assets  are  classified  as  held  for  sale  if  their  carrying  amounts  will  be  recovered  through  a  sale  transaction 
rather  than  through  continuing  use.  This  classification  is  required  when  the  sale  is  highly  probable  and  the  asset  is 
available for immediate sale in its present condition. For the sale to be highly probable, management must be committed 
to a plan to sell the asset, the asset must be actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable in relation to its fair 
value and the sale is expected to be completed within one year. 
 
Non-current assets classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of the carrying amount and fair value less costs 
to sell, with impairments recognized in the consolidated statement of loss in the period measured. Non-current assets held 
for sale are presented in current assets within the consolidated statement of financial position. Assets held for sale are not 
depleted, depreciated or amortized. 
 
Unless otherwise indicated, information presented in the notes to the financial statements relates only to  the Company’s 
continuing operations. Information related to discontinued operations is included in Note  7 and in some instances, where 
appropriate, is included as a separate disclosure within the individual footnotes. 
 
3.8 Impairment
The Company periodically assesses tangible and intangible assets or groups of assets for  impairment annually or earlier 
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Individual 
assets are grouped into cash generating units for impairment purposes at the lowest level at which there are identifiable 
cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows of other groups of assets.  
 
If  indicators  of  impairment  exist,  the  recoverable  amount  of  the  asset  group  is  estimated.  An  asset  group’s  recoverable 
amount is the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and its value in use. In assessing value in use, the estimated future 
cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of 
the  time  value  of  money  and  risks  specific  to  the  asset.  Where  the  carrying  amount  of  an  asset  group  exceeds  its 
recoverable amount, the asset group is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount. 
 
Previously recognized impairment losses are reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the 
asset group’s recoverable  amount. If that is the case,  the carrying  amount of the asset  group is increased to its revised 
recoverable amount which cannot exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation, had 
no impairment loss been recognized in prior periods. Such a reversal is recognized in earnings. Subsequent to a reversal 
of  impairment,  the  depletion  or  depreciation  expense  is  adjusted  in  future  periods  to  allocate  the  asset  group’s  revised 
carrying amount, less any residual value, over its remaining useful life. 
 
3.9 Decommissioning Provision
The  Company  recognizes  a provision  for  decommissioning  costs  when  it  has  an  obligation  to dismantle and remove its 
PP&E  or  restore  the  site  on  which  it  is  located.  The  provision  is  estimated  as  the  present  value  of  the  expected  future 
expenditures,  determined  in  accordance  with  local  conditions  and  requirements,  discounted  at  a  risk-free  rate.  A 
corresponding  amount  is  added  to  the  carrying  value  of  the  related  asset  and  is  amortized  as  an  expense  over  the 
economic  life  of  the  asset.  The  carrying  amount  of  the  provision  is  increased  for  the  passage  of  time  and  adjusted  for 
changes to the current market-based discount rate, amount and/or timing of the underlying cash flows needed to settle the 
obligation.  Actual  decommissioning  costs  incurred  reduce  the  obligation.  Any  difference  between  the  recorded 
decommissioning provision and the actual costs incurred is recorded as a gain or loss in the settlement period. 
 
3.10 Provisions and Contingencies
Provisions are recognized when the Company has a present obligation (legal or constructive) that has arisen as a result of 
a past event and it is probable that a future outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation, provided that a 
reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. 
 
Provisions are measured at the present value of the expenditures expected to be required to settle the obligation using a 
pre-tax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money  and the risks specific to the obligation. 
When  it  is  appropriate  to  discount  a  provision,  the  increase  in  the  provision  due  to  passage  of  time  is  recognized  as 
interest expense.
42
3.11 Financial Assets
Financial  assets  are  classified  as  i)  loans  and receivables,  ii)  available-for-sale,  iii)  financial  assets  at fair  value through 
profit  or  loss,  or  iv)  held-to-maturity.  Ivanhoe  determines  the classification of  its  financial  assets  upon  initial  recognition. 
Financial assets are recognized initially at fair value and subsequent measurement depends upon their classification. 
 
i. Loans and Receivables
Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets, with fixed or determinable payments, that are not quoted in an 
active market. Such assets are carried at amortized cost using the effective interest method if the time value of money is 
significant. Gains and losses are recognized in income when the loans and receivables are derecognized or impaired, as 
well  as  through  the  amortization  process.  The  Company’s  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  restricted  cash,  accounts 
receivable, note receivable and long term receivables are classified as loans and receivables. 
 
ii. Available-for-Sale
Available-for-sale financial assets are measured at fair value, with gains or losses recognized within other comprehensive 
income.  Accumulated  changes  in  fair  value  are  recorded  as  a  separate  component  of  equity  until  the  investment  is 
derecognized or impaired. The Company does not currently have any financial assets classified as available‐for‐sale. 
 
iii. Financial Assets at Fair Value Through Profit or Loss
Financial assets are classified as fair value through profit or loss (“FVTPL”) when the financial asset is held for trading or it 
is  designated  as  FVTPL.  Financial  assets  classified  as  FVTPL  are  measured  at  fair  value  with  unrealized  gains  and 
losses recognized through earnings. The Company currently does not have any financial assets classified at FVTPL.  
 
iv. Held-to-Maturity
Held-to-maturity  investments  are  non-derivative  financial  assets  with  fixed  or  determinable  payments  and  fixed  maturity 
dates that the Company has the intent and ability to hold to maturity. These investments are recognized on a trade  date 
basis  and  are  subsequently  measured  at  amortized  cost  using  the  effective  interest  method.  The  Company  does  not 
currently have any financial assets classified as held-to-maturity. 
 
v. Impairment
Financial  assets,  other  than  those  at  FVTPL,  are  assessed  for  indicators  of  impairment  annually.  Financial  assets  are 
impaired when there is evidence that the estimated future cash flows of the investment have been impacted. For financial 
assets carried at amortized cost, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and 
the present value of the estimated future cash flows, discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate.  
 
The  carrying  amount  of  all  financial  assets,  excluding  accounts  receivables,  is  directly  reduced  by  the  impairment  loss. 
The carrying amount of accounts receivable is reduced through the use of an allowance account. Subsequent recoveries 
of  amounts  previously  written  off  are  recorded  against  the  allowance  account.  Changes  in  the  carrying  amount  of  the 
allowance account are recognized in earnings. 
 
With the exception of available-for-sale equity instruments, which are revalued through other comprehensive income, if, in 
a subsequent period, the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease relates to an event occurring after 
the impairment was recognized, the previously recognized impairment loss is reversed through earnings. On the date of 
the  impairment  reversal,  the  carrying  amount  of  the  financial  asset  cannot  exceed  its  amortized  cost  had  it  not  been 
impaired. 
 
vi. Derecognition
Financial assets are derecognized when the rights to receive cash flows from the investments have expired, or have been 
transferred, and the Company has transferred substantially all risks and rewards of ownership.  
 
3.12 Financial Liabilities
Financial liabilities are classified as i) financial liabilities at FVTPL or ii) as other financial liabilities measured at amortized 
cost. Ivanhoe determines the classification of its financial  liabilities upon initial recognition. The measurement of financial 
liabilities depends on their classification.
43
i. Financial Liabilities at Fair Value Through Profit or Loss
Financial liabilities classified as FVTPL include financial liabilities held for trading and financial liabilities designated upon 
initial  recognition  as  FVTPL.  Derivatives,  including  bifurcated  embedded  derivatives,  are  also  classified  as  FVTPL. 
Changes  in  the  fair  value  of  financial  liabilities  classified  as  FVTPL  are  recognized  through  earnings.  The  Company’s 
derivative instruments are classified as financial liabilities at FVTPL.  
 
ii. Other Financial Liabilities
Financial  liabilities  classified  as  other  financial  liabilities  are  initially  recognized  at  fair  value  less  directly  attributable 
transaction  costs.  After  initial  recognition,  other  financial  liabilities  are  measured  at  amortized  cost  using  the  effective 
interest  method.  The  Company’s  accounts  payable  and  accrued  liabilities,  long  term  debt  and  long  term  provisions  are 
classified as other financial liabilities.  
 
3.13 Oil and Gas Revenue
Sales of oil and gas production are recognized when the risks and rewards of ownership pass to the buyer, collection is 
reasonably assured and the price is reasonably determinable. Oil and gas revenue represents the Company’s share and 
is recorded net of royalty payments to governments and other mineral interest owners. 
 
3.13 Income Tax
Income tax expense represents the sum of tax currently payable and deferred tax. 
 
i. Current income tax
Income  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  measured  at  the  amount  expected  to  be  recovered  from,  or  paid  to,  the  taxation 
authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted 
by the date of the statement of financial position.  
 
ii. Deferred income tax
Using the liability method, deferred income tax is provided for on taxable and deductible differences between the tax basis 
of assets and liabilities in comparison to their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes. 
 
Deferred income tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable temporary differences, except:
  where the deferred income tax liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a 
transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither accounting profit 
nor taxable profit or loss; and

in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries,  jointly controlled entities 
and associates, where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable 
that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred  income  tax  assets  are  recognized for  all  deductible  temporary  differences,  carry-forward  of  unused  tax  credits 
and  unused  tax  losses,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  probable that  taxable  profit  will  be  available against  which the deductible 
temporary differences and the carry-forward of unused tax credits and unused tax losses can be utilized except:
  where  the  deferred  income  tax  asset  relating  to  the  deductible  temporary  difference  arises  from  the  initial 
recognition  of  an  asset  or  liability  in  a  transaction  that  is  not  a  business  combination  and,  at  the  time  of  the 
transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss; and

in  respect  of  deductible  temporary  differences  associated  with  investments  in  subsidiaries,  jointly  controlled 
entities and associates, deferred tax assets are recognized only to the extent that it is probable that the temporary 
differences will reverse in the foreseeable future and taxable profit will be available against which the temporary 
differences can be utilized.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each date of the statement of financial position and reduced to 
the  extent  that  it  is  no  longer  probable  that  sufficient  taxable  profit  will  be  available  to  allow  all,  or  part,  of  the  deferred 
income tax asset to be utilized. Unrecognized deferred income tax assets are reassessed at each date of the statement of 
financial  position  and  are  recognized  to  the  extent  that  it  has  become  probable  that  future  taxable  profit  will  allow  the 
deferred tax asset to be recovered.
44
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the asset is 
expected to be realized or the liability is expected to be settled, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted 
or substantively enacted at the date of the statement of financial position. 
 
Deferred income tax relating to items recognized directly in equity is recognized in equity and not in earnings. 
 
Deferred income tax assets and deferred income tax liabilities are offset if, and only if, a legally enforceable right exists to 
set  off  current  tax  assets  against  current  tax  liabilities  and  the  deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  relate  to  income  taxes 
levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable entities which intend to either 
settle current  tax  liabilities  and assets on a net basis, or to realize the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously,  in 
each future period in which significant amounts of deferred tax assets or liabilities are expected to be settled or recovered. 
 
iii. Uncertain tax positions
The  Company  is  subject  to  taxation  in  numerous  jurisdictions.  The  Company  may  enter  into  transactions  or  perform 
calculations  during  the  course  of  business  for  which  the  ultimate  tax  determination  may  be  uncertain.  The  Company 
maintains  provisions  for  uncertain  tax  positions  that  it  believes  appropriately  reflect  its  risk.  These  provisions  are  made 
using the best estimate of the amount expected to be paid based on a qualitative assessment of all relevant factors. The 
Company reviews the adequacy of these provisions at the end of the reporting period. However, it is possible that at some 
future date, liabilities in excess of the Company’s provisions could result from audits by, or litigation with, tax authorities. 
Where  the  final  outcome  of  these  tax-related  matters  is  different  from  the  amounts  that  were  initially  recorded,  such 
differences will affect the tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made. 
 
3.14 Borrowing Costs
For  qualifying  assets,  which take a substantial  period  of  time to become ready  for  intended  use,  interest  on borrowings 
incurred to finance E&E assets and PP&E is capitalized until the asset is capable of fulfilling its intended use. Capitalized 
borrowing costs cannot exceed the actual interest and financing costs incurred. All other interest and financing costs are 
recognized in earnings in the period in which they are incurred. 
 
3.15 Share-Based Payments
Equity  settled  share-based  payments  in  the  form  of  stock  options  granted  to  directors,  employees  and  those  providing 
similar services to Ivanhoe and its subsidiaries, are measured at fair value on the grant date and expensed on a graded 
basis  over  the  vesting  period  of  each  annual  installment.  The  cumulative  expense  for  equity  settled  transactions 
incorporates a forfeiture rate to reflect the Company’s best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately 
vest. 
 
Cash  settled  share-based  payments,  such  as  the  restricted  share  units  granted  to  eligible  employees,  are  measured  at 
fair value on the grant date and are re-valued at each subsequent reporting period until vested. The awards are expensed 
on a graded basis over the vesting period of each annual installment. A forfeiture rate is applied in the same manner as 
described for equity settled awards. No expense is recognized for awards that do not ultimately vest. 
 
Shares issued from the stock bonus plan are measured at fair value on the grant date.  
 
3.16 Income or Loss per Common Share
Basic net income or loss per common share is computed by dividing net income or loss by the weighted average number 
of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income per common share amounts are calculated based on 
net income divided by dilutive common shares. Dilutive common shares are arrived at by adding common shares issuable 
on  conversion  of  options  or  purchase  warrants  to  weighted  average  common  shares,  assuming  that  proceeds  received 
from  the  exercise  of  in-the-money  stock  options  and  purchase  warrants  are  used  to  purchase  common  shares  at  the 
average market price; dilution from the Company’s convertible debt is considered using the “if converted” method.  
 
3.17 Standards and Interpretations Issued But Not Yet Adopted
The Company has reviewed new and revised accounting pronouncements listed below that have been issued, but are not 
yet  effective. There are no other standards or  interpretations  issued, but not  yet adopted, that  are  anticipated to have a 
material effect on the reported loss or net assets of the Company.
45
i. IFRS 9 Financial Instruments (“IFRS 9”)
The  first  phase  of  IFRS  9  was  issued  in  November  2009  and  is  intended  to  replace  IAS  39,  “Financial  Instruments: 
Recognition  and  Measurement”  (“IAS  39”).  IFRS  9  uses  a  single  approach  to  determine  whether  a  financial  asset  is 
measured at amortized cost or fair value,  as opposed to the multiple rules in IAS 39.  The approach is based on how an 
entity  manages  its  financial  instruments  given  its  business  model  and  the  contractual  cash  flow  characteristics  of  the 
financial  assets.  The  standard  also  requires  a  single  impairment  method  to  be  used,  replacing  the  multiple  impairment 
methods in IAS 39. IFRS 9 is effective for reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2015. The full impact of this 
standard will not be known until the phases addressing hedging and impairments have been completed. 
  
ii. IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements (“IFRS 10”)
IFRS  10  was  issued  in  May  2011  and  sets  a  single  basis  for  consolidation,  that  being  control  of  an  entity.  IFRS  10 
replaces portions of IAS 27, “Consolidated and  Separate Financial  Statements” and Standing Interpretations Committee 
12,  “Special  Purpose  Entities”  that  provide  a  single  model  on  how  entities  should  prepare  consolidated  financial 
statements.  This  standard  is  effective  for  reporting  periods  on  or  after  January  1,  2013,  with  earlier  adoption  permitted. 
The Company does not anticipate any changes to the consolidated financial statements as a result of this standard. 
 
iii. IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements (“IFRS 11”)
IFRS 11, issued in May 2011, establishes principles for financial reporting by entities involved in a joint arrangement and 
distinguishes  between  joint  operations  and  joint  ventures.  IFRS  11  supersedes  the  current  IAS  31,  “Interests  in  Joint 
Ventures”  and  Standing  Interpretations  Committee  13,  “Jointly  Controlled  Entities-Non  Monetary  Contributions  by 
Venturers” and is effective for reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013, with earlier adoption permitted. The 
Company does not anticipate any changes to the consolidated financial statements as a result of this standard. 
  
iv. IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities (“IFRS 12”)
IFRS  12,  issued  in  May  2011,  establishes  a  single  set  of  disclosure  objectives,  and  requires  minimum  disclosures 
designed to meet those objectives, regarding interests in subsidiaries, joint arrangements, associates or  unconsolidated 
structured  entities.  IFRS  12  is  intended  to  combine  the  disclosure  requirements  on  interests  in  other  entities  currently 
located throughout different standards.  This  standard  is  effective for  reporting  periods  on  or  after  January  1,  2013,  with 
earlier  adoption  permitted.  The  Company  does  not  anticipate  significant  changes  to  its  disclosure  of  interests  in  other 
entities as a result of this standard. 
 
v. IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurements (“IFRS 13”)
IFRS 13, issued in May 2011, defines fair value, sets out a single IFRS framework for measuring fair value and requires 
disclosures  about fair  value measurements.  IFRS  13  applies  to IFRS  that  require or  permit  fair  value measurements  or 
related disclosures, except in specified circumstances. IFRS 13 is to be applied for reporting periods beginning on or after 
January  1,  2013,  with  earlier  adoption  permitted.  The  Company  does  not  anticipate  significant  changes  to  its  fair  value 
measurements and related disclosures as a result of this standard. 
 
vi. IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures (“IAS 28”)
IAS 28 was amended in 2011 and prescribes the accounting for investments in associates and sets out the requirements 
for  the  application  of  the  equity  method  when  accounting  for  investments  in  associates  and  joint  ventures.  IAS  28  is 
effective for reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013, with earlier adoption permitted. The Company does 
not anticipate any changes to the consolidated financial statements as a result of this standard.  
  
4. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING JUDGMENTS AND KEY SOURCES OF ESTIMATION UNCERTAINTY
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  IFRS  requires  management  to  make  estimates  and 
assumptions in certain circumstances that affect reported amounts. The most sensitive estimates affecting the  Financial 
Statements are in the areas set out below. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
46
4.1 Critical Judgments in Applying Accounting Policies
i. E&E Assets
Management  must  determine  if  E&E  assets,  which  have  not  yet  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  proved  reserves,  should 
continue to be capitalized or charged to E&E expense. When making this determination, management considers factors 
such  as  the  Company’s  drilling  results,  planned  exploration  and  development  activities,  the  financial  capacity  of  the 
Company  to  further  develop  the  property,  the  ability  to  use  the  Company’s  HTL™  technology  in  certain  projects,  lease 
expiries, market conditions and technical recommendations from its exploration staff.  
 
ii. Impairment
a. Property, Plant and Equipment (“PP&E”)
Prior to the sale of its producing oil and gas properties in 2012, the Company periodically assessed  its oil and gas assets 
or groups of assets for impairment or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicated the carrying value may not 
be recoverable. Among other things, an impairment may be triggered by falling oil and gas prices, a significant negative 
revision to reserve estimates, the inability to use the Company’s HTL™ technology in certain projects, changes in capital 
costs  or  the  inability  to  raise  sufficient  financial  resources  to  further  develop  the  property.  Cash  flow  estimates  for  the 
Company’s impairment assessments require significant assumptions about future prices and costs, production, reserves 
volumes and discount rates, as well as potential benefits from the application of its HTL™ technology.   
 
b. Intangible Technology Assets
Ivanhoe  annually  reviews  the  intangible  Technology  Assets,  and  the  associated  FTF  assets  recorded  within  PP&E,  for 
impairment  or  if  an  adverse  event  or  change  occurs.  Indicators  of  adverse  events  could  include  HTL™  patent  expiries, 
advancements of new technologies or the inability to successfully commercialize the  HTL™ technology. The impairment 
of the Technology Assets requires management to make assumptions about competitive technological developments, the 
successful commercialization of the Company’s HTL™ technology and future cash flows from the HTL™ technology. 
 
4.2 Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty
i. HTL™ Technology
the  successful  commercialization  of
Future cash flows from  HTL™ technology  is  a key source of estimation uncertainty  as  it  requires management to make 
assumptions  about 
technological 
developments. Success in commercializing the HTL™ technology in the oil and gas industry depends on  the Company’s 
ability  to  economically  design,  construct  and  operate  commercial-scale  plants  and  a  variety  of  other  factors.  Ivanhoe 
expects  that  technological  advances  in  the  processes  and  procedures  for  upgrading  heavy  oil  and  bitumen  into  lighter, 
less viscous products  will  continue to progress. It is  possible that those advances could cause  the  HTL™ technology to 
become uncompetitive or obsolete. 
 
ii. Option Pricing Models
the  HTL™
technology  and  competitive
The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to measure the fair value of stock options and equity settled 
Restricted Share Units (“RSUs”) on the date of grant. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards on the grant date 
requires judgment, including estimating the expected life of the award, the expected volatility of the Company’s common 
shares and expected dividends. In addition, judgment is required to estimate the number of awards that are expected to 
be forfeited.  Changes in assumptions can materially affect the estimated fair value and, therefore, the existing models do 
not necessarily provide precise measures of fair value. 
 
iii. Convertible Note and Convertible Debentures
In connection  with the  acquisition  of  the  Tamarack  leases  in July  2008 from Talisman  Energy  Canada  (“Talisman”),  the 
Company  issued  a  Cdn$40.0  million  convertible  promissory  note  (the  “Convertible  Note”).  The  Canadian  dollar 
denominated debt is considered to contain an embedded derivative since the functional currency of the Company is the 
US  dollar.  As  a  result,  the  Convertible  Note  was  bifurcated  into  debt  and  the  equity  conversion  option,  which  was 
recognized at fair value using the Black-Scholes valuation method. The Black-Scholes valuation method requires the input 
of highly subjective assumptions regarding expected volatility of the Company’s share price and risk-free interest rate, and 
is therefore considered to be a crucial accounting estimate.  
 
On  June  9,  2011,  the  Company  issued  Cdn$73.3  million  of  5.75%  convertible  unsecured  subordinated  debentures 
(“Convertible  Debentures”).  The  Canadian  dollar  denominated  debt  is  considered  to  contain  an  embedded  derivative 
since the  functional  currency  of  the Company  is  the  US  dollar.  As  a result,  the  Convertible Debentures  were bifurcated 
into debt and the equity conversion option, which was recognized at fair value using the Black-Scholes valuation method.
47
The  Black-Scholes  valuation method  requires  the  input of  highly  subjective  assumptions  regarding expected  volatility  of 
the Company’s share price and risk-free interest rate, and is therefore considered to be a crucial accounting estimate.  
 
iv. Deferred Income Taxes
Ivanhoe operates in a specialized industry and in several tax jurisdictions. As a result, the Company’s income is subject to 
various  rates  of  taxation.  The  breadth  of  the  Company’s  operations  and  the global  complexity  of  tax  regulations  require 
assessments of uncertainties and judgments in estimating the taxes that the Company will ultimately pay. The final taxes 
paid are dependent upon  many factors,  including negotiations  with taxation authorities  in various jurisdictions, uncertain 
tax positions and resolution of disputes arising from federal, provincial, state and local tax audits. The resolution of these 
uncertainties and the associated final taxes may result in adjustments to the Company’s tax assets and tax liabilities.  
 
5. CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Cash at banks and on hand  
Restricted cash
December 31,
December 31,
2012
62,819 
– 
62,819
2011
16,867 
23 
16,890
Restricted cash includes funds pledged as security for a letter of credit with a short term maturity. 
 
6. RESTRICTED CASH
Ecuador Performance Bond  
Zitong Performance Bond
December 31,
December 31,
2012
500 
20,000 
20,500
2011
500 
20,000 
20,500
In December 2011, Ivanhoe was required to post a $20.0 million performance bond  (the “Zitong Performance Bond”) as 
part  of  the  completion  and  signing  of  a  supplementary  agreement  (the  “Supplementary  Agreement”)  to  the  Contract  for 
Exploration,  Development  and  Production  in  the  Zitong  Block  (the  “Zitong  Petroleum  Contract”)  with  China  National 
Petroleum Corporation (“CNPC”). Subsequent to year end the Zitong performance bond was released (see Note 25.1). 
 
7. ASSETS HELD FOR SALE AND DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
7.1 Zitong Block
On December 27, 2012 Sunwing Zitong Energy, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, completed the transfer of the 
Company’s participating interest in the Zitong Petroleum Contract to Shell China Exploration and Production Co. (“Shell”). 
 
In exchange for Sunwing’s interest in the Zitong Petroleum Contract, the Company will receive total pre-tax cash proceeds 
of  $105.0  million  subject  to  a  holdback  pending  the  completion  of  regulatory  audits.  Initial  pre-tax  proceeds  of 
approximately  $96.2  million  were  delivered  on  closing.  The  Company  will  receive  the  remaining  proceeds  once  CNPC 
completes  its  annual  cost  recovery  audit  for  2012  expenditures  ($3.7  million);  and  a  customary  holdback  period  of  six 
months from the transaction date expires ($5.1 million), less any post-closing adjustments. 
 
Shell will assume the obligations under the Supplementary Agreement and will replace the Zitong Performance Bond with 
a  new  performance  bond  financed  by  Shell.  As  a  result,  the  collateral  for  the  Zitong  Performance  Bond,  currently 
presented  as  restricted  cash  on  the  Company’s  consolidated  statement  of  financial  position,  will  be  released  (see  Note 
25.1). 
 
The carrying value of the Zitong asset, which is comprised of E&E expenditures, was $41.9 million at December 31, 2011; 
Zitong capital expenditures were previously reported in the Asia segment.
48
7.2 Pan-China Resources Ltd.
On December 17,  2012 the Company  completed the sale to  MIE  Holdings Corporation (“MIE”) for all of the outstanding 
shares of its indirect, wholly owned subsidiary, Pan-China Resources Ltd. 
 
As  consideration,  the  Company  received  $45.0  million  in  cash,  less  $5.4  million  in  adjustments  and  a  $4.0  million 
holdback. The Company will receive the holdback amount six months after closing if there are no claims form MIE. 
 
7.3 Results of Discontinued Operations
Analysis  of  the  results  of  discontinued  operations  and  on  the  disposal  of  the  assets  constituting  the  discontinued 
operations is as follows:
Revenue 
Expenses and other 
Net (loss) income before tax and before disposal 
Income taxes 
Net (loss) income after tax and before disposal 
 
Pre-tax gain on disposal 
Tax on disposal 
After-tax gain on disposal 
Net income (loss) from discontinued operations
Year Ended December 31,
2012
2011
32,470 
35,105 
(2,635) 
3,008 
(5,643) 
 
57,007 
 1,720  
55,287  
 49,644
37,407 
32,818 
4,589 
3,104 
1,485 
 
– 
– 
– 
1,485
2010
21,726 
25,939 
(4,213) 
111 
(4,324) 
 
– 
– 
– 
(4,324)
The  net  cash  flows  attributable to the  operating,  investing  and financing  activities  of  the  discontinued  operations  are  as 
follows:
Operating activities 
Investing activities 
Financing activities 
Total cash flows
Year Ended December 31,
2012
3,372 
111,909 
– 
115,281
2011
3,748 
(30,595) 
– 
(26,847)
2010
4,811 
 (20,657) 
– 
(15,846)
As  at December  31,  2012,  $14.4 million  due from  counterparties  in  the  sale  of  discontinued  operations  was  included in 
accounts receivable in the consolidated statement of financial position. 
 
8. INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Cost
Balance December 31, 2010                        
Additions 
Exploration and evaluation expense 
Assets reclassified as held for sale 
Balance December 31, 2011                     
Additions 
Exploration and evaluation expense 
Balance December 31, 2012
Exploration and Evaluation Assets
Asia
38,135 
23,094 
(2,124) 
(41,902) 
 17,203 
424 
(2,968) 
14,659
Canada
123,755 
9,697 
– 
– 
 133,452 
8,334 
(159) 
 141,627
Latin
America
19,525 
12,303 
(650) 
– 
31,178 
25,561 
(19,867) 
36,872
Total
181,415 
45,094 
(2,774) 
(41,902) 
181,833 
34,319 
(22,994) 
193,158
HTL™
Technology
92,153 
– 
– 
– 
92,153 
– 
– 
92,153
Total Intangible
Assets
273,568 
45,094 
(2,774) 
(41,902) 
273,986 
34,319 
(22,994) 
285,311
Exploration and evaluation costs of $23.0 million, mainly relating to drilling activities, were expensed in the twelve months 
ended December 31, 2012 (December 31, 2011 - $2.8 million, December 31, 2010 - $8.4 million). The IP-17 exploratory 
well in the southern part of Block 20 in Ecuador led to the discovery of non-commercial quantities of hydrocarbons and the 
Company expensed $19.9 million in related costs in 2012. In addition, the Company also expensed $3.0 million in capital 
costs in 2012 relating to the second Mongolian well drilled in 2011.
49
In  the  year  ended  December  31,  2012,  $1.5  million  (December  31,  2011  –  $2.1  million)  of  employee  benefits  directly 
attributable to E&E assets were capitalized. In addition, in the year ended December 31, 2012, nil (December 31, 2011 – 
$0.3 million) related to share-based compensation costs were capitalized to E&E assets. 
 
The carrying value of the HTL™ technology has not been amortized because the asset has not yet been brought into use. 
Asset use would include commercial application of the technology for one of the Company’s exploration projects, licensing 
the  technology  to  a  third  party  or  collecting  royalties  on  the  use  of  the  technology  by  a  third  party.  Once  a  commercial 
application  of  the  technology  occurs,  the  Company  will  review  the  pattern  in  which  the  economic  benefits  of  the  HTL™ 
technology will be consumed, or otherwise used up, and determine the appropriate method of amortization to be initiated 
at that time. 
 
9. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Cost
Balance December 31, 2010 
Additions 
Disposals 
Balance December 31, 2011                        
Additions  
Disposals
Balance December 31, 2012
Asia
35,939 
12,923 
– 
48,862 
6,984 
(55,846)
–
Accumulated Depletion and Depreciation
Balance December 31, 2010 
Depletion and depreciation 
Disposals  
Balance December 31, 2011                       
Depletion and depreciation 
Disposals
Balance December 31, 2012
Net Book Value
As at December 31, 2010 
As at December 31, 2011 
As at December 31, 2012
6,196 
6,899 
– 
 13,095 
6,691 
(19,786) 
–
29,743 
35,767 
–
9.1 Oil and Gas Property and Equipment
Oil and Gas Property and Equipment
Canada
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
– 
– 
–
Latin
America
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
– 
– 
–
Other 
Assets
13,009 
1,471 
(3)  
14,477 
– 
(79)
14,398
2,134 
1,132 
(1) 
3,265 
961 
(33) 
4,193
10,875 
11,212 
10,205
Total 
PP&E
48,948 
14,394 
 (3) 
63,339 
6,984 
(55,925)
14,398
8,330 
8,031 
(1) 
 16,360 
7,652 
(19,819)  
4,193
40,618 
 46,979 
10,205
Total
35,939 
12,923 
– 
48,862 
6,984 
(55,846)
–
6,196 
6,899 
– 
13,095 
6,691 
(19,786)
–
29,743 
35,767 
–
In the year ended December 31, 2012, the employee benefits directly attributable to PP&E capitalized was nil (December 
31, 2011 – $0.1 million). 
 
9.2 Other Assets
Other  assets  include  the  Company’s  FTF  at  the  Southwest  Research  Institute  in  San  Antonio,  Texas,  and  general 
furniture and fixtures.
50
9.3 Security
Should  Ivanhoe  receive  government  and  other  approvals  necessary  to  develop  the  northern  border  of  one  of  the 
Company’s oil sands leases in the Athabasca region of Canada (“Tamarack”), the Company will make a cash payment to 
Talisman of up to Cdn$15.0 million, as a  contingent, final  payment for the  acquisition of the oil sands leases (Note 15). 
The contingent payment is secured by a first fixed charge and security interest in favor of Talisman, including over the oil 
sands leases, and a general security interest in all of the Company’s present and after acquired property other than equity 
interests  in  the  Company’s  subsidiaries  (through  which  it  holds  assets  in  Mongolia  and  Ecuador  and  the  HTL™ 
technology).
10. DEBT
10.1 Convertible Debentures
Debt component of the Convertible Debentures  
Unamortized bifurcated derivative and transaction costs 
Carrying amount
December 31,
December 31,
2012
73,686 
(8,472) 
65,214
2011
72,085 
(10,193) 
61,892
On  June  9,  2011,  the  Company  issued  Cdn$73.3  million  in  5.75%  convertible  unsecured  subordinated  debentures  at  a 
price  of  Cdn$1,000  per  debenture  (“Convertible  Debentures”).  Cdn$50.0  million  of  the  Convertible  Debentures  were 
issued in a public offering of Cdn$50.0 million. The remaining Cdn$23.3 million were issued in a private placement on the 
same terms as the public offering. 
 
The Convertible Debentures mature on June 30, 2016, pay interest semi-annually on June 30 and December 31 and are 
convertible  at  a  price  of  Cdn$3.36  per  share.  They  are  redeemable  after  June  30,  2014  at  Ivanhoe’s  option  with  the 
redemption price being settled using either cash or common shares. 
 
The  Canadian  dollar  denominated  debt  is  considered  an  embedded  derivative  since  the  functional  currency  of  the 
Company is the US dollar and, as such, the option was bifurcated and recognized at fair value as a long term derivative 
liability (Note 12.1) with changes in value recorded each period in the consolidated statement of loss.  
 
Interest incurred for all outstanding debt was recorded as follows:
Interest expense(1) 
Capitalized to E&E 
Capitalized to PP&E 
Total interest incurred
Year ended December 31,
2012
4,213 
5,027 
(319) 
8,921
2011
333 
2,878 
319 
3,530
2010
– 
2,503 
– 
2,503
(1)
Interest expense is included in finance expense on the consolidated statements of loss and comprehensive loss.
11. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.1 Fair Value of Financial Instruments Measured at Amortized Cost
Except  as  detailed  below,  the  fair  value  of  the  Company’s  financial  instruments  recognized  at  amortized  cost 
approximates their carrying value due to the short term maturity of these instruments.
Convertible Debentures
Carrying amount 
Fair value
December 31,
December 31,
2012
65,214 
60,052
2011
61,892 
51,901
The  fair  value  of  the  liability  component  of  the  Convertible  Debentures  was  estimated  using  the  closing  price  of  the 
publicly traded debentures at December 31, 2012.
51
11.2 Financial Instruments Measured at Fair Value Through Profit or Loss
The  Company  classifies  its  financial  instruments  according  to  the  fair  value  hierarchy  outlined  in  IFRS  7,  Financial 
Instruments: Disclosures, as described below:
  Level 1 – using quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
  Level 2 – using inputs for the asset or liability, other than quoted prices, that are observable either directly (i.e. as
prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived from prices).
  Level 3 – using inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data, such as prices based
on internal models or other valuation methods.
The following table presents the Company’s derivative instruments measured at FVTPL:
Balance December 31, 2010 
Issuance of convertible debentures 
Exercise of options 
Derivative (gains) losses through profit and loss 
Expiration of purchase warrants through profit and loss 
Foreign exchange gains 
Balance December 31, 2011 
Derivative gains through profit and loss 
Foreign exchange gains 
Expiration of subsidiary option through profit and loss 
Balance December 31, 2012
Level 1
2006    
Purchase 
Warrants
5,615 
– 
(2) 
(3,267) 
(2,346) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
2009 & 2010 
Purchase 
Warrants
1,616 
– 
(3,107) 
2,968 
(1,477) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
Level 2 
2008
Convertible 
Component
of Debt 
1,216 
– 
– 
(1,216) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
2011
Convertible 
Component   
of Debentures
– 
9,852 
– 
(7,810) 
– 
(425) 
1,617 
(1,430) 
(6) 
–
181
Level 3
Subsidiary
Option
– 
– 
– 
183 
– 
– 
183 
– 
– 
(183)
–
Total     
Fair    
Value 
8,447 
9,852 
(3,109) 
(9,142) 
(3,823) 
(425) 
1,800 
(1,430) 
(6) 
(183)
181
The  gain  on  derivative instruments  of  $1.6 million  for  the  year  ended December  31,  2012  (December  31,  2011  –  $13.0 
million) originated from the revaluation of derivative instruments measured at FVTPL. 
  
11.3 Risks Arising from Financial Instruments
Ivanhoe is  exposed in varying  degrees  to  normal  market risks  resulting  from foreign currency  exchange  rate risk,  credit 
risk, interest rate risk and liquidity risk. The Company recognizes these risks and manages its operations to minimize the 
exposure to the extent practicable.  
 
i. Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
Ivanhoe is exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk as a result of incurring capital expenditures and operating costs 
in currencies other than the US dollar. A substantial portion of the Company’s activities are transacted in, or referenced to, 
US dollars, including capital spending in Ecuador and ongoing FTF operations. Some of the Canada exploration activities 
are funded in Canadian dollars and the Convertible Debentures were issued in  Canadian dollars in 2011. The Company 
did not enter into  any foreign currency  derivatives in 2012. To help reduce the  Company’s exposure to foreign currency 
exchange rate risk, the Company seeks to hold assets and liabilities denominated in the same currency when appropriate.  
 
The  following  table  shows  the  Company’s  exposure  to  foreign  currency  exchange  rate  risk  on  its  net  loss  and 
comprehensive  loss  for  2012,  assuming  reasonably  possible  changes  in  the  relevant  foreign  currency. This  analysis 
assumes all other variables remain constant.
(Increase) Decrease in Net Loss and Comprehensive Loss
Canadian dollar
Change From a 10%   
Increase or Weakening
Change From a 10%
Decrease or Strengthening
1,287
(1,444)
52
ii. Credit Risk
Ivanhoe is exposed to credit risk with respect to its cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, accounts receivable, note 
receivable  and  long  term  receivables.  The  Company’s  maximum  exposure  to  credit  risk  at  December  31,  2012,  is 
represented by the carrying amount of these non-derivative financial assets.  
 
The Company believes its exposure to credit risk related to cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash is minimal due 
to the quality of the financial institutions where the funds are held and the nature of the deposit instruments. Most of the 
Company’s credit exposures are with counterparties in the energy industry and are therefore exposed to normal industry 
credit risks. Ivanhoe manages its credit risk by entering into sales contracts only with established entities.
Accounts receivable – current
December 31,
December 31,
2012
14,848
2011
7,859
Long  term  value-added  tax  receivable  from  the  Ecuadorian  government  will  be  recoverable  upon  commencement  of 
commercial operations. Ivanhoe considers the risk of default on this to be low due to the Company’s ongoing operations in 
Ecuador.   
 
iii. Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that suitable sources of funding for the Company’s business activities may not be available. Since 
cash flows from existing operations are insufficient to fund operations and future capital expenditures, Ivanhoe intends to 
finance future capital projects with a combination of strategic investors and/or public and private debt and equity markets, 
either at the parent company level or at the project level or from the sale of existing assets. There is no assurance that the 
Company will be able to obtain such financing, or obtain it on favorable terms.   
 
The  contractual  maturity  of  the  fixed  rate  derivative  and  non-derivative  financial  liabilities  are  shown  in  the  table  below. 
The  amounts  presented  represent  the  future  undiscounted  cash  flows  and  therefore  may  not  equate  to  the  values 
presented in the statement of financial position.
As at December 31, 2012
Non-derivative financial liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Debt and interest
12. DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
12.1 Convertible Debentures
Less 
than 1 
year
14,436 
4,237
1 to 2 
years
– 
8,474
3 to 4 
years
– 
75,797
The  Company  issued  Cdn$73.3  million  in  Convertible  Debentures  in  the  second  quarter  of  2011,  as  described  in  Note 
10.1.  The outstanding principal amount is convertible into common shares of the Company. The fair value of the  equity 
conversion component was $0.2 million at December 31, 2012, calculated with the Black-Scholes valuation method using 
a  risk-free  interest  rate  of  1.38%,  a  dividend  yield  of  0.00%,  a  weighted  average  volatility  factor  of  40.00%  and  an 
expected life of 3.5 years.  
 
If the volatility  used to fair  value the equity conversion component decreased by  10%, the fair value would decrease  by 
$0.2 million. If volatility increased by 10%, the fair value of the convertible option would increase by $0.4 million. 
 
12.2 Purchase Warrants
All of the Company’s purchase warrants expired in 2011 and there were no purchase warrants outstanding at December 
31, 2012.
53
13. LONG TERM PROVISIONS
Decommissioning provision 
Balance, beginning of year
Liabilities incurred 
Revisions in cash flow estimates 
Unwinding of discount 
Change in discount rates
Balance, end of year
Long term accrued liabilities 
Long term provisions
13.1 Decommissioning Provision
December 31,
December 31,
2012
1,567 
950 
210 
28 
121 
2,876 
281 
3,157
2011
1,108 
– 
59 
27 
373 
1,567 
352 
1,919
The decommissioning provision represents the present value of decommissioning costs  related to oil and gas properties 
in Canada,  the  FTF,  and oil  and gas  properties  in Ecuador,  which are  expected  to be  incurred  in 2014, 2029  and  2038 
respectively.  The  Company  records  a  provision for  the estimated future cost  of  decommissioning  oil  and gas  properties 
and the FTF on a discounted basis. The provision for the costs of decommissioning these  oil and gas properties and the 
FTF has been estimated, using current prices and discounted using a risk-free interest rate of 0.9% to 2.2% at December 
31, 2012 (December 31, 2011 – 1.1% to 2.4%).   
 
13.2 Long term accrued liabilities
Long  term  accrued liabilities  include  share-based payments  arising  from  cash-settled  awards  from  the  Restricted  Share 
Unit plan (Note 17) and a finance lease obligation related to vehicle leases in Ecuador.   
 
14.  INCOME TAXES
The  Company  and  its  subsidiaries  are  required  to  individually  file  tax  returns  in  each  of  the  jurisdictions  in  which  they 
operate. The provision for income taxes differs from the amount computed by applying the statutory income tax rates to 
the  net  losses  before  income taxes.  The  combined  Canadian federal  and provincial  statutory  rates  as  at  December  31, 
2012, 2011 and 2010 were 25.0%, 26.5%% and 28.0%%, respectively. The sources and tax effects for the differences are 
as follows:
Year ended December 31,
2012 
66,450
25.0% 
(16,613) 
13,036 
(760) 
791 
387 
781 
327 
(461) 
– 
80 
(2,432)
2011
2010
31,135
26.5%
(8,251) 
7,456 
(867) 
172 
(3,784) 
1,410 
(136) 
(621) 
– 
247 
(4,374)
23,414 
28.0% 
(6,556) 
3,906 
(396) 
982 
– 
1,604 
(911) 
(1,306) 
1,096 
425 
(1,156)
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes 
Combined Canadian federal and provincial statutory rates 
Tax benefit  
Tax losses and deferred deductions not recognized as deferred tax assets 
Foreign net losses affected at higher income tax rates 
Expiry of tax loss carry-forwards 
Derivative and other gains not deductible (taxable) 
Compensation not deductible  
Net currency exchange losses (gains) not deductible (taxable)  
Change in prior year estimate of tax loss carry-forwards 
Effect of change in effective income tax rates on deferred tax assets 
Other differences 
Recovery of income taxes
54
Significant components of the Company’s deferred income tax assets and liabilities are as follows:
Assets held for sale 
Property, plant and equipment 
Intangible assets 
Tax loss carry-forwards 
Tax credit carry-forwards
December 31, 2012
Assets
– 
672 
2,543 
 21,556 
350 
 25,121
Liabilities
– 
 (3,686) 
 (35,786) 
– 
–
(39,472)
December 31, 2011
Assets
10,475 
3,325 
– 
21,105 
350 
35,255
Liabilities
(10,475) 
(3,344) 
(39,209) 
– 
– 
(53,028)
As  at  December  31,  2012,  the  Company’s  deferred  income tax  liability  is  $14.4  million  in the consolidated  statement  of 
financial position, which is composed of $11.7 million in the US tax jurisdiction and $2.7 million related to Mongolia. 
 
The  Company  has  recorded  deferred  tax  assets  only  to  the  extent  that  they  offset  deferred  tax  liabilities  in  respect  of 
income  taxes  expected  to  be  levied  by  a  particular  taxation  authority  on  a  particular  taxable  entity  or  where  different 
taxable entities can be expected to realize the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously. 
 
The Company has not recorded deferred income tax assets in respect of the following:
Operating tax loss carry-forwards 
Financing costs
December 31,
December 31,
2012
2011
175,655 
3,691 
179,346
172,617 
6,334 
178,951
The consolidated loss carry-forward amounts and the year of expiry as at December 31, 2012, are shown in the following 
table. A loss of approximately Cdn$83.0 million from the disposition of Russian operations in 2000 and the settlement of 
intercompany  loans  in  2012,  is  available  for  carry-forward  indefinitely  against  future  Canadian  capital  gains,  and  is  not 
included in the deferred income tax assets above.
Year of Expiry
2014 
2015 
2018 
2019 
2020 to 2025 
2026 to 2032
5,546 
7,197 
2,093  
1,078  
5,508 
218,112 
239,534
As  at  December  31,  2012,  the  Company’s  loss  carry-forwards  of  $239.5  million  were  composed  of  $177.4  million  in 
Canada and $62.1 million in the United States.  
 
At December 31, 2012, current income taxes payable is $1.7 million (December 31, 2011– $0.6 million).
55
15. COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
15.1 Operating Lease Arrangements
In  the  year  ended  December  31,  2012,  the  Company  expended  $1.0  million  (December  31,  2011  –  $1.8  million)  on 
operating leases relating to the rental of office space, which expire between June 2012 and March 2017.  
 
At December 31, 2012, future net minimum payments for operating leases were:
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
After 2016
15.2 Other
1,546 
626 
426 
426 
106 
3,130
Should  Ivanhoe  receive  government  and  other  approvals  necessary  to  develop  the  northern  border  of  one  of  the 
Tamarack leases, the  Company  will make a cash payment to Talisman of up to  Cdn$15.0 million,  as a contingent, final 
payment for the 2008 of the Tamarack leases.  
 
From time to time, Ivanhoe enters into consulting agreements whereby a success fee may be payable if and when either a 
definitive agreement is signed or certain other contractual milestones are met. Under the agreements, the consultant may 
receive  cash,  common  shares,  stock  options  or  some  combination  thereof.  Similarly,  agreements  entered  into  by  the 
Company  may  contain  cancellation  fees  or  liquidated  damages  provisions  for  early  termination.  These  fees  are  not 
considered to be material. 
 
The Company may provide indemnities to third parties, in the ordinary course of business, that are customary in certain 
commercial  transactions,  such  as  purchase  and  sale  agreements.  The  terms  of  these  indemnities  will  vary  based  upon 
the contract, the nature of which prevents Ivanhoe from making a reasonable estimate of the maximum potential amounts 
that may be required to be paid. The Company’s management is of the opinion that any resulting settlements relating to 
indemnities are not likely to be material. 
 
In the ordinary course of business, the Company is subject to legal proceedings being brought against it. While the final 
outcome  of  these  proceedings  is  uncertain,  the  Company  believes  that  these  proceedings,  in  the  aggregate,  are  not 
reasonably likely to have a material effect on its financial position or earnings. 
 
16. SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
16.1 Share Capital
Authorized 
 
 
Issued and Outstanding
Unlimited common shares with no par value 
Unlimited preferred shares with no par value
344,139,428 common shares (December 31, 2011 – 344,139,428, December 31, 2010 – 
334,365,482) 
Nil preferred shares (December 31, 2011 – nil, December 31, 2010 – nil)
In 2011, cash proceeds of $29.9 million were raised through the exercise of purchase warrants and stock options.  
 
In  2010,  the  Company  raised  $135.7  million,  net  of  $6.0  million  of  issuance  costs,  through  a  private  placement  of  50 
million  special  warrants  at  a  price  of  Cdn$3.00  per  special  warrant.  The  Canadian  dollar  purchase  warrants  were 
considered to contain an embedded derivative since the functional currency of the Company is the US dollar. As a result, 
they 
were 
bifurcated into debt and the equity conversion option, which was recognized at a fair value of approximately $14.0 million 
using the Black-Scholes valuation method. 
 
See  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Changes  in  Equity  for  the  change  in  common  shares  issued  in  the  years  ended 
December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010.
56
16.2 Contributed Surplus
Contributed surplus at December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 consisted solely of share-based compensation expense from 
equity settled awards. 
 
17. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS
Share-based transactions were charged to earnings, as general and administrative or operating expenses, or  capitalized 
to E&E assets as follows:
Share-based expense related to
Equity settled transactions 
Cash settled transactions 
Total share-based expense 
Share-based payments capitalized as E&E assets
17.1 Stock Option Plan
Details of transactions under the Company’s stock option plan are as follows:
Year ended December 31,
2012
3,289 
211 
3,502 
–
2011
2010
5,614 
269 
5,883 
335
7,557 
– 
7,557 
799
Outstanding, January 1, 2010 
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
Forfeited 
Outstanding, December 31, 2010 
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
Forfeited 
Outstanding, December 31, 2011 
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
Forfeited 
Outstanding, December 31, 2012
Exercisable, December 31, 2010 
Exercisable, December 31, 2011 
Exercisable, December 31, 2012
Number of
Stock Options
(000s)
15,013 
6,041 
(2,743) 
(635) 
(749) 
16,927 
2,924 
(1,687) 
(710) 
(1,706) 
15,748 
3,083 
– 
(1,420) 
(2,536)
14,875 
 
7,324 
8,231 
9,031
Weighted Average
Exercise Price
(Cdn$)
2.27 
2.56 
2.28 
2.60 
2.64 
2.24 
2.06 
2.44 
2.90 
2.46 
2.14 
0.93
–
2.05 
2.17 
1.89
2.19 
2.13 
2.10
Shares  authorized  for  issue  under  the  option  plan  at  December  31,  2012  were  24.1  million  (December  31,  2011  –  24.1 
million). 
 
There  were  no  stock  options  exercised  in  the  twelve  months  ended  December  31,  2012.  The  weighted  average  share 
price per option at the date of exercise for stock options exercised in the year ended December 31, 2011 was  Cdn$3.15 
(December 31, 2010 – Cdn$3.23).
57
The  weighted  average  fair  value  of  stock  options  granted  from  the  stock  option  plan  during  the  year  ended               
December 31, 2012 was Cdn$0.66 (December 31, 2011 – Cdn$1.22, December 31, 2010 – Cdn$1.81) per option at the 
grant  date  using  the  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model.  The  weighted  average  assumptions  used  for  the  calculation 
were:
Expected life (in years) 
Volatility (1) 
Dividend yield 
Risk-free rate 
Estimated forfeiture rate
2012
6.3
73.9%
–
1.7% 
8.1%
2011
6.4
74.0%
–
2.2% 
6.6%
2010
6.3
87.3%
–
2.6% 
5.5%
(1)  Expected volatility factor based on historical volatility of the Company’s publicly traded common shares.
The  following  table  summarizes  information  in  respect  of  stock  options  outstanding  and  exercisable  at  December  31, 
2012:
Range of Exercise Prices (Cdn$)
0.56 to 1.29 
1.30 to 1.89 
1.90 to 2.79 
2.80 to 3.44
17.2 Restricted Share Unit Plan
Outstanding
(000s)
3,498 
3,767 
6,762 
848 
14,875
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Life
(years)
Weighted Average
Exercise Price
(Cdn$)
6.2 
0.8 
3.9 
4.0 
3.7
0.92 
1.62 
2.37 
3.25 
1.89
The  Company  adopted  a  restricted  share  unit  (“RSU”)  plan  in  the  second  quarter  of  2011  under  which  it  may  issue 
restricted share units to eligible employees. RSUs vest in equal increments over three years and are settled in shares or 
cash  on  the  anniversary  date.  RSUs  do  not  entitle  the  holder  to  exercise  voting  rights  until  they  have  vested  and  the 
underlying shares have been delivered to the participant.   
 
Details of transactions under the Company’s RSU plan are as follows:
Outstanding, January 1, 2010 
Granted 
Vested 
Forfeited 
Outstanding, December 31, 2010 
Granted 
Vested 
Forfeited 
Outstanding, December 31, 2011 
Granted 
Vested 
Forfeited 
Outstanding, December 31, 2012
Number of
RSUs
(000s) (1)
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
1,115 
– 
(178) 
937 
2,548 
(283) 
(573) 
2,629
Weighted Average
Fair Value
(Cdn$)
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
1.62
–
2.08 
1.53 
0.68 
1.14 
1.04 
0.72
(1)
Includes RSUs that will be withheld on behalf of employees to satisfy statutory tax withholding requirements.
58
The weighted average fair value of RSU’s granted during the year ended December 31, 2012 was Cdn$0.68 (December 
31,  2011  –  Cdn$1.62)  per  RSU  at  the  grant  date  using  the  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model.  The  weighted  average 
assumptions used for the calculation were:
Expected life (in years) 
Volatility (1) 
Dividend yield 
Risk-free rate 
Estimated forfeiture rate
2012
2.0
69.2%
–
1.1% 
26.7%
2011
3.0
64.8%
–
1.2% 
6.1%
2010
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
(1)  Expected volatility factor based on historical volatility of the Company’s publicly traded common shares.
The liabilities arising from the RSUs to be settled by way of cash payments and the intrinsic value of those liabilities are:
Current liabilities related to RSUs 
Long term liabilities related to RSUs 
Intrinsic value of vested RSUs
18. RETIREMENT PLANS
December 31,
December 31,
2012
2011
228 
142 
–
152 
117 
–
In 2001, the  Company  adopted a defined contribution retirement or thrift  plan (“401(k) Plan”) to assist US employees  in 
providing for retirement or other future financial needs. Employees’ contributions (up to the maximum allowed by US tax 
laws) are matched 100% by the Company. 
 
For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2012,  the  Company  paid  $0.2  million  for  retirement  plan  contributions  (year  ended 
December 31, 2011 – $0.4 million, December 31, 2010 – $0.4 million).  
 
19. SEGMENT INFORMATION
Ivanhoe’s  organizational  structure  reflects  its  various  operating activities  and the  geographic  areas  in  which it  operates. 
Oil and gas operations are divided into three geographic segments: Asia, Canada and Latin America.  
 
Asian operations capture the Company’s exploration in Mongolia. In 2012, the Company disposed of its oil production in 
Dagang  and  Daqing  and  exploration  at  Zitong  in China,  formerly  included  in  the Asia segment.  The  Canadian segment 
comprises activities from Ivanhoe’s oil sands development project at Tamarack.  Latin America consists of exploration and 
development of Block 20 in Ecuador.  
 
The  Technology  Development  area  captures  costs  incurred  to  develop,  enhance  and  identify  improvements  in  the 
application  of  the  Company’s  HTL™  technology.  The  Corporate  area  consists  of  costs  that  are  not  directly  allocable  to 
operating projects, such as executive officers, corporate financings and other general corporate activities.  
 
The  accounting  policies  of  the  segments  are  the  same  as  the  Company’s  consolidated  accounting  policies.  Segment 
results  include  transactions  between  business  segments.  Corporate  activities  undertaken  on  behalf  of  a  segment  are 
allocated at cost. Segment liabilities include intercompany balances.
59
The  following  tables  present  the  Company’s  segment  income  (loss),  capital  investments  and  identifiable  assets  and 
liabilities:
Year ended December 31, 2012 
 
Interest income                                                                         
  
Expenses and other 
Operating  
General and administrative 
Exploration and evaluation 
Depreciation 
Foreign currency exchange (gain) loss 
Derivative instruments loss 
Finance 
Loss on debt repayment
Net loss before income taxes 
       
Recovery of income taxes 
Current 
Deferred
from  continuing
loss
income  and
loss  and  comprehensive
Net 
operations 
Net 
discontinued operations 
Net income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss) 
   
Capital investments – Intangible 
Capital investments – Property, plant and equipment
total  comprehensive
income
from
Technology 
Development
4,252  
 3,184
567
–      
 
 
 
 
 –      
 
 –      
 –      
 5  
 
 –
8,008  
 
 (8,008)
–      
 36  
 
 
 36  
 
 
 (7,972)
– 
 (7,972) 
 
– 
3
Corporate 
 
 25
–      
 
 –
–
17,119
184  
 1,309  
 (1,430) 
 4,474  
 2,977  
 24,633  
 
 (24,608)
2,396 
2,396 
 
(22,212)
– 
(22,212) 
 
– 
50
Total
28  
 
 
 4,252  
 31,149  
 22,994  
 961  
 1,247  
 (1,430) 
 4,328  
 2,977  
 66,478  
 
 (66,450)
–
2,432 
2,432 
 
(64,018)
49,644 
(14,374) 
 
40,112 
7,332
Asia
Canada
Latin
America
–      
 
 
 –      
 
 
 
 –      
 –      
 
 –
–      
 –      
 –
5,336  
 19,867  
 164
(169)
25,198  
 
 (25,198)
(25,198)
– 
 (25,198) 
 
23,416 
6
1,689  
 2,968  
 45  
 (62)
–      
 
 
 –      
 
 
 
 
 –      
 –      
 –
4,640  
 
 (4,640) 
 
 
 
 
–      
 –      
 –
(4,640)
49,644 
45,004 
 
12,853 
7,269
3
–      
 
 3,821  
 
 159  
 1  
 
 –      
 –      
 18  
 
 –
3,999  
 
 (3,996)
–      
 –      
 –
(3,996)
– 
 (3,996) 
 
3,834 
4
60
Year ended December 31, 2011 
 
Interest income                                                                         
  
Expenses and other 
Operating  
General and administrative 
Exploration and evaluation 
Depreciation 
Foreign currency exchange (gain) loss 
Derivative instruments gain 
Finance 
Gain on derecognition of long term provision
Loss before income taxes 
       
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes 
Current 
Deferred
income  and
Net  income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss) from 
continuing operations 
Net 
discontinued operations 
Net income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss) 
   
Capital investments – Intangible 
Capital investments – Property, plant and equipment
total  comprehensive
income
from
Technology 
Development 
 
–
4,561 
4,026 
– 
555 
– 
– 
8 
– 
9,150
(9,150) 
 
 
– 
(1,389) 
(1,389)
(10,539)
– 
(10,539) 
 
– 
879
Corporate 
 
572
– 
21,435 
– 
275 
(627) 
(13,148) 
289 
(1,900) 
6,324
(5,752) 
 
 
(7) 
5,770 
5,763
11
– 
11 
 
– 
15
Total
572 
 
 
 4,561  
 38,579  
 2,774  
 1,014  
 (534) 
 (13,148) 
 361  
 (1,900) 
31,707
(31,135) 
 
 
(7) 
4,381 
4,374
(26,761)
1,485 
(25,276) 
 
37,390 
13,670
Asia
Canada
Latin
America
– 
 2,216  
 2,124  
 37  
 96
–
-
26  
– 
4,499
(4,499) 
 
 
– 
– 
–
(4,499)
1,485  
(3,014) 
 
20,390 
12,733
– 
 
 
– 
3,257 
– 
9 
(6) 
– 
6 
– 
3,266
(3,266) 
 
 
– 
– 
–
(3,266)
– 
(3,266)
6,280 
–
–
– 
7,645 
650 
138 
3 
– 
32 
– 
8,468
(8,468) 
 
 
– 
– 
–
(8,468)
– 
(8,468) 
 
10,720 
43
61
Year ended December 31, 2010
Asia
Canada
Latin
America
Technology 
Development
Corporate
Total
Interest income                                                                         
  
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative 
Exploration and evaluation 
Depreciation 
Foreign currency exchange gain 
Derivative instruments gain 
Finance
Income (loss) before income taxes 
       
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes 
Current 
Deferred
Net  income  (loss)  and  comprehensive  income  (loss)  from 
continuing operations 
Net  loss  and  total  comprehensive  loss  from  discontinued 
operations
Net income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss) 
   
Capital investments – Intangible 
Capital investments – Property, plant & equipment
As at December 31, 2012
Assets(1) 
Liabilities(2)
As at December 31, 2011
Assets(1) 
Liabilities(2)
–
– 
1,759 
– 
38 
(6) 
– 
– 
1,791
(1,791) 
 
 
– 
(73) 
(73)
(1,864)
(4,324)
(6,188)
27,261 
4,580
Asia
37,901  
 25,616  
 
 
107,902 
140,621
– 
 
 
– 
3,719 
– 
9 
(15) 
– 
6 
3,719
(3,719) 
 
 
– 
– 
–
(3,719)
–
(3,719)
26,526 
3
Canada
142,051  
 156,696  
 
 
133,880 
144,531
–
– 
9,525 
4,934 
52 
– 
– 
8 
14,519
(14,519) 
 
 
– 
– 
–
(14,519)
–
(14,519)
11,560 
308
Latin
America
77,149  
 97,325  
 
 
40,216 
64,362
–
4,086 
953 
– 
(83) 
– 
– 
10 
4,966
(4,966)
– 
1,244 
1,244
(3,722)
–
(3,722)
– 
351
Technology 
Development
101,846  
 95,205  
 
 
102,435 
87,822
202
– 
20,197 
– 
243 
(3,248) 
(18,571) 
– 
(1,379)
1,581
(15) 
– 
(15)
1,566
–
1,566
– 
391
202
4,086 
36,153 
4,934 
259 
(3,269) 
(18,571) 
24 
 23,616
(23,414) 
 
 
 (15) 
 1,171  
 1,156  
 
 
(22,258)
(4,324) 
 
(26,582)
65,347 
5,633
Corporate
Total
43,110  
(275,783)
29,277 
(337,763)
402,057  
99,059 
 
 
413,710 
99,573
(1)  Segment assets include investments in subsidiaries that are eliminated for consolidation under Corporate segment and assets classified as held for sale.
(2)  Liabilities for the Corporate segment include intercompany receivables of $367.0 million at December 31, 2012 (December 31, 2011 – $428.7 million)
resulting in a negative balance.
62
20. CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
The  Company  defines  capital  as  long  term  debt and total  shareholders’  equity.  At  December  31,  2012,  the Company  is 
not subject to any financial covenants. The Company’s objectives are to safeguard Ivanhoe’s ability to continue as a going 
concern,  to  continue  the  exploration  and  development  of  its  projects  and  to  maintain  a  flexible  capital  structure  which 
optimizes the costs of capital at an acceptable risk. To manage its capital requirements, the Company prepares an annual 
expenditure budget that is updated periodically. The annual and updated budgets are approved by the Board of Directors. 
Ivanhoe’s capital structure at December 31 was:
Long term debt 
Shareholders’ equity
Total capital
December 31, 2012
65,214
302,998
368,212
17.7%
82.3%
100.0%
December 31, 2011
61,892
314,137
376,029
16.5%
83.5%
100.0%
The  Company’s  main  source  of  funds  has  historically  been  public  and  private  equity  and  debt  markets.  The  Company 
does not anticipate cash flow from operating activities will be sufficient to meet its operating and capital obligations and, 
as such, the Company intends to finance its operating and capital projects from a combination of strategic investors in its 
projects and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at a parent company level or at a project level.  
 
In 2012 the Company raised $64.6 million in debt, net of issuance costs; the debt was repaid for $70 million in the year. In 
comparison, the Company raised $72.9 million, net of issuance costs, through the issuance of the Convertible Debentures 
in 2011. 
 
In order to maximize ongoing development efforts, the Company does not pay dividends. The Company’s invests its cash 
in highly liquid, short  term, interest‐bearing investments with maturities of 90 days or less to correspond with the expected 
timing of expenditures. 
 
21. SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION
Changes in non-cash activities for the Company are comprised of the following:
Year ended December 31,
Operating activities
Accounts receivable 
Note receivable 
Prepaid and other current assets 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Discontinued operations
Investing activities
Accounts receivable 
Prepaid and other current assets 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Discontinued operations
Financing activities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
2012
2011
7,344
(3)   
(235)   
 
1,575 
 
908 
9,589
53
(14,346)   
 
1,555    
14,388 
 
 
1,650 
 
 
(32)   
(32)   
11,207
38
(2,210)   
 
(301)   
 
5,306 
 
– 
2,833
716 
1,748
(10,779)
–
(8,315)   
 
 
 
(5,425)
57 
57
2010
(551) 
(39) 
176 
2,076 
– 
1,662
(775) 
(2,264) 
8,503 
– 
5,464
(10) 
(10) 
7,116
22. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Ivanhoe  is  party  to  cost  sharing  agreements  with  other  companies  which  are  related  or  controlled  through  common 
directors  or  shareholders.  Through  these  agreements,  the  Company  shares  office  space,  furnishings,  equipment,  air 
travel  and  communications  facilities  in  various  international  locations.  Ivanhoe  also  shares  the  costs  of  employing 
administrative  and  non-executive  management  personnel  at  these  offices.  Finally,  Ivanhoe  entered  into  an  unsecured 
loan agreement on December 30, 2011 with Ivanhoe Capital Finance Ltd., a company wholly owned by Robert Friedland, 
for  a  $10.0  million  loan  (“ICFL  Loan”).  Interest  on  the  loan  was  13.33%  per  annum,  calculated  monthly  and  due  upon 
maturity. The funds were advanced to the Company on January 3, 2012 and repaid on December 31, 2012. These related 
party transactions are in the normal course of business and the Company believes them to be valued at fair market value.
63
The breakdown of the related party expenses for the year ended December 31 is as follows:
Related Party
Global Mining Management Corp. 
Ivanhoe Capital Aviation Ltd. 
Ivanhoe Capital Services Ltd. 
SouthGobi Resources Ltd. 
Ibex Resources Inc. 
1092155 Ontario Inc. 
Ensyn Technologies Inc. 
Ivanhoe Capital PTE Ltd. 
Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. 
Ivanhoe Capital Finance Ltd.
Nature of Transaction
Administration 
Aircraft 
Administration 
Administration 
Business development 
HTL™ technology 
HTL™ technology 
Administration 
Administration 
Financing
The liabilities of the Company include the following amounts due to related parties:
Related Party
Nature of Transaction
Global Mining Management Corp. 
SouthGobi Resources Ltd. 
Ivanhoe Capital Services Ltd. 
Ivanhoe Capital PTE Ltd. 
Ivanhoe Capital Finance Ltd.
Administration 
Administration 
Administration 
Administration 
Financing
2012
286 
1,200 
316 
44 
– 
44 
– 
– 
– 
1,627 
 3,517
2011
585 
1,200 
407 
154 
– 
44 
14 
150 
– 
– 
 2,554
2010
1,107 
1,200 
293 
77 
40 
52 
7 
75 
13 
– 
 2,864
December 
31, 2012
December 31,
2011
39 
– 
26 
– 
– 
65
52 
13 
93 
7 
– 
165
Ivanhoe sold Cdn$23.3 million of the Convertible Debentures, on a private placement basis and on the same terms as the 
public offering (Note 10.1), to certain officers and directors. 
 
23. REMUNERATION OF KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL
The remuneration of directors and other key members of management was:
Year ended December 31,
Base salaries or fees and other cash payments 
Employer’s contributions to retirement plan 
Share-based compensation expense
2012
2011
2010
4,416 
97 
2,817 
7,330
3,762 
87 
2,780 
6,629
3,675 
66 
2,398 
6,139
64
24. INVESTMENTS IN SUBSIDIARIES
Ivanhoe  has  investments  in  the  following  100%  owned  subsidiaries  which  principally  affect  the  operating  results  or  net 
assets of the Company. Subsidiaries which are inactive or immaterial have been omitted.
Name of Subsidiary
Sunwing Holding Corporation * 
Sunwing Energy Ltd.  
Sunwing Zitong Energy Ltd.  
Ivanhoe Energy Mongolia Inc. * 
PanAsian Energy Ltd.  
Shaman LLC   
Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc. * 
Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Canada Inc. * 
Ivanhoe Energy Holdings Inc. * 
Ivanhoe HTL Petroleum Ltd.
Jurisdiction of Incorporation or Formation
Barbados 
Bermuda 
British Virgin Islands 
Alberta 
Nevis 
Mongolia 
British Columbia 
British Columbia 
Alberta 
Nevada 
Nevada
* - subsidiary held directly by Ivanhoe Energy Inc. All other companies are held through subsidiary undertakings. 
 
25. SUBSEQUENT EVENT
25.1 Release of Zitong Performance Bond
With  the  completion  of  the  sale  of  the  Zitong  Block  described  in  Note  7.1,  Shell  assumed  the  obligations  under  the 
Supplementary Agreement, and on January 31, 2013 replaced the Company's performance bond with its own. As a result, 
on February 1, 2013 the $20.0 million collateral for that performance bond, currently presented as restricted cash on the 
Company's consolidated statement of financial position was released to the general operating account.
65
SUPPLEMENTARY DISCLOSURES ABOUT OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES  
(Unaudited)  
(all tabular amounts are expressed in US$000s, except reserves and depletion rate amounts) 
 
The  following  information  about  the  Company’s  oil  and  gas  producing  activities  is  presented  in  accordance  with 
Accounting  Standards  Codification  932  Extractive  Activities  –  Oil  and  Gas  (section  235-55)  formerly  US  SFAS  No.  69, 
“Disclosures About Oil and Gas Producing Activities”. 
 
Oil and Gas Reserves 
Proved oil and gas reserves are those quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, 
can  be  estimated  with  reasonable  certainty  to  be  economically  producible  from  a  given  date  forward,  from  known 
reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations. 
 
Proved  developed  oil  and  gas  reserves  are  proved  reserves  that  can  be  expected  to  be  recovered:  (i)  through  existing 
wells  with  existing  equipment  and  operating  methods  or  in  which  the  cost  of  the  required  equipment  is  relatively  minor 
compared  to  the  cost  of  a  new  well;  and  (ii)  through  installed  extraction equipment  and  infrastructure  operational  at  the 
time of the reserves estimate if the extraction is by means not involving a well. 
 
Estimates  of  oil  and  gas  reserves  are  subject  to  uncertainty  and  will  change  as  additional  information  regarding  the 
producing fields and technology becomes available and as future economic conditions change. 
 
Reserves presented in this section represent the Company’s share of reserves, excluding royalty interests of others. The 
reserves were based on the estimates by the independent petroleum engineering firm of GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. 
The changes in the Company’s net proved oil reserves in China for the three-year period ended December 31, 2012, were 
as follows:
(mbbls)
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2009
Revisions of previous estimates 
Production
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2010
Revisions of previous estimates 
Extensions and discoveries 
Production
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2011
Production 
Sale of reserves in place
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2012
Developed
Undeveloped
Total(1)
886 
   667 
(288) 
1,265 
271 
52 
(353) 
1235 
(284) 
(951) 
–
215 
        258 
– 
473 
(171) 
98 
– 
400 
– 
(400) 
–
1,101  
925(2) 
 (288) 
1,738  
100 
150 
(353) 
1,635 
(284) 
(1,351)
–
(1)  None of the Company’s proved oil reserves are related to bitumen.
(2)  The reserve revision in 2010 is mainly related to lower estimated decline rates on the Dagang property based on production to date.
Net proved producing reserves in China as at December 31, were as follows:
(mbbls)
2010 
2011
2012
1,265
1,235
–
66
Standardized  Measure  of  Discounted  Future  Net  Cash  Flows  and  Changes  Therein  Relating  to  Proved  Oil  and 
Gas Reserves 
 
For the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010 future net cash flows were computed using 12 month historical 
average  prices  in  estimating  the  Company’s  proved  oil  reserves,  current  costs,  and  statutory  tax  rates  adjusted  for  tax 
deductions, that relate to existing proved oil reserves. The following standardized measure of discounted future net cash 
flows  from  proved  oil  reserves  was  computed  using  prices  of  $93.91  and  $76.35  bbl  of  oil  for  2011,  and  2010, 
respectively. The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows from proved oil reserves  was nil for 2012 as 
the Company disposed of all of is proved reserves as part of the sale of Pan-China Resources Ltd. A discount rate of 10% 
was applied in determining the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows. 
 
The  Company  does  not  believe  that  this  information  reflects  the  fair  market  value  of  its  oil  and  gas  properties.  Actual 
future net cash flows will differ from the presented estimated future net cash flows in that:
•   future production from proved reserves will differ from estimated production;
•   future production may also include production from probable and possible reserves;
•   future, rather than average annual, prices and costs will apply; and
•   existing economic, operating and regulatory conditions are subject to change.
67
The  standardized  measure  of  discounted  future  net  cash  flows  for  China  as  at  December  31  in  each  of  the  three  most 
recently completed financial years were as follows:
Future cash inflows 
Future development and restoration costs 
Future production costs 
Future income taxes 
Future net cash flows 
10% annual discount 
Standardized measure
(1)  The Company disposed of all of is proved reserves as part of the sale of Pan-China Resources Ltd., any revenue generated in 2012 from
proved reserves is accounted for in discontinued operations.
Future cash inflows 
Future development and restoration costs 
Future production costs 
Future income taxes 
Future net cash flows 
10% annual discount 
Standardized measure
Future cash inflows 
Future development and restoration costs 
Future production costs 
Future income taxes 
Future net cash flows 
10% annual discount 
Standardized measure
2012(1)
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
–
2011
178,378  
(12,260) 
(75,639)       
(14,656) 
75,823       
(20,713) 
55,110
2010
132,745  
(7,209) 
(58,790)       
(12,238) 
54,508       
(14,861) 
39,647
Note:  The  Company  is  using  current  costs  in  the  preparation  of  the  information  shown  in  the  tables  above  and  to  determine  proved  reserves.  However,  future 
production costs may not be easily comparable to historical production costs. The two main causes of difficulty in analyzing future production costs when compared 
to historical spending are summarized as follows:
1.
In March 2006, the Ministry of Finance of the Peoples Republic of China (“PRC”) issued the “Administrative Measures on Collection of Windfall Gain Levy 
on  Oil  Exploitation  Business”  (the  “Windfall  Levy  Measures”).  According  to  the  Windfall  Levy  Measures,  effective  as  of  March  26,  2006,  enterprises 
exploiting  and  selling  oil  in  the  PRC  are  subject  to  a  windfall  gain  levy  (the  “Windfall  Levy”)  if  the  monthly  weighted  average  price  of  oil  is  above 
$40.00/bbl. The Windfall Levy is imposed at progressive rates from 20% to 40% on the portion of the weighted average sales price exceeding $40.00/bbl. 
As a result, the cost associated with the Windfall Levy is not related to production volumes but instead is related to the commodity price. As an example, 
as oil prices increased during 2008, the amount  of the Windfall Levy also increased significantly, resulting in a $13.46 per bbl increase in 2008 when 
compared to 2007. The Windfall Levy accounted for $21.14/bbl cost of the total $43.92/bbl operating costs in our China operations, or in absolute terms 
$10.4 million of the total $21.5 million. This compared to only $4.00/bbl or $1.9 million in absolute terms incurred during 2009. On November 1, 2011, 
China’s Ministry of Finance raised the windfall levy threshold from $40.00/bbl to $55.00/bbl.
2.  Effective  January  1,  2009,  the  Dagang  field  reached  “Commercial  Production”  status  as  defined  by  the  Production  Sharing  Contract  with  our  partner 
CNPC. The effect of this change is that the Company no longer pays 100% of operating costs but now pays 82%, representing the “pre-cost recovery” 
proportionate share. Effective September 1, 2009, the project reached cost recovery and the working interests changed to 51%  CNPC and 49% for the 
Company.  In  our  2008  independent  reserve  report  that  was  used  to  prepare  the  standardized  measure  disclosures  above,  the  49/51%  reversion  was 
estimated based on total costs yet to recover.
68
Changes in standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows from China as at December 31 in each of the three 
most recently completed financial years were as follows:
2012
(17,771) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(37,339) 
– 
(55,110) 
55,110
–
2011
(21,833) 
24,927 
9,426 
(18,571) 
12,605         
4,485 
3,965         
(2,418) 
2,877 
15,463 
39,647
55,110
2010
(12,216) 
15,878 
– 
(8,082) 
4,924         
31,578 
1,855
(11,645) 
(1,193) 
21,099 
18,548
39,647
Sale of oil and gas, net of production costs 
Net changes in prices and production costs 
Extensions and discoveries, net of future production and development costs 
Net change in future development costs 
Development costs incurred during the period that reduced future development costs 
Revisions of previous quantity estimates 
Accretion of discount 
Net change in income taxes 
Sale of reserves in place 
Changes in production rates (timing) and other 
Decrease 
Standardized measure, beginning of year 
Standardized measure, end of year
Sale of oil and gas, net of production costs 
Net changes in prices and production costs 
Extensions and discoveries, net of future production and development costs 
Net change in future development costs 
Development costs incurred during the period that reduced future development costs 
Revisions of previous quantity estimates 
Accretion of discount 
Net change in income taxes 
Changes in production rates (timing) and other 
Increase 
Standardized measure, beginning of year 
Standardized measure, end of year
Sale of oil and gas, net of production costs 
Net changes in prices and production costs 
Extensions and discoveries, net of future production and development costs 
Net change in future development costs 
Development costs incurred during the period that reduced future development costs 
Revisions of previous quantity estimates 
Accretion of discount 
Net change in income taxes 
Changes in production rates (timing) and other 
Increase 
Standardized measure, beginning of year 
Standardized measure, end of year
69
Costs incurred in oil and gas property acquisition, exploration, and development activities for the Company’s oil and gas 
properties for the years ended December 31 were as follows:
Canada 
Exploration
Ecuador 
Property acquisition
Unproved 
Exploration
Asia 
Exploration 
Development
Total
The depletion rates, on a net production basis, were as follows:
China ($/bbl)
2012 
2011 
2010
2012
8,176 
8,176 
 
 
– 
25,560  
25,560  
 
12,453 
7,878 
20,331 
54,067
2011
9,697 
9,697
767 
11,536 
12,303
23,094 
12,923 
36,017 
58,017
22.63 
19.54 
21.54
The results of operations from producing activities for the years ended December 31 were as follows:
Oil revenue 
Operating  
Depletion 
Results of operations from producing activities
2012
2011
2010
32,466 
(12,186) 
(6,681) 
13,599
37,403 
(15,570) 
(7,053) 
14,780
21,720 
(9,539) 
(6,303) 
5,878
70
ITEM 9.  CHANGES IN  AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING
AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A: CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
The Company’s management, including our Executive Chairman and Chief Financial Officer, evaluated the effectiveness 
of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-
15(e) and 15d-15(e)) as of December 31, 2012. Based upon this evaluation, management concluded that these controls 
and procedures were effective to ensure that (1) information required to be disclosed in the Company’s reports under the 
Exchange  Act  is  accumulated  and  communicated  to  the  Company’s  Executive  Chairman  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  to 
allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure and (2) information required to be disclosed by the Company in the 
reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time 
periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. Any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, 
can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives.  
 
MANAGEMENT REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
The management of the Company is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial 
reporting.  Internal  control  over  financial  reporting  is  a  process  designed  by,  or  under  the supervision  of,  the Company’s 
principal  executive  and  principal  financial  officers  and  effected  by  the  Company’s  board  of  directors,  management  and 
other  personnel,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of 
consolidated financial statements for external purposes in accordance with  generally accepted accounting principles and 
includes those policies and procedures that:
  pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the Company;
  provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of  consolidated 
financial statements in accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and 
expenditures  of  the  Company  are  being  made  only  in  accordance  with  authorizations  of  management  and 
directors of the Company; and
  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use  or
disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, 
projections  of  any  evaluation  of  effectiveness  to  future  periods  are  subject  to  the  risk  that  controls  may  become 
inadequate  because  of  changes  in  conditions,  or  that  the  degree  of  compliance  with  the  policies  or  procedures  may 
deteriorate.  The  Company’s  management  assessed  the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting as of December 31, 2012. In making this assessment, the Company’s management used the criteria set forth by 
the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission  (COSO) in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated 
Framework.  Based  on  our  assessment,  management  has  concluded  that,  as  of  December 31,  2012,  the  Company’s 
internal control over financial reporting was effective based on those criteria. Management has reviewed the results of its 
assessment  with  the  Audit  Committee  of  the  Board  of  Directors.  Deloitte  LLP,  the  Company’s  Independent  Registered 
Chartered Accountants that audited the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, has also 
audited the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2012, as stated in 
their report which immediately follows.
/s/ Carlos A. Cabrera
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Executive Chairman  
 
March 18, 2013
/s/ Gerald D. Schiefelbein
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Chief Financial Officer
71
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
 
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as 
of  December  31,  2012,  based  on  the  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the 
Committee of  Sponsoring Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission.    The  Company's  management  is  responsible for 
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control 
over financial reporting, included in the  accompanying Management Report of Internal Control over Financial Reporting.  
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. 
 
We  conducted  our  audit  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United 
States).    Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether 
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.  Our audit included obtaining an 
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and 
evaluating  the  design  and  operating  effectiveness  of  internal  control  based  on  the  assessed  risk,  and  performing  such 
other  procedures  as  we  considered  necessary  in  the  circumstances.    We  believe  that  our  audit  provides  a  reasonable 
basis for our opinion. 
 
A company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company's 
principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the company's 
board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted 
accounting  principles.    A  company's  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  includes  those  policies  and procedures  that 
(1)  pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that,  in  reasonable  detail,  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the  transactions  and 
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary 
to  permit  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  that 
receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being  made  only  in  accordance  with  authorizations  of  management  and 
directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 
 
Because  of  the  inherent  limitations  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  including  the  possibility  of  collusion  or 
improper  management  override  of  controls,  material  misstatements  due  to  error  or  fraud  may  not  be  prevented  or 
detected on  a timely  basis.    Also, projections  of  any  evaluation of  the  effectiveness  of the  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting  to  future  periods  are  subject  to  the  risk  that  the  controls  may  become  inadequate  because  of  changes  in 
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  
 
In  our  opinion,  the  Company  maintained,  in  all  material  respects,  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of 
December  31,  2012,  based  on  the  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control  —  Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. 
 
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  Canadian  generally  accepted  auditing  standards  and  the  standards  of  the 
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated financial statements as of and for the year 
ended  December  31,  2012  of  the  Company  and  our  report  dated  March  18,  2013  expressed  an  unqualified  opinion  on 
those consolidated financial statements. 
 
/s/ Deloitte LLP
Independent Registered Chartered Accountants
March 18, 2013 
Calgary, Canada
72
CHANGES IN INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
There were no changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 
2012  that  have  materially  affected,  or  are  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the  Company’s  internal  control  over 
financial reporting.
ITEM 9B:  OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
PART III
ITEM 10:  DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS  AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Each director is elected for a one-year term or until his successor has been duly elected or appointed.  All of our directors 
were  elected  at  our  last  annual  general  meeting  of  shareholders  (“AGM”)  held  on  April  24,  2012.  The  term  of  office  of 
each director concludes at our next AGM, unless the director’s office is earlier vacated in accordance with our by-laws.
Name
Age
Positions Held
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Robert M. Friedland 
A. Robert Abboud 
Howard R. Balloch 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia
61 
62 
83 
61 
71 
59 
69 
38 
63
Executive Chairman   
Founder and Executive Co-Chairman   
Independent Lead Director                            
Director  
Director  
Director  
Director 
Director 
Director
Officers serve at the pleasure of the Board of Directors.
Name
Age
Current Position
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Robert M. Friedland 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
K. C. Patrick Chua  
Gerald G. Moench 
Greg G. Phaneuf 
Michael A. Silverman 
Edwin J. Veith 
Joseph D. Kuhach 
Marlene A. Duff 
Santiago Pàstor Morris
A. ROBERT ABBOUD
61 
62 
54 
57 
64 
43 
59 
54 
51 
62 
54
Executive Chairman   
Founder and Executive Co-Chairman   
Senior Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer  
Senior Vice President 
Senior Vice President 
Senior Vice President, Business Development & Corporate Strategy 
Senior Vice President, Downstream Technology and Chief Technology Officer 
Senior Vice President, Canadian Projects 
Senior Vice President, Upstream Technology & Integration 
Senior Vice President, Human Resources 
Senior Vice President
Ivanhoe Director
Since
2010 
1995 
2006 
2002 
2005 
2005 
2007 
2010 
2005
Executive Officer
Since
2011 
2008 
2009 
1999 
1999 
2010 
2007 
2007 
2008 
2008 
2012
Mr.  Abboud  has  been  the  Independent  Lead  Director  of  the  Company  since May  2006 and  serves  as  a member  of  the 
Company’s  Audit,  Nominating  and  Corporate  Governance,  Compensation  and  Human  Resources  and  Executive 
Committees.  He was Co-Chairman of the Company from May 2006 to December 2011.  Mr. Abboud has been President 
and Chief Executive Officer of A. Robert Abboud and Company, a private investment company, since 1984, and has had 
a 46-year career in oil and gas, banking and foreign affairs.  He was previously President and Chief Operating Officer of 
Occidental  Petroleum  Corporation,  Chairman  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  First  Chicago  Corporation  and  The  First 
National Bank of Chicago, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of First City Bancorporation of Texas, Chairman of ACB 
International,  Ltd.,  a  joint  venture  that  included  the  Bank  of  China  and  a  subsidiary  of  the  Chinese  Ministry  of  Foreign 
Relations  and  Trade.    Mr.  Abboud  has  served  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  AMOCO  and  as  a  Board  and 
Compensation Committee member as well as Audit Committee Chairman for AAR Corporation, Alberto-Culver Company, 
Hartmarx Corporation, ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Inland Steel Industries. Mr. Abboud holds a Bachelor of Arts (Cum 
Laude)  from  Harvard  College,  a  J.D.  from  Harvard  Law  School  and  a  Master  of  Business  Administration  from  Harvard
73
Business  School,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Illinois  and  Massachusetts  Bar  Associations,  as  well  as  the  Federal  Bar  and 
American Bar Associations. Mr. Abboud was selected to serve on our Board due to his extensive experience at the senior 
executive and board level in the oil and gas industry and in international finance, and for the financial acumen, strategic 
insight, acute business judgment and international business experience he brings to the Company.
ROBERT M. FRIEDLAND
Mr.  Friedland  has  been  Founder  and  Executive  Co-Chairman  of  the  Company  since  May  2008.   A  co-founder  of  the 
Company, Mr. Friedland has been a director since February 1995. He was formerly Deputy Chairman from June 1999 to 
May  2008,  President from May  2008  to  May  2010 and Chief  Executive Officer  from  May  2008  to  December  2011.    Mr. 
Friedland has served on the Company’s Executive Committee since its formation in October 2008 and was Chair of the 
Executive Committee from October 2008 to December 2011.  
 
Mr.  Friedland  brings  many  valuable  attributes  to  the  Ivanhoe  Energy  Board,  including  his  extensive  experience  in 
international corporate finance and as a senior executive and director of several internationally-focused, natural resource 
companies  and  his  proven  track  record  in  overseeing  the  discoveries  of  major  mineral  deposits  in  Canada,  Mongolia, 
Africa and elsewhere.  
 
Mr. Friedland founded Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. (now Turquoise Hill Resources Ltd.) and was Executive Chairman from March 
1994  to  April  2012  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  from  October  2010  to  April  2012.  He  also  is  the  founder  of  Ivanplats 
Limited (formerly  Ivanhoe  Nickel & Platinum Ltd.), a  public company  presently  advancing mineral  projects in  Africa, has 
been Ivanplats’ Executive Chairman since November 2000 and was President from June 2003 to May 2008.  
 
Mr.  Friedland  founded  Ivanhoe  Capital  Corporation  and  has  been  its  Chairman  since  1991  and  President  since  1988. 
Ivanhoe Capital is a private, Singapore-based company specializing in providing venture capital and project financing for 
international business enterprises, predominantly in the fields of energy and minerals. He  was Chairman of Potash One 
Inc., a Canadian public company, from May 2009 to January 2011.  
 
HOWARD R. BALLOCH
Mr. Balloch has been a director of the Company since January 2002.  Mr. Balloch  chairs the Compensation and Human 
Resources Committee, and is a member of the Nominating and Corporate Governance and Executive Committees. From 
January  2011  until  March  2013,  he  served  as  Chairman  of  Canaccord  Genuity  Asia  Limited,  the  Asian  subsidiary  of 
Canaccord Financial Inc. which acquired in 2011 The Balloch Group, an investment advisory firm Mr. Balloch founded in 
2001.  A  veteran  Canadian  diplomat,  Mr.  Balloch  served  as  Canada’s  ambassador  to  the  People’s  Republic  of  China, 
Mongolia and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea between 1996 and 2001, at the end of a 25-year career in the 
Government of Canada’s Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade and the Privy Council Office. Mr. Balloch 
is  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Canada  China  Business  Council,  having  served  as  its  President  between  2001  and  2006.  Mr. 
Balloch  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  (Honours)  degree  in  Political  Science  and  Economics  and  a  Master  of  Arts  in 
International Relations from McGill University,  after which he pursued further studies at the University of  Toronto and at 
Fondation Nationale de Sciences Politiques in Paris.  Mr. Balloch was selected to serve as a director on our Board based 
on  his  experience  as  a  Canadian  diplomat  and  as  an  international  businessman,  his  extensive  knowledge  of  foreign 
affairs  and the  political  and regulatory  environment  in many  of  the  key  regions  in  which the Company  operates  and  his 
knowledge and experience in matters of public company governance.   
 
CARLOS A. CABRERA
Mr.  Cabrera  has  been  a  director  of  the  Company  since  May  2010  and  was  appointed  as  Executive  Chairman  of  the 
Company in December 2011.  Mr. Cabrera serves as the Chair of the Executive Committee and  served as a member of 
the Audit, Nominating and Corporate Governance and Compensation and Human Resources Committees from May 2010 
to  December  2011.    Mr.  Cabrera  is  the  former  Chairman  (January  2009  to  July  2009),  President  and  Chief  Executive 
Officer (from December 2006 to January 2009) of UOP LLC, a Honeywell company.  During his 35 year career with UOP, 
he  held  several  managerial  and  technology  positions,  including  Senior  Vice  President  of  Refining  and  Petrochemicals, 
Senior  Vice  President  of  Process  Technology  and  Equipment  and  Vice  President  of  Corporate  Development  and  New 
Ventures.  Mr.  Cabrera  served  as  the  President  and  Chief  Executive Officer  of  the  National  Institute  of  Low  Carbon and 
Clean Energy (NICE), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Shenhua Group, based in Beijing, China, from December 2009 to 
November  2011.  Since  June  2010,  Mr.  Cabrera  has  also  served  as  a  director  of  GEVO,  Inc.,  a  publicly  traded 
biotechnology company, and is a member of its Nominating and Corporate Governance and Audit Committees. In January 
2012, he joined the Board of Directors of the Gas Technology Institute, a US based research institute, development and 
training organization serving energy and environmental markets.  Mr. Cabrera has been a member of the Executive Board 
of  Big  West  Oil  LLC,  a  private  US  oil  company,  since  December  2011.  Mr.  Cabrera  also  serves  as  a  Distinguished
74
Associate  to  the  World  Energy  Consultancy  Firm  FACTS.    Mr.  Cabrera  serves  on  the  Global  Advisory  Board  of  the 
University  of  Chicago’s  Booth  School  of  Business.    During  Mr.  Cabrera’s  36  years  in  the  refining  and  petrochemicals 
industry,  he  has  been  granted  seven  U.S.  patents,  authored  numerous  publications  and  frequently  serves  on  industry 
panels as a recognized business and technical leader. He has a Bachelor of Science degree in chemical engineering from 
the University of Kentucky and a Master’s degree in business administration from the University of Chicago.  Mr. Cabrera 
brings to the Board extensive experience in petroleum refining, gas processing and petrochemical production as well as 
international business development and senior executive management experience.
BRIAN F. DOWNEY
Mr. Downey joined the Board of Directors and was appointed Chairman of the Audit Committee in July 2005. Mr. Downey 
also  serves  as  a  member  of  the  Compensation  and  Human  Resources  Committee  and  the  Nominating  and  Corporate 
Governance Committee. Mr. Downey has been President of Downey & Associates Management Inc., a real estate holding 
company, since July 1986, and Financial  Advisor to Lending  Solutions, Inc., a full-service loan call centre located in the 
US whose clients are primarily US and Canadian financial institutions, since January 2002. From 1995 to 2002 he was a 
principal and served as Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) of Lending Solutions, Inc., and from 1986 to 1995 he served as 
President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Credit  Union  Central  of  Canada,  the  national  trade  association  and  national 
liquidity  facility  for  all  credit  unions  in Canada. Mr.  Downey  has  a  Certified  Management  Accountant  (CMA)  designation 
acquired through the University of Manitoba and is a Member of the Society of Management Accountants of Ontario. Mr. 
Downey was selected to serve as a director on our Board due to his extensive experience  and expertise in financial and 
accounting matters.  Mr. Downey is the Company’s “audit committee financial expert” within the meaning of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.    
 
DR. ROBERT G. GRAHAM
Dr. Graham has been a director of the Company since April 2005 and served as the Company’s Chief Technology Officer 
from  April  2007  to  September  2007.    Dr.  Graham  co-founded  Ensyn  and  served  on  the  board  and  in  various  senior 
executive roles with Ensyn until it was acquired by the Company in 2005. Since then, he has served as Chairman (since 
June 2007) and Chief Executive Officer (since July 2008), and President and Chief Executive Officer (from April 2005 to 
June 2007) of Ensyn Corporation.  Dr. Graham has been working on the commercial development of the RTP™ biomass 
refining  and  petroleum  upgrading  technologies  since  the  early  1980s.  This  work  culminated  in  the  development  of 
commercial RTP applications in the wood industry in the late 1980’s and the establishment of Ensyn Renewables Inc. to 
capitalize on commercial projects for this business. In 1997, Dr. Graham initiated the application of this commercial RTP™ 
technology in the petroleum industry.  Dr. Graham holds Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Science Honours degrees 
from Carlton University, and a Master of Engineering and Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from the University of Western 
Ontario.  Dr. Graham brings unique skill, expertise and experience to our Board as the inventor of our HTL™ technology 
and as a scientist and businessman with extensive experience in the technology industry.  
 
PETER G. MEREDITH
Mr. Meredith joined the Board of Directors in December 2007 and serves as a member of the Executive Committee.  He 
previously  served  as  a  director  from  1996  to  1999  and  as  the  Company’s  Chief  Financial  Officer  from  June  1999  to 
January 2000.  Mr. Meredith was the Deputy Chairman of Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. (now Turquoise Hill Resources Ltd.), from 
May 2006 to April 2012 and was Chief Financial Officer of Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. from May 2004 to May 2006 and from June 
1999 to November 2001.  He also was the Chairman of SouthGobi Resources Ltd. from October 2009 to September 2012 
and  was  previously  Chief  Executive  Officer  from  June  2007  to  October  2009.  Mr.  Meredith  served  as  Chief  Financial 
Officer of Ivanhoe Capital Corporation from June 2001 to March 2009.  Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Meredith spent 
31 years with Deloitte & Touche LLP, Chartered Accountants, where he retired as a partner in 1996. He was a member of 
its  Canadian  board  of  directors  from  1991  to  1996.  Mr.  Meredith  is  a  Chartered  Accountant  and  is  a  member  of  the 
Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  British  Columbia,  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  Ontario  and  the  Ordre 
des Comptables Agrees du Quebec.  Mr. Meredith was selected to serve as a director on our Board due to his extensive 
experience  at  the  senior  executive  and  board  level  with  international  resource  companies  and  his  financial  accounting, 
reporting and corporate finance expertise, and the depth of his knowledge of the Company’s operations and of the political 
and  regulatory  requirements  of  the  regions  in  which  the  Company  operates  derived  from  his  involvement  in  leadership 
roles with the Company and other resource companies operating in similar regions since 1996. 
 
ALEXANDER A.  MOLYNEUX
Mr. Molyneux has been a director of the Company since May 2010.  Mr. Molyneux  has been the Executive Chairman of 
Celsius  Coal  Limited  (ASX:CLA)  since  December  2012.  He  has  also  served  as  a  non-executive  director  of  Goldrock 
Mines Corp. (TSX:GRM), a mining development and exploration company, since December 2012. Mr. Molyneux was the 
President  (April  2009  to  September  2012),  Chief  Executive  Officer  (October  2009  to  September  2012)  and  a  director
75
(October  2009  to  September  2012)  of  SouthGobi  Resources  Ltd.  (TSX:SGQ,  HK:1878).  Mr.  Molyneux  was  Head  of 
Metals  and  Mining  Investment  Banking  for  Citigroup  where  he  established  a  leading  metals  and  mining  investment 
banking  business  in  Asia.  During  his  career  at  Citigroup  and  UBS,  he advised  on coal-related  public  offerings,  mergers 
and  acquisitions,  bond  and  debt  offerings  totaling  several  billion  dollars.  Mr.  Molyneux  holds  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in 
Economics from Monash University in Australia. Mr. Molyneux was selected to serve as a director on our Board based on 
his comprehensive background in the areas of international capital markets, corporate finance and investment banking in 
Asia and elsewhere and his experience in doing business in the natural resource sector in China and Mongolia. 
 
ROBERT A. PIRRAGLIA
Mr. Pirraglia has been a director of the Company since April 2005 and acted as the Chair of the Business Development 
Committee from August 2007 until May 2008.  He is currently the Chair of the Nominating and the Corporate Governance 
Committee and a member of the Audit Committee and the Compensation and Human Resources Committee. Mr. Pirraglia 
is  an  engineer  and  attorney  with  more  than  25  years  of  experience  in  the  development  of  energy  projects  and  projects 
employing  innovative  technologies.  He  served  on  the  board  of  Ensyn  Group,  Inc.  starting  in  1996,  and  was  also  Chief 
Operating  Officer  of  Ensyn  Group,  Inc.  from  September  1998  to  April  2005.  He  was  appointed  the  President  of  Ensyn 
Corporation in June 2011 and was its Chief Operating Officer and Vice President from April 2005 to October 2007 and its 
Executive  Vice  President  from  October  2007  to  June  2011.    Mr.  Pirraglia  has  been  a  member  of  the  Management 
Committee of  Envergent Technologies  LLC  since October  2007.  In  addition  to being a  founder  and  manager  of  several 
energy  and  waste  processing  companies,  Mr.  Pirraglia  has  provided  management  and  business  consulting  services  to 
various  US,  Canadian  and  European  companies.    Mr.  Pirraglia  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Electrical  Engineering  degree  from 
New  York  University  and  a  J.D.  from  Fordham  University  School  of  Law.  Mr.  Pirraglia  brings  significant  legal,  technical 
and project management experience and expertise to our Board as well as governance experience from acting as a public 
company director. 
 
GERALD D. SCHIEFELBEIN
Mr. Schiefelbein has been the Chief Financial Officer of the Company since November 2009 and Senior Vice President, 
Finance since September 2012. He brings 26 years of finance experience in the international oil and gas industry, having 
worked  in North  America,  Europe and  the  Middle  East  with  the  BP  Group  and  Amoco.   Immediately  prior  to joining  the 
Company,  Mr.  Schiefelbein  was  Chief  Financial  Officer  with  Chicago-based  BP  plc,  Integrated  Supply  &  Trading  from 
September  2007  to  February  2009,  where  he  led  the  finance  department  for  BP's  crude  and  oil-products  supply  and 
trading  operations  in  the  Americas.  Prior  to  his  appointment  as  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  BP  plc,  Integrated  Supply  & 
Trading, Mr. Schiefelbein served as Controller from February 2006 to September 2007.  
 
Mr.  Schiefelbein  has  substantial  finance  and  control  experience  throughout  the  exploration  and  production  value  chain, 
including exploration bidding, production operations, gas plants, pipelines and supply and trading operations. In addition, 
he is highly experienced with merging companies and operations. 
 
K. C. PATRICK CHUA
Mr.  Chua  has  been  Senior  Vice  President  of  the  Company  since  June  1999  and  Chairman  of  the  Company’s  wholly 
owned subsidiary, Sunwing Energy Ltd., since April 2004.  From March 2000 to April 2004 he was President of Sunwing 
Energy Ltd. 
 
Mr.  Chua  spent  the early  years  of  his  career  evaluating  and conducting economic  analysis  of  oil  and  gas  assets.  Since 
1992,  he  has  shifted  his  career  focus  to  China.  Under  his  leadership,  Sunwing  Energy  signed  three  production-sharing 
contracts with the Chinese government to develop proven oil and gas reserves in China. Mr. Chua has been a member of 
the  Canadian  Institute  of  Mining,  Metallurgy  and  Petroleum  since  1975  and  is  the  recipient  of  the  Petroleum  Society 
Fellowship  Award  in  both  1980-81  and  1981-82.  He  served  in  many  executive  positions  with  the  Petroleum  Society  of 
Canada  and  was  the  Chairman  of  the  Calgary  Section  in  1992-93.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the  Chinese  People's 
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) of Beijing Chaoyang District since December 2006. 
 
GERALD G. MOENCH
Mr.  Moench  has  been  Senior  Vice  President  of  the Company  since June  1999.      In  September  2012,  Mr.  Moench  was 
appointed General Manager of Sunwing Holding Corporation, the company's Asian-focused subsidiary.  He has served as 
President and director of Sunwing Holding’s wholly owned subsidiary, Sunwing Energy Ltd., since April 2004.   
 
Mr. Moench has over 44  years of operating and management experience, 30 of  which have been focused in  Southeast 
Asia and China, and most recently over 14 years directly in China. He has been involved in the development of Sunwing 
Energy  Ltd.  since  1996  and  has  overall  responsibility  for  the  operating  functions  of  Sunwing  Energy  Ltd.  including
76
production-sharing  contract  negotiation,  contract  execution  and  government  and  corporate  issues.  He  has  held  various 
senior management positions with Canadian and overseas companies specializing in drilling, production, and completion 
operations and has been involved in operations in Australia, Indonesia, and China. 
  
GREG G. PHANEUF
Mr.  Phaneuf  was  appointed  Senior  Vice  President,  Business  Development  and  Corporate  Strategy  in  September  2012.   
He  previously  served  as  Executive  Vice  President,  Corporate  Development  of  the  Company  from  March  2011  to 
September  2012  and  as  Senior  Vice  President,  Corporate  Development  from  September  2010  to  March  2011.  Mr. 
Phaneuf is responsible for the overall approach and execution on the Company's existing corporate development projects, 
as  well  pursuing  new  corporate  development  initiatives.  He  also  leads  the  Investor  Relations  and  Communications 
Department and is a key spokesperson in dealing with the investment community.  
 
Mr. Phaneuf has 22 years of related experience which includes Vice President, Corporate Development, for The Churchill 
Corporation  from  September  2009  to  September  2010,  where  he  led  a  $390  million  corporate  acquisition,  as  well  as 
leading  the  associated  $200  million  equity  and  convertible  debenture  financing  and  a  new  $200  million  revolving  credit 
facility.  
 
Prior  to  joining  Churchill,  Mr.  Phaneuf  was  Vice  President  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  Seven  Generations  Energy,  a 
private energy resource and development company, and from September 2004 to October 2007, he was the Treasurer for 
Western Oil Sands Inc., where he actively participated in that company's financings, M&A activities and risk management 
functions. Mr. Phaneuf was an integral member of the deal team associated with Western Oil Sands $7 billion divestiture 
to Marathon Corporation in 2007. 
 
MICHAEL A. SILVERMAN
Dr. Silverman was appointed Senior Vice President, Downstream Technology in September 2012 and has served as the 
Chief Technology Officer of the Company since September 2007.  He previously served as the Executive Vice President, 
Technology  from  September  2007  to  September  2012.   From  May,  2007  to  September,  2007  he  was  Vice  President, 
Technology.   Since  joining  the  Company  in  2007,  Dr.  Silverman  has  been  responsible  for  all  technical  aspects  of  the 
Company's  proprietary  HTL  upgrading  process.  This  includes  interfacing  with  leading  engineering firms  in  the  design of 
commercial HTL installations, technology development and intellectual property management.   
 
Dr.  Silverman  has  almost  30  years  of  experience  in  technology  development  and  management,  including  the 
commercialization  and  marketing  of  new  technologies,  and  is  a  leading  expert  in  the  fluid  catalytic  cracking  (FCC) 
processes.  Dr.  Silverman  served  as  Vice  President,  Petrochemicals  (May  2004  to  May  2007)  and  Director,  Technology 
Center (May 2000 to May 2004) for Kellogg, Brown and Root, now KBR, Inc.  
 
Prior  to  joining  KBR,  Dr.  Silverman  was  the  Manager  of  Technology  Development  for  Stone  &  Webster,  Inc.  where  he 
managed all aspects of technology development in the refining business, including FCC's and several heavy oil upgrading 
technologies.  Earlier  experience  included  the  management  of  fluid  catalytic  cracking  for  Tenneco  Oil  Company,  and  an 
assistant professorship in Chemistry at Rutgers University. 
 
EDWIN J. VEITH
Mr.  Veith  has  been  the  Senior  Vice  President,  Canadian  Projects  since  September  2012.  He  previously  served  as  
Executive Vice President, Upstream from September 2007 to September 2012.  Mr. Veith has also been Vice President, 
HTL Technology of Ivanhoe Energy (USA) Inc. from November 2005 until June 2009.   
 
Mr.  Veith  has  over  25  years  of  experience  in  the  oil  industry  with  a  focus  on  heavy  oil  recovery  techniques.  Mr.  Veith 
joined  the  Company  in  2001  from  Aera  Energy,  a  California  joint  venture  of  Shell  and  ExxonMobil,  where  he  had 
responsibility for heavy oil development and operations in the giant Belridge and Cymric heavy oil fields in California. He 
managed  thermal  horizontal  and  vertical  well  development  projects  using  state  of  the  art  reservoir  management 
techniques  and  utilized  advanced  3-D  reservoir  visualization  methods  to  integrate  complex  data  sets.  He  planned  new 
project  expansions  and  investigated  new  development  scenarios  using  reservoir  simulation  and  advanced  economic 
modeling.  Mr.  Veith previously  worked  with  Insight  Energy,  LLC,  Bechtel  and  Williams  Brothers.  As  President of  Insight 
Energy, LLC, Mr. Veith evaluated major oil fields for acquisition and joint ventures. 
 
JOSEPH D. KUHACH
Mr. Kuhach was appointed Senior Vice President, Upstream Technology and Integration in September 2012.  Mr. Kuhach 
is  responsible  for  global  upstream  technology  and  for  providing  strategic  leadership  in  assessing  and  developing  the
77
Company’s  assets.  He  has 27  years  of  energy  industry  experience  focused  predominantly  on  heavy  oil  recovery  and 
upgrading.  Mr.  Kuhach  was  the  Vice  President,  Engineering,  Upstream  and  Integration  with  the  Company  from  August 
2008 to September 2012. Prior to joining the Company in 2005, Mr. Kuhach spent 20 years with Shell and its subsidiaries 
in engineering  and  management  positions.  As  Manager  of Technology  he  oversaw  heavy  oil  recovery  efforts  for  Shell’s 
largest thermal assets including Belridge, Cymric, McKittrick, and  Lost Hills fields. During his time with Shell, Mr. Kuhach 
was a leader in advancing horizontal well implementation in thermal recovery applications. He led the effort to design and 
implement  Shell’s  first  grass  roots  thermal  horizontal  well  project. Mr.  Kuhach has  published numerous  papers  and  is  a 
past technical editor for Society of Petroleum Engineering (SPE) Reservoir Evaluation and Engineering magazine. 
 
MARLENE A. DUFF
Ms. Duff has been Senior Vice President, Human Resources since September 2012.   Previously, Ms. Duff was the Vice 
President, Human  Resources  from  October  2008  to September  2012.  Ms.  Duff  is  responsible for  company-wide  human 
resource  strategy,  staffing,  compensation  &  benefits,  organizational  design,  talent  management  and  human  resource 
administrative services on behalf of the Company. 
 
Prior  to  joining  Ivanhoe  in  2008,  Ms.  Duff  held  human  resource  management  positions  in  oilfield  services,  banking, 
chemicals and E&P in both domestic and international organizations. With over 30 years of experience, Ms. Duff has been 
responsible  for  human  resource  strategies  focused  on  best  practice  cultures  and  work  environments  and  large  scale 
redesign of HR programs in performance management, resource planning, leadership development and business process 
improvement.  
 
SANTIAGO PÁSTOR MORRIS
Mr.  Pástor  Morris  has  served  as  Senior  Vice  President  of  the  Company  and  President  and  General  Manager  of  the 
Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc., since September 2012. Previously, he served as Vice 
President, Operations of Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador from May 2010 to September 2012. 
 
Mr.  Pástor  Morris  was  Operations  Manager  for  Petrobras  Energia  Ecuador  from  January  2005  until  May  2010. He  has 
over 24 years of experience in upstream design, construction, and operations in the international oil and gas industry. His 
expertise  has  taken  him  beyond  Latin  America  to  the  USA  and  Europe,  working  with  companies  like  Texaco, 
Petroecuador,  Oryx  Energy  Company,  Kerr  McGee  Ecuador  Energy  Corporation,  Perenco  Energy  Ecuador,  and 
Petrobras Energia Ecuador. 
 
OTHER PUBLIC COMPANY DIRECTORSHIPS
The following is information respecting directorships held by our directors over the last five years at public and registered 
investment companies.  
 
Messrs.  Meredith  and  Friedland  are  directors  of  Ivanplats  Limited  and  were  previously  directors  of  Ivanhoe  Australia 
Limited.  Mr.  Friedland  was  a  past  director  of  Potash  One  Inc.,  and  Ivanhoe  Mines  Ltd.  (now  Turquoise  Hill  Resources 
Ltd.). Mr. Balloch is a director of Methanex Corporation and was previously a director of Ivanhoe Mines Ltd., East Energy 
Corp.,  Canaccord  Financial  Inc.  and  Tiens  Biotech  Group  USA  Inc.  Mr.  Meredith  is  also  a  director  of  Turquoise  Hill 
Resources Ltd., Entrée Gold Inc., and Great Canadian Gaming Corporation, and was previously a director of  SouthGobi 
Resources  Ltd.  and  Jinshan  Gold  Mines  Inc.  (now  China  Gold  International)  and  Olympus  Pacific  Minerals  Inc.  Mr. 
Molyneux is and the  Executive Chairman of Celsius  Coal Limited  and a non-executive director  of Goldrock Mines Corp. 
He was previously a director of SouthGobi Resources Ltd. Mr. Cabrera is also a director of GEVO, Inc. 
 
BOARD COMMITTEES
As required under the Business Corporations Act (Yukon) and under section 3(a)(58)(A) of the Exchange Act, our Board 
of  Directors  has  a  separately  designated  standing  Audit  Committee.  The  members  of  the  Audit  Committee  are  Messrs. 
Brian  F.  Downey  (Chair),  A.  Robert  Abboud  and  Robert  A.  Pirraglia.  Mr.  Downey,  one  of  our  current  independent 
directors, has been determined by the Board of Directors to be an Audit Committee financial expert. We believe that Mr. 
Downey’s  prior  experience  working  as  a  Certified  Management  Accountant  and  significant  financial  and  business 
experience at the executive levels of management qualifies him to be an Audit Committee financial expert.  
 
We also have a Compensation and Human Resources Committee, a Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee 
and an Executive Committee. The current members of the Compensation and Human Resources Committee are Messrs. 
Howard  R.  Balloch  (Chair),  A.  Robert  Abboud  and  Brian  F.  Downey.  The  current  members  of  the  Nominating  and 
Corporate  Governance  Committee  are  Messrs.  Robert  A.  Pirraglia  (Chair),  Brian  F.  Downey,  A.  Robert  Abboud  and 
Howard R. Balloch. The current members of the Executive Committee are Messrs.  Carlos A. Cabrera (Chair), Robert M.
78
Friedland, A. Robert Abboud, Howard R. Balloch, and Peter G. Meredith. 
 
CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS
We  have  a  Code  of  Business  Conduct  and  Ethics  applicable  to  all  employees,  consultants,  officers  and  directors 
regardless  of  their  position  in  our  organization,  at  all  times  and  everywhere  we  do  business. The  Code  of  Business 
Conduct  and  Ethics  provides  that  our  employees,  consultants,  officers  and  directors  will  uphold  our  commitment  to  a 
culture  of  honesty,  integrity  and  accountability  and  that  we  require  the  highest  standards  of  professional  and  ethical 
conduct from our employees, consultants, officers and directors. The Code of Business Conduct and Ethics was amended 
in  November  2007  to  reflect  our  adoption  of  a  whistleblower  policy  and  to  update  our  internal  reporting  process  in 
connection with Code-related matters.  
 
A  copy  of  our  Code  of  Business  Conduct  and  Ethics,  as  amended,  may  be  obtained,  without  charge,  by  request  to 
Ivanhoe Energy Inc., Suite 654-999 Canada Place, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6C 3E1, Attention: Corporate 
Secretary or by phone to 604-688-8323.
ITEM 11.  EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
We are  a foreign private  issuer  that  voluntarily  files  its  annual  reports  on  Form  10-K.  As  permitted  by  Item  402(a)(1)  of 
Regulation  S-K,  we  follow  the  disclosure  requirements  applicable  in  Canada  with  respect  to  executive  compensation 
(Form 51-102 F6 of the CSA), which we believe address the requirements of, and require more detailed information than, 
Items 6.B and 6.E.2 of Form 20-F.  
 
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Executive Summary
  The  purpose  of  the  Company’s  compensation  program  for  senior  executives  is  to  provide  incentives  to  attract, 
motivate and retain qualified and experienced executives, to ensure their interests are aligned with shareholders 
and to provide fair transparent and defensible compensation.
  The  Board,  through  its  Compensation  and  Human  Resources  Committee  (the  “Compensation  Committee”)  is
committed to the transparent presentation of its compensation program.
  The three principal elements that make up the compensation program are: base salary, performance bonus and
long term incentives.
  Salary  for  senior  executives  is  targeted  at  the  median  of  the  market  while  overall  compensation,  inclusive  of 
salary,  performance  incentive  bonus  and  long  term  incentives  is  targeted  at  the  seventy-fifth  percentile  of  the 
market.
  Overall  incentive  compensation  is  awarded  based  on  both  corporate  objectives  and  individual  performance
objectives.
  Long term incentives are comprised of incentive stock options and restricted share unit (“RSUs”).

In  2012,  Mr.  Friedland,  Founder  and  Executive  Co-Chairman,  voluntarily  waived  a  salary  for  acting  as  an 
executive  of  the  Company  and  did  not  participate  in  the  compensation  program  for  executives.    Although  Mr. 
Friedland remains eligible to receive incentive compensation as determined by the Compensation Committee and 
the Board from time to time, he did not receive any such compensation in 2012.
In  2012,  the  individuals  who  served  as  our  principal  executive  officer,  our  principal  financial  officer  and  the  other  three 
most highly compensated executive officers as of the end of 2012 (the “Named Executive Officers” or “NEOs”) were:
NEO
Position Held
Carlos A Cabrera 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Joseph D. Kuhach 
Michael A. Silverman 
Edwin J. Veith 
David A. Dyck
Executive Chairman 
SVP, Finance & Chief Financial Officer 
SVP, Upstream Technology & Integration 
SVP, Downstream  Technology & CTO 
SVP, Canadian Projects 
President & Chief Operating Officer
79
Compensation Committee
The  Company’s  executive  compensation  program  is  administered  by  the  Compensation  Committee. The  Compensation 
Committee’s responsibilities include the following:


reviewing  and  approving  corporate  goals  and  objectives  for  the  principal  executive  officer’s  compensation, 
evaluating his performance and setting his compensation level;
reviewing and making recommendations to the Board with respect to the adequacy and form of compensation and 
benefits of all executive officers and directors;
  administering and making recommendations to the Board with respect to the Company’s incentive compensation
plans and equity-based plans;


reviewing  the  Company’s  compensation  program  and  the  specific  performance  objectives  and  targets  set  to 
establish short term and long term incentive awards;
recommending  to  the  Board  the  principal  executive  officer’s  performance  evaluation  which  takes  into 
consideration  the  principal  executive  officer’s  annual  objectives  as  established  by  the  Board  and  input  the 
Committee has received from other Board members with respect to the principal executive officer’s performance; 
and
  determining the recipients of, and the nature and size of share compensation awards and bonuses granted from
time to time.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
All Compensation Committee members are independent directors. The Committee met four times during 2012 and once 
during  the  first  quarter  of  2013.  All  meetings  of  the  Committee  are  documented  in  the  form  of  meeting  minutes.  The 
Committee is made up of the following members, all of whom have experience in dealing with compensation matters:
  Mr. Howard Balloch has served as the Chair of the Company’s Compensation Committee since 2004. He served 
as the Chair of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee from 2003 until 2012. Mr. Balloch has also 
served on the compensation committees of Ivanhoe Mines Ltd., now turquoise Hill Resources Ltd., and Methanex 
Corporation. He  was until  March 2013, the Chairman of Canaccord Genuity  Asia Limited, a boutique investment 
banking  firm  that  provides  financial  advisory  services,  and  chaired  its  Compensation  Committee  (management 
level).  In  these  various  roles,  Mr.  Balloch  has  had  frequent  interaction  with  professional  compensation  advisors 
with matters pertaining to executive and director compensation;
  Mr.  Brian  Downey  has  served  as  a  member  of  the  Compensation  Committee  since  May  2006.   He  was  the 
President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Credit  Union  Central  of  Canada  from  1986  to  1995  and  the  Chief 
Executive Officer of Lending Solutions, Inc. from November 1995 to January 2002.  During Mr. Downey’s career 
in the financial services industry, he has had extensive experience with matters pertaining  to senior management 
compensation;
  Mr. Robert Pirraglia  has served as a member of the Company’s Compensation Committee since May 2008.  He 
was appointed as the President of Ensyn Corporation in June 2011 and was the Chief Operating Officer and Vice 
President  of  the  company  from  April  2005  to  October  2007  and  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  company  from 
October 2007 to June 2011.  Mr. Pirraglia is an engineer and attorney with more than 25 years of experience in 
project development and has provided executive management and business consulting services to various U.S., 
Canadian  and  European  companies.   Mr.  Pirraglia  has  been  a  member  of  the  Management  Committee  of 
Envergent  Technologies  LLC  since  October  2007  and  is  also  a  director  of  a  number  of  family-owned 
companies.   In  these  roles,  Mr.  Pirraglia  has  regularly  addressed  executive  and  director  compensation  matters; 
and
  Mr. A. Robert Abboud was appointed to the Compensation Committee in April 2012, having previously served on 
the  Compensation  Committee  from  May  2008  until  May  2010.  Mr.  Abboud  has  enjoyed  a  business  career 
spanning  more  than  55  years  and  has  extensive  executive  management  experience  involving  compensation 
matters,  including  serving  as  CEO  and  COO  of  public  companies  and  having  served  on  the  compensation 
committees of several public companies and not-for-profit organizations.
In  establishing  policies  covering  base  salaries,  benefits,  annual  incentive  bonuses  and  long  term  incentives,  the 
Compensation Committee takes into consideration the recommendations of management.  The Compensation Committee 
may  seek  compensation  advice  where  appropriate  from  external  consultants.  When  the  Compensation  Committee 
considers it necessary or advisable, it may retain, at the Company’s expense, outside consultants or advisors to assist or
80
advise the Committee on any matter within its mandate.  The Committee has the sole authority to retain and terminate any 
such consultants or advisors. 
 
In the second quarter of 2010, the Compensation Committee engaged the services of the consulting firm Mercer Canada 
Ltd. (“Mercer”) to undertake a comprehensive review of executive compensation for executive positions and other senior 
management positions, including the development of a comparator group for the company to help the Company establish 
its  compensation  plan  components  with  reference  to  its  peers  (the  “Mercer  Study”).  No  external  consultants  were  hired 
during  2012,  although  the  Company  does  review  and  participate  in  certain  market  studies  as  to  compensation  market 
standards,  including the Mercer Total Compensation  Survey for  Energy  Sector  published in August of each year setting 
out reward levels as a general benchmark for industry in Canada (the “Mercer Annual Market Study”).  In 2012, no fees 
were  paid  to  compensation  consultants,  apart  from  nominal  fees  to  participate  in  market  studies,  including  the  Mercer 
Annual Market Study.  
 
Compensation and Benefits Philosophy and Goals
In determining the nature and quantum of compensation for the Company’s executive officers the Company is seeking to 
achieve the following objectives, in approximately an equal level of importance:
to provide a strong incentive to management  to contribute to the  achievement  of  Ivanhoe’s  short  term  and long 
term corporate goals;
to ensure that the  interests of Ivanhoe’s  executive officers and the  interests of the Company’s shareholders are 
aligned;
to ensure that Ivanhoe is able to attract, retain and motivate executive officers of the highest caliber in light of the 
strong competition in the oil and gas industry for qualified personnel;
to recognize that the successful implementation of Ivanhoe’s corporate strategy cannot necessarily be measured, 
at this stage of its development, only with reference to quantitative measurement criteria of corporate or individual 
performance; and
to provide fair, transparent, and defensible compensation.





In  addition,  the  Company  strives  to  follow  guiding  principles  to  be  cost  effective  and  competitive,  to  promote  internal 
equity, to represent both value of the job and value of the person, to link compensation decisions to results, and to both be 
responsive to local factors within a global outlook. 
 
NEOs and directors are not permitted to purchase financial instruments, including, for  greater certainty, prepaid variable 
forward  contracts,  equity  swaps  collars,  or  units  of  exchange  funds,  that  are  designed to  hedge  or  offset  a decrease  in 
market  value  of  equity  securities  granted  as  compensation  or  held,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  the  NEO  or  director  in 
accordance with the Company’s Corporate Disclosure, Confidentiality and Securities Trading Policy. 
 
How the Company Makes Compensation Decisions
The  Compensation  Committee  oversees  and  sets  the  general  guidelines  and  principles  for  the  implementation  of  the 
Company’s  executive  compensation  policies,  assesses  the  individual  performance  of  the  Company’s  executive  officers 
and makes recommendations to the Board of Directors.  Based on these recommendations, the Board of Directors makes 
decisions  concerning  the  nature  and  scope  of  the  compensation  to  be  paid  to  the  Company’s  executive  officers.  The 
Compensation  Committee  bases  its  recommendations  to  the  Board  on  Ivanhoe’s  compensation  philosophy  and  on 
individual and corporate performance.  
 
The  Compensation  Committee  annually  reviews,  and  recommends  to  the  Board,  the  cash  compensation,  any  annual 
performance bonus, long term incentive grants and overall compensation package for each of the  Company’s executive 
officers. 
 
Decisions  for  base  salary  adjustments  are  usually  made  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  new  fiscal  year.    In  the  normal 
course of business, corporate goals and certain individual goals upon which performance bonuses are, in part, made for a 
fiscal year are set at the beginning of the fiscal year, and decisions on actual bonuses and incentive awards are reviewed 
during the  first  quarter  following  the  end of  the  fiscal  year  and  awarded as  soon  as  practicable thereafter.  Management 
presents  its  compensation  recommendations  for  consideration  by  the  Compensation  Committee.  The  Compensation 
Committee presents its recommendations for overall compensation for base pay, bonuses and incentives to the Board for 
its approval.  
 
Notwithstanding the adoption of a more formalized approach following the development of the Company’s compensation 
plan  in  2010,  based  on  the  Mercer  Study,  the  Compensation  Committee  and  the  Board  retain  a  significant  level  of
81
discretion in making compensation decisions, particularly in determining the satisfaction of broad performance criteria and 
overall  personal  performance  in  determining  the  percentage  of  target  bonus  and  long  term  incentive  that  is  ultimately 
awarded  within  the  established  bonus  framework.  The  Compensation  Committee  and  Board  also  retain  flexibility  in 
making compensation awards outside of the compensation plan framework where circumstances justify such awards. 
 
In  designing  and  implementing  the  Company’s  compensation  policy  the  Compensation  Committee  and  the  Board 
regularly assess, as part of their respective deliberations, the risks associated with the Company’s policies and practices.  
The  structure  of  incentive  compensation  for  executives  is  designed  not  to  focus  on  a  single  metric,  which  in  the 
Company’s  view  could  be  distortive,  but  instead  a  combination  of  both  corporate  and  personal  objectives  as  well  as 
discretion in the ultimate awards, that balance both long term and short term objectives and a subjective view of overall 
performance.    The  policies  are  designed  to  preserve  cash  to  the  extent  practicable,  with  executives  participating  in  the 
upside potential of the Company through stock options and RSUs that aim to mirror shareholder returns. Consideration of 
risk  is  also  directly  incorporated  into  the  incentive  compensation  by  including  compliance  as  an  important  factor  in 
corporate objectives for bonus and long term incentive awards. 
 
Peer Comparator Group
The  comparator  group  for  the  Company  for  purposes  of  developing  the  compensation  program  includes  oil  and  gas 
companies  with  international  operations,  oil  sands  operations  and  similar  market  capitalization.  The  comparator  group 
included  Pacific  Rubiales  Energy  Corporation,  Black  Pearl  Resources  Inc.,  Niko  Resources  Ltd.,  Connacher  Oil  &  Gas 
Ltd.,  Athabasca  Oil  Sands  Corporation,  OPTI  Canada  Inc.,  Petrobank  Energy  &  Resources  Ltd.,  TransGlobe  Energy 
Corporation,  Bankers  Petroleum  Ltd., Ithaca  Energy  Inc., Gran  Tierra  Energy  Inc., Calvalley  Petroleum  Inc., Paramount 
Resources  Ltd.,  Pan  Orient  Energy  Corporation,  Southern  Pacific  Resources  Corporation  and  Transatlantic  Petroleum 
Ltd.  For  compensation  decisions  in  2012,  specific  reference  was  not  made  to  this  comparator  group  but  rather 
benchmarking at the median (for salary) and seventy-fifth percentile (for overall compensation) was done with reference to 
appropriate data from the Mercer Annual Market Study, adjusted for inflation. 
 
Elements of Total Compensation
The compensation package that the Company provides to its executive officers generally consists of base salary, annual 
performance bonuses and equity incentives.  The Company’s compensation policy reflects a belief that an element of total 
compensation  for  the  Company’s  executive  officers  should  be  “at  risk”  and  in  the  form  of  common  shares  or  incentive 
stock options so as to create a strong link to build shareholder value.  In setting compensation levels, the Compensation 
Committee takes into  account an executive’s past  performance, future expectations for performance and also considers 
both  the  cumulative  compensation  being  granted  to  executives  as  well  as  internal  and  external  equity  amongst  the 
Company’s  executives.    At  this  stage  of  the  Company’s  development,  the  Company  also  considers  the  available  cash 
resources of the Company. 
 
The following summarizes the primary purpose of each compensation element and its emphasis:
  base salary – paid in cash as a fixed amount of compensation for performing the day to day responsibilities of the
job;
  performance bonus  –  annual  award, paid  in cash and  earned for  the  achievement  of  near  term  critical  strategic
corporate and project goals; and

long  term  incentive  awards  –  annual  equity  award,  in  the  form  of  a  combination  of  stock  options  and  RSUs, 
granted to align the interests of the executive with longer term Company goals, the creation of shareholder value 
and the retention of key executives.
Base Salary
The  base  salaries  of  the  Company’s  executive  officers  are  determined  at  the  commencement  of  employment  as  an 
executive  officer  by  the  terms  of  the  executive  officer’s  employment  contract.    The  base  salary  is  determined  by  a 
subjective  assessment  of  each  individual’s  performance,  experience  and  other  factors  the  Company  believes  to  be 
relevant,  including  prevailing industry  demand for  personnel  having  comparable  skills  and  performing  similar  duties,  the 
compensation the individual could reasonably expect to receive from a competitor and the Company’s ability to pay.   
 
Under  the  Company’s  compensation  program  and  onward,  salary  levels  are  to  be  assessed  using  a  pay  grade  system 
that is consistent with industry practice.  Each of the Company’s employees, including the Company’s executive officers, 
is placed in a pay grade based upon his or her position, knowledge, skills, relevant experience and credentials.  Annual 
salary  increases  are  made  based  on  performance  and  the  relative  position  within  a  pay  grade.    The  Compensation 
Committee  also  considers  retention  risks,  succession  requirements  and  compensation  changes  in  the  market  in
82
determining salary changes. Salary targets for executives are generally targeted at a median salary determined, in 2012, 
with reference to the relevant ranges set out in the Mercer Annual Market Study.    
 
Cash Performance Bonus
The annual bonus program is intended to align the performance of the Company’s employees  with the near term critical 
goals  defined  in  the  annual  business  plan.    The  program  calls  on  the  same  pay  grade  system  used  to  establish  base 
salary to be used for determining the bonus targets for each employee.
Under the compensation plan for 2011 and onwards, cash bonuses are awarded to the Company’s executive officers and 
senior  non-executive  management  based  on  the  performance  of  the  Company,  the  success  in  meeting,  or  exceeding,  
defined corporate and individual performance targets and the discretionary assessment of the executive’s performance by 
the Compensation Committee and the Board. For executive officers, potential bonus awards can range from 55% to 75% 
of base salary multiplied by a weighted achievement factor ranging from 0% to 200%.   
 
Long Term Incentive Plan
Equity  based  compensation  is  granted  to  the  Company’s  executive  officers  and  management.  This  long  term  incentive 
portion  of  salary  is  meant  to  retain  key  employees  over  the  long  term  and  to  focus  the  efforts  of  those  individuals  on 
shareholder  return  and  the  longer  broader  goals  of  the  organization.  To  remain  competitive  within  the  industry,  equity 
grants in the form of stock options and RSUs are used to enhance the overall total compensation package. 
 
Equity  based  compensation  is  determined  as  a  percentage  of  base  pay  and  may  have  a  combination  of  stock  option 
grants and RSUs, the combination of which is determined by the pay grade level.  The higher the grade level the higher 
the weighting towards “at risk” stock option grants. 
 
All outstanding stock options that have been granted under the Company’s Equity Incentive Plan were granted at prices 
not less than 100% of the fair market value of the Company’s common shares on the dates such options were granted. In 
addition, the Board of Directors has traditionally taken an approach to vesting that is based on the passage of time and 
option  exercise  periods  and  vesting  schedules  for  options  granted  to  executive  officers  are  determined  by  the 
Compensation Committee and the Board of Directors.  
 
During 2011, the Company established an RSU Plan to provide a form of equity-linked compensation that is less dilutive 
than options as the RSU Plan does not involve any issue of shares from treasury. The RSU Plan is administered by the 
Board  which  has  the  power  make  decisions  about  the  awarding  of  RSUs.  The  awards  under  the  RSU  Plan  consist  of 
RSUs which, upon vesting, may be settled in cash or common shares of the Company purchased on the TSX through a 
Trustee.  Generally  RSUs  vest  in  thirds  on  the  first, second, and  third  anniversaries  of  the  date  of  grant. On  the  date  of 
vesting, employees are entitled to receive one common share for each vested RSU. In lieu of common shares, employees 
may  receive  a cash amount equal  to the  fair  market value  of  the  common  shares  then  deliverable.  Employees  who are 
taxpayers in jurisdictions outside Canada and those individuals who are non-employee service providers may only receive 
cash in exchange for their vested RSUs. If an employee voluntarily leaves the employment of the Company any unvested 
RSUs  are forfeited  by  the  employee  under  the  terms  of  the  RSU  Plan.    In  the  event  of  a termination  without  cause,  as 
defined  in the  RSU  Plan,  all  unvested  RSUs  are  terminated  six  months  after  the  date  of  termination;  provided  however 
that in the event such termination without cause occurs within six months following a change of control, all unvested RSUs 
vest on the earlier of the next vesting date for the applicable RSU award and the effective time of such termination.   
 
While the Compensation Committee and  the Board retain flexibility  in apportioning long term incentive compensation as 
between  stock  options  and  RSUs,  the  targeted  allocation  for  NEOs  is  generally  expected  to  be  in  the  range  of  60%  to 
80% weighting for stock options and 20% to 40% for RSUs for a given award. 
 
Long  term  incentive  awards  granted  under  the  compensation  plan  are  awarded  according  to  performance  and  the 
success in meeting or exceeding the annual established corporate and project targets. For NEOs, potential value of equity 
grants  can  range  from  160%  to  225%  of  base  salary  multiplied  by  a  weighted  achievement  factor  ranging  from  0%  to 
200%.     
 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION DECISIONS
Salary Compensation
In 2012, the base salary for the Executive Chairman was increased by 5% to $580,000, the base salary for President and 
COO was increased by 11% to $500,000 and the salaries of the other NEOs were increased by 4.3 % over the previous 
year. These increases were determined with reference to externally generated compensation data from the Canadian oil 
and gas industry upon which the Compensation Committee relied, including the Mercer Annual Market Study. In the case
83
of the salaries for the Executive Chairman and President and Chief Operating Officer these increases were made in April 
2012 retro-active to January 1, 2012 in connection with a re-alignment of responsibilities in the Executive Team and with 
regard to prevailing industry demand and retention considerations.
Robert M. Friedland, Founder and Executive Co-Chairman, has voluntarily waived a cash salary from the Company.
In  2013,  the  base  salaries  for  NEO’s  were  increased  based  on  an  overall  budget  of  4.5%.  Individual  NEO  base  salary 
adjustments  were  determined  with reference  to  externally  generated  compensation  data from  the  Canadian  oil  and  gas 
industry and individual performance ratings recommended by the Executive Chairman to the Compensation Committee.
Short Term and Long Term Incentive Compensation Awards Made in 2013 Relating to 2012 Performance 
 
The  following  chart  sets  out  the  value  of  bonus  (short  term  incentive)  and  long  term  incentive  compensation  awarded 
during 2013 relating to 2012 performance for each of the NEOs receiving such compensation in 2013.
Name
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein(1) 
Michael A. Silverman 
Edwin J. Veith 
Joseph D. Kuhach
Maximum
Maximum
Target Long
Percentage of
2012 Salary
Target Bonus
Term Incentive
Maximum Target
Bonus Awarded
Long Term Incentive
Awarded(2)
($)
580,000 
293,904  
305,400 
285,984
300,000
($)
870,000 
323,294 
335,940 
314,582
330,000
($)
Awarded
($)
($)
2,610,000 
940,933 
977,280 
915,149
960,000
N/A(8) 
51.7% 
53.6% 
53.3% 
53.4%
1,000,000(8) 
167,027 
179,943 
167,559 
176,101
1,954,600(3) 
 485,896(4) 
523,470(5) 
487,445(6) 
512,294(7)
(1)  Amounts  paid  in  Canadian  dollars  to  Mr.  Schiefelbein  were  converted  to  US  currency  based  on  the  Bank  of  Canada  monthly  average  exchange  rate
during the pay periods.
(2)  The  value  of  the  stock  options  awarded  is  the  estimated  fair  value  on  date  of  grant  calculated  using  the  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model,  with  the 
following assumptions: an estimated volatility equal to the historical volatility of the Company’s common shares over a period equal to the expected life of 
the option, an estimated dividend yield of $nil, a risk free rate of return equal to the rate currently available on federal government zero-coupon bonds with 
a term equal to the expected life of the option and an expected life approximating the term of the option.  The value of stock options with a Canadian dollar 
exercise price was converted to US dollars using the Bank of Canada closing  exchange rate on date of grant, for example, Cdn$1.00 to US$0.982 on      
February 21, 2013.
The  value  of  the  RSUs  awarded  is  the  estimated  fair  value  on  date  of  grant,  which  is  calculated  as  the  number  of  RSUs  awarded  multiplied  by  the 
weighted average price of the Company’s common shares for the five trading days immediately preceding the date of grant, converted to US dollars using 
the Bank of Canada closing exchange rate on date of grant.
(3)  Consists of 521,226 RSUs which vest as to one third on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015 and 2016, options to purchase 2,950,340 common shares
exercisable at Cdn$0.74, expiring on February 21, 2020, and vesting as to 25% on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017.
(4)  Consists of 259,144 RSUs which vest as to one third on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015 and 2016, and options to purchase 550,071 common shares
exercisable at Cdn$0.74, expiring on February 21, 2020, and vesting as to 25% on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017.
(5)  Consists of 279,184 RSUs which vest as to one third on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015 and 2016, and options to purchase 592,608 common shares
exercisable at Cdn$0.74, expiring on February 21, 2020, and vesting as to 25% on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017.
(6)  Consists of 259,970 RSUs which vest as to one third on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015 and 2016, and options to purchase 551,824 common shares
exercisable at Cdn$0.74, expiring on February 21, 2020, and vesting as to 25% on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017.
(7)  Consists of 273,223 RSUs which vest as to one third on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015 and 2016, and options to purchase 579,956 common shares
exercisable at Cdn$0.74, expiring on February 21, 2020, and vesting as to 25% on each of February 21 of 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017.
(8)  See discussion of additional special merit compensation below.
84
The  following  chart  sets  out  the  corporate  performance  objectives  applicable  to  NEOs  receiving  annual  incentive 
compensation in respect of 2012, these performance objectives were set at the beginning of the year and included such 
elements as the securing of sufficient financing to deliver on corporate commitments and refund working capital reserves, 
the  advancing  of  commercialization  of  the  HTL  technology,  achieving  production  reserve  and  share  price  growth,  and 
achieving  a good corporate record in employee health and safety and  in ensuring a spotless environmental record. The 
principal  weighting  for  corporate  goals  (approximately  40%)  was  set  on  achieving  financing  objectives,  with  the  other 
corporate objectives having weightings at between 5% and 20%. Given the significant weighting to financing goals which 
were exceeded, the net corporate goals were determined to be 44.4% of the targeted maximum for 2012.
Corporate Performance Objectives 
 (In Respect of 2012 Performance)
Financing:
Meet: Sufficient funds to meet subsequent years planned capital, operating and general and administrative expenditures
and/or success in other project funding initiatives;
Exceed: Sufficient funds to meet 200% subsequent years’ planned capital, operating and general and administrative
expenditures and/or success in other project funding initiatives
Performance Results
Meet and Partially Exceeded
Reserve Growth:
Meet: increased reserves by 3%;  
Exceed: increased reserves by 6%
Production & Cash Flow:
Meet: increased incremental working interest production by 258%;
Exceed: increased incremental working interest production by 517% 
Commercialize HTL:
Establish agreements to proceed in partnership with 3rd party organizations
Share Price Appreciation:
Meet: share price increase of 50%;
Exceed: share price increase of 100%
Environment:
Meet: Less than 2 recordable incidents;
Exceed: Zero recordable or reportable incidents
Safety:
Meet: Company TRIR is industry average;
Exceed: Zero lost time incidents or recordable incidents
Not achieved
Not achieved
Not achieved
Not achieved
Exceeded
Exceeded
As Executive Chairman, Mr. Cabrera’s performance was judged by the Compensation Committee principally on corporate 
objectives, while in the case of the other NEO’s the judgment was based on a mix of 60% corporate objectives and 40% 
performance objectives for each such executive as well as a discretionary assessment of overall job performance. 
 
Mr.  Silverman  was  rated  67.3%  of  maximum  on  his  personal  project  achievements  in  respect  of  the  development  and 
further  efficiencies  related  to the Feedstock  Test  Facility  and  to  defend  and  enhance the HTL intellectual  property.    Mr. 
Silverman was accordingly given an overall weighted achievement factor of 53.6% of maximum. 
 
Mr.  Schiefelbein  was  rated  62.5%  of  maximum  for  success  in  his  goals  with  respect  to  the  external  reporting,  tax, 
regulatory  compliance  and  human  resources  management.  Mr.  Schiefelbein  was  accordingly  given  an  overall  weighted 
achievement factor of 51.7% of maximum.  
 
Mr.  Veith  was  rated  66.5%  of  maximum  on  achievement  of  his  personal  objectives  largely  related  to  the  further 
development  of  the  Tamarack  project,  as  well  as  his  contributions  to  corporate  finance  activities  of  the  Company.  Mr. 
Veith was accordingly given an overall weighted achievement factor of 53.3% of maximum. 
 
Mr.  Kuhach  was  rated  66.8%  of  maximum  on  achievement  of  his  personal  objectives  largely  related  to  the  successful 
creation  of the Centers of Excellence and his contribution to the development of the Tamarack project. Mr. Kuhach was 
accordingly given an overall weighted achievement factor of 53.4% of maximum.
85
For  2012,  the  Compensation  Committee  and  Board  determined  that  Mr.  Cabrera,  who  is  awarded  on  overall  corporate 
performance, should  receive special  merit  incentive compensation  in  excess  of  the  maximum  targeted compensation  in 
light  of  Mr.  Cabrera’s  integral  role  in  achieving  corporate  objectives,  particularly  its  financing  objectives  for  2012.  The 
bonus of $1,000,000 was divided between a cash bonus of $750,000 and an award of shares valued at $250,000. Long 
term incentive was awarded 80% in stock options and 20% in RSU’s. 
 
Severance Compensation 
 
In respect of the termination of Mr. David Dyck’s employment as of August 31, 2012, under his contractual arrangements, 
Mr. Dyck received a severance payment of Cdn$500,000 and payment in lieu of benefits of Cdn$27,200. In addition, he 
received accelerated vesting of unexercised options with a value of $nil as the exercise price of the unexercised options 
was higher than the December 31, 2012 closing market price of the Company’s common shares.  
 
Other Compensation
Employees of Ivanhoe Energy Holdings Inc. may participate in Ivanhoe’s 401(k), a defined contribution plan that includes 
Employee and Company contributions. See also “Pension Plan” below. In 2012, the Company paid Mr. Silverman $22,000 
for  the  purpose  of  contributing  to  his  401(k)  retirement  plan.  In  2012,  Mr.  Veith  was  paid  $22,500  for  the  purpose  of 
contributing  to  his  401(k)  retirement  plan  as  well  as  $129,143  as  an  expatriate  uplift.  In  2012,  Mr.  Kuhach  was  paid 
$22,500 for the purpose of contributing to his 401(k) retirement plan as well as $138,114 as an expatriate uplift.  In 2012, 
Mr. Cabrera was paid $22,500 for the purpose of contributing to his 401(k) retirement plan. 
 
All  NEOs  participate  in  insurance  plans  offered  to  all  employees,  including  group  life  insurance,  accidental  death  and 
dismemberment,  Business  Travel  Accidental  coverage  and  Supplemental  Business  Travel  Medical  coverage  calendar 
year.
Performance Graph
The  following  graph  shows  the  change  in  a  Cdn$100  investment  in  Ivanhoe  common  shares  over  the  past  five  years, 
compared to the S&P/TSX Composite Index, the S&P/TSX Oil & Gas Exploration & Production and the S&P/TSX Energy 
Sector Index as at December 31, 2012. The Company’s common shares were part of the S&P/TSX Composite Index from 
March 22, 2010 until December 9, 2011.
$200
$150
$100
$50
$0
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
86
(Cdn$)
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
S&P/TSX Composite  Index 
S&P/TSX Oil & Gas Exploration & Production Index 
S&P/TSX Energy Sector Index
2007
100.00  
  100.00  
  100.00  
 100.00
2008
2009
2010
37.42  
 64.97  
 66.05  
 63.66
190.97  
 84.91  
 
 
 90.65  
85.93
175.48  
97.18  
 
 
99.15  
94.52
2011
72.26 
86.42 
79.05 
82.92
2012
45.81 
89.88 
67.81 
79.91
The trend in overall compensation paid to the Company’s executive officers over the past five  years has not  specifically 
tracked  the  performance  of  the  market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares,  or  the  S&P/TSX  Composite  Index, 
particularly since 2007.  Overall compensation for NEOs increased during the period. 
 
Option-Based Awards
Please  see  the  section  “Incentive  Compensation”  in  the  Compensation  Discussion  and  Analysis  for  a  discussion  of  the 
Company’s approach to option-based awards.   
 
In  2012,  the  Company  issued  option-based  awards  under  its  Equity  Incentive  Plan  to  executive  officers  as  described 
under the heading “2012 Executive Compensation Decisions.”   
 
COMPENSATION TABLE
The  following  table  sets  forth  all  compensation  earned  by  the  individuals  who  served  as  our  NEOs.  Our  NEOs  may 
change from year to year due to fluctuations in our executive officers’ annual compensation.
Non-Equity
Share-Based
Option-Based
Salary(1)
Awards(2)
Awards(3)
Incentive  Plan 
Compensation -                   
Annual Incentive
Pension
All Other
Total
Value
Compensation
Compensation
Name and Principal Position
Year
($)
($)
($)
Awards(4) ($)
($)
($)
($)
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Executive Chairman
Gerald D. Schiefelbein
SVP, Finance & Chief Financial 
Officer
Edwin J. Veith
SVP, Canadian Projects
2012 
2011(5) 
2010
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011 
2010
Michael A. Silverman 
2012 
SVP, Downstream Technology   2011 
& CTO 
2010
Joseph D. Kuhach 
SVP, Upstream Technology
& Integration
David A. Dyck 
President & COO
2012 
2011
2010
2012(7) 
2011 
2010
611,378 
27,237 
–
297,347
287,567
264,523
283,032
274,176 
263,627
305,396 
295,056 
283,687
266,333 
239,208
212,658
318,509 
426,088 
353,921
628,687  
– 
–
1,535,221   
421,316 
408,504
188,276
286,232
110,717(9)
168,765
188,877
97,387(9) 
138,282
202,836  
115,190(9) 
176,706
198,505  
157,691
136,273
– 
71,332 
117,697
166,075(9)
393,593(11)
287,144
146,081(9) 
357,671(14)
308,366   
172,785(9) 
402,950(12)
373,419  
110,150
80,377
– 
412,246(9) 
669,419(10)
750,000 
– 
–
167,027
95,148
146,267
167,559
83,692 
115,995
179,943 
98,991 
148,225
176,101 
75,000
80,000
– 
118,886 
197,831
22,500 
– 
–
– 
99,870(6) 
53,667(6)
–
–
–
22,500
20,400 
22,000
22,000 
22,000 
22,000
22,500 
22,500
22,500
– 
– 
–
918
–
–
160,896(13)
71,654 
122,715
4,200 
4,200 
–
213,143(15) 
127,532
58,234
543,338(8) 
26,449 
24,917
3,547,786 
548,423 
462,171
939,800
659,507
973,148
1,110,008
693,390 
1,020,290
1,022,741 
708,222 
1,033,568
1,250,001 
732,081
590,042
861,847 
1,055,001 
1,363,785
(1)  Amounts  paid  in  Canadian  dollars  to  Messrs.  Dyck  and  Schiefelbein  were  converted  to  US  currency  based  on  the  Bank  of  Canada  monthly  average
closing exchange rate during the pay periods.
(2)  The  value  of  the  RSUs  awarded  is  the  estimated  fair  value  on  date  of  grant,  which  is  calculated  as  the  number  of  RSUs  awarded  multiplied  by  the 
weighted average price of the Company’s common shares for the five trading days immediately preceding the date of grant, converted to US dollars using 
the Bank of Canada exchange rate on date of grant.
(3)  The  value  of  the  stock  options  awarded  is  the  estimated  fair  value  on  date  of  grant  calculated  using  the  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model,  with  the 
following assumptions: an estimated volatility equal to the historical volatility of the Company’s common shares over a period equal to the expected life of 
the option, an estimated dividend yield of $nil, a risk free rate of return equal to the rate currently available on federal government zero-coupon bonds with 
a term equal to the expected life of the option and an expected life approximating the term of the option.  The value of stock options with a Canadian dollar 
exercise price was converted to US dollars using the Bank of Canada closing exchange rate on date of grant.
87
(4)  Cash bonuses in respect of a year’s performance are awarded in the subsequent year but recorded in the year in respect of which the compensation is 
awarded.  Cash bonuses paid to Messrs. Dyck and Schiefelbein were converted to US currency based on the Bank of Canada monthly average closing 
exchange rate during the pay period.
(5)  Mr. Cabrera was appointed as Executive Chairman, effective December 12, 2011 and was employed for approximately one half month in 2011.
(6)  Mr.  Cabrera  is  also  a  director  of  the  Company.  Pursuant  to  the  Company’s  policies  regarding  management  directors,  Mr.  Cabrera  did  not  receive 
compensation from the Company for acting as a director subsequent to his appointment as Executive Chairman.  Prior to his appointment, Mr. Cabrera 
earned $91,323 in option-based awards and $99,870 in fees for his service as a director in 2011. In 2010, Mr. Cabrera earned $408,504 in option-based 
awards and $53,667 in fees for his service as a director.
(7)  Mr.  Dyck’s  employment  terminated  as  of  August  31,  2012.  In  respect  of  the  termination  of  Mr.  Dyck’s  employment  as  of  August  31,  2012,  under  his 
contractual arrangements, Mr. Dyck received a severance payment of Cdn$500,000 and payment in lieu of benefits of Cdn$27,200 which are included in 
other  compensation.  In  addition,  he  received  accelerated  vesting  of  unexercised  options  with  a  value  of  $nil  as  the  exercise  price  of  the  unexercised 
options was higher than the December 31, 2012 closing market price of the Company’s common shares.
(8)  Mr. Dyck received an annual retirement allowance in 2012 of Cdn$12,250, which was paid in Canadian dollars and converted to US currency using the
Bank of Canada monthly average closing exchange rate during the pay periods.
(9)  Other than option-based awards in the amount of $126,920 for Mr. Dyck, the values for share-based awards and option based awards were recorded in
our 2011 10-K under “All Other Compensation” as the estimated value of compensation still to be awarded as stock options and/or RSUs later in 2011.
(10)  Includes $369,860 of option-based awards granted to Mr. Dyck in 2011, in connection with his performance in 2010, and $299,559 of previously disclosed
option-based awards granted in 2010.
(11)  Includes $198,879 of option-based awards granted to Mr. Schiefelbein in 2011, in connection with his performance in 2010, and $194,714 of previously
disclosed option-based awards granted in 2010.
(12)  Includes $208,236 of option-based awards granted to Mr. Silverman in 2011, in connection with his performance in 2010, and $194,714 of option-based
awards granted in 2010.
(13)  Mr. Veith received $70,984 as an expatriate uplift. The amount of income taxes payable by Ivanhoe in connection with Mr. Veith’s 2012 compensation is
estimated at $84,257.
(14)  Includes $162,957 of option-based awards granted to Mr. Veith in 2011, in connection with his performance in 2010, and $194,714 of previously disclosed
option-based awards granted in 2010.
(15)  Mr.  Kuhach  received  $69,452  as  an  expatriate  uplift  in  2012.  The  amount  of  income  taxes  payable  by  Ivanhoe  in  connection  with  Mr. Kuhach’s  2012
compensation is estimate at $138,036.
88
INCENTIVE PLAN AWARDS
To value stock options awarded to our NEOs, we used the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The actual value realized 
on exercises may be higher or lower depending on our common share price at the time of exercise. 
 
Outstanding option-based awards at December 31, 2012
Option Awards
Share-Based Awards
Total Value of
Number of        
RSUs That         
Have Not        
Vested (#)
Market Value                      
of RSUs That
Have Not
Vested (US$)(2)
Name 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Executive Chairman 
 
 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
SVP, Finance & Chief Financial 
Officer 
 
Edwin J. Veith 
SVP Canadian Projects 
 
 
Michael A. Silverman 
SVP Downstream Technology 
& CTO 
 
Joseph D. Kuhach 
SVP Upstream Technology 
 & Integration 
 
 
David A. Dyck 
President & COO
Number Of Securities
Underlying 
Unexercised         
Options (#)
Option 
Exercise
Price
($)
650,000 
200,000 
100,000 
50,000 
242,666 
128,695 
130,000 
200,000 
214,825 
130,000 
105,450 
150,000 
254,095 
150,000 
130,000 
134,750 
200,000 
152,812 
80,000 
80,000 
52,083 
62,500 
104,228 
100,000 
375,000 
119,669
$0.92 
$2.00 
$2.63 
$2.65 
$0.98 
$2.65 
$2.28 
$2.51 
$0.98 
$2.28 
$2.65 
$2.22 
$0.98 
$2.22 
$2.28 
$2.65 
$0.56 
$0.98 
$2.22 
$2.28 
$2.65 
$0.92 
$0.98 
$2.28 
$2.51 
$2.65
Option
Unexercised
Expiration
Options(1)
Date
Dec 16, 2018 
Jul 28, 2017 
May 18, 2017 
Apr 28, 2018 
Mar 26, 2019 
May 24, 2018 
Oct 28, 2017 
Oct 1, 2016 
Mar 26, 2019 
Oct 28, 2017 
May 24, 2018 
Sep 17, 2014 
Mar 26, 2019 
Sep 17, 2014 
Oct 28, 2017 
May 24, 2018 
Sep 25, 2019 
Mar 26, 2019 
Sep 17, 2014 
Oct 28, 2017 
May 24, 2018 
Jan 31, 2013 
Jan 31, 2013 
Jan 31, 2013 
Jan 31, 2013 
Jan 31, 2013
(US$)
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
30,153 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
 
 
 
153,695 
 
 
 
133,331 
 
 
 
160,932 
 
 
 
196,785 
 
 
 
 
–
– 
 
 
 
– 
 
 
 
– 
 
 
 
– 
 
 
 
– 
 
 
 
 
–
(1)  Calculated  as  the  difference  between  the  December  31,  2012,  closing  market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  and  the  exercise  price  of  the 
options, multiplied by the number of unexercised options. The value of options with a US dollar exercise price is calculated using the NASDAQ closing 
price of $0.71 per common share.  The value of options with a Canadian dollar exercise price is calculated using the TSX closing price of Cdn$0.71 per 
common share and converted to US dollars using the December 31, 2012, Bank of Canada closing rate. Where the exercise price exceeds the market 
value per common share, the value is zero.
(2)  Calculated  as  the  December  31,  2012,  closing  market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  multiplied  by  the  number  of  unexercised  RSUs  and
converted to US dollars using the December 31, 2012, Bank of Canada closing rate.
Incentive plan awards – value vested in 2012
Name
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Edwin J. Veith 
Michael A. Silverman 
Joseph D. Kuhach 
David A. Dyck
Option-Based Awards
Share-Based Awards
Value Vested During the Year(1)
Value Vested During the Year (2)
(US$)
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
(US$)
– 
14,787 
12,116 
15,483 
13,465 
10,313
(1)  Calculated as the difference between the closing market price of the Company’s common shares on the vesting date and the exercise price of the options, 
multiplied by the number of options vesting in the current year. The value of options with a Canadian dollar exercise price were converted to US dollars 
using the Bank of Canada closing rate on the vesting date. Where the exercise price exceeds the market price per common share, the value is zero.
(2)  Calculated as the December 31, 2012, closing market price of the Company’s common shares multiplied by the number of vested RSUs and converted to
US dollars using the December 31, 2012, Bank of Canada closing exchange rate.
89
PENSION PLAN
Employees of Ivanhoe Energy Holdings Inc. (the “Employees”) may participate in Ivanhoe’s 401(k) (the “Plan”).  The Plan 
is a defined contribution plan that includes Employee and Company contributions.  Employees may contribute up to the 
maximum amount established by  the Internal Revenue Code  and the Company may  elect to make annual discretionary 
matching and profit sharing contributions. Employee contributions vest immediately and Company contributions vest after 
two years of service.  Investment decisions are made by the Employee from a variety of investment options.  
  
The  following  table  represents  the  value  of  accumulated  pension  assets  within  the  Plan  for  Messrs.  Cabrera,  Kuhach, 
Silverman and Veith.  There were no above-market or preferential earnings provisions.
Name
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Joe Kuhach 
Michael A. Silverman 
Edwin J. Veith
Accumulated Value 
at January 1, 2012
($)
– 
226,839 
187,169 
279,298
(1)  Represents employer contributions, distributions and earnings. 
(2)  Represents employee contributions, distributions and earnings.
TERMINATION AND CHANGE OF CONTROL BENEFITS
Compensatory(1)
Non-compensatory(2)
Accumulated Value at 
December 31, 2012
($)
11,275 
33,521 
33,975 
23,607
($)
11,275 
34,763 
33,688 
22,876
($)
22,550 
295,123 
254,832 
325,781
The Company has written contracts of employment with Messrs. Cabrera, Schiefelbein, Silverman, Kuhach and Veith.  In 
the  case  of  termination  for  cause  or  voluntary  resignation,  the  employment  contracts  do  not  result  in  incremental 
payments,  payables  or  benefits,  and therefore  have been excluded from  the  following discussion. Perquisites  and other 
personal benefits totaling less than $50,000 have also been omitted.  
 
Estimated  incremental  payments  are  based  on  the  individual’s  annual  salary  as  at  December  31,  2012.    Any  amounts 
payable in Canadian  dollars have been  translated to US dollars using the December 31, 2012, Bank of Canada closing 
rate.  Unexercised  stock  options  were  valued  using  the  December  31,  2012,  closing  market  price  of  the  Company’s 
common  shares  and  stock  options  with  a  Canadian  dollar  exercise  price  were  converted  to  US  dollars  using  the 
December 31, 2012, Bank of Canada closing rate. Unexercised RSUs were valued using the December 31, 2012 closing 
market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  multiplied  by  the  number  of  unexercised  RSUs  and  converted  to  U.S. 
dollars using the December 31, 2012 Bank of Canada closing rate. 
 
Carlos A. Cabrera
Mr. Cabrera’s employment contract provides that:
(a)
(b)
in  the  case  of  termination  without  cause  or  termination  upon  disability,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months 
wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the 
succeeding twelve months to vest immediately and generally remain exercisable for six months;
in  the  case  of  termination  of  the  employment  contract  by  the  Company  within  twelve  months  of  a  change  of 
control, the Company must pay a lump sum equal to two times the sum of i) Mr. Cabrera’s current salary, and ii) 
the  average  of  the  two  highest  value  aggregate  annual  performance  bonuses  paid  to  Mr.  Cabrera  by  the 
Company  during  the  two  completed  fiscal  years  of  the  Company  in  which  Mr.  Cabrera  was  employed  by  the 
Company that preceded the date of such termination.  All stock options will vest immediately and generally remain 
exercisable  for  six  months;  Mr.  Cabrera  is  bound  by  a  non-competition  clause  effective  until  the  later  of  twelve 
months  after  the  termination of  active employment  or  the  date he  no  longer  receives  compensation of  any  kind 
under the employment contract;
(c)  Mr.  Cabrera  is  bound  by  a  non-solicitation  clause  effective  for  twelve  months  after  the  termination  of  active
employment; and
(d)  Mr.  Cabrera  is  bound  by  a  confidentiality  clause  that  is  effective  for  three  years  after  the  termination  of  active
employment.
90
The  estimated  incremental  payments  to  Mr.  Cabrera  in  the  above  scenarios  are  (a)  a  lump  sum  of  $580,000  and 
accelerated  vesting  of  stock  options  valued  at  $31,957;  and  (b)  a  lump  sum  of  $1,100,000,  and  accelerated  vesting  of 
stock options valued at $127,829.
Gerald D. Schiefelbein
Mr. Schiefelbein’s employment contract provides that:
(a)
(b)
in  the  case  of  termination  without  cause  or  termination  upon  disability,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months 
wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the 
succeeding  twelve  months  to  vest  immediately  and  to  remain  exercisable  for  twelve  months  (subject  to  earlier 
expiration),  cause  all  of  the  unvested  RSUs  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the  succeeding  twelve 
months to vest immediately and deliver those RSUs that have, or are deemed to have, vested to Mr. Schiefelbein;
in the case of: i) termination of the employment contract by the Company, other than in the case of termination for 
just cause or disability; or ii) resignation for just cause, in either case, within twelve months of a change of control, 
the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months  wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  vested  stock  options  to  remain 
exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration) and cause all RSUs, vested or unvested on the date 
of termination, to be deemed vested and deliverable to Mr. Schiefelbein.  If the termination referred to in i) occurs 
forthwith  following  a  change  of  control,  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  held  by  Mr.  Schiefelbein  shall  vest 
immediately and remain exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration);
(c)  on the occurrence of (a) or (b), if the criteria for earning a milestone bonus under his employment arrangements 
are satisfied (whether prior to the date of termination or subsequent to the date of termination but prior to the date 
by which such criteria were to be met), Mr. Schiefelbein shall be entitled to such milestone bonus effective as of 
the date that the applicable milestones are reached;
(d)  Mr.  Schiefelbein  is  bound  by  a  non-competition  clause  effective  until  the  later  of  twelve  months  after  the 
termination  of  active  employment  or  the  date  he  no  longer  receives  compensation  of  any  kind  under  the 
employment contract;
(e)  Mr.  Schiefelbein  is  bound  by  a  non-solicitation clause effective  for  twelve  months  after  the  termination  of  active
employment; and
(f)  Mr. Schiefelbein is bound by a confidentiality clause that is effective for three years after the termination of active
employment.
The  estimated  incremental  payments  to  Mr.  Schiefelbein  in  the  above  scenarios  are:  (a)  a  lump  sum  of  $293,904,  the 
accelerated vesting and delivery of 153,695 RSUs, valued at $109,680 and accelerated vesting of stock options valued at 
$nil;  and (b) a lump sum of $293,904, the accelerated vesting and delivery  of  153,695   RSUs,  valued at $109,680 and, 
assuming termination occurs forthwith following a change of control, accelerated vesting of stock options valued at $nil. In 
addition  to  the  foregoing  payments  under  each  of  scenarios  (a)  and  (b)  and  assuming  full  satisfaction  of  all  applicable 
criteria under scenario (c), Mr. Schiefelbein would be entitled to a milestone bonus of up to a maximum of $161,647.
Michael A. Silverman
Mr. Silverman’s employment contract provides that:
(a)  in  the  case  of  termination  without  cause  or  termination  upon  disability,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months 
wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the 
succeeding  twelve  months  to  vest  immediately  and  to  remain  exercisable  for  twelve  months  (subject  to  earlier 
expiration),  cause  all  of  the  unvested  RSUs  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the  succeeding  twelve 
months to vest immediately and deliver those RSUs that have, or are deemed to have, vested to Mr. Silverman;
(b)  in the case of: i) termination of the employment contract by the Company, other than in the case of termination for 
just cause or disability; or ii) resignation for just cause, in either case, within twelve months of a change of control, 
the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months  wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  vested  stock  options  to  remain 
exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration) and cause all RSUs, vested or unvested on the date 
of termination, to be deemed vested and deliverable to Mr. Silverman.  If the termination referred to in i) occurs 
forthwith  following  a  change  of  control,  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  held  by  Mr.  Silverman  shall  vest 
immediately and remain exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration);
91
(c)  on the occurrence of (a) or (b), if the criteria for earning a milestone bonus set out in his employment agreement 
are satisfied (whether prior to the date of termination or subsequent to the date of termination but prior to the date 
by which such criteria were to be met), Mr. Silverman shall be entitled to such milestone bonus effective as of the 
date that the applicable milestones are reached;
(d)
Mr. Silverman is bound by a non-competition clause effective until the later of six months after the termination of 
active employment or the date he no longer receives compensation of any kind under the employment contract;
(e)
Mr.  Silverman  is  bound  by  a  non-solicitation  clause  effective  for  twelve  months  after  the  termination  of  active 
employment; and
(f)
Mr.  Silverman  is  bound by  a confidentiality  clause that is  effective for  three  years  after  the  termination of  active 
employment.
The  estimated  incremental  payments  to  Mr.  Silverman  in  the  above  scenarios  are:  (a)  a  lump  sum  of  $305,400,  the 
accelerated vesting and delivery of 160,932 RSUs, valued at $114,844 and accelerated vesting of stock options valued at 
$nil;  and  (b)  a  lump  sum  of  $305,400,  the  accelerated  vesting  and  delivery  of  160,932  RSUs,  valued  at  $114,844  and, 
assuming termination occurs forthwith following a change of control, accelerated vesting of stock options valued at $nil. In 
addition  to  the  foregoing  payments  under  each  of  scenarios  (a)  and  (b)  and  assuming  full  satisfaction  of  all  applicable 
criteria under scenario (c), Mr. Silverman would be entitled to a milestone bonus of up to a maximum of $167,970.
Joseph Kuhach
Mr. Kuhach’s employment contract provides that:
(a)  in  the  case  of  termination  without  cause  or  termination  upon  disability,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months 
wages  in  a  lump  sum;  cause  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the 
succeeding  twelve  months  to  vest  immediately  and  to  remain  exercisable  for  twelve  months  (subject  to  earlier 
expiration),  cause  all  of  the  unvested  RSUs  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the  succeeding  twelve 
months to vest immediately and deliver those RSUs that have, or are deemed to have, vested to Mr. Kuhach;
(b)  in the case of: i) termination of the employment contract by the Company, other than in the case of termination for 
just cause or disability; or ii) resignation for just cause, in either case, within twelve months of a change of control, 
the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months  wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  vested  stock  options  to  remain 
exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration) and cause all RSUs, vested or unvested on the date 
of  termination,  to  be  deemed  vested  and  deliverable  to  Mr.  Kuhach.    If  the  termination  referred  to  in  i)  occurs 
forthwith  following  a  change  of  control,  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  held  by  Mr.  Kuhach  shall  vest 
immediately and remain exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration);
(c)  on the occurrence of (a) or (b), if the criteria for earning a milestone bonus set out in his employment agreement 
are satisfied (whether prior to the date of termination or subsequent to the date of termination but prior to the date 
by which such criteria were to be met), Mr. Kuhach shall be entitled to such milestone bonus effective as of the 
date that the applicable milestones are reached;
(d)  Mr. Kuhach is bound by a non-competition clause effective until the later of twelve months after the termination of
active employment or the date he no longer receives compensation of any kind under the employment contract;
(e)  Mr.  Kuhach  is  bound  by  a  non-solicitation  clause  effective  for  twelve  months  after  the  termination  of  active
employment; and
(f)  Mr.  Kuhach  is  bound  by  a  confidentiality  clause  that  is  effective  for  three  years  after  the  termination  of  active
employment.
The  estimated  incremental  payments  to  Mr.  Kuhach  in  the  above  scenarios  are:  (a)  a  lump  sum  of  $300,000,  the 
accelerated vesting and delivery of 196,785 RSUs, valued at $140,430 and accelerated vesting of stock options valued at 
$30,153;  and  (b)  a  lump  sum  of  $300,000,  the  accelerated  vesting  and  delivery  of  196,785  RSUs,  valued  at  $140,430 
and, assuming termination  occurs forthwith following a change of control, accelerated vesting  of stock options valued at 
$30,153.  In addition  to the  foregoing  payments  under  each of  scenarios  (a)  and  (b)  and assuming  full  satisfaction  of  all 
applicable criteria under scenario (c), Mr. Kuhach would be entitled to a milestone bonus of up to a maximum of $165,000.
92
Edwin Veith
Mr. Veith’s employment contract provides that:
(a)  in  the  case  of  termination  without  cause  or  termination  upon  disability,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months 
wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  unvested  stock  options  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the 
succeeding  twelve  months  to  vest  immediately  and  to  remain  exercisable  for  twelve  months  (subject  to  earlier 
expiration),  cause  all  of  the  unvested  RSUs  that  would  otherwise  have  vested  during  the  succeeding  twelve 
months to vest immediately and deliver those RSUs that have, or are deemed to have, vested to Mr. Veith;
(b)  in the case of: i) termination of the employment contract by the Company, other than in the case of termination for 
just cause or disability; or ii) resignation for just cause, in either case, within twelve months of a change of control, 
the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months  wages  in  a  lump  sum,  cause  all  of  the  vested  stock  options  to  remain 
exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration) and cause all RSUs, vested or unvested on the date 
of  termination,  to  be  deemed  vested  and  deliverable  to  Mr.  Veith.    If  the  termination  referred  to  in  i)  occurs 
forthwith following a change of control, all of the unvested stock options held by Mr. Veith shall vest immediately 
and remain exercisable for twelve months (subject to earlier expiration); and
(c)  on the occurrence of (a) or (b), if the criteria for earning a milestone bonus set out in his employment agreement 
are satisfied (whether prior to the date of termination or subsequent to the date of termination but prior to the date 
by which such criteria were to be met), Mr. Veith shall be entitled to such milestone bonus effective as of the date 
that the applicable milestones are reached.
The estimated incremental payments to Mr. Veith in the above scenarios are: (a) a lump sum of $285,984, the accelerated 
vesting and delivery of 133,331 RSUs, valued at $95,148 and accelerated vesting of stock options valued at $nil; and (b) 
a  lump  sum  of  $285,984,  the  accelerated  vesting  and  delivery  of  133,331  RSUs,  valued  at  $95,148  and,  assuming 
termination occurs forthwith following a change of control, accelerated vesting of stock options valued at $nil. In addition 
to  the  foregoing  payments  under  each  of  scenarios  (a)  and  (b)  and  assuming  full  satisfaction  of  all  applicable  criteria 
under scenario (c), Mr. Veith would be entitled to a milestone bonus of up to a maximum of $157,291.
RSU Plan
If a NEO is terminated without cause within six months of a change of control, all of his unvested RSUs shall vest on the 
earlier of the original vesting date or upon termination.
Name
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Edwin J. Veith 
Michael A. Silverman 
Joseph D. Kuhach 
David A. Dyck
Value of RSUs Upon
Change of Control ($)(1)
– 
109,680 
95,148 
114,844 
140,430 
–
(1)  Calculated  as  the  December  31,  2012,  closing  market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  multiplied  by  the  number  of  unexercised  RSUs  and
converted to US dollars using the December 31, 2012, Bank of Canada closing exchange rate.
93
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
Each non-management director other than Mr. Abboud, the Independent Lead Director, receives $40,000 per annum for 
acting as a director of the Company.  Mr. Abboud, Independent Lead Director, receives $80,000 per annum.   
 
Until May 2012, the fees for acting as chair of board committees were $5,000 per annum for each position other than the 
Audit  Committee  chair  who  received  $10,000  per  annum.  In  May  2012,  to  bring  such  fees  more  in  line  with  industry 
standards,  the  annual fees for acting  as committee chairs  were increased to $10,000 per  annum other than the audited 
committee chair whose annual fee was increased to $15,000 per annum.  
 
NON-MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR COMPENSATION TABLE
The following compensation was earned by non-management directors in 2012.
Name
A. Robert Abboud 
Howard R. Balloch 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia
($)
98,000 
64,930 
73,333 
48,000 
48,000 
46,000 
64,736
Fees Earned
Option-Based 
Awards(1) (US$)
Total
($)
123,788 
90,718 
99,121 
73,788 
73,788 
71,788 
90,524
25,788 
25,788 
25,788 
25,788 
25,788 
25,788 
25,788
(1)  Estimated fair value of stock options on date of grant calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Key assumptions are outlined in Note 17.1 
to the Financial Statements. The value of stock options with a  Canadian dollar  exercise price was converted to  US  dollars using the Bank  of  Canada 
exchange rate on date of grant.
94
Outstanding option-based awards at December 31, 2012
Name
A. Robert Abboud
Howard R. Balloch
Brian F. Downey
Robert G. Graham
Peter G. Meredith
Alexander A. Molyneux
Robert A. Pirraglia
Number of Securities
Option
Option
Total Value of Unexercised
Underlying Unexercised
Exercise Price
Expiration
in-the-Money Options(1)
Options (#)
($)
Date
(US$)
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000
50,000 
100,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
100,000
50,000 
50,000 
100,000 
80,000
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000
Cdn$0.86 
Cdn$2.65 
Cdn$3.26 
US $2.69
Cdn$0.86 
Cdn$0.92 
Cdn$2.65 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
Cdn$2.66
Cdn$0.86 
Cdn$2.65 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51
Cdn$0.86 
Cdn$2.65 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
Cdn$2.66
Cdn$0.86 
Cdn$2.65 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
Cdn$2.66 
Cdn$1.68
Cdn$0.86 
Cdn$2.65 
Cdn$2.63 
Cdn$2.22
Cdn$0.86 
Cdn$2.65 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
US $2.69
May 14, 2019 
Apr 28, 2018 
Apr 29, 2017 
May 29, 2013
May 14, 2019 
Dec 16, 2018 
Apr 28, 2018 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013
May 14, 2019 
Apr 28, 2018 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016
May 14, 2019 
Apr 28, 2018 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013
May 14, 2019 
Apr 28, 2018 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013 
Mar 11, 2013
May 14, 2019 
Apr 28, 2018 
May 18, 2017 
Sep 17, 2014
May 14, 2019 
Apr 28, 2018 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
(1)  Calculated  as  the  difference  between  the  December  31,  2012,  closing  market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  and  the  exercise  price  of  the 
options, multiplied by the number of unexercised options. The value of options with a US dollar exercise price is calculated  using the NASDAQ closing 
price of $0.71 per common share.  The value of options with a Canadian dollar exercise price is calculated using the TSX closing price of Cdn$0.71 per 
common share and converted to US dollars using the December 31, 2012, Bank of Canada closing rate. Where the exercise price exceeds the market 
value per common share, the value is zero.
Incentive plan awards – value vested in 2012
Name
A. Robert Abboud 
Howard R. Balloch 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia
Option-Based Awards
Value Vested During the Year(1)
(US$)
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–
(1)  Calculated as the difference between the closing market price of the Company’s common shares on the vesting date and the exercise price of the options, 
multiplied by the number of options vesting in the current year. The value of options with a Canadian  dollar exercise price were converted to US dollars 
using the Bank of Canada closing rate on the vesting date. Where the exercise price exceeds the market price per common share, the value is zero.
95
ITEM 12:  SECURITY OWNERSHIP  OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS  AND
MANAGEMENT AND RELATE D STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Ivanhoe’s  common  shares  are  its  only  class  of  voting  securities.  The  following  table  shows  each  person  or  group  who 
beneficially  owns  (pursuant  to  SEC  Regulations)  more  than  5%  of  our  voting  securities  as  at  March  7,  2013.  With  the 
exception of Mr. Friedland, the information below is based solely on filings under Regulation 13D under the Exchange Act.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
Robert M. Friedland 
150 Beach Road 
#25-03 The Gateway West                                                                    
Singapore  189720
Manulife Asset Management (US) LLC 
101 Huntington Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts 
USA 02199
TD Asset Management Inc. 
Canada Trust Tower, BCE Place 
161 Bay Street, 35th Floor 
Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2T2
Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec 
1000 place Jean-Paul-Riopelle  
Montreal, Quebec, H2Z 2B3
Number of Shares
Beneficially Owned(1)
Percentage of Class
60,397,558(2)
40,052,273
22,259,888
19,442,822
17.40
11.63
6.46
5.64
(1)  Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. 
Unissued common shares subject  to options,  warrants or other convertible securities currently exercisable  or convertible,  or exercisable or convertible 
within 60 days, are deemed outstanding for the purpose of computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of the person holding such convertible 
security but are not deemed outstanding for computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of any other person.
(2)
Includes  57,397,120  issued  common  shares  held  indirectly  through  Newstar  Securities  SRL  (“Newstar”),  Premier  Mines  SRL  and  Evershine  SRL, 
companies controlled by Mr. Friedland. Also includes 500,000 unissued common shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options, 2,083,333 unissued 
common shares issuable upon the exercise of convertible debentures held indirectly through Newstar and 417,105 common shares held directly by Mr. 
Friedland.
96
Security Ownership of Management
The following table sets forth the beneficial ownership, pursuant to SEC Regulations, as at March 7, 2013, of our common 
shares by each of our directors, our executive officers and by all of our directors and executive officers as a group:
Amount And Nature of 
Beneficial Ownership(1)
Percentage
Incentive Stock Options
of Class
Included in (a)
Name of Beneficial Owner
A. Robert Abboud 
Robert M. Friedland (2) 
Howard R. Balloch 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Patrick Chua 
Gerald Moench 
Greg G. Phaneuf (3) 
Michael A. Silverman 
Edwin J. Veith 
Joseph Kuhach 
Marlene Duff (4) 
Santiago Pàstor Morris  
All directors and executive officers as a group (18 persons)
(a)
959,028 
60,397,558 
319,642 
845,833 
304,468 
4,546,726 
367,261 
243,761 
515,929 
307,840 
333,239 
404,663 
212,121 
305,470 
333,195 
192,813 
217,679 
172,405 
70,979,631
(b)
0.28 
17.40 
0.09 
0.25 
0.09 
1.32 
0.11 
0.07 
0.15 
0.09 
0.10 
0.12 
0.06 
0.09 
0.10 
0.06 
0.06 
0.05 
20.49
(c)
150,000 
500,000 
225,000 
512,500 
150,000 
200,000 
300,000 
214,000 
200,000 
307,840 
278,921 
314,512 
160,357 
282,211 
265,069 
155,224 
171,134 
172,405 
4,559,173
(1)  Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. 
Unissued common shares subject  to options,  warrants or other convertible securities currently exercisable  or convertible,  or exercisable or convertible 
within 60 days, are deemed outstanding for the purpose of computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of the person holding such convertible 
security but are not deemed outstanding for computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of any other person.
(2)
Includes  57,397,120  issued  common  shares  held  indirectly  through  Newstar  Securities  SRL  (“Newstar”),  Premier  Mines  SRL  and  Evershine  SRL, 
companies controlled by Mr. Friedland. Also includes 500,000 unissued common shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options, 2,083,333 unissued 
common shares issuable upon the exercise of convertible debentures held indirectly through Newstar and 417,105 common shares  held directly by Mr. 
Friedland.
(3) 
(4)
Includes 33,198 common shares underlying restricted share units that will vest within 60 days. 
Includes 37,794 common shares underlying restricted share units that will vest within 60 days.
97
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans
All  of  the  incentive stock  options  and  equity  compensation awards  the  Company  granted in  2012  were  made under  the 
Company’s  Equity Incentive Plan and  Restricted Share Unit (“RSU”) Plan. The  Equity Incentive Plan and the RSU  Plan 
are  the  only  equity  compensation plans  the  Company  has  in effect  and are  intended  to further  align the  interests  of  the 
Company’s  directors  and  management  with  the  Company’s  long  term  performance  and  the  long  term  interests  of  the 
Company’s  shareholders.  The  Company’s  shareholders  have,  to  date,  approved  the  Equity  Incentive  Plan  and  all 
amendments  thereto  in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  policies  of  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (“TSX”).  The  RSU  Plan, 
which  does  not  require  shareholder  approval  under  the  rules  and  policies  of  the  TSX,  does  not  involve  any  issue  of 
common  shares  from  the  Company’s  treasury.  Upon  vesting,  RSUs  may  be  settled  in  cash  or  common  shares  of  the 
Company purchased on the open market by an RSU Plan trustee. The following information is as at December 31, 2012:
Number of Securities to be
Plan category
Equity Incentive Plan - approved by Security 
holders 
Equity  Incentive  Plan  -  not  approved  by  Security 
holders(1) 
Total Equity Incentive Plan 
 
RSU Plan
Issued/Delivered Upon 
Exercise of Outstanding 
Options/Vesting of RSUs
Outstanding Awards
Available for Future Issuance Under
(Cdn$)
Equity Compensation Plans
Weighted-Average Price(2) of
Number of Securities Remaining
14,855,163
20,000 
14,875,163 
 
2,628,852
1.89
2.15 
1.89
0.72
7,296,245
– 
7,296,245 
 
–
(1)  20,000 stock options were granted as employment inducements and therefore were not granted under the Company’s stock option plan.
(2)  The weighted average price shown is the weighted average exercise price for outstanding stock options and the weighted average fair value for outstanding
RSUs.
ITEM 13:  CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS  AND DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENCE
RELATED TRANSACTIONS
Ivanhoe  is  party  to  cost  sharing  agreements  with  other  companies,  some  of  which  are  wholly  or  partially  owned  by  Mr. 
Friedland.  Through  these  agreements,  the  Company  shares  office  space,  furnishings,  equipment,  air  travel  and 
communications  facilities  in  various  international  locations.  The  Company  also  shares  the  costs  of  employing 
administrative  and  non-executive  management  personnel  at  these  offices.  In  2012,  our  share  of  these  costs  was  $1.5 
million. In 2008, we agreed, as part of our cost sharing arrangements and in connection with Mr. Friedland’s position as 
Founder and Executive Co-Chairman, to share the costs of operating an aircraft owned by a private company of which Mr. 
Friedland  is  the  sole  shareholder.  Ivanhoe  paid  $1.2  million  towards  aircraft  operating  costs  in  2012.  A  director  of  the 
Company,  Dr.  Robert  Graham,  was  engaged  to  provide  services  through  his  private  consulting  company.  In  2012,  the 
Company paid $44,000 to his firm.   
 
Ivanhoe entered into a $10.0 million unsecured loan agreement on December 30, 2011 with Ivanhoe Capital Finance Ltd.  
(“ICFL”),  a  company  wholly  owned  by  Mr.  Friedland.  The  funds  were  advanced  to  the  Company  on  January  3,  2012. 
Interest on the loan is 13.33% per annum, calculated monthly and due upon maturity. On March 14, 2012, the ICFL loan 
agreement  was  amended  to  provide  that  at  ICFL’s  option,  the  outstanding  amount  of  the  loan  may  be  converted  into 
common shares of the Company at Cdn$0.96 per share. The loan was repaid on December 31, 2012. 
 
Our  Board  of  Directors  recognizes  that  related  party  transactions  present  a  heightened  risk  of  conflicts  of  interest  and 
therefore has a written policy that is part of our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics. This policy prohibits activities that 
could  give  rise  to  conflicts  of  interest,  unless  they  are  specifically  approved  by  the  Board  of  Directors.  Directors  and 
officers  are  obligated  to  inform  us  of  any  related  party  transactions  and  any  proposed  related  party  transactions.  In 
addition,  we  present  a summary  of  related party  transactions  to the  Audit  Committee on  a  quarterly  basis  for  its  review 
and approval.
98
DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
We undertook a review  of the  independence of our directors and, using the definitions and independence standards for 
directors  established  under  NASDAQ  and  CSA’s  National  Instrument  58-101,  “Disclosure  of  Corporate  Governance 
Practices.”  As  a  result  of  this  review,  we  determined  that  each  of  Messrs.  Abboud,  Balloch,  Downey,  Graham  and 
Pirraglia is considered to be an independent director.
ITEM 14.  PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
In considering the nature of the services provided by Deloitte LLP (“Deloitte”), the Audit Committee determined that such 
services are compatible with the provision of independent audit services. The Audit Committee discussed these services 
with  Deloitte  and  our  management  to  determine  that  they  were  permitted  in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  regulations 
concerning  auditor  independence  under  the  Rules  of  Professional  Conduct  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of 
Alberta,  the  rules  and  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  and  the  securities  laws  and 
regulations administered by the SEC. In accordance with our policy, all of the services outlined below were pre-approved 
by our Audit Committee.
(US$000s)
Audit fees 
Audit related fees 
Tax fees 
All other fees
2012
2011
576 
71 
62 
23 
732
599 
92 
141 
104 
936
2010
535 
89 
217 
236 
1,077
Audit  fees  include  services  related  to  the  audit  of  our  annual  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  review  of  our 
interim consolidated financial statements. Fees were also incurred for the audit of internal controls related to requirements 
under the United States Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and similar Canadian regulatory compliance.
Audit related fees include services performed to translate the annual and  quarterly consolidated financial statements into 
French  as  well  as  the  reimbursement  of  the  pro-rata  share  of  annual  fees  charged  to  each  audit  firm  by  the  Canadian 
Public Accountability Board.
Tax services performed by Deloitte, outside of normal audit procedures, consisted of tax compliance and tax planning and 
advice.  Tax  compliance  services  consisted  of  federal,  state  and  local  income  tax  return  assistance,  preparation  of 
expatriate tax  returns  and  assistance  with tax  return  filings  in certain  foreign  jurisdictions.  Tax  planning and advice  was 
rendered in connection  with the  structuring  of intercompany transactions  as  well as proposed mergers, acquisitions  and 
disposals.  
 
Other  fees  relate  to  services  provided  in  connection  with  debt  and  equity  issuance.  Both  2011  and  2010  include  fees 
related to services provided in support for the Company’s transition to IFRS on January 1, 2011. Other fees also include a 
subscription to an accounting research tool and human capital salary information. 
 
AUDIT COMMITTEE PRE-APPROVAL POLICY
The Audit Committee has  adopted a pre-approval  policy for  non-audit services that may  be provided by  the Company’s 
auditors.  A description of the services expected to be performed by Deloitte in the following fiscal year is presented to the 
Audit  Committee  for  approval.    If  services  that  were  not  pre-approved  are  required,  approval  may  be  granted  by  the 
Chairman  of  the  Audit  Committee.  However,  the  Chairman  must  inform  the  Audit  Committee,  at  the  next  regularly 
scheduled meeting, of any services that were pre-approved by him.  Additionally, the Audit Committee generally requests 
a range of fees associated with each proposed service.  On a quarterly basis, the Audit Committee reviews the status of 
services and fees incurred year-to-date against the original estimates and the forecast of remaining services and fees.
99
PART IV
ITEM 15.  EXHIBITS  AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
We  refer  you  to  the  Financial  Statements  and  Supplementary  Data  in  Item  8  of  this  Annual  Report  where  these 
documents are listed. The following exhibits are filed as part of this Annual Report:
Exhibit           
Number
Incorporated by Reference
Description of Document
Filing Date/
Exhibit Number
Form
Period End Date
(if different)
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
21.1
23.1
23.2
31.1
31.2
32.1
32.2
99.1
Loan Agreement between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and Ivanhoe Capital Finance Ltd.
Loan  Agreement  between  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc  and  Ivanhoe  Capital  Finance  Ltd 
amendment
8-K
8-K
March 20, 2012
March 20, 2012
Credit and Guaranty Agreement between Ivanhoe Energy Inc and UBS Securities 
LLC
8-K
March 20, 2012
10.1
10.2
10.3
Agreement  for  the  Sale  and  Purchase  of  Interests  in  Respect  of  Zitong  Block, 
Sichuan Basin, People’s Republic of China
8-K
October 18, 2012
10.1
Share  Purchase  and  Sale  Agreement  between  Sunwing  Energy  Ltd  and  MIE 
Holdings Corporation
8-K
November 26, 2012
2.1
Selected unaudited financial information of Pan-China Resources Ltd
Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc  unaudited  pro-forma  condensed  consolidated  financial 
statements
8-K
8-K
November 26, 2012
December 18, 2012
99.1
99.1
Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc  unaudited  pro-forma  condensed  consolidated  financial 
statements
8-K
December 28, 2012
99.1
Subsidiaries of Ivanhoe Energy Inc.
Consent of GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd., Petroleum Engineers
Consent of Deloitte LLP
Certification by the Executive Chairman Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002
Certification  by  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  Pursuant  to  Section  302  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Certification by the Executive Chairman Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002
Certification  by  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  Pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
GLJ  Petroleum  Consultants  Ltd.,  Report  on  Reserves  Data  by  Independent 
Qualified Reserves Evaluator or Auditor as of December 31, 2012
100
SIGNATURES
/s/ Robert M. Friedland 
Robert M. Friedland 
Founder and Executive Co-Chairman
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  Section  13  or  15(d)  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  the  registrant  has  duly 
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on March 18, 2013. 
 
IVANHOE ENERGY INC. 
 
By: /s/ Carlos A. Cabrera 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Executive Chairman 
(Principal Executive Officer) 
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by  the following 
persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on March 18, 2013. 
 
/s/ Carlos A. Cabrera 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Executive Chairman 
(Principal Executive Officer) 
 
/s/ Gerald D. Schiefelbein  
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Chief Financial Officer 
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
/s/ A. Robert Abboud 
A. Robert Abboud 
Independent Lead Director 
 
/s/ Howard R. Balloch 
Howard R. Balloch, Director 
 
/s/ Brian F. Downey 
Brian F. Downey, Director 
 
/s/ Robert G. Graham  
Robert G. Graham, Director
/s/ Alexander A. Molyneux 
Alexander A. Molyneux, Director
/s/ Robert A. Pirraglia 
Robert A. Pirraglia, Director
/s/ Peter G. Meredith 
Peter G. Meredith, Director
101
Subsidiaries of Registrant
Name of Subsidiary
Jurisdiction of Incorporation or Formation
EXHIBIT 21.1
IELA Colombia Inc.  
IELA Mexico Pte. Ltd. 
IELA Singapore Pte. Ltd   
Ivanhoe Energy (Latin America) Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy (Middle East) Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Advisory Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Canada Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Canadian Holdings Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Colombia Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Holdings Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy HTL (USA) Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy HTL Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy International Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy International Ventures Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy MENA Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Mexico IELA, S.A. de C.V. 
Ivanhoe Energy Mexico Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Mongolia Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Petroleum Projects Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Services Mexico IELA S.A. de C.V. 
Ivanhoe HTL Petroleum Ltd  
Panasian Energy Ltd.  
Shaman LLC   
Sunwing Energy Ltd.  
Sunwing Holding Corporation  
Sunwing Management Limited  
Sunwing Zitong Energy Ltd.
Barbados 
Singapore 
Singapore 
British Virgin Islands 
British Virgin Islands 
British Virgin Islands 
Alberta 
Alberta 
Barbados 
British Columbia 
Nevada 
Nevada   
Nevada 
British Virgin Islands 
British Virgin Islands 
British Columbia 
British Columbia 
Mexico 
British Columbia 
Alberta 
Nevada 
Mexico 
Nevada 
Nevis 
Mongolia 
Bermuda 
Barbados 
Hong Kong 
British Virgin Islands
GLJ
Petroleum 
Consultants
LETTER OF CONSENT
EXHIBIT 23.1
Principal Officers:
Keith M. Braaten, P. Eng. 
  President & CEO 
Jodi L. Anhorn, P. Eng. 
  Executive Vice President & COO
Officers / Vice Presidents:
Terry L. Aarsby, P. Eng. 
Caralyn P. Bennett, P. Eng. 
Leonard L. Herchen, P. Eng. 
Myron J. Hladyshevsky, P. Eng. 
Bryan M. Joa, P. Eng. 
Mark Jobin, P. Geol. 
John E. Keith, P. Eng. 
John H. Stilling, P. Eng. 
Douglas R. Sutton, P. Eng. 
James H. Willmon, P. Eng.
We hereby consent to the  filing as an exhibit to the annual report on Form 10-K of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. of our report 
dated February 22, 2013 on the oil reserves of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. relating to the Tamarack Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated:  February 28, 2013  
Calgary, Alberta 
CANADA
Jason Paul, P. Eng. 
Manager, Engineering
GLJ PETROLEUM CONSULTANTS LTD.
“Originally Signed by”
Yours very truly,
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
We  consent  to  the  incorporation  by  reference  in  Registration  Statements  No. 333-113054,  333-143029,  333-151943 
and 333-168964 on Form S-8 of our reports dated March 18, 2013, relating to the consolidated financial statements of 
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, appearing in this Annual Report 
on Form 10-K of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2012. 
 
/s/ Deloitte LLP
EXHIBIT 23.2
Independent Registered Chartered Accountants 
Calgary, Canada 
March 18, 2013
THIRD PARTY REPORT ON RESERVES
EXHIBIT  99.1
By GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. – (Independent Qualified Reserves Evaluator)
This  report  is  provided  to  satisfy  the  requirements  contained  in  Item  1202(a)(8)  of  U.S.  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission Regulation S-K.  
 
The numbering of items below corresponds to the requirements set out in Item 1202(a)(8) of Regulation S-K. Terms to 
which a meaning is ascribed in Regulation S-K and Regulation S-X have the same meaning in this report.
i.  We  have  prepared  an  independent  evaluation  of  the  oil  and  gas  reserves  of  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  (the 
"Company")  for  the  management  and  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Company.  The  primary  purpose  of  our 
evaluation  report  was  to  provide  estimates  of  reserves  information  in  support  of  the  Company’s  year-end 
reserves  reporting  requirements  under  US  Securities  Regulation  S-K  and  for  other  internal  business  and 
financial needs of the Company.
ii.   We have evaluated the reserves of the Company as at December 31, 2012. The completion date of our report
is February 22, 2013 for the properties in Canada.
iii.   The  following  table  sets  forth  the  geographic  area  covered  by  our  reports,  proved,  probable  and  possible 
reserves  estimated  using  constant  prices  and  costs,  and  the  proportion  of  the  total  company  that  we  have 
evaluated.
Canada
Proved reserves
Developed producing
Developed non-producing
Undeveloped
Total proved
Probable reserves
Developed
Undeveloped
Possible reserves
Developed
Undeveloped
Company Net Reserves
Crude Oil
Bitumen
Total Oil   
Equivalent (1)
Mbbl
Mbbl
Mbbl
Portion of Oil 
Equivalent 
Reserves
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
138,857
138,857
–
–
32,929
32,929
–
–
100%
–
100%
1)  Oil equivalence factors:  crude oil 1 bbl/bbl; bitumen1 bbl/bbl.
iv.    As noted in item iii., our evaluation covered all of the Company’s proved and probable reserves. We carried out 
our  evaluation  in  accordance  with  standards  set  out  in  the  Canadian  Oil  and  Gas  Evaluation  Handbook  (the 
"COGE  Handbook")  with  the  necessary  modifications  to  reflect  definitions  and  standards  under  the  U.S. 
Financial Accounting Standards Board policies (the “FASB  Standards”) and the legal requirements under the 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC requirements”).
Data  used  in  our  evaluation  were  obtained  from  regulatory  agencies,  public  sources  and  from  Company 
personnel  and  Company  files.  In  the  preparation  of  our  report  we  have  accepted  as  presented,  and  have 
relied,  without  independent  verification,  upon  a  variety  of  information  furnished  by  the  Company  such  as 
interests  and  burdens,  recent  production,  product  transportation  and  marketing  and  sales  agreements, 
historical revenue, capital costs, operating expense data, budget forecasts and capital cost estimates and well
v.
data  for  recently  drilled  wells.  If  in  the  course  of  our  evaluation,  the  validity  or  sufficiency  of  any  material 
information  was  brought  into  question,  we  did  not  rely  on  such  information  until  such  concerns  were 
satisfactorily resolved.
The Company has warranted in a representation letter to us that, to the best of the Company’s knowledge and 
belief,  all  data  furnished  to  us  was  accurate  in  all  material  respects,  and  no  material  data  relevant  to  our 
evaluation was omitted.  
 
A  field  examination  of  the  evaluated  properties  was  not  performed  nor  was  it  considered  necessary  for  the 
purposes of our report.  
 
In our opinion, estimates provided in our report have, in all material respects, been  determined in accordance 
with  the  applicable  industry  standards,  and  results  provided  in  our  report  and  summarized  herein  are 
appropriate for inclusion in filings under Regulation S-K.
As required under SEC Regulation S-K, reserves are those quantities of oil and gas that are estimated to be 
economically  producible  under  existing  economic  conditions.  As  specified,  in  determining  economic 
production,  constant  product  reference  prices  have  been  based  on  a  12-month  average  price,  calculated  as 
the  unweighted  arithmetic  average  of  the  first-day-of-the-month  price  for  each  month  within  the  12-month 
period prior to the  effective date of our report.  As the  project  in Canada has not commenced production, the 
above  described  prices  are  based  on  posted  benchmark  prices  and  estimates  of  quality  and  transportation 
differences  to  the  field.  In  our  economic  analysis,  operating  and  capital  costs  are  those  costs  estimated  as 
applicable at the effective date of our report, with no future escalation. Where deemed appropriate, the capital 
costs  and  revised  operating  costs  associated  with  the  implementation  of  committed  projects  designed  to 
modify specific field operations in the future may be included in economic projections.
Twelve Month Average Benchmark Prices
Bank of Canada Average Noon Exchange Rate ($US/$C)
Brent Blend Crude Oil FOB North Sea ($US/bbl)
NYMEXWTI ($US/bbl)
Light, Sweet Crude Oil at Edmonton ($C/bbl)
Bow River Crude Oil at Hardisty ($C/bbl)
Average Realized Prices
Light/Medium Oil ($/bbl)
Bitumen ($/bbl)
1.0002
111.46
94.57
87.85
76.70
–
56.05
vi.  Our report has been prepared assuming the continuation existing regulatory and fiscal conditions subject to the 
guidance  in  the  COGE  Handbook  and  SEC  regulations.  Notwithstanding  that  the  Company  currently  has 
applied for regulatory approval to produce the reserves located in Canada, there is no assurance that changes 
in  regulation  will  not  occur;  such  changes,  which  cannot  reliably  be  predicted,  could  impact  the  Company’s 
ability to recovery the estimated reserves.
vii.  Oil  and  gas  reserves  estimates  have  an  inherent  degree  of  associated  uncertainty  the  degree  of  which  is 
affected by many factors.  Reserves  estimates  will vary due  to the limited and imprecise nature  of data upon 
which the estimates of reserves are predicated. Moreover, the methods and data used in estimating reserves 
are  often  necessarily  indirect  or  analogical  in  character  rather  than  direct  or  deductive.  Furthermore,  the 
persons involved in the preparation of reserves estimates and associated information are required, in applying 
geosciences, petroleum engineering and evaluation principles, to make numerous unbiased judgments based 
upon  their  educational  background,  professional  training,  and  professional  experience.  The  extent  and 
significance of the judgments to be made are, in themselves, sufficient to render reserves estimates inherently 
imprecise.  Reserves  estimates  may  change  substantially  as  additional  data  becomes  available  and  as 
economic conditions impacting oil and gas prices and costs change. Reserves estimates will also change over 
time  due  to  other  factors  such  as  knowledge  and  technology,  fiscal  and  economic  conditions,  contractual, 
statutory and regulatory provisions.
viii. In  our  opinion,  the  reserves  information  evaluated  by  us  have,  in  all  material  respects,  been  determined  in 
accordance  with  all  appropriate  industry  standards,  methods  and  procedures  applicable  for  the  filing  of 
reserves information under U.S. SEC Regulation S-K.
ix.  A summary of the Company reserves evaluated by us is provided in item iii.
GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. 
4100, 400 - 3rd Avenue S.W. 
Calgary, Alberta  CANADA  T2P 4H2 
Dated:  February 28, 2013 
 
 
   “Originally Signed by”    
Jason Paul, P. Eng. 
Manager, Engineering
CERTIFICATION OF QUALIFICATION
Page: 112 of 184
I, Jason E. Paul, Professional Engineer, 4100, 400 - 3rd Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
hereby certify:
1.
2.
3.
4.
That I am an employee of GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd., which company did prepare a 
detailed  analysis  of  the  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  (the  “Company”)  Tamarack  property.  The 
effective date of this evaluation is December 31, 2012.
That I do not have, nor do I expect to receive any direct or indirect interest in the securities of 
the Company or its affiliated companies.
That  I  attended  the  University  of  Calgary  where  I  graduated  with  a  Bachelor  of  Science 
Degree in Mechanical Engineering in 1998; that I am a Registered Professional Engineer in 
the Province of Alberta; and, that I have in excess of fifteen years experience in engineering 
studies relating to Western Canadian oil and gas fields.
That a personal field inspection of the properties was not made; however, such an inspection 
was not considered necessary in view of the information available from public information 
and records, the files of the Company, and the appropriate provincial regulatory authorities.
GLJ
Petroleum Consultants