
SB-2 1 formsb2current.htm FORM SB-2
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on October 31, 2005
Registration No.  333 - ________
==============================================================================
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM SB-2
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(Name of small business issuer in its charter)
NEVADA
2741
N/A
(State or jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
10870 Harvest Lake Way NE, Calgary, Alberta  Phone (403) 617-8786
(Address and telephone number of principal executive offices)
Paracorp Incorporated
318 North Carson Street, Suite 208, Carson City, Nevada 89701  Telephone: (888) 972-7273
(Name, address and telephone numbers of agent for service)
COPIES OF ALL COMMUNICATIONS TO:
W. SCOTT LAWLER, ESQ
41877 Enterprise Circle N., Temecula, California 92590 Telephone: (951) 506-8888  Facsimile:
(951) 506-8877
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after
this Registration Statement becomes effective.
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the
Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of
the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. [ ]
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act,
check  the  following  box  and  list  the  Securities  Act  registration  statement  number  of  the  earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. [ ]
If this Form is a post effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act,
check  the  following  box  and  list  the  Securities  Act  registration  statement  number  of  the  earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. [ ]
If delivery of the prospectus is expected to be made pursuant to Rule 434, check the following box.
[ ]
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each
Class of
Amount To Be
Registered1
Securities To
Be Registered
Common Stock 3,000,000
Proposed Maximum
Offering Price Per
Proposed Maximum
Aggregate Offering
Amount of
Registration
Unit
Price
Fee
$0.10
$300,000.00
$35.31
(1)
Estimated solely for the purpose of computing the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(o) under
the Securities Act.
The  registrant  hereby  amends  this  registration  statement  on  such  date  or  dates  as  may  be
necessary  to  delay  its  effective  date  until  the  registrant  shall  file  a  further  amendment  which
specifically states that this registration statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance
with  Section  8(a)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933  or  until  the  registration  statement  shall  become
effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Subject to Completion
Prospectus
Samoyed Energy Corp.
3,000,000 shares of
Common Stock
This  is  a  public  offering  of  3,000,000  shares  of  common  stock  of  Samoyed  Energy  Corp.,  a
Nevada corporation (“Samoyed”) at a price of $0.10 per share.
This offering involves a high degree of risk; see "RISK FACTORS" beginning on page 4 to
read about factors you should consider before buying shares of the common stock.
These securities have not been approved or disapproved by the Securities and Exchange
Commission (the “SEC”) or any state or provincial securities commission, nor has the SEC
or any state or provincial securities commission passed upon the accuracy or adequacy of
this prospectus.  Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Following the registration statement on Form SB-2 in which this prospectus is included becoming
effective, we intend to have a market maker apply for approval of our common stock for quotation
on the Over-the Counter / Bulletin Board quotation system. No assurance can be made however
that we will be able to locate a market maker to submit such application or that such application
will be approved.
Our common stock is presently not listed on any national securities exchange or the Nasdaq Stock
Market.
The Offering:
3,000,000 shares Offered
Public Price
Underwriting 
Commissions
Total
Discounts
Price Per Share
and
$0.10
- 0 -
$0.10
Total
$300,000
$    0
$300,000
This is a best efforts public offering, with no minimum purchase requirement.
1. Samoyed is not using an underwriter for this offering.
2. There is no arrangement to place the proceeds from this offering in an escrow, trust or similar
account.    Nevada  law  does  not  require  that  funds  raised  pursuant  to  the  sale  of  securities  be
placed into an escrow account.  Any funds raised from this offering will be immediately available to
Samoyed Energy Corp. for its use.
3. The closing date for this offering is December 31, 2006.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed.  Samoyed Energy Corp.
may not sell these securities until the registration statement relating to these securities has been
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and is effective.  This prospectus is not an
offer  to  sell  these  securities  and  it  is  not  soliciting  an  offer  to  buy  these  securities  in  any  state
where the offer or sale is not permitted.
The date of this Prospectus is October, 2005.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Item No. Item in Form SB-2 Prospectus Caption
Page No.
3
8
9
9
10
10
10
11
12
12
12
13
13
14
18
20
20
21
22
22
23
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Front of Registration Statement and Outside Front Cover Page
of Prospectus
Prospectus Cover Page
Prospectus Summary and Risk Factors
Use of Proceeds
Determination of Offering Price
Dilution
Selling Security Holders
Plan of Distribution
Legal Proceedings
Directors, Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons
Security  Ownership  of  Certain  Beneficial  Owners  and
Management
Description of Securities
Interest of Named Experts and Counsel
Disclosure  of  Commission  Position  on  Indemnification  for
Securities Act Liabilities
Organization within Last Five Years
Description of Business
Plan of Operation
Description of Property
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
15
16
17
18
19
20 Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters
21
22
23
in  and  Disagreements  with  Accountants  on
Executive Compensation
Financial Statements
Changes 
Accounting and Financial Disclosure
Securities offered through this prospectus will not be sold through dealers, but will be sold on a
direct participation basis only.
2
Item 3.   Prospectus Summary and Risk Factors
The Company
Samoyed Energy Corp. (referred to in this prospectus as “Samoyed”, “us”, “we” and “our”)  was
incorporated on August 31, 2005 in the State of Nevada.  Samoyed's principal executive offices
are located at 10870 Harvest Lake Way NE, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, V3M 6H5.  Our telephone
number is (403) 617-8786. As of the date of this prospectus, we have no revenue or operations.
We are a development stage company.  We have not had any revenues or operations and we
have few assets.  We do not expect to have revenues until at least six months after this registration
statement becomes effective.
Since incorporation, we have not made any significant purchases or sale of assets, nor have we
been  involved  in  any  mergers,  acquisitions  or  consolidations.    Samoyed  has  never  declared
bankruptcy, has never been in receivership, and has never been involved in any legal action or
proceedings.
We were formed to operate in Canada as an oil and gas exploration, development, production and
acquisition company.  As of the date hereof, Samoyed has no interests in oil and gas properties.
We plan to aggressively acquire, exploit and explore for oil and gas prospects.  We will focus on
acquisitions  of  oil  and  gas  properties  where  management  believes  further  exploitation  and
development  opportunities  exist.    While  largely  opportunity  driven,  Samoyed  plans  to  pursue  a
balanced portfolio of crude oil and natural gas prospects.  In selecting exploration, exploitation and
development  prospects,  management  of  Samoyed  will  choose  those  that  offer  an  appropriate
combination of risk and economic reward, recognizing that all drilling involves substantial risk and
that a high degree of competition exists for prospects. We do not intend to purchase other oil and
gas companies, but rather identify oil and gas projects that other companies have made available
on the open market. No assurance can be given that drilling will prove successful in establishing
commercially recoverable reserves. See ''Risk Factors''
Samoyed’s business strategy is to acquire, exploit and explore for oil and natural gas reserves
throughout  Canada.  Samoyed  will  focus  on  exploration  and  acquisition  opportunities  in  the
Provinces  of  Saskatchewan,  Alberta  and  British  Columbia  with  the  goal  of  maintaining  high
working  interests  in  properties  that  will  allow  for  operatorship  or  the  potential  for  operatorship.
Acquisitions will be targeted in areas that will compliment the company’s exploration endeavors.
Samoyed intends to focus its business operations on obtaining higher quality reservoirs and to
create value through exploitation, development and exploration activities on to be acquired oil and
gas  prospects  with  a  view  to  increasing  shareholder  value  and  returns,  taking  into  account
Samoyed’s financial position, taxability and access to debt and equity financing.
Initially the focus of Samoyed will be to acquire producing properties in order to establish base
cash flow and production levels.  We expect to compliment our acquisition focus with exploitation
and exploration drilling after completing our initial focus of the acquisition of production.
Samoyed will endeavor to acquire and explore for longer life reserves that will withstand several
pricing cycles and will attempt to focus its asset base on a select number of areas with desirable
characteristics. It is anticipated that the number and diversity of these focus areas will expand with
the growth of our business.
3
Summary of Financial Information
Current Assets
Current Liabilities
Shareholders’ Equity
Revenue
Net Loss
As at September 30, 2005
$34,950
$1,250
$33,700
From August 31, 2005 to September 30,
2005
$0
$1,300
We  have  not  begun  operations  and  are  currently  without  revenue.    Our  company  has  no
employees at the present time.  As at September 30, 2005, our accumulated deficit was $1,300.
 We anticipate that we will operate in a deficit position and continue to sustain net losses for the
foreseeable future.
The Offering
Common Shares Outstanding Before This Offering
Maximum Shares Being Offered
Maximum  Common  Shares  Outstanding  After  This
Offering
3,500,000
3,000,000
6,500,000
Samoyed  Energy  Corp.  is  authorized  to  issue  75,000,000  shares  of  common  stock.    Current
shareholders of Samoyed collectively own 3,500,000 shares of restricted common stock.
This  offering  consists  of  3,000,000  shares  of  Samoyed  Energy  Corp.  common  stock  (the
“Offering”).  The Offering price is $0.10 per share.
There is currently no public market for the common stock of Samoyed, as it is presently not traded
on any market or securities exchange.
RISK FACTORS
The securities offered hereby are highly speculative and should be purchased only by persons
who can afford to lose their entire investment in Samoyed Energy Corp.  Each prospective investor
should  carefully  consider  the  following  risk  factors,  as  well  as  all  other  information  set  forth
elsewhere in this prospectus, before purchasing any of the shares of our common stock.
Failure to Secure Additional Financing May Affect our Company’s Ability to Survive.
We  may  require  additional  financing  in  addition  to  the  funds  we  hope  to  raise  from  the  sale  of
shares offered under this prospectus in order to establish profitable operations.  Such financing, if
required, may not be forthcoming.  Even if additional financing is available, it may not be available
on  terms  we  find  favorable.  Failure  to  secure  the  needed  additional  financing  will  have  a  very
serious effect on Samoyed’s ability to survive.
Inability of Officers and Directors to Devote Sufficient Time to the Operation of the Business
May Limit Samoyed’s Success.
Presently the officers and directors of Samoyed allocate only a portion of their time to the operation
of  Samoyed’s  business.    Should  the  business  develop  faster  than  anticipated,  the  officers  and
directors may not be able to devote sufficient time to the operation of the business to ensure that it
continues as a going concern.  Even if this lack of sufficient time of our management is not fatal to
Samoyed’s existence it may result in limited growth and success of the business.
4
Unproven Profitably Due to Lack of Operating History Makes an Investment in Samoyed an
Investment in an Unproven Venture.
Samoyed Energy Corp. was formed on August 31, 2005.  As of this date, we do not have any
revenues or operations, and we have few assets.  We do not expect to have revenues until at least
six months after this prospectus becomes effective.
Due to our lack of operating history, the revenue and income potential of our business is unproven.
  If  we  cannot  successfully  implement  our  business  strategies,  we  may  not  be  able  to  generate
sufficient  revenues  to  operate  profitably.    Since  our  resources  are  very  limited,  insufficient
revenues would result in termination of our operations, as we cannot fund unprofitable operations,
unless additional equity or debt financing is obtained.
With No Minimum Share  Sale Requirement it is Possible that Samoyed Fails to Commence
Operations Despite Having Raised some Funds from this Offering.
The  offering  is  not  subject  to  any  minimum  share    sale  requirement.    Consequently,  the  early
investor is not assured of any other, later shares being sold.  You may be the only purchaser.  If
Samoyed fails to sell the entire Offering, it may never commence operations and your investment
would be lost.
Difficulty For Samoyed Stockholders to Resell Their Stock Due to a Lack of Public Trading
Market
There is presently no public trading market for our common stock, and it is unlikely that an active
public trading market can be established or sustained in the foreseeable future.  We intend to have
our common stock quoted on the OTC/Bulletin Board as soon as practicable.  However, there can
be no assurance that Samoyed's shares will be quoted on the OTC/Bulletin Board.  Until there is
an established trading market, holders of our common stock may find it difficult to sell their stock or
to obtain accurate quotations for the price of the common stock.  If a market for our common stock
does develop, our stock price may be volatile.
Our independent auditors’ report states that there is a substantial doubt that we will be able
to continue as a going concern.
Our independent auditors,
Smith  &  Company,  state  in  their  audit  report,  dated  October  12,  2005,  and  included  with  this
prospectus,  that  since  we  are  a  development  stage  company,  have  no  established  source  of
revenue and are dependent on our ability to raise capital from shareholders or other sources to
sustain operations, there is a substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Broker-dealers may be discouraged from effecting transactions in our shares because they
are considered penny stocks and are subject to the penny stock rules.
Rules 15g-1 through 15g-9 promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 impose sales
practice  and  disclosure  requirements  on  NASD  broker-dealers  who  make  a  market  in  "penny
stocks". A penny stock generally includes any non-Nasdaq equity security that has a market price
of less than $5.00 per share.  Our shares currently are not traded on Nasdaq nor on any other
exchange nor are they quoted on the OTC/Bulletin Board or “OTC/BB”. Following the date that the
registration statement, in which this prospectus is included, becomes effective we hope to find a
broker-dealer  to  act  as  a  market  maker  for  our  stock  and  file  on  our  behalf  with  the  NASD  an
application on Form 15c(2)(11) for approval for our shares to be quoted on the OTC/BB. As of the
date of this prospectus, we have not attempted to find a market maker to file such application for
us. If we are successful in finding such a market maker and successful in applying for quotation on
the  OTC/BB,  it  is  very  likely  that  our  stock  will  be  considered  a  “penny  stock”.  In  that  case,
purchases and sales of our shares will be generally facilitated by NASD broker-dealers who act as
market makers for our shares.  The additional sales practice and disclosure requirements imposed
upon  broker-dealers  may  discourage  broker-dealers  from  effecting  transactions  in  our  shares,
which could severely limit the market liquidity of the shares and impede the sale of our shares in
the secondary market.
Under the penny stock regulations, a broker-dealer selling penny stock to anyone other than an
established customer or "accredited investor" (generally, an individual with net worth in excess of
$1,000,000  or  an  annual  income  exceeding  $200,000,  or  $300,000  together  with  his  or  her
spouse)  must  make  a  special  suitability  determination  for  the  purchaser  and  must  receive  the
purchaser's  written  consent  to  the  transaction  prior  to  sale,  unless  the  broker-dealer  or  the
transaction is otherwise exempt.
In addition, the penny stock regulations require the broker-dealer to deliver, prior to any transaction
involving a penny stock, a disclosure schedule prepared by the Commission relating to the penny
stock market, unless the broker-dealer or the transaction is otherwise exempt.  A broker-dealer is
also  required  to  disclose  commissions  payable  to  the  broker-dealer  and  the  registered
representative and current quotations for the securities.  Finally, a
5
broker-dealer  is  required  to  send  monthly  statements  disclosing  recent  price  information  with
respect to the penny stock held in a customer's account and information with respect to the limited
market in penny stocks.
Our business operations will be speculative.  The failure of our plans could ultimately force
us  to  reduce  or  suspend  operations  and  even  liquidate  any    asset,    should  we  acquire
assets, and wind-up and dissolve our company.
Samoyed's  business  is  the  acquisition  and  operation  of  oil  and  natural  gas  assets  that  either
produce or that we hope will produce revenue.  As of September 30, 2005, our only assets consist
of  cash  of  $29,950  and  prepaid  expenses  of  $5,000.    Exploration  and  development  of  oil  and
natural gas is extremely risky, particularly given our present financial condition.  An investment in
our company should be considered highly speculative due to that fact that oil and gas exploration
involves a high degree of risk, which even a combination of experience, knowledge and careful
evaluation may not be able to overcome.  There is no assurance that expenditures we make on
acquiring  producing  oil  and  gas  properties  will  result  in  revenues.    There  is  no  assurance  that
future exploration will result in new discoveries of oil or gas.  Exploratory drilling is very expensive
and is subject to numerous risks, including the risk that no commercially productive oil and natural
gas  reservoirs  will  be  encountered.    The  cost  to  drill,  complete  and  operate  wells  is  often
uncertain, and drilling operations may be curtailed, delayed or cancelled as a result of a variety of
factors  including  unexpected  drilling  conditions,  abnormal  pressures,  equipment  failures,
premature  declines  of  reservoirs,  blow-outs,  cratering,  sour  gas  releases,  fires,  spills  or  other
accidents, as well as weather conditions, compliance with governmental requirements, delays in
receiving governmental approvals or permits, unexpected environmental issues and shortages or
delays in the delivery of equipment. These uncertainties could result in our portion of the drilling
costs  exceeding  our  financial  resources  to  fund  the  drilling  and  therefore  could  result  in
suspension  of  drilling  activities  prior  to  completion  of  a  well.  Our  inability  to  participate  in  the
drilling of wells that produce commercial quantities of oil and natural gas would have a material
adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Future oil and gas exploration may involve unprofitable efforts, not only from dry wells, but from
wells  that  are  productive  but  do  not  produce  sufficient  net  revenues  to  return  a  profit  after
exploration, drilling, operating and other costs.  Completion of wells does not ensure a profit on the
investment or recovery of exploration, drilling, completion and operating costs.  Drilling hazards or
environmental damage could greatly increase the cost of operations, and various field operating
conditions  may  adversely  affect  production.    Adverse  conditions  include  delays  in  obtaining
governmental approvals or consents, shut-ins of connected wells resulting from extreme weather
conditions,  insufficient  storage  or  transportation  capacity  or  other  geological  and  mechanical
conditions.
Samoyed  intends  to  identify  exploration  and  development  projects    or  existing  oil  and  gas
production.  There  can  be  no  guarantee  that  we  will  be  successful  in  locating  and  acquiring
working  interests  in  projects  of  merit  or  in  location  of  a  suitable  exploration  and  development
project.
Our future operating results may fluctuate significantly and are difficult to predict.
Our  future  operating  results  may  fluctuate  significantly  depending  upon  a  number  of  factors
including  industry  conditions,  prices  of  oil  and  natural  gas,  rate  of  drilling  success,  rates  of
production from completed wells and the timing of capital expenditures.  This variability makes it
very difficult to predict when we might reach profitability and hence would have a serious impact
on  the  value  of  investor's  investment  in  our  company.    In  addition,  any  failure  or  delay  in  the
realization of expected cash flows from initial operating activities could limit our future ability to
continue exploration and to participate in economically attractive projects.
A  significant  or  prolonged  decrease  in  oil  and  natural  gas  prices  will  seriously  and
 negatively impact our business plans and operations.
Oil and natural gas are commodities whose prices are determined based on world demand and
supply.  It is impossible to predict future oil and natural gas price movements with any certainty, as
they  have  historically  been  subject  to  wide  fluctuations  in  response  to  a  variety  of  market
conditions, including relatively minor changes in the supply and demand for oil and natural gas,
economic, political and regulatory developments, and competition from other sources of energy.
Any extended or substantial decline in oil and natural gas prices would have a material adverse
effect on our ability to negotiate favorable joint ventures with viable industry participants, our ability
to acquire drilling rights, the volume of oil and natural gas that could be economically produced,
our cash flow and our access to capital.
6
We do not currently intend to engage in hedging activities (although we reserve the right to do so
in the future), and may be more adversely affected by fluctuations in oil and natural gas prices than
other industry participants that do engage in such activities.  A sustained material decline in prices
from  historical  average  prices  could  add  additional  limitation  factors  to  our  borrowing  base,
reducing  credit  available  to  our  company.    Our  business,  financial  condition  and  results  of
operations would be materially and adversely affected by adverse changes in prevailing oil and
natural gas prices.
Our officers have limited experience in marketing oil and natural gas.
If we pursue development of an oil and gas prospect without a partner, we will have to establish
markets for any oil and natural gas we do produce and we will also have to market our oil and
natural gas to prospective buyers.  The marketability and price of oil and natural gas, which may
be  acquired  or  discovered  by  us,  will  be  affected  by  the  differential  between  the  price  paid  by
refiners for light quality oil and the grades of oil produced by us.  Our ability to market our oil and
gas production may depend upon our ability to acquire space on pipelines which deliver oil and
gas to commercial markets.  We will also likely be affected by deliverability uncertainties related to
the  proximity  of  our  reserves  to  pipelines  and  processing  facilities  and  relating  to  price,  taxes,
royalties,  land  tenure,  allowable  production,  and  the  export  of  oil  and  natural  gas.      We  have
limited direct experience in the marketing of oil and natural gas.
We  compete  directly  with 
independent,  technology-driven  exploration  and  service
companies,  and  with  major  oil  and  natural  gas  companies  in  our  exploration  for  and
development of commercial oil and natural gas properties.
The  oil  and  natural  gas  industry  is  highly  competitive.    Many  companies  and  individuals  are
engaged in the business of acquiring interests in and developing oil and natural gas properties,
and the industry is not dominated by any single competitor or a small number of competitors.  We
will compete with numerous industry participants for the acquisition of land and rights to prospects,
and  for  the  equipment  and  labor  required  to  drill  and  develop  those  prospects.    Many  of  these
competitors  have  financial,  technical  and  other  resources  substantially  in  excess  of  those
available to us.  These competitive disadvantages could adversely affect our ability to participate
in projects with favorable rates of return.
We may be unable to effectively manage our planned growth.
Our success will depend upon the expansion of our business.  Expansion will place a significant
strain on our financial, management and other resources, and will require us, among other things,
to change, expand and improve our operating, managerial and financial systems and controls and
improve  coordination  between  our  various  corporate  functions.    We  presently  have  no  full  time
employees or management personnel.
We presently have no properties. We intend to acquire further properties which are expected to be
development,  exploration  or  producing  properties.    We  may  rely  on  outside  operators  for  the
operations  of  our  oil  and  gas  properties.    Should  we  begin  operating  our  own  oil  and  gas
properties we will be forced to hire either field contractors or our own field staff and management
personnel to oversee the field operations.
Our inability to effectively manage our growth, including the failure of any new personnel we hire to
achieve  anticipated  performance  levels,  would  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our  business,
financial condition and results of operations.
Our President may  face possible conflicts of interest through dual directorships.
Our President, Mr. Christopher Yee serves as a director for Buckskin Petroleum Inc. that operates
in the oil and gas industry.  It is possible that Mr. Yee may face a conflict of interest if he obtains
information  regarding  an  oil  and  gas  asset  available  for  acquisition  that  would  fall  in  the
parameters of acquisitions being sought by both companies.  Samoyed expects that if such event
did occur, that Mr. Yee would pass the information regarding such acquisition to both companies
for consideration and withdraw from further activity regarding such asset except with the written
consent of both companies.
Samoyed has had no business interaction with Buckskin Petroleum Inc.
There is a possibility that we could incur environmental liabilities that are not covered by
insurance,  which  liabilities  could  be  in  excess  of  any  revenues  or  assets  that  we  may
accumulate.
7
We intend to carry liability insurance for any of our own operations of our oil and gas assets and
we intend that any operations of our oil and gas assets conducted by third party operators will
carry excess liability insurance contracted by the operator.  In the event that losses or damages
result  from  the  operation  of  the  assets  that  are  not  covered  by  our  insurance  in  the  case  of  us
operating or by the operator's insurance in the case of those assets operated by third parties then
in both cases these losses or damages would become a liability for Samoyed.  It is possible that
uncovered  losses  and  damages  could  be  incurred  which  could  cause  us  to  have  to  file  for
bankruptcy protection from the courts.
Item 4. Use of Proceeds
We  intend  to  raise  $300,000  from  the  sale  of  3,000,000  shares  of  common  stock  at  $0.10  per
share.  This Offering has a maximum amount of $300,000 and no minimum.  Samoyed has no
intention to return any stock sales proceeds to investors if the maximum amount is not raised.
Readers will note that Samoyed has already raised a total of $35,000 from the sale of common
stock.  The total amount of $35,000 has been raised from the sale of stock to affiliates, officers and
directors;  these  shares  sold  are  restricted  and  are  not  being  registered  in  this  offering.    As  at
September 30, we had prepaid expenses of  $5,000 to legal counsel against legal expenses and
office and administration expenses of $50.00.  We estimate it will require an additional $26,250 to
complete  this  offering.  We  intend  to  use  our  existing  cash,  of  which  we  have  $29,950  as  of
September 30, 2005 to pay the remaining balance of $26,250 in expenses of this offering.  None of
the offering expenses are to be paid out of the proceeds of this offering.  The entire sum of monies
we  raise  from  this  offering  will  be  used  to  finance  Samoyed’s  plan  of  operations.    None  of  the
proceeds of this offering will be used to repay any existing debt. None of the proceeds will be used
to pay officers or directors or to repay any loans from officers or directors.
The following table indicates how Samoyed intends to use these proceeds of this offering.
Proceeds from Sale of Common Stock
$300,000
Expenses
Exploration and development activities
Legal and Accounting
Consulting
Office Furniture, Equipment and Supplies
Miscellaneous Administration Expenses
Total
The above expenditure items are defined as follows:
240,000
20,000
10,000
15,000
15,000
$300,000
Exploration and development: This item refers to the cost for us to acquire, exploit and explore for
oil and gas prospects. Samoyed will focus on acquisitions of oil and gas properties where
management believes further exploration, exploitation and development opportunities exist.
Legal  and  Accounting:    This  expenditure  item  refers  to  the  normal  legal  and  accounting  costs
associated  with  fulfilling  the  reporting  and  auditing  obligations  of  a  public  company.  It  will  also
cover the cost of preparation of appropriate agreements and documents. We expect to be making
these  expenditures  throughout  the  year,  commencing  on  the  effective  date  of  the  registration
statement, of which this prospectus is a part.
Consulting: This expenditure item refers to the total cost of consulting with industry experts and
consulting engineers.
Office Furniture, Equipment and Supplies:  This expenditure refers to items such as a photocopier,
fax machine, scanner, telephone system, shredder, binding machine, fire retardant filing cabinets
and other similar office requirements.  It also includes regular office supplies such as pens, paper
and ink cartridges. Samoyed expects to begin making these purchases during the sixth month of
operations after the effective date of this prospectus.
8
Hosting  and  Telecom:  This  item  refers  to  the  cost  of  hosting  our  website  and  basic  monthly
telephone and fax services. The amount indicated covers the first year of operations.
Miscellaneous  Administration  Expenses:    This  expense  refers  to  any  miscellaneous  costs  that
have not been otherwise listed - such as bank service charges and sundry items.  This amount will
cover such costs during the first year of operation.
Item 5. Determination of Offering Price
There is no established market for our stock. The offering price for shares sold pursuant to this
offering is set at $0.10.  The 3,500,000 shares of Common stock already purchased by affiliates,
officers  and  directors,  were  sold  for  $0.01  per  share.  All  of  the  shares  of  outstanding  stock  are
restricted. The additional factors that were included in determining the sales price are the lack of
liquidity since there is no present market for our stock and the high level of risk considering our
lack of operating history.
Item 6. Dilution
“Net  tangible  book  value”  is  the  amount  that  results  from  subtracting  the  total  liabilities  and
intangible assets from the total assets of an entity.  Dilution occurs because we determined the
offering  price  based  on  factors  other  than  those  used  in  computing  book  value  of  our  stock.
 Dilution exists because the book value of shares held by existing stockholders is lower than the
offering price offered to new investors.
Samoyed is offering shares of its common stock for $0.10 per share through this offering. Since its
inception  on  August  31,  2005,  its  affiliates,  officers  and  directors  have  purchased  shares  of  its
common stock for $0.01 per share.
As at September 30, 2005, the net tangible book value of Samoyed was $0.00963 per share.  If
Samoyed is successful in selling all of the offered shares at the public offering price, the pro forma
net  tangible  book  value  of  Samoyed  would  be  $302,450  or  approximately  $  0.0465  per  share,
which would represent an immediate increase of $0.0369
in net tangible book value per share and $ 0.0535 or 53.47% per share dilution to new investors,
assuming all the shares are sold at the offering price of $0.10 per share.
Following is a table detailing dilution to investors if 10%, 50%, 75%, or 100% of the offering is sold.
Net  Tangible  Book  Value  Per  Share  Prior  to
Stock Sale
Net Tangible Book Value Per Share After Stock
Sale
Increase  in  Net  Book  Value  Per  Share  Due  to
Stock Sale
Immediate  Dilution  (subscription  price  of  $.10
less net tangible book value per share)
10%
50% 75% 100%
0.0096 0.0096 0.0096 0.0096
0.0085 0.0305 0.0396 0.0465
(0.0011) 0.0209 0.0299 0.0369
0.0915 0.0695 0.0604 0.0535
Assuming all the shares are sold, the following table illustrates the pro forma per share dilution:
Price to the Public (1)
Net tangible book value per Share before Offering (2)
$   0.10
$ 0.0096
Increase Attributable to purchase of Stock by New Investors (5)
$0.0369
Net tangible book value per Share after Offering  (3), (4)
Immediate Dilution to New Investors (6)
Percent Immediate Dilution to New Investors (7)
$ 0.0465
$ 0.0535
53.47%
(1)
Offering price per equivalent common share.
(2)
The net tangible book value per share before the offering is determined by dividing the number of
shares of common stock outstanding into the net tangible book value of Samoyed.
(3)
9
(4)
The net tangible book value after the offering is determined by adding the net tangible book value
before the offering to the estimated proceeds to Samoyed from the current offering less the offering
costs of $31,250.
(5)
The net tangible book value per share after the offering is determined by dividing the number of
shares that will be outstanding after the offering into the net tangible book value after the offering
as determined in Note 3.
(6)
The  increase  attributable  to  purchase  of  stock  by  new  investors  is  derived  by  taking  the  net
tangible book value per share after the offering and subtracting from it the net tangible book value
per share before the offering.
(7)
The dilution to new investors is determined by subtracting the net tangible book value per share
after the offering from the public offering price, giving a dilution value.
(8)
The percent of immediate dilution to new investors is determined by dividing the dilution to new
investors by the price to the public.
These two paragraphs compare the differences of your investment in our shares with the share
investment  of  our  existing  stockholders,  the  officers  and  directors  of  Samoyed.    The  existing
stockholders have purchased a total of 3,500,000 shares for an aggregate amount of $35,000, or
an average cost of $0.001 per share.  Your investment in our shares will cost you $0.10 per share.
 In the event that this offering is fully subscribed the book value of the stock held by the existing
stockholders will increase by $0.369 per share, while your investment will decrease by $0.0535
per share.
If  this  offering  is  fully  subscribed,  the  total  capital  contributed  by  new  investors  will  be
$300,000.00.    The  percentage  of  capital  contribution  will  then  be  10.45%  for  the  existing
stockholders and 89.55% for the new investors.  The existing stockholders will then hold, as
a  percentage,  53.85%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of  Samoyed,  while  the  new
investors will hold, as a percentage, 46.15%.
Item 7. Selling Security Holders
Our current shareholders are not selling any of the shares being offered in this prospectus.
Item 8. Plan of Distribution
Upon effectiveness of the registration statement, of which this prospectus is a part, we will conduct
the  sale  of  shares  we  are  offering  on  a  self-underwritten,  best–efforts  basis.    There  will  be  no
underwriters used, no dealer's commissions, no finder's fees, and no passive market making. The
officers and directors of Samoyed, Mr. Christopher Yee, Mr. Dan Koyich, Mr. Dave Burroughs and
Mr. Wally Yee, will sell securities on behalf of Samoyed in this offering.  Messers. Yee, Koyich,
Burroughs and Yee are not subject to a statutory disqualification as such term is defined in Section
3 (a)(39) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  They will rely on Rule 3a4-1 to sell Samoyed’s
securities without registering as broker-dealers.  They are serving as officers and directors and
primarily perform substantial duties for or on behalf of Samoyed otherwise than in connection with
transactions in securities and will continue to do so at the end of the offering, and have not been a
broker or dealer, or an associated person of a broker or dealer, within the preceding 12 months,
and have not nor will not participate in the sale of securities for any issuer more than once every
twelve months.  Our officers and directors will not receive commissions or other remuneration in
connection with their participation in this offering based either directly or indirectly on transactions
in  securities.    Our  officers  and  directors  intend  to  contact  people  that  they  know  from  previous
business  relationships  in  connection  with  their  efforts  to  sell  the  securities  offered  by  this
prospectus.
We plan to offer our shares to the public, at a price of $0.10 per share, with no minimum amount to
be  sold.    The  officers,  directors  and  existing  shareholders  and  affiliates  will  not  purchase  any
shares under this offering.  We will keep the offering open until we sell all of the shares registered,
or December 31, 2006, which ever occurs first.  There can be no assurance that we will sell all or
any of the shares offered.  We have no arrangement or guarantee that we will sell any shares.  All
subscription  checks  will  be  made  payable  to  Samoyed  Energy  Corp.  or  as  Samoyed  may
otherwise direct.
Item 9. Legal Proceedings
Samoyed Energy Corp. is not a party to any pending legal proceedings, nor is Samoyed aware of
any governmental authority contemplating any legal proceeding against it.
10
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons
Christopher F. Yee, President, Member of the Board of Directors, age 48
Mr.  Christopher  Yee  served  as  Samoyed’s  President  and  a  member  of  Samoyed’s  Board  of
Directors since September 1, 2005.  The term of his office is for one year and is renewable on an
annual  basis.      Mr.  Yee  is  presently  President  of  Richmond  Capital  Corp.,  a  private  corporate
finance company and he is also a practicing Chartered Accountant since 1982.  Since April, 2004,
Mr. Yee has been CFO of Buckskin Petroleum Inc. which is an oil and gas exploration company
active in Southern California.  Prior to that, Mr. Yee was corporate finance associate with Groome
Capital  Advisory  Inc.,  a  company  located  in  Vancouver,  British  Columbia  from  February  until
August 1996.  From May of 1991 to May, 1992, Mr. Yee was President and director for Hockey
Hose Athletic Inc. located in Calgary, Alberta which was a manufacturer of an athletic garment
patented by Mr. Yee. Mr. Yee is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Alberta and
holds a Bachelor of Science degree from the University of British Columbia.
Mr.  Yee  is  currently  devoting  approximately  30  hours  a  week  of  his  time  to  Samoyed.    He  is
prepared to spend up to 30 hours a week of his time upon commencement of our operations, and
as much as 40 hours a week during the critical first 6 months of operation.
Mr. Yee is not an officer or director of any reporting company that files annual, quarterly, or periodic
reports with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
Daniel R. Koyich, Secretary-Treasurer, Member of the Board of Directors, age 66
Mr. Daniel Koyich has served as Samoyed’s Secretary and Treasurer and a member of the Board
of Directors since September 1, 2005. The term of his office is for one year and is renewable on an
annual basis.  Mr. Koyich is currently the President of JeanDan Management Ltd. and has been
since June 1977, a company which offers consulting services regarding investor relations, public
relations, business administration and financing.  Mr. Koyich is currently devoting approximately
20 hours a week of his time to Samoyed.  He is prepared to spend up to 30 hours a week of his
time upon commencement of our operations, and as much as 40 hours per week during the critical
first 6 months of operations.
Mr.  Koyich  is  not  an  officer  or  director  of  any  reporting  company  that  files  annual,  quarterly  or
periodic reports with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
Dave Burroughs, Member of the Board of Directors, age 43
Mr. Dave Burroughs served as a member of the Board of Directors since Samoyed’s inception on
September 1, 2005.  The term of his office is for one year and is renewable on an annual basis.
  Mr.  Burroughs  is  currently  President/General  Manager  of  Chemserv  Products  Inc.  an  Alberta
based Oil and Gas Specialty Chemical Service Company and has held this position since October
2000. Mr. Burroughs has 22 years of corporate and technical management experience in the oil
and gas service industry including international business experience and investment knowledge
in the oil and gas business as well as previous public company experience.
Mr.  Dave  Burroughs  is  not  an  officer  or  director  of  any  reporting  company  that  files  annual,
quarterly or periodic reports with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
Wally Yee, Member of the Board of Directors, age 45
Mr. Wally Yee, has been a Senior/Lead Engineer with Fluor Canada Ltd. since 1994 designing
infrastructure services on projects including  Opti/Nexen  Long  Lake  Upgrader  Project,  Syncrude
Upgrading Expansion at Fort McMurray, Alberta and EPC of the mining and extraction facilities for
95 MM tonnes/annum of oil sands for Albian Sands Energy Inc. at Muskeg River, Alberta. From
1988 to 1993, Mr. Yee was Project Engineer with Kilborn Engineering Ltd. located in Vancouver,
British Columbia where he had responsibilities in mining and transportation.  Mr. Wally Yee is the
brother of our President, Mr. Christopher Yee.
Mr. Yee is not an officer or director of any reporting company that files annual, quarterly or periodic
reports with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
11
Item 11. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
The following is a table detailing the current shareholders of Samoyed owning 5% or more of the
common stock, and shares owned by Samoyed’s directors and officers as of September 30, 2005:
Title of
Name  and  Address  of  Beneficial Amount and Nature Percent of Class
Title of
Class
Name  and  Address  of  Beneficial
Owner
Amount and Nature
Percent of Class
of 
Ownership
Beneficial
Common Dave Burroughs
500,000
14.29%
Director
11531 15 Ave
Edmonton, Alberta T6J 7C9
Common Christopher Yee
500,000
14.29%
Director, President
10870 Harvest Lake Way NE
Calgary, Alberta T3K 4L1
Common Dan Koyich
500,000
14.29%
Director, Secretary/Treasurer
1451 Acadia Dr SE
Calgary, Alberta T2J 5B1
Common Wally Yee
500,000
14.29%
Director
9716 Oakhill Dr SW
Calgary, Alberta  T2V 3W5
Common Directors  and  officers  as  a
2,000,000
57.16%
group of four (4)
Common Scott Koyich
500,000
14.29%
47 Valley Crest Rise NW
Calgary, Alberta T3B 5Y3
The percentage of class is based on the total number of shares outstanding of 3,500,000.
Item 12. Description of Securities
Common Stock
Our Articles of Incorporation authorize the issuance of 75,000,000 shares of common stock with
$0.001 par value.  We are not authorized to issue any series or shares of preferred stock. Each
record holder of common stock is entitled to one vote for each share held in all matters properly
submitted to the stockholders for their vote.  Cumulative voting for the election of directors is not
permitted by the By-Laws of Samoyed.
Holders of outstanding shares of common stock are entitled to such dividends as may be declared
from  time  to  time  by  the  board  of  directors  out  of  legally  available  funds;  and,  in  the  event  of
liquidation,  dissolution  or  winding  up  of  the  affairs  of  Samoyed,  holders  are  entitled  to  receive,
ratably, the net assets of the Company available to stockholders after distribution is made to the
preferred  stockholders,  if  any,  who  are  given  preferred  rights  upon  liquidation.    Holders  of
outstanding shares of common stock have no preemptive, conversion or redemptive rights.  To the
extent that additional shares of Samoyed’s common stock are issued, the relative interest of then
existing stockholders may be diluted.
Item 13. Interest of Named Experts and Counsel
Samoyed  has  not  hired  or  retained  any  experts  or  counsel  on  a  contingent  basis,  who  would
receive a direct or indirect interest in Samoyed, or who is, or was, a promoter, underwriter, voting
trustee, director, officer or employee, of Samoyed.
12
Smith & Company, of   Salt Lake City, Utah, have audited our financial statements for the period
ended September 30, 2005 and presented its audit report dated October 12, 2005
regarding such audit which is included with this prospectus with Smith & Company’s consent as
experts in accounting and auditing.
Lawler & Associates has issued an opinion on the validity of the shares offered by this prospectus,
which has
been filed as an Exhibit to this prospectus with Lawler & Associates’ consent.
Item 14. Disclosure of Commission Position of Indemnification for Securities Liabilities
The Nevada General Corporation Law requires Samoyed to indemnify officers and directors for
any expenses incurred by any officer or director in connection with any actions or proceedings,
whether  civil,  criminal,  administrative,  or  investigative,  brought  against  such  officer  or  director
because of his or her status as an officer or director, to the extent that the director or officer has
been successful on the merits or otherwise in defense of the action or proceeding. The Nevada
General  Corporation  Law  permits  a  corporation  to  indemnify  an  officer  or  director,  even  in  the
absence  of  an  agreement  to  do  so,  for  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with  any  action  or
proceeding  if  such  officer  or  director  acted  in  good  faith  and  in  a  manner  in  which  he  or  she
reasonably  believed  to  be  in  or  not  opposed  to  the  best  interests  of  the  Company  and  such
indemnification  is  authorized  by  the  stockholders,  by  a  quorum  of  disinterested  directors,  by
independent  legal  counsel  in  a  written  opinion  authorized  by  a  majority  vote  of  a  quorum  of
directors consisting of disinterested directors, or by independent legal counsel in a written opinion
if a quorum of disinterested directors cannot be obtained.
The  Nevada  General  Corporation  Law  prohibits  indemnification  of  a  director  or  officer  if  a  final
adjudication  establishes  that  the  officer's  or  director's  acts  or  omissions  involved  intentional
misconduct,  fraud,  or  a  knowing  violation  of  the  law  and  were  material  to  the  cause  of  action.
Despite the foregoing limitations on indemnification, the Nevada General Corporation Law may
permit an officer or director to apply to the court for approval of indemnification even if the officer or
director is adjudged to have committed intentional misconduct, fraud, or a knowing violation of the
law.
The  Nevada  General  Corporation  Law  also  provides  that  indemnification  of  directors  is  not
permitted  for  the  unlawful  payment  of  distributions,  except  for  those  directors  registering  their
dissent to the payment of the distribution.
According to Section 10 of Samoyed Energy Corp.’s bylaws, Samoyed is authorized to indemnify
its  directors  to  the  fullest  extent  authorized  under  Nevada  Law  subject  to  certain  specified
limitations.
Insofar  as  indemnification  for  liabilities  arising  under  the  Securities  Act  may  be  provided  to
directors,  officers  or  persons  controlling  the  Company  pursuant  to  the  foregoing  provisions,
Samoyed  has  been  informed  that,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,
such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore,
unenforceable.
Item 15. Organization Within Last Five Years
See “Certain Relationships and Related Transactions”, Item 19, below.
13
Item 16. Description of Business
Business Development
Samoyed Energy Corp. was incorporated on August 31, 2005, in the State of Nevada.  We have
not  yet  begun  our  business  operations  and  we  currently  have  no  revenue  and  no  significant
assets. Samoyed has never declared bankruptcy, has never been in receivership, and has never
been involved in any legal action or proceedings.  Since becoming incorporated, Samoyed has
not  made  any  significant  purchase  or  sale  of  assets,  nor  has  it  been  involved  in  any  mergers,
acquisitions or consolidations.  Samoyed is not a blank check registrant as that term is defined in
Rule 419(a)(2) of Regulation C of the Securities Act of 1933, since it has a specific business plan
or purpose.
Neither Samoyed nor its officers, directors, promoters or affiliates, has had preliminary contact or
discussions with, nor do we have any present plans, proposals, arrangements or understandings
with any representatives of the owners of any business or company regarding the possibility of an
acquisition or merger.
Business of Issuer
Samoyed  was  formed  to  operate  in  Canada  as  an  oil  and  gas  exploration,  development,
production and acquisition company. As at the date hereof, Samoyed has no interests in oil and
gas properties.
Samoyed plans to acquire, exploit and explore for oil and gas prospects. Samoyed will focus on
acquisitions of oil and gas properties where management believes further exploration, exploitation
and development opportunities exist.
While largely opportunity driven, the Corporation plans to pursue a balanced portfolio of crude oil
and  natural  gas  prospects.  In  selecting  exploration,  exploitation  and  development  prospects,
management  of  Samoyed  will  choose  those  that  offer  an  appropriate  combination  of  risk  and
economic reward, recognizing that all drilling involves substantial risk and that a high degree of
competition exists for prospects. No assurance can be given that drilling will prove successful in
establishing commercially recoverable reserves. See ''Risk Factors''
Samoyed’s business strategy is to acquire, exploit and explore for oil and natural gas reserves
throughout  Canada.  Samoyed  will  focus  on  exploration  and  acquisition  opportunities  in  the
Provinces  of  Saskatchewan,  Alberta  and  British  Columbia  with  the  goal  of  maintaining  high
working  interests  in  properties  that  will  allow  for  operatorship  or  the  potential  for  operatorship.
Acquisitions will be targeted in areas that will compliment the company’s exploration endeavors.
Samoyed will seek out, analyze and complete corporate mergers and asset acquisitions where
value creation opportunities have been identified.
Samoyed will consistently use the following operation and financial management techniques to
increase shareholder
value and returns, taking into account Samoyed’s financial position, taxability and access to debt
and equity financing:
•
Focus growth capital to higher quality reservoirs;
•
Utilize  production  enhancement  techniques  to  increase  productivity  and  add  value  within  the
parameters of good oilfield production practices;
•
Create  value  from  Samoyed’s  asset  base  through  exploitation,  development  and  exploration
activities; and
•
Utilize risk management opportunities through hedging or other means for cash flow management.
Initially, the focus of Samoyed will be to acquire producing properties in order to establish base
cash flow and production levels. This acquisition focus will be complimented with both exploitation
and exploration drilling.
With a focus on enhancing shareholder value, Samoyed will look to acquire and develop oil and
gas assets that have
as many of the following characteristics as possible:
•
Exhibit the potential for delivering superior rates of return on capital employed;
•
Accretive to cash flow per share;
•
Accretive to net asset value;
•
Accretive to reserves per share;
•
•
14
Potential  for  value  enhancement  through  further  exploitation,  including  improved  production
practices,  additional  development  drilling,  infill  drilling  or  re-drilling/re-completion  and  improved
marketing arrangements;
•
Operatorship or the potential to obtain the same;
•
Assets that include associated undeveloped lands for development and exploration opportunities;
•
Geological opportunities with multi-zone potential;
•
Near-term market access and sufficient infrastructure for increased activity.
Samoyed will endeavor to acquire and explore for longer life reserves that will withstand several
pricing cycles and
will attempt to focus its asset base on a select number of areas with desirable characteristics. It is
anticipated that
the number and diversity of these focus areas will expand with the growth of the Corporation’s
business.
Disclosure of Oil and Gas Activities:
We presently have no properties and no oil and gas operations.   We intend to seek acquisitions in
the oil and gas industry.
Drilling Activity:
We have not undertaken any drilling activity as we presently have no properties.
Present Activities:
The Company will seek acquisitions in the oil and gas industry.  It presently has no business and
no oil and gas properties.
Delivery Commitments:
The  Company  does  not  have  any  delivery  commitments  or  any  short  or  long  term  contractual
obligations.
Marketing
We  currently  do  not  conduct  any  marketing  activities.    When  we  have  oil  and  gas  producing
properties, the sale of the extracted products is determined by existing market conditions.  We do
not  believe  that  any  marketing  activities  will  be  necessary  to  conduct  operations  following  the
acquisition of any of the properties described above.  The properties described above currently
have operators who will be responsible for the marketing.  Should we take on the operatorship of a
property then one of the responsibilities would be the marketing of the products.  At this time, we
have no plans for becoming an operator.
Pricing and Marketing - Oil
In Canada, producers of oil negotiate sales contracts directly with oil purchasers, with the result
that  the  market  determines  the  price  of  oil.  The  price  depends  in  part  on  oil  quality,  prices  of
competing fuels, distance to market, the value of refined products and the supply/demand balance.
Oil exports may be made pursuant to export contracts with terms not exceeding one year in the
case of light crude, and not exceeding two years in the case of heavy crude, provided that an order
approving any such export has been obtained from the National Energy Board of Canada (“NEB”).
Any oil export to be made pursuant to a contract of longer duration (to a maximum of 25 years)
requires  an  exporter  to  obtain  an  export  license  from  the  NEB  and  the  issue  of  such  a  license
requires the approval of the Governor in Council.
Pricing and Marketing - Natural Gas
In Canada, the price of natural gas sold in interprovincial and international trade is determined by
negotiation between buyers and sellers. Natural gas exported from Canada is subject to regulation
by the NEB and the Government of Canada. Exporters are free to negotiate prices and other terms
with purchasers, provided that the export contracts continue to meet certain criteria prescribed by
the NEB and the Government of Canada. Natural gas exports for a term of less than two years or
for a term of two to 20 years (in quantities of not more than 30,000
m3/day) must be made pursuant to an NEB order. Any natural gas export to be made pursuant to a
contract of longer duration (to a maximum of 25 years) or a larger quantity requires an exporter to
obtain an export license from the NEB and the issue of such a license requires the approval of the
Governor in Council.
15
The  governments  of  Alberta,  British  Columbia  and  Saskatchewan  also  regulate  the  volume  of
natural gas which may be removed from those provinces for consumption elsewhere based on
such factors as reserve availability, transportation arrangements and market considerations.
The North American Free Trade Agreement
On  January  1,  1994,  NAFTA  became  effective  among  the  governments  of  Canada,  the  United
States of America and
Mexico. NAFTA carries forward most of the material energy terms contained in the Canada-U.S.
Free Trade Agreement. In the context of energy resources, Canada continues to remain free to
determine whether exports to the
United States of America or Mexico will be allowed provided that any export restrictions do not: (i)
reduce  the  proportion  of  energy  resource  exported  relative  to  domestic  use  (based  upon  the
proportion prevailing in the most recent 36 month period), (ii) impose an export price higher than
the domestic price, and (iii) disrupt normal channels of supply. All three countries are prohibited
from imposing minimum export or import price requirements.
NAFTA contemplates the reduction of Mexican restrictive trade practices in the energy sector and
prohibits  discriminatory  border  restrictions  and  export  taxes.  NAFTA  also  contemplates  clearer
disciplines on regulators to ensure fair implementation of any regulatory changes and to minimize
disruption of contractual arrangements, which is important for Canadian natural gas exports.
Employees
We  presently  have  no  employees.      We  hire  consultants  as  required  and  rely  on  present
management,  being  the  directors  and  officers,  to  direct  our  business.      We  will  need  to  hire
employees with experience in the oil and gas industry as we implement our business plan to grow
the  Company  by  acquisition  of  producing  oil  and  gas  assets  and  exploration  and  development
properties where the Company may participate in drilling or in the acquisition of any business in
the oil and gas industry.  As we  grow through acquisitions we will require employees with oil and
gas expertise to review potential acquisitions and accounting and administrative staff to manage
revenues and expenditures.  We intend to hire these employees as it raises capital and completes
acquisitions requiring these employees.   Should we find a property or properties of merit which
would require an operator, we would need to hire additional staff for operations.
REGULATORY MATTERS AFFECTING OUR BUSINESS
Environment and Safety
Our  oil  and  gas  acquisitions  will  be    subject  to  numerous  federal,  state  and  local  laws  and
regulations relating to environmental protection from the time oil and gas projects commence until
abandonment. These laws and regulations govern, among other things, the amounts and types of
substances and materials that may be released into the environment, the issuance of permits in
connection  with  exploration,  drilling  and  production  activities,  the  release  of  emissions  into  the
atmosphere,  the  discharge  and  disposition  of  generated  waste  materials,  offshore  oil  and  gas
operations,  the  reclamation  and  abandonment  of  wells  and  facility  sites  and  the  remediation  of
contaminated sites. In addition, these laws and regulations may impose substantial liabilities for
the failure to comply with them or for any contamination resulting from the operations associated
with our assets.  Laws and regulations protecting the environment have become more stringent in
recent years, and may in certain circumstances impose "strict liability," rendering a person liable
for environmental damage without regard to negligence or fault on the part of such person. Such
laws and regulations may expose us to liability for the conduct of or conditions caused by others,
or for acts of Samoyed which were in compliance with all applicable laws at the time such acts
were performed. The application of these requirements or the adoption of new requirements could
have a material adverse effect on our financial position and results of operations.
We take the issue of environmental stewardship very seriously and will work diligently with our
operators  to  insure  that  compliance  with  applicable  environmental  and  safety  rules  and
regulations.  However,  because  environmental  laws  and  regulations  are  becoming  increasingly
more stringent, there can be no assurances that such laws and regulations or any environmental
law or regulation enacted in the future will not have a material effect on our operations or financial
condition.
16
Exploration and Operating Risks
Our business will be  subject to all of the operating risks normally associated with the exploration
for and production of oil and gas, including blowouts, cratering and fire, any of which could result
in damage to, or destruction of, oil and gas wells or formations or production facilities and other
property and injury to persons. As protection against financial loss resulting from these operating
hazards,  Samoyed  will  maintain,  through  its  operators,  insurance  coverage,  including  certain
physical damage, employer's liability, comprehensive general liability and worker's compensation
insurance. Although we are not insured against all risks in all aspects of its business, such as
political  risk,  business  interruption  risk  and  risk  of  major  terrorist  attacks,  we  believe  that  this
coverage  is  customary  for  companies  engaged  in  similar  operations.  The  occurrence  of  a
significant event against which we are not fully insured would have a material adverse effect on
our financial position.
Competition
Our competition comes from other oil and gas companies that are acquiring oil and gas assets that
we would contemplate acquiring due to its investment and capital costs compared to our financial
capabilities.  Since our financial resources are severely limited at this time, we are at a distinct
disadvantage when competing against companies with significant assets.
Patent,  Trademark,  License  &  Franchise  Restrictions  and  Contractual  Obligations  &
Concessions
There are no inherent factors or circumstances associated with this industry that would give cause
for any patent, trademark or license infringements or violations.  Samoyed has not entered into any
franchise  agreements  or  other  contracts  that  have  given,  or  could  give  rise  to  obligations  or
concessions.
At present Samoyed does not hold any intellectual property nor does it anticipate that it will have
any need for any intellectual property.
Research and Development Activities and Costs
Samoyed  has  not  incurred  any  costs  to  date  and  has  no  plans  to  undertake  any  research  and
development activities.
Facilities
We do not own or rent facilities of any kind. At present we are operating from our principal office
address that is located within the offices of our President, who provides this space free of charge.
We will continue to use this space for our executive offices for the foreseeable future.
Forward-Looking Statements
This  prospectus  contains  forward-looking  statements  that  involve  risks  and  uncertainties.
  Samoyed  uses  words  such  as:  anticipate,  believe,  plan,  expect,  future,  intend  and  similar
expressions, to identify such forward-looking statements.  You should not place too much reliance
on these forward-looking statements.  Actual results are most likely to differ materially from those
anticipated  in  these  forward-looking  statements  for  many  reasons,  including  the  risks  faced  as
described in this Risk Factors section and elsewhere in this prospectus.  Factors which may cause
the actual results or the actual plan of operations to vary include, among other things, decisions of
the board of directors not to pursue a specific course of action based on its re-assessment of the
facts or new facts, or changes in general economic conditions and those other factors set out in
this prospectus.
Reports to Security Holders
We  will  voluntarily  make  available  to  securities  holders  an  annual  report,  including  audited
financials  on,  Form  10-KSB.    We  are  not  currently  a  fully  reporting  company,  but  upon
effectiveness  of  this  registration  statement,  we  will  be  required  to  file  reports  with  the  SEC
pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; such as quarterly reports on Form 10-QSB, and
current reports on Form 8-K.
17
The public may read and copy any materials filed with the SEC at the SEC's Public Reference
Room at 450 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20549. The public may obtain information about
the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC
maintains  an  Internet  site  that  contains  reports,  proxy  and  information  statements,  and  other
information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC at http://www.sec.gov.
Item 17. Plan of Operation
Samoyed  Energy  Corp.  is  a  development  stage  company  with  no  operations,  no  revenue,  no
financial backing and few assets. Our plan of operations is to establish ourselves as an oil and gas
company with both production and exploration properties.
During  the  first  stages  of  Samoyed’s  growth  the  officers  and  directors  will  provide  all  the
management  to  further  the  sourcing  of  oil  and  gas  properties  at  no  charge.  Since  we  intend  to
operate  with  very  limited  administrative  support,  the  officers  and  directors  will  continue  to  be
responsible for these duties for at least the first year of operations.  We may need to hire industry
experts to review properties prior to undertaking any acquisitions.  We have provided for the funds
to hire these experts in our budget from the funds to be raised under this prospectus.
How  long  Samoyed  will  be  able  to  satisfy  its  cash  requirements,  and  whether  we  will  require
additional outside funding in the next twelve months (12) depends on how quickly our company
can generate revenue and how much revenue can be generated. At the present time we only have
funds  available  to  complete  the  expenses  of  this  offering.  However,  should  we  raise  the  entire
$300,000 we are seeking from this offering, management is of the opinion that no further funds
need be required for the operation of Samoyed’s business for the twelve month period following
the completion of this offering.  If we fail to raise any portion of the $300,000 we are seeking from
this offering, then we will have to find other methods to raise additional funds.  At this time, there
are no anticipated sources of additional funds in place.
If we are unable to raise additional funding through this offering or from other sources, we will not
be able to survive more than several months. In that event, it will be critical that we begin to realize
revenues as quickly as possible. We will require additional funding from either outside sources or
from reserves to survive past our first year of operation.
We are confident we can meet our financial obligations and pursue our plan of operations if we
can raise $300,000 through this offering.
There are also no plans or expectations to purchase or sell any significant equipment in the first
year of operations. Management also has no intention of hiring any employees during the first year
of operations, unless there is sufficient revenue from operations to do so.
During the first year of operations, we will concentrate our efforts exclusively on identifying and
acquiring  oil  and  properties  of  merit,  either  production  or  exploration,  in  the  Provinces  of
Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia, Canada.
We currently do not have the $300,000 needed to commence our operations, nor do we have a
source to supply the necessary funding if we are unsuccessful in raising the capital through this
offering.  Samoyed  believes  that  it  will  take  from  two  (2)  to  three  (3)  months  to  raise  capital  for
completion of the development of the business after this prospectus becomes effective.
During  our  first  year  of  operations,  we  expect  to  identify  and  acquire  at  least  one  oil  and  gas
property of merit.   We cannot determine at this time whether this will be an exploration property or
a  producing  property.    If  it  is  an  exploration  property  we  will  need  to  drill  a  well,  which  will  be
required to be successful in order to be able to commence revenues.  If we acquire a producing
property we will expect revenues to commence upon acquisition.
Milestones
As soon as sufficient funds are available from this offering, we intend to immediately start to review
potential oil and gas acquisitions.
18
Members of our management will initially operate from their homes and our President will provide
an  office  free  of  charge.    For  the  first  three  months  we  expect  that  we  will  review  potential
acquisitions and determine at least one suitable acquisition to fit with our business plan.
Dependent on the type of property we acquire, we will either be required to drill a well or wells, in
order  to  commence  revenues  or  we  may  acquire  a  producing  property  which  would  mean  that
revenues should commence within 30 days of the acquisition of the property.  We cannot at this
time state with certainty how long it will take to find a suitable acquisition for which we will have
sufficient funds or if we do find an acquisition which is an exploration or development property,
 how long it will take  to drill a well.   Further, there can be no guarantees that if we drill a well we
will be successful in being able to produce oil or gas in sufficient quantities to sustain operations.
By the fourth month we intend to have found a suitable oil and gas property.  We will initially seek
a  property  which  is  in  production  and  will  generate  revenue  or  hope  to  also  find  a  suitable
exploration and development property for new drilling to expand our revenue base.  We expect
that  our  projected  budget  of  $240,000US  based  on  present  costs  of  $25,000USD  per  flowing
barrel  of  oil  would  equate  to  a  production  property  of  approximately  10  barrels  per  day  which
should generate approximately $300.00US net per day of revenue after costs of production and
royalties.  This expectation is based on the present experience of our President who is a director of
an existing oil and gas company.  Should Samoyed be unable to negotiate a reasonable price for
a producing property then they will look to negotiate the acquisition of working interests into low
risk  drilling  prospects.    It  is  expected  that  $240,000.00US  would  be  more  than  adequate  to
purchase some working interests in two or three drilling prospects, which we would expect would
be situated in one of our core areas.
By the sixth month we plan to have at least one producing well and one exploration property on
which we can start drilling.  We expect that we will either be able to fund this growth from existing
revenues or by loans or equity financings.
At  the  current  time,  Samoyed  has  not  commenced  any  operations  in  regard  to  outsourcing
properties.  We will start to develop leads and review properties with the filing of this prospectus,
however, we will be unable to finalize any agreements until such time as this prospectus goes
effective and we have raised sufficient funds to make an acquisition.  It is possible that during the
review of this prospectus we could find an acquisition that would fit within our business plan, in
which  case,  we  will  look  to  raise  funds  for  this  acquisition  by  way  of  loans  or    convertible
debentures, or the sale of additional shares.
Expenditures
The following chart provides an overview of our budgeted expenditures, by major area of activity,
for  Samoyed  to  remain  operational  for  the  twelve  (12)  month  period  upon  effectiveness  of  this
prospectus.
Expenses
Exploration and development activities
Legal and Accounting
Consulting
Office Furniture, Equipment and Supplies
Miscellaneous Administration Expenses
Total
The above expenditure items are defined as follows:
240,000
20,000
10,000
15,000
15,000
$300,000
Exploration and Development Activities:  This item refers to the cost of acquiring an oil and gas
prospect which may be either a producing property or a property which will require drilling.  We
expect to be incurring these costs beginning during the third month of operations after the effective
date of this prospectus, and we expect that we will need all of these funds should we identify a
suitable property.
Legal  and  Accounting:    This  expenditure  item  refers  to  the  normal  legal  and  accounting  costs
associated with maintaining a publicly traded company. It will also cover the cost of preparation of
19
appropriate agreements and documents. We expect to be making these expenditures throughout
the year, commencing on the effective date of this registration.
Consulting:  This expenditure item refers to the total cost of consulting with industry experts. We
expect  to  retain  outside  geologists  and  engineers  to  review  any  properties  before  they  are
acquired.
Office Furniture, Equipment and Supplies:  This expenditure refers to items such as photocopier,
fax machine, scanner, telephone system, shredder, binding machine, fire retardant filing cabinets
and other similar office requirements.  Samoyed expects to begin making these purchases during
the fourth month of operations after the effective date of this prospectus.
Miscellaneous  Administration  Expenses:    This  expense  refers  to  any  miscellaneous  costs  that
have not been otherwise listed - such as bank service charges and sundry items.  This amount will
cover such costs during the first year of operation.
As  previously  noted,  we  have  raised  $35,000  from  the  sale  of  stock  to  affiliates,  officers  and
directors.  To date we have paid $5,050 of the expenses associated with this offering, which we
anticipate to total $31,250.  On September 30, 2005 we had $29,950 in cash on hand.  After the
remaining  $26,200  is  used  to  complete  this  offering,  we  expect  to  have  $3,750  to  apply  to  our
expenditures during the next twelve (12) month period from the effective date of this prospectus.
Should we raise the entire $300,000 we are seeking from this offering together with the $3,750
cash remaining after the offering expenses are paid, management is of the opinion that no further
funds  need  be  required  for  the  operation  of  Samoyed’s  business  for  the  twelve  month  period
following  the  completion  of  this  Offering.  If  we  fail  to  raise  any  portion  of  the  $300,000  we  are
seeking from this offering, then we will have to find other methods to raise additional funds. At this
time, there are no anticipated sources of additional funds in place.
We are confident we can meet our financial obligations and pursue our plan of operations if we
can raise the amount of funding as contemplated by this Offering, and begin collecting revenue
from operations within the first six months of this prospectus becoming effective.
Item 18. Description of Property
Samoyed does not own any property, real or otherwise.  For the first year, we will conduct our
administrative affairs from the office of Mr. Yee, our President, at no cost to Samoyed.
We do not have any investments or interests in any real estate.  Our company does not invest in
real estate mortgages, nor does it invest in securities of, or interests in, persons primarily engaged
in real estate activities.
Item 19. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
Other than the stock transactions discussed below, Samoyed has not entered into any transaction
nor are there any proposed transactions in which any director, executive officer, shareholder of
Samoyed or any member of the immediate family of any of the foregoing had or is to have a direct
or indirect material interest.
Mr. Christopher Yee, Mr. Dan Koyich, Mr. Dave Burroughs and Mr. Wally Yee, each purchased
500,000 shares of our common stock on September 23, 2005, in a private offering at a price of
$0.01 per share for a total of $20,000.
There are no promoters being used in relation to this offering, except for Samoyed’s officers and
directors who will be selling the securities offered by the Company and who may be deemed to be
promoters  under  Rule  405  of  Regulation  C  promulgated  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission under the Securities Act of 1933.  No person who may, in the future, be considered a
promoter of this offering, will receive or expect to receive assets, services or other considerations
from us.  No assets will be, nor are expected to be, acquired from any promoter on behalf of our
company.  We have not entered into any agreements that require disclosure to our shareholders.
Mr. Wally Yee, who is a director of the Company, is the brother of Mr. Christopher Yee, a director
and the President of the Company.
20
Item 20. Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters
Market Information
Currently  there  is  no  public  trading  market  for  our  stock,  and  we  have  not  applied  to  have
Samoyed’s common stock listed.  We intend to apply to have our common stock quoted on the
OTC Bulletin Board.  No trading symbol has yet been assigned.
Rules  Governing  Low-Price  Stocks  that  May  Affect  Our  Shareholders'  Ability  to  Resell
Shares of Our Common Stock
Our stock currently is not traded on any stock exchange or quoted on any stock quotation system.
 Upon the registration statement in which this prospectus is included becoming effective, we will
apply for quotation of our common stock on the OTC/BB.  Companies whose stock is quoted on
the OTC/BB do not have any filing, reporting or listing requirements with the Nasdaq Stock Market,
Inc. or the NASD.  Such companies are subject to the periodic reporting requirements of the SEC.
Quotations  on  the  OTC/BB  reflect  inter-dealer  prices,  without  retail  mark-up,  markdown  or
commission and may not reflect actual transactions.  Samoyed’s common stock may be subject to
certain  rules  adopted  by  the  SEC  that  regulate  broker-dealer  practices  in  connection  with
transactions in "penny stocks".  Penny stocks  generally  are  securities  with  a  price  of  less  than
$5.00,  other  than  securities  registered  on  certain  national  exchanges  or  quoted  on  the  Nasdaq
system, provided that the exchange or system provides current price and volume information with
respect to transaction in such securities.
Broker-dealers may be discouraged from effecting transactions in our shares because they
are considered penny stocks and are subject to the penny stock rules.
Rules 15g-1 through 15g-9 promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 impose sales
practice  and  disclosure  requirements  on  NASD  broker-dealers  who  make  a  market  in  "penny
stocks". A penny stock generally includes any non-Nasdaq equity security that has a market price
of less than $5.00 per share.  Our shares currently are not traded on Nasdaq nor on any other
exchange nor are they quoted on the OTC/Bulletin Board or “OTC/BB”. Following the date that the
registration statement, in which this prospectus is included, becomes effective we hope to find a
broker-dealer  to  act  as  a  market  maker  for  our  stock  and  file  on  our  behalf  with  the  NASD  an
application on Form 15c(2)(11) for approval for our shares to be quoted on the OTC/BB. As of the
date of this prospectus, we have not attempted to find a market maker to file such application for
us. If we are successful in finding such a market maker and successful in applying for quotation on
the  OTC/BB,  it  is  very  likely  that  our  stock  will  be  considered  a  “penny  stock”.  In  that  case,
purchases and sales of our shares will be generally facilitated by NASD broker-dealers who act as
market makers for our shares.  The additional sales practice and disclosure requirements imposed
upon  broker-dealers  may  discourage  broker-dealers  from  effecting  transactions  in  our  shares,
which could severely limit the market liquidity of the shares and impede the sale of our shares in
the secondary market.
Under the penny stock regulations, a broker-dealer selling penny stock to anyone other than an
established customer or "accredited investor" (generally, an individual with net worth in excess of
$1,000,000  or  an  annual  income  exceeding  $200,000,  or  $300,000  together  with  his  or  her
spouse)  must  make  a  special  suitability  determination  for  the  purchaser  and  must  receive  the
purchaser's  written  consent  to  the  transaction  prior  to  sale,  unless  the  broker-dealer  or  the
transaction is otherwise exempt.
In addition, the penny stock regulations require the broker-dealer to deliver, prior to any transaction
involving a penny stock, a disclosure schedule prepared by the Commission relating to the penny
stock market, unless the broker-dealer or the transaction is otherwise exempt.  A broker-dealer is
also  required  to  disclose  commissions  payable  to  the  broker-dealer  and  the  registered
representative and current quotations for the securities.  Finally, a broker-dealer is required to send
monthly statements disclosing recent price information with respect to the penny stock held in a
customer's account and information with respect to the limited market in penny stocks.
The additional sales practice and disclosure requirements imposed upon broker-dealers are may
discourage broker-dealers from effecting transactions in our shares which could severely limit the
market liquidity of the shares and impede the sale of our shares in the secondary market.
Unless the transaction is otherwise exempt, the penny stock rules require broker-dealers, prior to a
transaction in a penny stock by someone other than an established customer or an “accredited
investor”,  to make a special suitability determination for the purchaser to receive the purchaser’s
written consent to the transaction prior to sale, to deliver
21
standardized  risk  disclosure  documents  prepared  by  the  SEC  that  provides  information  about
penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market.  The broker-dealer must
also provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock.  In addition, the
penny stock regulations require the broker-dealer to deliver, prior to any transaction involving a
penny  stock,  a  disclosure  schedule  prepared  by  the  SEC  relating  to  the  penny  stock  market,
unless the broker-dealer or the transaction is otherwise exempt.  A broker-dealer is also required
to  disclose  commissions  payable  to  the  broker-dealer  and  the  registered  representative  and
current  quotations  for  the  securities.    Finally,  a  broker-dealer  is  required  to  send  monthly
statements disclosing recent price information with respect to the penny stock held in a customer's
account and information with respect to the limited market in penny stocks.
Generally, an individual is regarded as an “accredited investor” if he or she has a net worth in
excess of $1 million or an annual income in excess of $200,000, or $300,000 together with his or
her spouse.
Holders
As of the filing of this prospectus, we have seven (7) shareholders of record of Samoyed common
stock.
Rule 144 Shares.
A  total  of  3,500,000  shares  of  the  common  stock  will  be  available  for  resale  to  the  public  after
September 28, 2006 in accordance with the volume and trading limitations of Rule 144 of the Act.
In general, under Rule 144 as currently in effect, a person who has beneficially owned shares of a
company's common stock for at least one year is entitled to sell within any three month period a
number of shares that does not exceed the greater of: 1% of the number of shares of Samoyed
common stock then outstanding which, in this case, will equal approximately 28,200 shares as of
the  date  of  this  prospectus;  or  the  average  weekly  trading  volume  of  Samoyed  common  stock
during the four calendar weeks preceding the filing of a notice on form 144 with respect to the sale.
Sales under Rule 144 are also subject to manner of sale provisions and notice requirements and
to the availability of current public information about Samoyed. Under Rule 144(k), a person who is
not one of Samoyed’s affiliates at any time during the three months preceding a sale, and who has
beneficially owned the shares proposed to be sold for at least 2 years, is entitled to sell shares
without  complying  with  the  manner  of  sale,  public  information,  volume  limitation  or  notice
provisions of Rule 144.
As  of  the  date  of  this  prospectus,  persons  who  are  Samoyed  affiliates  hold  2,000,000  shares,
which may be sold pursuant to Rule 144 after September 30, 2006.
Dividends.
As of the filing of this prospectus, we have not paid any dividends to our shareholders. There are
no restrictions which would limit the ability of Samoyed to pay dividends on common equity or that
are  likely  to  do  so  in  the  future.  The  Nevada  Revised  Statutes,  however,  do  prohibit  us  from
declaring dividends where, after giving effect to the distribution of the dividend: Samoyed would
not be able to pay its debts as they become due in the usual course of business; or its total assets
would be less than the sum of the total liabilities plus the amount that would be needed to satisfy
the rights of shareholders who have preferential rights superior to those receiving the distribution.
Difficulty To Resell Samoyed Stock, As The Company Has No Expectations To Pay Cash
Dividends In The Near Future
The holders of our common stock are entitled to receive dividends when, and if, declared by the
board of directors.  We will not be paying cash dividends in the foreseeable future, but instead we
will be retaining any and all earnings to finance the growth of our business.  To date, we have not
paid cash dividends on our common stock.  This lack of an ongoing return on investment may
make it difficult to sell our common stock and if the stock is sold the seller may be forced to sell the
stock at a loss.
Item 21. Executive Compensation
From  the  date  of  inception  through  the  date  of  this  prospectus,  our  executive  officers  have  not
currently received and are not accruing any compensation.  The officers anticipate that they will
not receive, accrue, earn, be paid or awarded any compensation during the first year of operations.
Item 22. Financial Statements
The audited financial statements of Samoyed appear on pages F-1 through F-9:
22
Item 23. Changes In and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial
Disclosures
Not applicable.
23
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
F-1
Smith & Company
A Professional Corporation of Certified Public Accountants
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC
ACCOUNTING FIRM
Officers and Directors
Samoyed Energy Corp.
Calgary, Alberta
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  balance  sheet  of  Samoyed  Energy  Corp.  (a  Nevada
development  stage  corporation)  as  of  September  30,  2005,  and  the  related  statements  of
operations,  stockholders’  equity,  and  cash  flows  for  the  period  from  August  31,  2005  (date  of
inception)  to  September  30,  2005.    These  financial  statements  are  the  responsibility  of  the
Company’s  management.    Our  responsibility  is  to  express  an  opinion  on  these  financial
statements based on our audit.
We  conducted  our  audit  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting
Oversight Board ( United States).  Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  of  material
misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures  in  the  financial  statements.    An  audit  also  includes  assessing  the  accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation.  We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial  position  of  Samoyed  Energy  Corp.  as  of  September  30,  2005,  and  the  results  of  its
operations,  stockholders’ equity, and its cash flows for the period from August 31, 2005 (date of
inception) to September 30, 2005 in  conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America.
The accompanying financial statements referred to above have been prepared assuming that the
Company will continue as a going concern.  As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the
Company  is  in  the  development  stage,  and  has  no  established  source  of  revenue  and  is
dependent on its ability to raise capital from shareholders or other sources to sustain operations.
These  factors,  along  with  other  matters  as  set  forth  in  Note  1,  raise  substantial  doubt  that  the
Company will be able to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any
adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ Smith & Company
Certified Public Accountants
Salt Lake City, Utah
October 12, 2005
F-2
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
BALANCE SHEET
September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
ASSETS
Current
Cash
Prepaid expense
Current
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
LIABILITIES
$
29,950
5,000
$
34,950
$
1,250
STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Capital stock – Notes 3 and 5
Authorized:
         75,000,000 common shares, par value $0.001 per
share
Issued and outstanding:
     3,500,000 common shares
3,500,000 common shares
    Additional Paid in Capital
Deficit accumulated during the development stage
31,500
         ( 1,300)
33,700
$
34,950
F-3
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
for the period from August 31, 2005 (Date of Incorporation) to September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
Expenses
Organizational costs
Professional fees
Office and administration
 
Net loss for the period
Basic and diluted loss per share
Weighted average number of shares outstanding
F-4
$
1,250
-
50
(
1,300)
$
(
0.00)
3,500,000
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
for the period from August 31, 2005 (Date of Incorporation) to September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
Cash flows used in Operating Activities
Net loss for the period
Adjustment  to  reconcile  net  loss  to  net  cash  used  by
operating
activities
Prepaid expenses
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Cash flows from Financing Activity
Issuance of common shares
 
Increase in cash during the period
 
Cash, beginning of period
 
Cash, end of period
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
Cash paid for:
Interest
$
(
1,300)
(
5,000)
1,250
(
5,050)
35,000
29,950
-
$
29,950
$
-
Income taxes
$
-
F-5
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
for the period from August 31, 2005 (Date of Incorporation) to September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
Capital stock issued for cash
Common Stock
Shares
Amount
Additional
Deficit
Accumulated  
during the  
Paid-in Development 
Capital
Stage
Total
– at $0.01
3,500,000 $
$
Net loss for the period
-
3,500
-
31,500
-
Balance, September 30, 2005
3,500,000 $
$
$
-
$
$
35,000
(
(
1,300)
1,300)
$
3,500
31,500
(   1,300)
33,700
F-6
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
Note 1
Nature and Continuance of Operations
a)
Organization
The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada, United States of America on August 31,
2005.  The Company’s year-end is August 31.
b)
Development Stage Activities
The Company is in the development stage and has not yet realized any revenues from its planned
operations.  The Company intends to operate in Canada as an oil and gas exploration,
development, production and acquisition company.  As at the date hereof, the Company has no
interest in oil and gas properties.
These financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.  The Company has
accumulated  a  deficit  of  $1,300  since  inception.    Its  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern  is
dependent upon the ability of the Company to generate profitable operations in the future and/or to
obtain  necessary  financing  to  meet  its  obligations  and  repay  its  liabilities  arising  from  normal
business operations when they come due.
Note 2
Significant Accounting Policies
The  financial  statements  of  the  Company  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  generally
accepted accounting principles in the United States of America.  Because a precise determination
of  many  assets  and  liabilities  is  dependent  upon  future  events,  the  preparation  of  financial
statements for a period necessarily involves the use of estimates, which have been made using
careful judgment.  Actual results may vary from these estimates.
The  financial  statements  have,  in  management’s  opinion,  been  properly  prepared  within
reasonable  limits  of  materiality  and  within  the  framework  of  the  significant  accounting  policies
summarized below:
a)
Organizational and Start-up Costs
Costs of start-up activities, including organizational costs, are expensed as incurred.
b)
Development Stage Company
The Company is a development stage company as defined in Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards No. 7.  The Company is devoting substantially all of its present efforts to establish a
new  business  and  none  of  its  planned  principal  operations  have  commenced.    All  losses
accumulated since inception has been considered as part of the Company’s development stage
activities.
c)
Offering Expenses
The  company  proposes  to  file  a  Form  SB-2  Registration  Statement  to  offer  to  the  public  up  to
3,000,000  common  shares  at  $0.10  per  share.    The  $31,250  estimated  costs  relating  to  this
Registration Statement will be charged to capital.
F-7
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
Note 2
Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
d)
Income Taxes
The  Company  has  adopted  Statement  of  Financial  Accounting  Standards  (“SFAS”)  No.  109  –
“Accounting for Income Taxes”.  SFAS No. 109 requires the use of the asset and liability method of
accounting of income taxes.  Under the asset and liability method of SFAS No. 109, deferred tax
assets  and  liabilities  are  recognized  for  the  future  tax  consequences  attributable  to  temporary
differences  between  the  financial  statements  carrying  amounts  of  existing  assets  and  liabilities
and their respective tax bases.  Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax
rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are
expected to be recovered or settled.
e)
Basic and Diluted Loss Per Share
In accordance with SFAS No. 128 – “Earnings Per Share”, the basic loss per common share is
computed by dividing net loss available to common stockholders by the weighted average number
of common shares outstanding.  Diluted loss per common share is computed similar to basic loss
per common share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional
common  shares  that  would  have  been  outstanding  if  the  potential  common  shares  had  been
issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive.  At September 30, 2005, the Company
had no stock equivalents that were anti-dilutive and excluded in the loss per share computation.
f)
Financial Instruments
The  carrying  value  of  the  Company’s  financial  instruments,  consisting  of  cash  and  accounts
payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair value due to the short-term maturity of such
instruments.    Unless  otherwise  noted,  it  is  management’s  opinion  that  the  Company  is  not
exposed to significant interest, currency or credit risks arising from these financial statements.
g)
Foreign Currency Translation
The Company’s functional currency is Canadian dollars as all of the Company’s operations are in
Canada.    The  Company  used  the  United  States  of  America  dollar  as  its  reporting  currency  for
consistency with registrants of the Securities and Exchange Commission and in accordance with
Statement of Financial Accounting No. 52.
Assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in  a  foreign  currency  are  translated  at  the  exchange  rate  in
effect at the year end and capital accounts are translated at historical rates.  Income statement
accounts  are  translated  at  the  average  rates  of  exchange  prevailing  during  the  year  and  are
included in the Comprehensive Income Account in Stockholders’ Equity, if applicable.
Transactions  undertaken  in  currencies  other  than  the  functional  currency  of  the  Company  are
translated using the exchange rate in effect as of the transaction date.  Any exchange gains or
losses are included in the Statement of Operations.
h)
New Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective accounting standards
if currently adopted could have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
F-8
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
(A Development Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
September 30, 2005
(Stated in US Dollars)
Note 3
Common Stock
The  Company’s  authorized  common  stock  consists  of  75,000,000  shares  with  a  par  value  of
$0.001 per share.
On September 23, 2005, the Company issued 3,500,000 shares of common stock at $0.01 per
share for cash totaling $35,000.
Note 4
Deferred Tax Assets
The following table summarizes the significant components of the Company’s deferred tax assets:
Deferred Tax Assets
Non-capital loss carry forward
Valuation allowance for deferred tax asset
Total
$
-
-
$
-
The amount taking into income as deferred tax assets must reflect that portion of the income tax
loss carry forwards that is likely to be realized from future operations.  The Company has chosen to
provide an allowance of 100% against all available income tax loss carry forwards, regardless of
their time of expiry.
At September 30, 2005, the Company has accumulated non-capital losses totaling $ nil, which are
available  to  reduce  taxable  income  in  future  taxation  years.    These  losses  expire  beginning  in
2024.
Note 5
Related Party Transactions
During the period August 31, 2005, (Date of Incorporation) to September 30, 2005, the Company
issued  3,500,000  shares  of  common  stock  for  $35,000  to  directors,  close  friends  and  business
associates of the Company.
Note 6
Commitment
The Company intends to file a Form SB–2 Registration Statement to offer to the public up to
3,000,000 common shares at $0.10 per share.
F-9
PART II. INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 24. Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Our officers and directors are indemnified as provided by the Nevada Revised Statutes and the
bylaws.
Under  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes,  director  immunity  from  liability  to  a  company  or  its
shareholders  for  monetary  liabilities  applies  automatically  unless  it  is  specifically  limited  by  a
company's Articles of Incorporation.  Samoyed’s Articles of Incorporation do not specifically limit
the  directors’  immunity.    Excepted  from  that  immunity  are:  (a)  a  willful  failure  to  deal  fairly  with
Samoyed  or  its  shareholders  in  connection  with  a  matter  in  which  the  director  has  a  material
conflict  of  interest;  (b)  a  violation  of  criminal  law,  unless  the  director  had  reasonable  cause  to
believe  that  his  or  her  conduct  was  lawful  or  no  reasonable  cause  to  believe  that  his  or  her
conduct was unlawful; (c) a transaction from which the director derived an improper personal profit;
and (d) willful misconduct.
Samoyed’s bylaws provide that we will indemnify the directors to the fullest extent not prohibited
by Nevada law; provided, however, that Samoyed may modify the extent of such indemnification
by individual contracts with the directors and officers; and, provided, further, that we shall not be
required  to  indemnify  any  director  or  officer  in  connection  with  any  proceeding,  or  part  thereof,
initiated by such person unless such indemnification: (a) is expressly required to be made by law,
(b)  the  proceeding  was  authorized  by  the  board  of  directors,  (c)  is  provided  by  us,  in  our  sole
discretion,  pursuant  to  the  powers  vested  us  under  Nevada  law  or  (d)  is  required  to  be  made
pursuant to the bylaws.
Our bylaws provide that we will advance to any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be
made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil,
criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he is or was a director or officer
of Samoyed, or is or was serving at the request of us as a director or executive officer of another
company,  partnership,  joint  venture,  trust  or  other  enterprise,  prior  to  the  final  disposition  of  the
proceeding, promptly following request therefore, all expenses incurred by any director or officer in
connection with such proceeding upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of such person to
repay  said  amounts  if  it  should  be  determined  ultimately  that  such  person  is  not  entitled  to  be
indemnified under the bylaws or otherwise.
Our bylaws provide that no advance shall be made by it to an officer of Samoyed except by reason
of the fact that such officer is or was a director of Samoyed in which event this paragraph shall not
apply, in any action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, if a
determination is reasonably and promptly made: (a) by the board of directors by a majority vote of
a quorum consisting of directors who were not parties to the proceeding, or (b) if such quorum is
not  obtainable,  or,  even  if  obtainable,  a  quorum  of  disinterested  directors  so  directs,  by
independent legal counsel in a written opinion, that the facts known to the decision-making party at
the time such determination is made demonstrate clearly and convincingly that such person acted
in bad faith or in a manner that such person did not believe to be in or not opposed to the best
interests of Samoyed.
Item 25. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution
We have, or will expend fees in relation to this registration statement as detailed below:
Expenditure Item
Attorney Fees
Audit Fees
Incorporation Fees
SEC  Registration  and  Blue  Sky
Registration
Printing  Costs  and  Miscellaneous
Expenses
Transfer Agent Fees
Total
Amount
$25,000
2,000
1,250
10
990
2,000
$31,250
24
Item 26. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
We have sold securities within the past three years without registering the securities under the
Securities Act of 1933 on one occasion.
During  the  period  from  September  1,  2005  to  September  30,  2005,  a  private  offering  was
completed, under which 3,500,000 shares of common stock were sold by subscription at a price of
$0.01 per share to eleven (11) shareholders for $35,000. Neither we nor any person acting on our
behalf offered or sold these securities by any form of general solicitation or general advertising.
The shares sold are restricted securities and the certificates representing these shares have been
affixed with a standard restrictive legend, which states that the securities cannot be sold without
registration  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933  or  an  exemption  therefrom.  Each  purchaser
represented  to  us  that  he  was  purchasing  the  securities  for  his  own  account  and  not  for  the
account  of  any  other  persons.  Each  purchaser  was  provided  with  written  disclosure  that  the
securities have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933 and therefore cannot be sold
without registration under the Securities Act of 1933 or an exemption therefrom. No underwriters
were  used,  and  no  commissions  or  other  remuneration  was  paid  except  to  Samoyed.  The
securities were sold in reliance on Regulation D, Section 504 of the Securities Act of 1933.
Samoyed qualified for an exemption from registration under Rule 504 for these issuances since it
is not subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Act of 1933, is
not an investment company, it had a specific business plan at the time it sold the securities, it was
not a blank check company, as that term is defined in Rule 419(a)(2) of Regulation C or Rule 504
(a)(3) of Regulation D of the Securities Act of 1933. Neither Samoyed nor any person acting on its
behalf  offered  or  sold  any  of  the  securities  by  any  form  of  general  solicitation  or  general
advertising.  The  securities  sold  are  restricted  shares;  the  purchasers  were  informed  that  the
securities cannot be resold without the securities being registered under the Securities Act of 1933
or  an  exemption  therefrom.    Samoyed  exercised  reasonable  care  to  assure  that  the  purchases
were not underwritten within the meaning of section 2(a)(11) of this Act including but not limited to
the placement of a restrictive legend on the certificates representing the shares, and the aggregate
offering price was less that $1,000,000.
The following table provides details of all stock sales transactions that have taken place during the
period from Samoyed’s formation, on August 31, 2005, to the date of this Registration Statement.
Stock Purchaser’s Name
Date of Purchase
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
Dave Burroughs
September 23,
500,000
2005
Christopher Yee
September 23,
500,000
2005
Daniel Koyich
September 23,
500,000
Daniel Koyich
September 23,
500,000
2005
Wally Yee
September 23,
500,000
2005
W. Scott Lawler
September 23,
166,667
Caribbean Overseas
Investments Ltd.
Buccaneer Holdings Inc.
Scott Koyich
Derrek Moore
Robert Moore
2005
September 23,
166,666
2005
September 23,
166,667
2005
September 23,
500,000
2005
September 23,
166,666
2005
September 23,
166,667
2005
Pam Johnston
September 23,
166,667
Total
2005
3,500,000
25
Item 27. Exhibits
Number Description
3.1
3.2
5
23.1
23.2
24
Articles of Incorporation.
Bylaws.
Legality opinion
Consent of attorney
Consent of independent auditor
Power of Attorney
Filed herewith
Filed herewith
Filed herewith
Included in Exhibit 5
Filed herewith
Filed herewith
26
Item 28. Undertakings
Samoyed hereby undertakes the following:
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to
this registration statement:
(a)
To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(b)
To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of this registration
statement,  or  most  recent  post-effective  amendment,  which,  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,
represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in this registration statement; and
(c)
To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed
in  this  registration  statement  or  any  material  change  to  such  information  in  the  registration
statement.
That,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  liability  under  the  Securities  Act,  each  post-effective
amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered
herein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide
offering thereof.
To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being
registered hereby which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to the
directors,  officers  and  controlling  persons  pursuant  to  the  provisions  above,  or  otherwise,
Samoyed has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such
indemnification  is  against  public  policy  as  expressed  in  the  Securities  Act,  and  is,  therefore,
unenforceable.
In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities, other than the payment by us of
expenses incurred or paid by one of the directors, officers, or controlling persons in the successful
defense of any action, suit or proceeding, is asserted by one of the directors, officers, or controlling
persons in connection with the securities being registered, Samoyed will, unless in the opinion of
its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act, and Samoyed will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
27
SIGNATURES
In accordance with the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form SB-2 and
authorized this Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized, in the City of Calgary, Province of Alberta, Canada, on October 28, 2005.
SAMOYED ENERGY CORP.
By:    ​
​/s/ Christopher Yee
Name:  Christopher Yee
Title:    President, Principal Executive Officer and Member of the Board of Directors
/s/ Christopher Yee
President, Principle Executive Officer
October
28, 2005
Christopher Yee
and Member of the Board of Directors
/s/ Dan Koyich
​
Dan Koyich
October 28, 2005
Dan Koyich
Secretary-Treasurer, Principal Financial Officer
and Principal Accounting Officer and Member of
the Board of Directors
/s/ Dave Burroughs
Dave Burroughs
October 28, 2005
Dave Burroughs
Director
/s/ Wally Yee
Wally Yee
October
28, 2005
Wally Yee
Director
28