
20-F 1 form20f.htm FORM 20-F Avalon Rare Metals Inc. - Form 20-F - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 20-F
[   ] REGISTRATION STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OR (g) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT
OF 1934
OR
[X] ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For fiscal year ended August 31, 2014
OR
[   ] TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF
1934
For the transition period from ______________ to ______________
OR
[   ] SHELL COMPANY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT
OF 1934
Date of event requiring this shell company report: ______________
Commission file number: 001-35001
AVALON RARE METALS INC. 
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Canada
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
130 Adelaide St. West, Suite 1901, Toronto, Ontario M5H 3P5, Canada
(Address of principal executive offices)
R. J. Andersen, Tel: 416-364-4938 Fax: 416-364-5162
130 Adelaide St. West, Suite 1901, Toronto, Ontario M5H 3P5, Canada
(Name, Telephone, E-mail and/or Facsimile number and Address of Company Contact Person)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of Each Class
 
Common Shares
Name of each exchange on which registered
 
NYSE MKT
1
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Securities for which there is a reporting obligation pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Act: None
Indicate the number of outstanding shares of each of the Registrant’s classes of capital or common stock as of the
close of the period covered by the annual report: 126,343,686 common shares as at August 31, 2014
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. 
Yes [   ]      No [X]
If this report is an annual or transition report, indicate by check mark if the Registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. 
Yes [   ]      No [X]
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. 
Yes [X]      No [   ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any,
every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of
this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and
post such files). 
Yes [   ]      No [   ]
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated
filer. See definition of “accelerated filer and large accelerated filer” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one)
Large accelerated filer [   ]
Accelerated filer [X]
Non-accelerated filer [   ]
Indicate by check mark which basis of accounting the registrant has used to prepare the financial statements included
in this filing:
U.S. GAAP [ ]
International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by
the International Accounting Standards Board [X]
Other [ ]
If “Other” has been checked in response to the previous question, indicate by check mark which financial statement
item the registrant has elected to follow: 
Item 17 [   ]      Item 18 [   ]
If this is an annual report, indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act). 
Yes [   ]      No [X]
This annual report is prepared as of December 1, 2014.
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION  
CURRENCY  
QUALIFIED PERSONS  
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS  
CAUTIONARY NOTE TO UNITED STATES INVESTORS CONCERNING RESERVE AND RESOURCE
ESTIMATES
EXPLANATORY NOTE REGARDING PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION  
THIRD PARTY INFORMATION AND DATA  
GLOSSARY OF MINING TERMS  
 
PART I
 
   ITEM 1.
   ITEM 2.
   ITEM 3.
   ITEM 4.
IDENTITY OF DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ADVISORS
OFFER STATISTICS AND EXPECTED TIMETABLE
KEY INFORMATION
INFORMATION ON THE COMPANY
4
4
4
4
6
6
6
7
 
11
 
11
11
11
24
ITEM 5.
   ITEM 6.
   ITEM 7.
   ITEM 8.
   ITEM 9.
   ITEM 10.
   ITEM 11.
   ITEM 12.
 
PART II
 
   ITEM 13.
   ITEM 14.
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW AND PROSPECTS
DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
THE OFFER AND LISTING
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES OTHER THAN EQUITY SECURITIES
 
 
 
DEFAULTS, DIVIDEND ARREARAGES AND DELINQUENCIES
MATERIAL MODIFICATIONS TO THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS AND USE OF
PROCEEDS
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
[RESERVED]
ITEM 15.
   ITEM 16.
   ITEM 16A. AUDIT COMMITTEE FINANCIAL EXPERT
   ITEM 16B. CODE OF ETHICS
   ITEM 16C. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
   ITEM 16D. EXEMPTIONS FROM THE LISTING STANDARDS FOR AUDIT COMMITTEES
   ITEM 16E. PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES BY THE ISSUER AND AFFILIATED PURCHASERS
   ITEM 16F. CHANGES IN REGISTRANTS CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANT
   ITEM 16G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
   ITEM 16H. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURE.
 
 
PART III
 
 
 
   ITEM 17.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
   ITEM 18.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
   ITEM 19.
EXHIBITS
 
 
SIGNATURES
68
79
100
102
103
107
119
120
 
120
 
120
120
121
122
122
122
122
123
123
123
123
124
 
124
 
124
125
125
 
127
3
Introduction
In this annual report on Form 20-F, which we refer to as the "Annual Report", except as otherwise indicated or as the
context otherwise requires, the "Company", "we", “our” or "us" or “Avalon” refers to Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
This Annual Report, Exhibits 15.1 to 15.19 included with this Annual Report and the financial statements included in
this Annual Report are expressly incorporated by reference into this Annual Report and are hereby incorporated by
reference as exhibits to the Registration Statement on Form F-10 of Avalon Rare Metals Inc. (File No. 333-190771), as
amended or supplemented.
Currency
Unless we otherwise indicate in this Annual Report, all references to "Canadian Dollars", "CDN$" or "$" are to the
lawful currency of Canada and all references to "U.S. Dollars" or "US $" are to the lawful currency of the United States.
Qualified Persons
Except as otherwise noted in this Annual Report, Mr. Donald S. Bubar, P.Geo., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Mr. David Marsh, FAusIMM (CP), Vice President, Metallurgy and Interim COO and Dr. William Mercer, P.Geo., Vice
President, Exploration are qualified persons for the purposes of National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure
for Mineral Projects (“NI 43-101”), and have reviewed and approved the technical information included in this Annual
Report. See also Item 7. – Major Shareholders and Related Party Transactions – C. Interests of Experts and Counsel.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This  Annual  Report  contains  “forward-looking  statements”  within  the  meaning  of  the  Private  Securities  Litigation
Reform  Act  of  1995  and  within  the  meaning  of  applicable  Canadian  securities  regulations.  There  are  risks  and
uncertainties that could cause actual events or results to differ materially from estimated or anticipated events or results
reflected in the forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future
events and are include, among other things, statements regarding targets, estimates and/or assumptions in respect of
reserves and/or resources, and are based on estimates and/or assumptions related to future economic, market and
other conditions that, while considered reasonable by management, are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties,
including  significant  business,  economic,  competitive,  political  and  social  uncertainties  and  contingencies.  These
estimates and/or assumptions include, but are not limited to:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
grade of ore;
rare earth and by-product commodity prices;
metallurgical recoveries;
operating costs;
achievement of current timetables for development;
strength of the global economy;
availability of additional capital; and
availability of supplies, equipment and labour.
Factors that could cause the Company’s actual results, performance, achievements, developments or events to differ
materially from those expressed or implied by forward-looking statements include, among others, the factors described
or referred to under “Description of the Business - Risk Factors” herein and the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
risks  related  to  the  Company’s  history  of  losses,  lack  of operating  history  and  ability  to  generate  material
revenues;
risks related to establishing new mining operations in the event that the Company elects to proceed with the
development of one of its mineral projects;
risks related to the Company’s need for additional financing;
4
risks related to any joint venture or strategic alliances that may be entered into by the Company;
risks related to securing product off-take agreements on a timely basis;
risks  related  to  the  unique  ore  type  at  the  Nechalacho Rare  Earth  Elements  Project  (“Nechalacho”  or  the
“Nechalacho Project”) for which known metallurgical processes have not previously been applied;
uncertainty related to title to the Company’s properties as well as the risk of delays in obtaining licenses and
permits  as  a result  of  local  opposition,  including  uncertainty  related  to  any challenges  in  connection  with
aboriginal land title claims and aboriginal rights in the Northwest Territories;
risks related to the possible existence of rights and interests of aboriginal groups, which may limit the Company’s
ability to develop its properties;
risks  related  to  the  need  to  acquire  properties  for  the Hydrometallurgical  Plant  and  rare  earth  refinery  for  the
Nechalacho Project;
risks that actual capital costs, production schedules and economic returns for the Nechalacho Project may differ
significantly from those anticipated by the Company;
risks related to the demand for rare earth minerals and fluctuations in mineral prices;
risks related to competition and the actions of competitors;
uncertainties relating to the fact that the Company’s mineral resources and mineral reserves are only estimates;
risks related to possible shortages of supplies, equipment and labour;
risks related to obtaining, maintaining and renewing licenses and permits, and the material costs, liabilities and
obligations in connection therewith;
risks  that  the  Company  will  be  subject  to  material  costs, liabilities  and  obligations  in  connection  with
environmental laws, regulations and approvals and that approvals will not be available;
risks  related  to  the  extensive  federal,  state, provincial,  territorial  and  local  laws  and  regulations  to  which  the
Company’s activities are subject;
uncertainties involving uninsured risks;
risks related to the Company’s ability to attract and retain qualified management and technical personnel;
uncertainty  whether  the  Company  will  acquire  commercially mineable  ore  deposits  or  whether  the  current
mineral deposits identified by the Company can be developed as commercially viable ore bodies;
risks related to the availability and reliability of adequate infrastructure;
•
•
•
•
•
risks related to the availability and reliability of adequate infrastructure;
risks and hazards inherent to the mining industry;
risks  related  to  any  changes  in  critical  accounting estimates  that  adversely  affect  the  Company’s  financial
results;
risks related to potential conflicts of interest of the Company’s directors and officers who may have involvement
with other resource companies; and
risks related to fluctuations of currency exchange rates.
Most  of  the  foregoing  factors  are  beyond  the  Company’s  ability  to  control  or  predict.  Although  the  Company  has
attempted to identify important factors that could cause actual results, performance achievements, developments or
events to differ materially from those described in forward-looking statements, there may be other factors that cause
actual results, performance, achievements, developments or events not to be as anticipated, estimated or intended.
There can be no assurance that the estimates and/or assumptions upon which these forward-looking statements are
based will occur.
Readers  can  identify  many  of  these  statements  by  looking  for  words  such  as  “believe”,  “expects”,  “will”,  “intends”,
“projects”, “anticipates”, “estimates”, “continues” or similar words or the negative thereof. There can be no assurance
that the plans, intentions or expectations upon which these forward-looking statements are based will occur.
The forward-looking statements contained herein are made as of the date of this Annual Report and are expressly
qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. Readers should not place undue reliance on the forward-looking
statements,  which  reflect  management’s  plans,  estimates,  projections  and  views  only  as  of  the  date  hereof.  The
Company undertakes no obligation to publicly revise these forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or
circumstances, except as required by applicable law.
5
Cautionary Note to United States Investors Concerning Reserve and Resource Estimates
The reserve and resource estimates in this Annual Report have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of
Canadian  securities  laws,  which  differ  from  the  requirements  of  United  States  securities  laws.  Unless  otherwise
indicated, all reserve and resource estimates included in this Annual Report have been prepared in accordance with
NI 43-101. NI 43-101 is a rule developed by the Canadian Securities Administrators which establishes standards for
all public disclosure an issuer makes of scientific and technical information concerning mineral projects.
Canadian standards, including NI 43-101, differ significantly from the requirements of the United States Securities and
Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), and reserve and resource information contained in this Annual Report may not be
comparable  to  similar  information  disclosed  by  United  States  companies.  In  particular,  and  without  limiting  the
generality of the foregoing, the term “resource” does not equate to the term “reserve”. Under United States standards,
mineralization may not be classified as a “reserve” unless the determination has been made that the mineralization
could be economically and legally produced or extracted at the time the reserve determination is made. The SEC’s
disclosure standards normally do not permit the inclusion of information concerning “measured mineral resources”,
“indicated mineral resources” or “inferred mineral resources” or other descriptions of the amount of mineralization in
mineral deposits that do not constitute “reserves” by United States standards in documents filed with the SEC. United
States investors should also understand that “inferred mineral resources” have a great amount of uncertainty as to their
existence and as to their economic and legal feasibility. It cannot be assumed that all or any part of an “inferred mineral
resource” exists, is economically or legally mineable, or will ever be upgraded to a higher category. Under Canadian
rules, estimated “inferred mineral resources” may not form the basis of feasibility or pre-feasibility studies except in rare
cases. Disclosure of the amount of minerals contained in a resource estimate is permitted disclosure under Canadian
regulations; however, the SEC normally only permits issuers to report mineralization that does not constitute “reserves”
by SEC standards as in-place tonnage and grade without reference to unit measures. The requirements of NI 43-101
for  identification  of  “reserves”  are  also  not  the  same  as  those  of  the  SEC,  and  reserves  reported  by  Avalon  in
compliance with NI 43-101 may not qualify as “reserves” under SEC standards. Accordingly, information concerning
mineral deposits set forth herein may not be comparable with information made public by companies that report in
accordance with United States standards.
Explanatory Note Regarding Presentation of Financial Information
The annual audited consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 20-F are reported in
Canadian dollars. For all periods up to and including the years ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, we prepared
our  consolidated  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  as
issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”). For the years ended August 31, 2011 and 2010, we
prepared our financial statements in accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting principles (“Canadian
GAAP”) and included a reconciliation from Canadian GAAP to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“US
GAAP”), describing the effects on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Financial statements prepared in
accordance with IFRS are not comparable in all respects with financial statements that are prepared in accordance
with either Canadian GAAP or with US GAAP.
Anomalous
Anomaly
Anorthosite
Assay
 
Calcined
Comminution
 
Cubic metres or m3
 
Diamond drill
Fault
 
Feasibility Study
Feldspar
Grade
6
Glossary of Mining Terms
A value, or values, in which the amplitude is statistically between that of a low contrast
anomaly and a high contrast anomaly in a given data set.
 
Any  concentration  of  metal  noticeably  above  or  below  the average  background
concentration.
 
An  unusual  mafic  igneous  intrusive  rock  consisting  of greater  than  90%  plagioclase
feldspar
 
An analysis to determine the presence, absence or quantity of one or more components.
 
Heated  to  a  high  temperature  but  below  the  melting  or fusing  point,  causing  loss  of
moisture,  reduction  or  oxidation,  and  the decomposition  of  carbonates  and  other
compounds.
 
The reduction to a powder.
 
A metric measurement of volume, being a cube one metre in length on each side.
 
A  rotary  type  of  rock  drill  that  cuts  a  core  of  rock  that is  recovered  in  long  cylindrical
sections, two centimetres or more in diameter.
 
A fracture in a rock where there has been displacement of the two sides.
 
A  Feasibility  Study  is  a  comprehensive  technical  and economic  study  of  the  selected
development  option 
includes  appropriately  detailed
assessments  of  applicable  Modifying Factors  together  with  any  other  relevant
operational factors and detailed financial analysis that are necessary to demonstrate, at
the time of reporting, that extraction is reasonably justified (economically mineable). The
results of the study may reasonably serve as the basis for a final decision by a proponent
or  financial  institution  to  proceed  with, or finance, the development of the project. The
confidence level of the study will be higher than that of a Pre-Feasibility Study.
 
Any  of  a  group  of  abundant  rock-forming  minerals occurring  principally  in  igneous,
plutonic,  and  some  metamorphic  rocks, and  consisting  of  silicates  of  aluminum  with
potassium, sodium, calcium, and, rarely, barium.
 
The concentration of each ore metal in a rock sample, usually given as weight percent.
Where  extremely  low  concentrations  are involved,  the  concentration  may  be  given  in
grams  per  tonne  (g/t  or  gpt) or  ounces  per  ton  (oz/t).  The  grade  of  an  ore  deposit  is
calculated, often using sophisticated statistical procedures, as an average of the grades
of a very large number of samples collected from throughout the deposit.
for  a  mineral  project that
Hectare or ha
 
Highly anomalous
An area totaling 10,000 square metres and 2.47 acres.
 
An  anomaly  which  is  50  to  100  times  average  background, i.e.  it  is  statistically  much
An  anomaly  which  is  50  to  100  times  average  background, i.e.  it  is  statistically  much
greater in amplitude.
7
review the  “Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.
Indicated Mineral Resource An  Indicated  Mineral  Resource  is  that  part  of  a  Mineral Resource  for  which  quantity,
grade  or  quality,  densities,  shape  and physical  characteristics  are  estimated  with
sufficient confidence to allow the application of Modifying Factors in sufficient detail to
support mine planning and evaluation of the economic viability of the deposit.
 
Geological  evidence  is  derived  from  adequately  detailed and  reliable  exploration,
sampling  and  testing  and  is  sufficient  to  assume geological  and  grade  or  quality
continuity between points of observation.
 
An Indicated Mineral Resource has a lower level of confidence than that applying to a
Measured Mineral Resource and may only be converted to a Probable Mineral Reserve.
 
Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.  Investors: Please 
Investors Regarding Reserve and Resource Estimates” above.
Inferred Mineral Resource An Inferred Mineral Resource is that part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity and
grade or quality are estimated on the basis of limited geological evidence and sampling.
Geological evidence is sufficient to imply but not verify geological and grade or quality
continuity.
 
An Inferred Mineral Resource has a lower level of confidence than that applying to an
Indicated  Mineral  Resource  and  must not  be  converted  to  a  Mineral  Reserve.  It  is
reasonably expected that the majority of Inferred Mineral Resources could be upgraded
to Indicated Mineral Resources with continued exploration.
 
Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.  Investors: Please 
Investors Regarding Reserve and Resource Estimates” above.
 
A  rock  mass  formed  below  earth’s  surface  from  magna  which has  intruded  into  a
preexisting rock mass.
 
A  Measured  Mineral  Resource  is  that  part  of  a  Mineral Resource  for  which  quantity,
grade  or  quality,  densities,  shape,  and physical  characteristics  are  estimated  with
confidence  sufficient  to  allow the  application  of  Modifying  Factors  to  support  detailed
mine planning and final evaluation of the economic viability of the deposit.
 
Geological  evidence  is  derived  from  detailed  and  reliable exploration,  sampling  and
testing  and  is  sufficient  to  confirm  geological and  grade  or  quality  continuity  between
points of observation.
 
A  Measured  Mineral  Resource  has  a  higher  level  of confidence  than  that  applying  to
either  an  Indicated  Mineral  Resource  or an  Inferred  Mineral  Resource.  It  may  be
converted to a Proven Mineral Reserve or to a Probable Mineral Reserve.
 
Cautionary Note to U.S. Investors: Please review the “Cautionary Note to U.S.
Investors Regarding Reserve and Resource Estimates” above.
 
A  Mineral  Reserve  is  the  economically  mineable  part  of  a Measured  and/or  Indicated
Mineral Resource. It  includes  diluting  materials and allowances for losses, which may
occur when the material is mined or extracted and is defined by studies at Pre-Feasibility
or  Feasibility level  as  appropriate  that  include  application  of  Modifying  Factors.  Such
studies demonstrate that, at the time of reporting, extraction could reasonably be justified.
Mineral Reserve
Measured Mineral
Resource
review the  “Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.
Intrusive
8
Mineral Resource
Modifying Factors
Pegmatite
Plagioclase
Possible or inferred ore
Preliminary Economic
Assessment or Scoping
Study
 
Pre-feasibility study
(preliminary feasibility
study)
review the  “Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.
The reference point at which Mineral Reserves are defined, usually the point where the
ore  is  delivered  to  the  processing plant,  must  be  stated.  It  is  important  that,  in  all
situations  where  the reference  point  is  different,  such  as  for  a  saleable  product,  a
clarifying statement is included to ensure that the reader is fully informed as to what is
being reported.
 
The public disclosure of a Mineral Reserve must be demonstrated by a Pre- Feasibility
Study or Feasibility Study.
 
Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.  Investors: Please 
Investors Regarding Reserve and Resource Estimates” above.
 
A  Mineral  Resource  is  a  concentration  or  occurrence  of solid  material  of  economic
interest in or on the Earth’s crust in such form, grade or quality and quantity that there are
reasonable prospects for eventual economic extraction.
 
The location, quantity, grade or quality, continuity and other geological characteristics of
a  Mineral  Resource  are  known, estimated  or  interpreted  from  specific  geological
evidence and knowledge, including sampling.
 
Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.  Investors: Please 
Investors Regarding Reserve and Resource Estimates” above.
 
Modifying  Factors  are  considerations  used  to  convert Mineral  Resources  to  Mineral
Reserves.  These  include,  but  are  not restricted  to,  mining,  processing,  metallurgical,
infrastructure, economic,  marketing,  legal,  environmental,  social  and  governmental
factors.
 
A  coarse-grained  granite,  sometimes  rich  in  rare  elements such as uranium, tungsten,
and tantalum.
 
Any  of  a  common  rock-forming  series  of  triclinic feldspars,  consisting  of  mixtures  of
sodium and calcium aluminum silicates.
 
Term used to describe ore where the mineralization is believed to exist on the basis of
some  geological  information,  but  the size,  shape,  grade,  and  tonnage  are  a  matter  of
speculation.
 
A  study,  other  than  a  pre-feasibility  or  feasibility study,  that  includes  an  economic
analysis of the potential viability of mineral resources.
review the  “Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.
A Pre-Feasibility Study is a comprehensive study of a range of options for the technical
and  economic  viability  of  a  mineral project  that  has  advanced  to  a  stage  where  a
preferred mining method, in the case of underground mining, or the pit configuration, in
the case of an open pit, is established and an effective method of mineral processing is
determined.  It  includes  a  financial  analysis  based  on  reasonable assumptions  on  the
Modifying Factors and the evaluation of any other relevant factors which are sufficient for
a Qualified Person, acting reasonably, to determine if all or part of the Mineral Resource
may be converted to a Mineral Reserve at the time of reporting. A Pre-Feasibility Study is
at a lower confidence level than a Feasibility Study.
9
Probable mineral reserve A Probable Mineral Reserve is the economically mineable part of an Indicated, and in
some  circumstances,  a  Measured  Mineral Resource.  The  confidence  in  the  Modifying
Proven mineral reserve
Syenite
Metric tonne or tonne
review the  “Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.
Factors applying to a Probable Mineral Reserve is lower than that applying to a Proven
Mineral Reserve.
 
Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.  Investors: Please 
Investors Regarding Reserve and Resource Estimates” above.
 
A  Proven  Mineral  Reserve  is  the  economically  mineable part  of  a  Measured  Mineral
Resource.  A  Proven  Mineral  Reserve  implies  a high  degree  of  confidence  in  the
Modifying Factors.
 
Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.  Investors: Please 
Investors Regarding Reserve and Resource Estimates” above.
 
Coarse-grained  intrusive  igneous  rock  with  a  general composition  similar  to  that  of
granite,  but  deficient  in  quartz,  which,  if present  at  all,  occurs  in  relatively  small
concentrations.
 
Metric measurement of weight equivalent to 1,000 kilograms (or 2,204.6 pounds).
review the  “Cautionary  Note  to  U.S.
10
Part I
Item 1. Identity of Directors, Senior Management and Advisors
Not applicable.
Item 2. Offer Statistics and Expected Timetable
Not applicable.
Item 3. Key Information
A. Selected Financial Data
The selected historical consolidated financial information set forth below has been derived from our annual
audited consolidated financial statements.
For the years ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 we have prepared our consolidated financial statements
in  accordance  with  IFRS,  as  issued  by  the  IASB.  Our  August  31,  2011  consolidated  financial  statements  were
originally prepared in accordance with Canadian GAAP, consistent with the year ended August 31, 2010. We have
adjusted our consolidated financial information as at and for the year ended August 31, 2011, in accordance with IFRS
1, and adopted IFRS with a transition date of September 1, 2010.
The selected historical consolidated financial information presented below is condensed and may not contain
all of the information that you should consider. This selected financial data should be read in conjunction with our
annual audited consolidated financial statements, the notes thereto and the sections entitled “Item 3. Key Information –
D. Risk Factors” and “Item 5 - Operating and Financial Review and Prospects.”
The table below sets forth selected consolidated financial data under IFRS as issued by the IASB, which differ
in certain respects from the principles the Company would have followed had its consolidated financial statements
been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The information has been derived from our annual audited consolidated
financial statements, including as set forth in “Item 18 — Financial Statements.”
The tables below set forth selected consolidated financial data under IFRS for the years ended August 31,
2014, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
In this Annual Report all dollars are expressed in Canadian dollars unless otherwise stated.
August 31,
2014
August 31,
2013
August 31,
2012
August 31,
2011
Operating Revenues
Loss before other items
Net Loss for the Year
Net Comprehensive Loss for the Year
Loss per Share, Basic and Diluted
Total Assets
Total Liabilities
Share Capital
Total Equity
Weighted Average Number of Common Shares
   Outstanding
Dividends declared
$
(5,730,581)
 
(5,730,581)
 
(5,730,581)
 
 
(0.05)
  116,837,367 
 
3,742,967 
  158,553,485 
  113,094,400
-  $
(11,199,164)
 
(11,199,164)
 
(11,199,164)
 
 
(0.11)
  111,845,946 
 
2,878,631 
  149,379,724 
  108,967,315
-  $
(11,152,194)
 
(11,152,194)
 
(11,152,194)
 
 
(0.11)
  124,081,323 
 
6,804,869 
  149,045,672 
  117,276,454
- 
 -  $
(8,709,760)
 
(8,709,760)
 
(8,709,760)
 
 
(0.09)
  123,815,949 
 
3,792,595 
  146,244,597 
  120,023,354
112,724,520 
 
Nil
103,683,356 
 
Nil
103,224,070 
 
Nil
93,074,790 
Nil
11
Exchange Rates
All dollar amounts set forth in this Annual Report are in Canadian dollars, except where otherwise indicated.
The following table sets forth the average exchange rates for the Canadian Dollar and U.S. Dollar for the five most
recent financial years indicated based on the noon buying rate per the Bank of Canada (1 Canadian dollar = US$X),
calculated by using the average of the exchange rates on the last day of each month during each financial year.
Year Ended August 31,
2011
2012
2013
2014
Average
US$    1.0150
US$    0.9929
US$    0.9848
US$    0.9276
The following table sets forth the high and low exchange rate for the past six months. As of November 24, 2014,
the exchange rate was US$0.8864 for each CDN$1.
High
US$    0.9247
US$    0.9393
US$    0.9416
US$    0.9251
US$    0.9241
US$    0.9017
Low
US$    0.9085
US$    0.9122
US$    0.9149
US$    0.9103
US$    0.8913
US$    0.8783
Month
May 2014
June 2014
July 2014
August 2014
September 2014
October 2014
B. Capitalization and Indebtedness
Not Applicable.
C. Reasons for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
Not Applicable.
D. Risk Factors
An investment in securities of Avalon is highly speculative and involves significant risks. Exploration activities
are  based  on  professional  judgments  and  statistically-based  tests  and  calculations,  and  often  yield  few  rewarding
results. Mineral properties are often non-productive for reasons that cannot be anticipated in advance and operations
may be subject to risks including labour disputes, environmental hazards, safety issues, geological issues, weather
conditions and changing regulatory requirements as examples. Avalon is subject to competitive risk as its ability to
finance its activities and generate profitable operations or proceeds from disposal of assets are subject to world prices
for rare metals, rare earth elements (“REE”) and other rare minerals and the economic forces that influence capital
markets.  Any  one  of  the  following  risk  factors  could  materially  affect  Avalon’s  business,  financial  condition  and/or
future  operating  results  and  prospects  and  could  cause  actual  events  to  differ  materially  from  those  described  in
forward looking statements relating to Avalon. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently identified or that Avalon
currently believes not to be material also may materially and adversely affect Avalon’s business, financial condition,
operations or prospects.
We have No Operating Revenues and a History of Losses.
The  Company  has  had  no  operating  revenues  and  a  history  of  losses,  and  no  operating  revenues  are
anticipated until one of the Company’s projects comes into production, which may or may not occur. The Company will
continue to experience losses unless and until it can successfully develop and begin profitable commercial production
at one of its mining properties. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to do so.
12
We have No History of Operations.
Avalon is an exploration and development company and has no history of mining or refining mineral products
from  its  properties.  As  such,  any  future  revenues  and  profits  are  uncertain.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  the
Nechalacho Project or any other project will be successfully placed into production, produce minerals in commercial
quantities or otherwise generate operating earnings. Advancing projects from the exploration stage into development
and  commercial  production  requires  significant  capital  and  time  and  will  be  subject  to  further  technical  studies,
permitting requirements and construction of mines, processing plants, roads and related works and infrastructure. The
Company will continue to incur losses until mining-related operations successfully reach commercial production levels
and generate sufficient revenue to fund continuing operations. There is no certainty that the Company will generate
revenue from any source, operate profitably or provide a return on investment in the future.
There is uncertainty regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
The business of mining and exploring for minerals involves a high degree of risk and there can be no assurance
that current exploration programs will result in profitable mining operations. The recoverability of the carrying value of
exploration and evaluation assets and the Company's ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the
preservation  of  its  interest  in  the  underlying  properties,  the  discovery  of  economically  recoverable  reserves,  the
achievement of profitable operations or the ability of the Company to raise alternative financing.
The Company is currently in the exploration stage of its properties. If the Company determines based on its
most recent information that it is feasible to begin operations on its properties, the Company will be required to raise
additional capital in order to develop and bring the properties into production. Our ability to raise funds will depend on
several factors, including, but not limited to, current economic conditions, our properties, our prospects, metal prices,
businesses competing for financing and our financial condition. There can be no assurance that we will be able to
raise funds, or to raise funds on commercially reasonable terms.
guarantees that it will be successful.
The  development  of  the  Nechalacho  Project  involves  numerous  uncertainties  and  there  are  no
Mine development projects typically require long time frames and significant expenditures before production is
possible. Bringing the Nechalacho Project into successful operation is dependent on many factors such as:
•
•
•
•
•
•
the availability of funds to finance construction and other capital expenditures and to provide working capital;
the timing and availability of permits and other approvals to proceed with construction and to operate the mine
and processing facilities;
the completion of negotiations with First Nations and other Aboriginal groups and stakeholders affected by the
project;
the  completion  of  acquisition  of  a  property  or  properties for  the  processing  facilities  and  the  availability  of
infrastructure necessary for construction and operation;
the negotiation of sales or off-take contracts for the planned production from the project; and
the  completion  of  negotiations  with  strategic  partners for  the  provision  of  additional  investment  and/or  the
provision of technical assistance or services.
Other unanticipated problems and delays may arise in the development of the Nechalacho Project and,
accordingly, the Company may not be successful in establishing mining and processing operations.
13
Additional Financing may be needed for our business operations and there are no guarantees that we
will be able to raise sufficient funds.
The Company does not have sufficient funds to complete permitting, development and construction of the
Nechalacho  Project,  or  to  complete  exploration  or  feasibility  studies  on  any  of  its  other  properties.  The  Company
believes its existing financial resources, along with anticipated funds to be raised through “at the market” issuances
pursuant to the Sales Agreement described below, will be adequate to fund general and administrative expenses and
planned  exploration  and  development  expenses  through  the  end  of  2015,  but  unanticipated  expenses  or  other
developments could cause its existing resources to be depleted prior to that time. Accordingly, the Company will need
to  raise  additional  financing,  which  may  be  sought  through  sales  of  equity  or  debt  securities,  asset  sales,  joint
ventures, project financing or other arrangements. The recent climate for financing in the mining industry in general
and for rare earth minerals projects in particular has been difficult, and there can be no assurance that the Company
will be able to complete necessary financings on a timely basis or at all. Failure to complete adequate financing on a
timely basis could result in delay or indefinite postponement of the development of the Nechalacho Project, and could
require the Company to reduce general and administrative expenses or impair the Company’s ability to continue as a
going concern. Future financings may result in significant dilution to existing shareholders.
We May Fail to Identify Joint Venture Partners or May Fail to Successfully Manage Joint Ventures.
As part of the Company's development strategy, the Company is considering a number of alternatives to access
development capital for its mineral properties, including joint ventures with strategic partners. However, there can be
no assurance that the Company will be able to identify joint venture candidates or that it will succeed at effectively
managing  the  operation  of  any  joint  venture.  Unprofitable  joint  ventures  may  adversely  affect  the  price  of  the
Company’s common shares and negatively affect the Company's results of operations.
We will need to enter off-take agreements and failure to secure and enter into favourable off-take
agreements with customers could have a material adverse effect on, and could result in delay or suspension
of the development of, the Nechalacho Project.
The Company intends to pursue entering into off-take agreements with industrial consumers of the minerals it
intends to produce in order to have assurance of future sales of its products. It is likely that it will be necessary to have
some of the off-take agreements in place in order to secure project financing for the Nechalacho Project in order to
demonstrate  the  economic  viability  of  the  project  to  lenders.  Failure  to  secure  and  enter  into  favourable  off-take
agreements with customers could have a material adverse effect on, and could result in delay or suspension of the
development of, the Nechalacho Project.
The Ore Type at the Nechalacho Project is Unique and there is a risk that the metallurgical process that
we anticipate using will not perform at commercial scale as expected.
The ore type at the Nechalacho Project is unique and one for which known metallurgical processes have not
previously been applied. Accordingly, there is a risk that the process designed at the bench and pilot scale will not
perform at commercial scale as expected. The failure of such metallurgical process, when applied to the ore at the
Nechalacho  Project,  could  materially  and  adversely  affect  the  Company’s  expected  development  and  production
schedule.
Title to some of our mineral properties may be challenged or defective. Aboriginal groups may raise title
disputes in relation to land claims and any impairment or defect in title could have a negative impact on our
results of operations and financial condition.
The Company’s title to its properties may be subject to disputes or other claims including Aboriginal land title
claims. Although the Company has exercised the usual due diligence with respect to determining title to properties in
which it has a material interest, there is no guarantee that title to such properties will not be challenged or impugned.
There  may  be  valid  challenges  to  the  title  of  the  Company’s  properties,  which,  if  successful,  could  impair  the
Company’s ability to explore, develop and/or operate its properties or to enforce its rights with respect to its properties.
Aboriginal rights and title may be claimed with respect to Crown properties or other types of tenure with respect to
which mining rights have been conferred. In addition, other parties may dispute the Company’s title to the properties in
which  it  has  an  interest  and  such  properties  may  be  subject  to  prior  unregistered  agreements  or  transfers  or  land
claims by aboriginal peoples, and title may be affected by undetected encumbrances or defects or government actions.
14
An impairment to or defect in the Company’s title to its properties could have a material adverse effect on the
Company’s business, financial condition or results of operations. In addition, such claims, whether or not valid, will
involve additional costs and expenses to defend or settle which could adversely affect the Company’s profitability.
The  Company  will  need  to  enter  into  agreements  with  applicable  Aboriginal  groups  to  complete  the
development  of  the  Nechalacho  Project.  The  Company  has  entered  into  an  accommodation  agreement  with  the
Deninu  K’ue  First  Nation  (“DKFN”)  which  provides  for  business  and  employment  opportunities  for  the  DKFN  and
contains measures to mitigate the environmental and cultural impacts of the project. The Company is seeking to enter
into similar agreements with the Lutsel K’e Dene First Nation (the “LKDFN”) and Yellowknives Dene First Nation (the
“YKDFN”), but there is no assurance that these agreements will be completed in a timely manner or at all. Even after
the accommodation agreements are entered into, the continuing co-operation of the First Nations will be required to
implement the terms of the agreements and proceed with the Nechalacho Project. Any failure of co-operation by these
or  any  other  potentially  impacted  Aboriginal  groups  could  result  in  delay  of  work  on  the  Nechalacho  Project.  The
Company also has entered into a Participation Agreement with the Northwest Territory Métis Nation (“NWTMN”). This
agreement provides for training, employment, and business opportunities for the NWTMN related to the Project and
associated  facilities  in  the  Northwest  Territories.  The  Participation  Agreement  also  contains  measures  to  mitigate
environmental and cultural impacts that may result from the project development.
We may need to acquire additional properties for our hydrometallurgical plant which may significantly
delay the development of the Nechalacho Project as a whole.
As  parts  of  the  Nechalacho  Project,  in  the  current  Feasibility  Study  (“FS”),  the  Company  plans  for  a
hydrometallurgical plant to be located at Pine Point, 85 kilometres east of Hay River, Northwest Territories and a rare
earth refinery to be located in Geismar, Louisiana. The Company has applied to the relevant government departments
for surface leases on the Pine Point location, but such surface leases have not yet been granted, and the application
for a surface lease on the portion of the Pine Point location intended for use as a tailings management facility has been
returned by the government department in charge of that property. Any grants and surface leases, if granted, may be
subject to the rights of holders of exploration claims or other subsurface rights, which may be inconsistent with the use
of the property for the hydrometallurgical plant. In addition, economic factors such as power cost and infrastructure
factors such as the adequacy of road and/or rail access may cause the Company not to proceed with acquiring the
Pine Point surface leases.
As the Company’s initial purchase option on the land parcel in Geismar, Louisiana expired on December 1,
2013, Avalon entered into a new purchase option with a different property owner on a different, adjacent, land parcel.
This new option expires on December 15, 2014. Other sites in western Canada are also under consideration for the
location of an updated Hydrometallurgical Plant. Subsequent to Fiscal 2014, three potential sites were identified in
Saskatchewan which are now undergoing further evaluation.
If the properties in Pine Point, Geismar or a suitable alternative are not acquired, the Company will need to
identify and acquire another suitable site or sites for its hydrometallurgical plant and rare earth refinery, which may
significantly delay the development of the Nechalacho Project as a whole.
Our  feasibility  study  relies  upon  estimates  based  on  assessments  of  current  and  future  market
conditions and available technical information concerning the Nechalacho Project, which are only projections
and are inherently uncertain.
15
The Company’s expected production schedules, capital costs, engineering and construction estimates and
operating costs which are included in this Annual Report are contained in the Feasibility Study and described in our
material change report dated April 29, 2013 and our management’s discussion and analysis of results of operations
and  financial  condition  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  August  31,  2013.  The  FS  relies  upon  estimates  based  on
assessments of current and future market conditions and available technical information concerning the Nechalacho
Project. Accordingly, the results indicated by the FS are projections only and are inherently uncertain. In particular,
actual capital costs may significantly exceed those estimated by the FS, and engineering and construction estimates
and schedules set forth in the FS may prove materially inaccurate.
Anticipated operating costs and production schedules set forth in the FS are based upon a variety of factors,
including:
•
•
anticipated tonnage, grades and metallurgical characteristics of the ore to be mined and processed;
anticipated recovery rates of REE and other minerals from the ore;
•
•
•
cash operating costs of comparable facilities, supplies/consumables and equipment;
anticipated climatic conditions; and
forecasts for foreign exchange markets, and discount rates.
Capital costs, operating costs, production and economic returns, and other estimates contained in studies or
estimates  prepared  by  or  for  the  Company  in  the  future  may  differ  significantly  from  those  anticipated  by  the
Company’s current estimates, and there can be no assurance that the Company’s actual capital and operating costs
will not be higher than currently anticipated. The Company’s actual costs and production may vary from estimates for a
variety of reasons, including: lack of availability of raw material or equipment; unexpected construction or operating
problems; metallurgical performance; unanticipated geologic features; short-term operating factors; delays in delivery
of  consumables;  revisions  to  mine  plans;  risks  and  hazards  associated  with  mining;  natural  phenomena,  such  as
inclement weather conditions, water availability, floods, and earthquakes; and unexpected labour shortages or strikes.
Costs may also be affected by a variety of factors, including: changing waste-to-ore ratios, ore grade metallurgy, labour
costs,  the  cost  and  consumption  rate  of  commodities,  general  inflationary  pressures  and  currency  exchange  rates.
Many of these factors are beyond the Company’s control. Failure to achieve estimates or material increases in costs
could  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  Company’s  future  cash  flows,  business,  results  of  operations  and  financial
condition.
Furthermore, delays in the construction and commissioning of mining projects or other technical difficulties may
result in even further capital expenditures being required. Any delay in the development of a project or cost overruns or
operational difficulties once the project is developed may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s ability to
finance or complete construction of the Nechalacho Project and on the Company’s business, results of operations and
financial condition.
Changes in the market price of rare earth minerals, which in the past has fluctuated widely, will affect the
profitability of our operations and financial condition.
The Company’s revenues, if any, from the Nechalacho Project and any of its other projects, are expected to be
derived  in  large  part  from  the  mining  and  sale  of  rare  metals  and  minerals.  Demand  for  and  the  prices  of  those
commodities  has  fluctuated  widely,  particularly  in  recent  years,  and  is  affected  by  numerous  factors  beyond  the
Company’s  control,  including  international  economic  and  political  conditions  (such  as  the  complaint  filed  with  the
World Trade Organization and won by the United States, the European Union and Japan against China’s REE export
restrictions in 2014), expectations of inflation, international currency exchange rates, interest rates, global or regional
consumption patterns, speculative activities, levels of supply and demand, increased production of rare metals and
minerals due to new mine developments and improved mining and production methods, availability and costs of rare
metal,  REE  and  other  rare  mineral  substitutes;  rare  metal,  REE  and  other  rare  mineral  and  other  stock  levels
maintained by producers and others and inventory carrying costs. The effect of these factors on the price of REE and
therefore the Company’s ability to finance the construction of the Nechalacho Project and economic viability of the
Company’s operations cannot be accurately predicted.
16
REE prices declined significantly between 2008 and late 2009 during the global economic crisis. Prices
increased significantly during 2010 and most of 2011 and experienced a significant drop in 2012, due in part to a
reported  reduction  in  speculative  buying  of  REE  products  as  concerns  about  continuing  price  escalation  abated.
Prices have not recovered materially in 2013 or 2014. Demand for REE products may be impacted by demand for
products  incorporating  rare  earths,  including  hybrid  and  electric  vehicles,  wind  power  equipment  and  other  clean
technology products, as well as demand in the general automotive and electronic industries. Lack of growth in these
markets  may  adversely  affect  the  demand  for  REE  products,  which  would  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the
Nechalacho Project and the Company’s business. In contrast, extended periods of high commodity prices may create
economic dislocations that may be destabilizing to rare earth minerals supply and demand. Strong REE prices, as well
as real or perceived disruptions in the supply of REE, also create economic incentives to identify or create alternate
technologies  that  ultimately  could  depress  future  long-term  demand  for  REE  products,  and  at  the  same  time  may
incentivize development of additional mining properties to produce REE. For example, automobile manufacturers have
previously announced plans to develop motors for electric and hybrid cars that do not require REE products due to
concerns about the available supply of rare earths. If the automobile industry or other industries reduce their reliance
on  rare  earth  products,  the  resulting  change  in  demand  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the  Company’s
business. In particular, if prices or demand for rare earths were to decline, this could impair the Company’s ability to
obtain financing for the Nechalacho Project and its ability to find purchasers for its products at prices acceptable to the
Company.
We operate in a highly competitive industry and some of our competitors may engage in predatory
pricing behaviour or manipulation of the available supply of REE.
An increase in the global supply of rare metal and REE products, dumping and predatory pricing by our competitors
may materially adversely affect our ability to raise capital and construct and profitably operate the Nechalacho Project.
The pricing and demand for rare metal and REE products is affected by a number of factors beyond the Company’s
control,  including  growth  of  economic  development  and  the  global  supply  and  demand  for  rare  metal  and  REE
products. Currently China provides the majority of the world’s supply of REE. It has in recent years reduced its export
quotas and imposed heavier taxes on the production/or export of REE. These steps resulted in significant increases in
the prices of rare earth elements and minerals during 2011, with a peak reached in August 2011 for most elements.
These high rare earth prices caused demand to contract and prices to fall during 2012 and early 2013. Prices have not
recovered materially in 2014. Higher rare earth prices have caused a number of companies to engage in exploration
and development of REE projects which, if brought to production, would, in the long term, increase the supply of REE
and lead to downward pressure on prices. Further, the prospect of the Nechalacho Project and other development
projects achieving production may lead our competitors to engage in predatory pricing behaviour or manipulation of
the available supply of REE. Any increase in the amount of rare earth products exported from China or from mines
outside China and increased competition may result in price reductions, reduced margins and loss of potential sales,
any of which could materially adversely affect the profitability of the Nechalacho Project. As a result of these factors,
the Company may not be able to compete effectively against future competitors.
Any unexpected costs or delays in the commercialization of rare earth products could have a material
adverse effect on our ability to finance construction of and successfully operate the Nechalacho Project.
The success of the Nechalacho Project will depend, in part, on the establishment of new markets by the
Company or third parties for certain rare earth products that may be in low demand, the creation of new markets and
the successful commercialization of REE products in existing and emerging markets. Any unexpected costs or delays
in the commercialization of any of the foregoing products and applications could have a material adverse effect on our
ability to finance construction of and successfully operate the Nechalacho Project.
Competition for recruitment and retention of qualified personnel, for which we compete with other
exploration companies, many of which have greater financial resources than us, and a shortage of equipment
and supplies could adversely affect our ability to operate our business.
17
The  Company  will  be  dependent  on  various  supplies,  equipment,  parts  and  labour  and  the  services  of
contractors to carry out construction of the Nechalacho Project and to carry out its other exploration and development
projects. The availability and cost of such supplies, equipment, parts or labour or the services of contractors could
have a material adverse effect on the Company’s ability to successfully construct and operate the Nechalacho Project
and carry out its other exploration and development activities.
Mineral resource and mineral reserve estimates are based upon estimates made by Company personnel and
independent  geologists.  These  estimates  are  inherently  subject  to  uncertainty  and  are  based  on  geological
interpretations and inferences drawn from drilling results and sampling analyses and may require revisions based on
further exploration or development work. There is no certainty that any of the mineral resources or mineral reserves
identified on the Nechalacho Project will be realized, that any anticipated level of recovery of minerals will in fact be
realized,  or  that  an  identified  mineral  reserve  or  mineral  resource  will  ever  qualify  as  a  commercially  mineable  (or
viable) deposit which can be legally and economically exploited. Evaluations of drilling results are ongoing, but until a
deposit is actually mined and processed, the quantity of mineral resources and mineral reserves and grades must be
considered as estimates only.
In addition, the grade of mineralization which may ultimately be mined may differ from that indicated by drilling
results and such differences could be material. The quantity and resulting valuation of mineral reserves and mineral
resources may also vary depending on, among other things, metal prices (which may render mineral reserves and
mineral  resources  uneconomic),  cut-off  grades  applied  and  estimates  of  future  operating  costs  (which  may  be
inaccurate).  Production  can  be  affected  by  such  factors  as  permitting  regulations  and  requirements,  weather,
environmental  factors,  unforeseen  technical  difficulties,  unusual  or  unexpected  geological  formations  and  work
interruptions. Any material change in quantity of mineral resources, mineral reserves, grade, or stripping ratio may also
affect the economic viability of any project undertaken by the Company. In addition, there can be no assurance that
metal  recoveries  in  small  scale,  and/or  pilot  laboratory  tests  will  be  duplicated  in  a  larger  scale  test  under  on-site
conditions or during production.
The Company’s estimated mineral resources and mineral reserves should not be interpreted as assurances of
commercial viability or potential or of the profitability of any future operations. Readers should be cautioned not to
place  undue  reliance  on  these  estimates.  The  Company  cannot  be  certain  that  its  mineral  resource  and  mineral
reserve  estimates  are  accurate  and  cannot  guarantee  that  it  will  recover  the  expected  quantities  of  metals.  Future
production could differ dramatically from such estimates for the following reasons:
•
•
•
•
•
actual mineralization or ore grade could be different from those predicted by drilling, sampling, feasibility studies
or technical reports;
increases in the capital or operating costs of the mine;
changes in the life-of-mine plan;
the  grade  of  ore  may  vary  over  the  life  of  the  mine  and the  Company  cannot  give  any  assurances  that  any
particular mineral reserve estimate will ultimately be recovered; or
metallurgical performance could differ from forecast.
The occurrence of any of these events may cause the Company to adjust its mineral resource and reserve
estimates or change its mining plans, which could negatively affect the Company’s financial condition and results of
operations.  Moreover,  short-term  factors,  such  as  the  need  for  additional  development  of  the  ore  body  or  the
processing of new or different grades, may adversely affect the Company.
We may not be able to obtain all required Permits and Licenses to place our properties into production.
The  construction  and  operation  of  the  Nechalacho  Project  and  the  other  exploration  and  development
operations  of  the  Company  require  licenses  and  permits  from  various  governmental  authorities.  Obtaining  the
necessary governmental permits is a complex and time consuming process involving numerous jurisdictions. There
can be no assurance that the Company will be able to obtain all necessary licenses and permits that may be required
to carry out exploration, development, mining and processing operations at its projects. If the Company proceeds to
production  on  the  Nechalacho  Project  or  any  other  project,  licenses  and  permits  may  contain  specific  operating
conditions  and  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  these  conditions  will  not  result  in  material  increases  in  capital  or
operating  costs  or  reductions  in  anticipated  production,  or  that  the  Company  will  be  able  to  comply  with  any  such
conditions. Costs related to applying for and obtaining permits and licenses or complying with the requirements they
impose  may  be  prohibitive  and  could  delay  planned  exploration,  development,  construction  or  operation  activities.
Failure to comply with applicable laws, regulations and permitting requirements or with the conditions contained in
licenses  or  permits  may  result  in  enforcement  actions,  including  orders  issued  by  regulatory  or  judicial  authorities,
causing  operations  to  cease  or  be  curtailed,  and  may  include  corrective  measures  requiring  capital  expenditures,
installation of additional equipment, or remedial actions.
18
Parties engaged in exploration, development, mining or processing operations may be required to compensate
those  suffering  loss  or  damage  by  reason  of  the  those  activities  and  may  have  civil  or  criminal  fines  or  penalties
imposed  for  violations  of  applicable  laws  or  regulations.  Amendments  to  current  laws,  regulations  and  permits
governing  operations  and  activities  of  mining  companies,  or  more  stringent  implementation  thereof,  could  have  a
material adverse impact on our operations and cause increases in capital expenditures or production costs, reductions
in levels of production at producing properties or require abandonment or delays in the development of new mining
properties.
Our activities are subject to environmental laws and regulations that may increase our costs of doing
business and restrict our operations.
All phases of the Company’s exploration and development activities are subject to regulation by governmental
agencies  under  various  environmental  laws  in  the  various  jurisdictions  in  which  it  operates.  These  laws  and  the
regulations  adopted  thereunder  address  emissions  into  the  air,  discharges  into  water,  management  of  waste,
management of hazardous substances, the transportation of hazardous and/or radioactive substances, protection of
natural  resources,  antiquities  and  endangered  species,  and  reclamation  of  lands  disturbed  by  mining  operations.
Environmental legislation and regulation is evolving in a manner which will require stricter standards and enforcement,
increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent environmental assessments of proposed projects,
and a heightened degree of responsibility for companies and their officers, directors and employees. Compliance with
environmental laws and regulations may require significant capital outlays on behalf of the Company and may cause
material  changes  or  delays  in  the  Company’s  intended  activities.  There  is  no  assurance  that  future  changes  in
environmental regulation, if any, will not adversely affect the Company’s operations or result in substantial costs and
liabilities to the Company in the future. Furthermore, environmental hazards which are unknown to the Company at
present  and  which  have  been  caused  by  previous  or  existing  owners  or  operators  may  exist  on  the  Company’s
properties.
We do not maintain insurance with respect to certain high-risk activities, which exposes us to significant
risk of loss.
In the course of exploration and development of, and production from, mineral properties, certain risks, and in
particular, unexpected or unusual geological operating conditions including rock bursts, cave-ins, fire, flooding and
earthquakes may occur. It is not always possible to fully insure against such risks as a result of high premiums or other
reasons. Should such events arise, they could reduce or eliminate any future profitability and result in increasing costs
and a decline in the value of the Company’s securities.
The loss of key management personnel may adversely affect our business and results of operations.
The Company is dependent on the services of key executives including the Company’s President and Chief
Executive  Officer  and  other  highly  skilled  and  experienced  executives  and  personnel  focused  on  managing  the
Company’s interests and the advancement of the Nechalacho Project and other projects, as well as the identification
of new opportunities for growth and funding. Due to the Company’s relatively small size, the loss of these persons or
the Company’s inability to attract and retain additional highly skilled employees required for the development of the
Company’s activities may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business or future operations.
19
The mining industry is highly speculative and involves substantial risks.
Mineral exploration and development is highly speculative, and certain inherent exploration risks could have a
negative effect on the Company. Most exploration projects do not result in the discovery of commercially mineable ore
deposits and no assurance can be given that any particular level of recovery of ore reserves will be realized or that any
identified mineral deposit will ever qualify as a commercially mineable (or viable) ore body which can be legally and
economically exploited. Estimates of reserves, mineral deposits and production costs can also be affected by such
factors  as  environmental  permitting  regulations  and  requirements,  weather,  environmental  factors,  unforeseen
technical  difficulties,  unusual  or  unexpected  geological  formations  and  work  interruptions.  Material  changes  in  ore
reserves, grades, stripping ratios or recovery rates may affect the economic viability of any project.
The  Company’s  future  growth  and  productivity  will  depend,  in  part,  on  its  ability  to  identify  and  acquire
additional mineral rights, and on the costs and results of continued exploration and development programs. Mineral
exploration is highly speculative in nature and is frequently non-productive. Substantial expenditures are required to:
•
•
•
•
establish ore reserves through drilling and metallurgical and other testing techniques;
determine metal content and metallurgical recovery processes to extract metal from the ore;
conduct environmental, social, economic and technical studies; and
construct, renovate or expand mining and processing facilities.
In addition, if the Company discovers a mineral deposit, it would take several years from the initial phases of
exploration until production is possible. During this time, the economic feasibility of production may change. As a result
of these uncertainties, there can be no assurance that the Company will successfully acquire additional mineral rights.
We operate in a highly competitive industry.
The mineral exploration and development industry is intensely competitive. Significant competition exists for the
marketing of the minerals that the Company intends to produce as well as the acquisition of mineral concessions,
claims, leases and other mineral interests. The Company may be at a competitive disadvantage in arranging for the
sale  of  products  intended  to  be  produced  at  the  Nechalacho  Project  or  other  properties,  or  in  acquiring  additional
mining  properties  because  it  must  compete  with  other  individuals  and  companies,  many  of  which  have  greater
financial  resources,  operational  experience  and  technical  capabilities  than  the  Company.  The  Company  may  also
encounter increasing competition from other mining companies in its efforts to hire experienced mining professionals.
Competition  for  exploration  resources  at  all  levels  is  currently  very  intense,  particularly  affecting  the  availability  of
manpower,  drill  rigs  and  helicopters.  Increased  competition  could  adversely  affect  the  Company’s  ability  to  attract
necessary capital funding or acquire suitable producing properties or prospects for mineral exploration in the future.
Our exploration activities are subject to various federal, provincial, state and local laws and regulations.
The Company’s operations and exploration and development activities in Canada and the United States are
subject  to  extensive  federal,  state,  provincial,  territorial  and  local  laws  and  regulations  governing  various  matters,
including:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
environmental protection;
management, transportation and use of toxic, hazardous and/or radioactive substances and explosives;
management of tailings and other wastes generated by the Company’s operations;
management of natural resources;
exploration and development of mines, production and post-closure reclamation;
exports;
price controls;
20
taxation;
regulations concerning business dealings with native groups;
labour standards and occupational health and safety, including mine safety; and
historic and cultural preservation.
Failure to comply with applicable laws and regulations may result in civil or criminal fines or penalties or
enforcement actions, including orders issued by regulatory or judicial authorities enjoining or curtailing operations or
requiring corrective measures, installation of additional equipment or remedial actions, any of which could result in the
Company  incurring  significant  expenditures.  The  Company  may  also  be  required  to  compensate  private  parties
suffering loss or damage by reason of a breach of such laws, regulations or permitting requirements. It is also possible
that future laws and regulations, or changes to or a more stringent enforcement of current laws and regulations by
governmental authorities, could cause additional expense, capital expenditures, restrictions on or suspensions of the
Company’s operations and delays in the development of the Company’s properties.
Exploration activities depend on adequate infrastructure and we cannot be assured that our properties
will maintain adequate infrastructure.
Mining, processing, development and exploration activities depend on adequate infrastructure. Reliable roads,
bridges,  power  sources  and  water  supply  are  important  determinants,  which  affect  capital  and  operating  costs.
Unusual  or  infrequent  weather  phenomena,  sabotage,  government  or  other  interference  in  the  maintenance  or
provision  of  such  infrastructure  could  adversely  affect  the  Company’s  operations,  financial  condition  and  results  of
operations.
Mining and resource exploration is inherently dangerous and subject to conditions or events beyond
our control, which could have a material adverse effect on our business and plans.
Mineral exploration, the development and construction and operation of mines and mining involves many risks,
which even a combination of experience, knowledge and careful evaluation may not be able to overcome. The work
which the Company is undertaking and proposes to undertake will be subject to all the hazards and risks normally
incidental to exploration, development and production of resources, any of which could result in work stoppages and
damage to persons or property or the environment and possible legal liability for any and all damage. Fires, power
outages, labour disruptions, flooding, explosions and cave-ins, are risks involved in the operation of mines and the
conduct of exploration programs. Although the Company has secured liability insurance and will, when appropriate,
secure property insurance in an amount which it considers adequate, the nature of these risks is such that liabilities
might exceed policy limits, the liabilities and hazards might not be insurable, or the Company might elect not to insure
itself against such liabilities due to high premium costs or other reasons, in which event the Company could incur
significant costs or uninsured losses that could have a material adverse effect upon its financial condition.
Changes in Critical Accounting Estimates Could Adversely Affect Financial Results.
Avalon’s most significant accounting estimates relate to the carrying value of the Company’s metal and mineral
property assets. The accounting policies in relation to metal and mineral properties are set out in full in the Company’s
annual financial statements. Management regularly reviews the net carrying value of each metal and mineral property.
Where  impairment  indicators  exist,  management  assesses  if  carrying  value  can  be  recovered.  Management’s
estimates of metal and mineral prices, mineral resources and operating, capital and reclamation costs are subject to
certain  risks  and  uncertainties  which  may  affect  the  recoverability  of  metal  and  mineral  property  costs.  Although
management has made its best estimate of these factors, it is possible that changes could occur in the near term,
which could adversely affect the future net cash flows to be generated from the properties. Other significant estimate
relates to accounting for stock based compensation and warrant valuation. Option and warrant pricing models require
the  input  of  highly  subjective  assumptions  including  the  expected  price  volatility.  Changes  in  the  subjective  input
assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate, and therefore the existing models do not necessarily provide
a reliable single measure of the fair value of the Company’s stock options granted/vested during the year, or of the
value of the Company’s warrants denominated in foreign currency.
21
Certain officers and directors may be in a position of conflicts of interest.
Certain of the Company’s directors and officers also serve as directors and/or officers of other companies or
other  managerial  positions  involved  or  related  to  natural  resource  exploration  and  development  and  consequently
there exists the possibility for such directors and officers to be in a position of conflict. Any decision made by any of
such directors and officers involving the Company will be made in accordance with their duties and obligations to deal
fairly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of the Company and its shareholders. In addition, each of the
Company’s directors is required to declare any interest in any matter in which such directors may have a conflict of
interest  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  set  forth  in  the Canada Business Corporations Act  (“CBCA”)  and  other
applicable laws.
We believe that we may be a "passive foreign investment company" for the current taxable year which
would  likely  result  in  materially  adverse  United  States  federal  income  tax  consequences  for  United  States
investors.
U.S. investors in the Company’s common shares and warrants should be aware that the Company believes it
was classified as a “passive foreign investment company” under the meaning of Section 1297 of the United States
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (a “PFIC”) during its tax year ended August 31, 2014, and based on
current business plans and financial expectations, the Company believes that it may be a PFIC for the current and
future taxable years. If the Company is a PFIC for any taxable year during which a United States person holds its
common shares or warrants it would likely result in materially adverse United States federal income tax consequences
for such United States person. The potential consequences include, but are not limited to, re-characterization of gain
from  the  sale  of  the  common  shares,  warrants,  and  those  common  shares  received  upon  exercise  of  warrants  as
ordinary income and the imposition of an interest charge on such gain and on certain distributions received on the
common shares or common shares received upon exercise of warrants. Certain elections may be available under U.S.
tax rules to mitigate some of the adverse consequences of holding shares in a PFIC.
A U.S. taxpayer that makes a “qualified electing fund” (a “QEF”) election with respect to the Company generally
will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on such U.S. taxpayer’s pro rata share of the Company’s “net capital gain”
and  “ordinary  earnings”  (as  specifically  defined  and  calculated  under  U.S.  federal  income  tax  rules),  regardless  of
whether such amounts are actually distributed by the Company. U.S. taxpayers should be aware, however, that there
can  be  no  assurance  that  the  Company  will  satisfy  record  keeping  requirements  under  the  QEF  rules  or  that  the
Company will supply U.S. taxpayers with required information under the QEF rules, if the Company is a PFIC and a
U.S. taxpayer wishes to make a QEF election. Alternatively, a U.S. taxpayer may make a “mark-to-market election” if
the Company is a PFIC and the common shares are “marketable stock” (as specifically defined). A U.S. taxpayer that
makes a mark-to-market election generally will include in gross income, for each taxable year in which the Company is
a PFIC, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of (a) the fair market value of the common shares as of the close of such
taxable year over (b) such U.S. taxpayer’s adjusted tax basis in the common shares.
This risk factor is qualified in its entirety by the discussion below under the heading “Certain United States
Federal  Income  Tax  Consequences.”  Investors  should  consult  their  own  tax  advisor  regarding  the  PFIC  rules  and
other U.S. federal income tax consequences of the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of common shares.
We are subject to foreign currency fluctuations.
It  is  expected  that  a  significant  portion  of  the  Company’s  revenue  from  the  sale  of  its  products  from  the
Nechalacho Project will likely be priced in U.S. dollars, whereas most of its operating costs will likely be incurred in
Canadian  dollars  and  other  international  currencies.  In  addition,  a  significant  portion  of  the  capital  costs  for  the
construction of the mining plant at the Nechalacho Project will also likely be priced in U.S. dollars. The fluctuation in
the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the Canadian dollar and other international currencies may have a
significant  impact  on  the  future  profitability  of  the  Company  and  it  may  also  significantly  increase  or  decrease  the
capital costs for the Nechalacho Project.
22
Our common shares have experienced volatility in share price.
In recent years, the securities markets in Canada have experienced a high level of price and volume volatility
and the market price of securities of many companies, particularly those considered development stage companies,
have  experienced  wide  fluctuations  in  price  which  would  not  have  necessarily  been  related  to  the  operating
performance,  underlying  asset  values  or  prospects  of  such  companies.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  continual
fluctuation in price will not occur.
Additional financing may be needed for our business operations which may lead to dilution of our
current shareholders
The Company will require additional funds, in addition to those funds which have been raised and may be
raised  in  the  future  under  the  Sales  Agreement  and  the  Purchase  Agreement  described  below,  to  fund  further
exploration and/or development activities or to fulfill its obligations under any applicable agreements. If the Company
raises  additional  funding  by  issuing  additional  equity  securities,  such  financing  will  dilute  the  holdings  of  the
Company’s shareholders. Future sales of common shares or warrants of the Company in public or private markets
could adversely affect the trading price of the Company’s common shares and its ability to continue to raise funds by
new offerings of common shares or warrants.
We do not currently intend to pay cash dividends.
The Company has not paid any dividends on its common shares. Any decision to pay dividends on its common
shares in the future will be dependent upon the financial requirements of the Company to finance future growth, the
financial  condition  of  the  Company  and  other  factors  which  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  may  consider
appropriate in the circumstances.
Our Use of Proceeds
Management will have certain discretion over the use of proceeds of any offering of securities as well as the
timing  of  expenditures.  As  a  result,  investors  will  be  relying  on  the  judgment  of  management  as  to  the  specific
application of the proceeds of any offering of securities. Management may use the net proceeds of any offering of
securities in ways that an investor may not consider optimal. The results and effectiveness of the application of the net
proceeds of any offering of securities are uncertain.
We are a foreign corporation and most of our directors and officers are outside of the United States,
which may make enforcement of civil liabilities difficult.
The Company is a Canadian corporation and U.S. investors may have difficulty bringing actions and enforcing
judgments under U.S. securities laws. Investors in the United States or in other jurisdictions outside of Canada may
have difficulty bringing actions and enforcing judgments against the Company, its directors, its executive officers and
some of the experts named in this Annual Report based on civil liabilities provisions of the federal securities laws or
other laws of the United States or any state thereof or the equivalent laws of other jurisdictions of residence outside of
Canada.
There is no market for our warrants.
There is no existing trading market for warrants to purchase the common shares of the Company. As a result,
there can be no assurance that a liquid market will develop or be maintained for those securities, or that you will be
able to sell any of those securities at a particular time (if at all). The Company may not list any of its warrants on any
Canadian or U.S. securities exchange, and the common shares could be delisted or suspended. The liquidity of the
trading  market  in  those  securities,  and  the  market  price  quoted  for  those  securities,  may  be  adversely  affected  by,
among other things:
23
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
changes in the overall market for those securities;
changes in the Company’s financial performance or prospects;
changes or perceived changes in the Company’s creditworthiness;
the prospects for companies in the Company’s industry generally;
the number of holders of those securities;
the interest of securities dealers in making a market for those securities; and
prevailing interest rates.
Item 4. Information on the Company
A. History and Development of the Company
Avalon Rare Metals Inc. was amalgamated on July 24, 1991 under the British Columbia Company Act (now the
British  Columbia  Business  Corporations  Act  (“BCA”))  under  the  name  Keith  Resources  Ltd.  pursuant  to  the
amalgamation of Rockridge Mining Company and Meadfield Mining Corp.
On September 29, 1994, the Company consolidated its share capital on a five-for-one basis and changed its
name to Avalon Ventures Ltd.
On July 18, 2005, the Company carried out a transition under the BCA by filing Notice of Articles and at the
same time adopted new Articles to bring them in line with the requirements and alternatives available under the BCA,
including increasing its authorized share structure to an unlimited number of common shares without par value and
25,000,000 preferred shares without par value. The new Articles also reduced the percentage of votes required from
75% to 66 2/3% to pass special and separate resolutions and gave authority to the Board of Directors to make capital
alterations and changes to the Company’s name as permitted under the BCA.
On February 17, 2009, the Company changed its name to Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
On February 9, 2011, the Company continued under the CBCA.
The Company’s head and registered office is located at Suite 1901, 130 Adelaide Street West, Toronto, Ontario,
M5H 3P5, (416) 364-4938.
The Company is a reporting issuer in all of the provinces (except for the Province of Quebec) and territories of
Canada.  The  Company’s  shares  are  listed  and  posted  for  trading  on  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  in  Canada  (the
“TSX” or the “Exchange”), on the NYSE MKT LLC (the “NYSE MKT”) in the United States, in each case under the
symbol “AVL” and are also traded on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in Germany under the symbol “OU5”.
The Company operates principally in Canada and is currently extra-provincially registered to carry on business
in Ontario, British Columbia, Northwest Territories, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.
Avalon is a mineral exploration and development company with a primary focus on rare metals and minerals
with high technology and environmentally beneficial applications. Avalon operates primarily in Canada with a focus on
rare earth elements REE, and other rare metals and minerals, including lithium, tantalum, niobium, cesium, indium,
gallium, yttrium, zirconium as well as a related base metal: tin. By definition, REE are the lanthanide series of elements
(atomic numbers 57 - 71), whereas the term “rare metals” is a more general “umbrella” term that includes the REE as
well as other rare metals including those named above.
The Company is in the process of exploring or developing three of its six mineral resource properties. For at
least the last three years the Company has expended substantially all of its efforts on the development of Nechalacho
Rare Earth Elements Project (“Nechalacho” or the “Nechalacho Project”). The Company completed its feasibility study
(“FS”) on the Nechalacho Project in April 2013, and its Report of Environmental Assessment (the “Report of EA”) was
approved  by  the  Minister  of  Aboriginal  Affairs  and  Northern  Development  Canada  (“AANDC”)  in  November  2013.
Nechalacho is the Company’s most advanced project and only material property. A preliminary site preparation water
license  and  land  use  permit  has  been  issued  which  provides  approval  for  first  year  site  preparation  work  at  the
Nechalacho  site.  If  approved,  the  full  operational  license  and  permit  for  the  Nechalacho  site  are  anticipated  to  be
issued  in  mid-2015.  The  Company’s  principal  capital  investments  have  been  in  its  resource  properties,  with
expenditures totalling $9,561,375, $19,121,915 and $32,646,542 in Fiscal 2014, 2013 and 2012 respectively.
24
Since the completion of the FS, Avalon has been focused on optimization work on the project development
model, including metallurgical process optimization work and mine plan optimization. Although preliminary estimates
of the capital and operating costs associated with these new processes may be higher than those contained in the FS,
it  is  anticipated  that  the  increased  revenues  from  the  additional  “heavy”  rare  earths,  europium  through  lutetium
(“HREE”) production may yield an overall improvement in project economics.
In early 2014 the Company entered into an agreement with Solvay, to have Solvay toll-process the Company’s
rare earth concentrate into separated and purified rare earth oxides for an anticipated period of 10 years from the start
of deliveries to Solvay’s rare earth refining facility located in La Rochelle, France (the “Solvay Refining Agreement”).
Commencing December 31, 2014, Solvay will have certain termination rights until project financing is achieved. In
addition, Solvay has begun to provide Avalon with technical support for the further design optimization, engineering
and commissioning of Avalon’s hydrometallurgical processing plant (the “Hydrometallurgical Plant”).
Under the terms of the Solvay Refining Agreement, Avalon can ship a concentrate to La Rochelle containing
98.5% Rare Earth Oxide (“REO”) and Solvay will return separated oxides of praseodymium (Pr), neodymium (Nd),
europium (Eu), gadolinium (Gd), terbium (Tb), dysprosium (Dy), lutetium (Lu) and yttrium (Y) ranging in purity from
99.5% to 99.99% . The agreement also provides Solvay with the opportunity to purchase selected REO from Avalon.
All  refined  rare  earth  products  not  purchased  by  Solvay  can  be  sold  by  Avalon  and  delivered  directly  from  the  La
Rochelle plant.
Avalon  is  continuing  its  feasibility  study  optimization  work  and  it  is  now  integrating  the  Solvay  Refining
Agreement into the project development model.
The Company has embraced the principles of sustainability as core to its business practice and has made a
strong commitment toward implementing corporate social responsibility (“CSR”) best practices. Contemporaneously
with  this  filing,  the  Company  is  releasing  its  third  comprehensive  Sustainability  Report  entitled  Lead.  Collaborate.
Diversify. (the "2014 Sustainability Report").
The  Company  believes  that  industrial  demand  for  rare  metals  is  growing  due  to  their  importance  in  an
expanding array of applications in technology related to energy efficiency and a cleaner environment. China is the
major supplier of REE to the world. Policy directives announced by the Chinese government over the past five years
have resulted in a net reduction in export quotas of unprocessed REE which has led to price volatility and concern
about security of supply of certain REE in major REE consuming countries such as Japan, Korea, Germany and the
United States.
25
B. Business Overview
Operations and Principal Activities
The Company is a mineral exploration and development company with a primary focus on rare metals and
minerals.  Avalon  presently  owns  six  rare  metals  and  mineral  projects  in  Canada,  three  of  which  are  under  active
development, but none of which are in production. It also owns royalty interests in two development projects which are
not in production. For at least the last three years the Company has expended substantially all of its efforts on the
development of Nechalacho Project.
The Nechalacho Project is located at Thor Lake in the Mackenzie Mining District of the Northwest Territories
(“NWT”), about five kilometres north of the Hearne Channel of Great Slave Lake and approximately 100 kilometres
southeast of the city of Yellowknife. The property is comprised of five contiguous mining leases totalling 10,449 acres
(4,249 hectares) and three claims totalling 4,597 acres (1,869 hectares), the latter staked in 2009 to cover favourable
geology to the west of the mining leases. The property is subject to one underlying 2.5% Net Smelter Returns (“NSR”)
royalty  agreement.  Avalon  has  the  contractual  right  to  buy  out  this  royalty  on  the  basis  of  a  fixed  formula,  which
currently approximates $1.3 million and which will increase at a rate equal to the Canadian prime rate until the royalty
is bought out.
The  property  is  situated  in  an  area  referred  to  as  the  Akaitcho  Territory,  an  area  which  is  subject  to
comprehensive  native  land  claim  negotiations  between  the  Government  of  Canada  and  the  Treaty  8  Tribal
Corporation, which consists of the Yellowknives Dene First Nation (“YKDFN”), the Deninu K’ue First Nation (“DKFN”)
and the Lutsel K’e Dene First Nation (“LKDFN”). The Company has completed an Accommodation Agreement with the
DKFN. Negotiations towards signing similar accommodation agreements with the LKDFN and the YKDFN continue.
The general area around the Project is also subject to Aboriginal rights asserted by other Aboriginal groups,
including  Métis  represented  by  two  organizations;  the  Northwest  Territory  Métis  Nation  (“NWTMN”)  and  the  North
Slave Métis Alliance (“NSMA”). During 2014, Avalon concluded an agreement with the NWTMN (the “Participation
Agreement”)  which  provides  for  training,  employment,  and  business  opportunities  for  the  NWTMN  related  to  the
Project  and  associated  facilities  in  the  Northwest  Territories.  The  Company  has  also  commenced  negotiating  an
agreement with NSMA.
Avalon’s next steps are primarily focused on continuing its optimization work, with a view to producing an
updated technical report incorporating the results of such work. Other goals include completing land use permit and
water license applications, carrying out an additional pilot plant trial of the new Hydrometallurgical Plant flowsheet (to
confirm reagent recycle performance), finalize detailed plant designs and engineering, securing commitments on off-
take and arranging project financing.
The key factors going forward influencing the timely execution of the Nechalacho Project are securing one or
more strategic or financial partners, securing sufficient binding agreements for offtake to support project financing, the
availability of equity and debt financing at a reasonable cost and receipt of all requisite construction permits.
The Company currently relies on equity markets to raise capital to finance its exploration and development
programs.  The  Company  has  no  debt  and  no  sources  of  revenue  at  the  present  time  to  finance  its  development
programs  other  than  investment  income  on  its  cash  balances.  As  at  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  had  working
capital of $5,607,733 (which is calculated by adding back the liability for warrants denominated in foreign currency of
$1,720,622 to the net current assets of $3,887,111). The Company also may potentially finance exploration and/or
development of its properties through joint ventures or other arrangements with third parties.
26
Significant Acquisitions and Significant Dispositions
The Company has not made any significant acquisitions or dispositions since the end of its 2013 fiscal year.
Competition
The mining industry in which we are engaged is highly competitive. Competitors include well capitalized mining
companies, independent mining companies and other companies having financial and other resources far greater than
those of the Company’s. The Company competes with other mining companies in connection with the acquisition of
rare  earth  metals  and  mineral  properties.  In  general,  properties  with  a  higher  grade  of  recoverable  mineral  and/or
which are more readily minable afford the owners a competitive advantage in that the cost of production of the final
mineral  product  is  lower.  Thus,  a  degree  of  competition  exists  between  those  engaged  in  the  mining  industries  to
acquire the most valuable properties. As a result, the Company may eventually be unable to acquire attractive mining
properties.
Dependence on Customers and Suppliers
The Company is not dependent upon a single or few customers or suppliers for revenues or its operations.
Seasonality
Certain of the Company’s operations are conducted in the NWT. The weather during the spring and fall
seasons  can  be  extreme  and  can  cause  interruptions  or  delays  in  the  Company’s  operations.  As  a  result,  the
preferable time for activities in these regions is the winter and summer when costs are more reasonable and access to
the properties is easier. In the summer months, however, if the weather has been unusually hot and dry, access to the
Company’s properties may be limited as a result of access restrictions being imposed to mitigate the risks of forest
fires.
Government and Environmental Regulation
The  current  and  anticipated  future  operations  of  the  Company,  including  development  activities  and
commencement of production on its properties, require permits from various federal, territorial and local governmental
authorities  and  such  operations  are  and  will  be  governed  by  laws  and  regulations  governing  prospecting,
development,  mining,  production,  exports,  taxes,  labor  standards,  occupational  health,  waste  disposal,  toxic
substances,  land  use,  environmental  protection,  mine  safety  and  other  matters.  Companies  engaged  in  the
development  and  operation  of  mines  and  related  facilities  generally  experience  increased  costs  and  delays  in
production and other schedules as a result of the need to comply with applicable laws, regulations and permits. Such
operations  and  exploration  activities  are  also  subject  to  substantial  regulation  under  these  laws  by  governmental
agencies  and  may  require  that  the  Company  obtain  permits  from  various  governmental  agencies.  The  Company
believes it is in substantial compliance with all material laws and regulations which currently apply to its activities.
There  can  be  no  assurance,  however,  that  all  permits  which  the  Company  may  require  for  construction  of  mining
facilities and conduct of mining operations will be obtainable on reasonable terms or that such laws and regulations, or
that new legislation or modifications to existing legislation, would not have an adverse effect on any exploration or
mining project which the Company might undertake.
See also Item 3. Key Information – D. Risk Factors – Regulations and Mining Law, Governmental Regulation.
Corporate Social Responsibility (“CSR”)
Contemporaneously  with  the  filing  of  this  annual  report,  the  Company  released  its  third  comprehensive
Sustainability  Report.  The  2014  Sustainability  Report  is  available  for  download  on  the  Company’s  website  at:
http://www.avalonraremetals.com. The 2014 Sustainability Report does not form part of this annual report.
27
The 2014 Sustainability Report was prepared in accordance with the Global Reporting Initiative ("GRI") Version
4  guidelines  for  core  reporting.  In  accordance  with  the  guidance,  the  Company  conducted  a  detailed  materiality
assessment process identifying the topics that have the highest priority to the Company and its communities of interest.
This report focuses on the social, environmental and economic issues that are most material to the Company.
The 2014 Sustainability Report also incorporates a self-assessment of Fiscal 2014 performance and sets
targets for 2015 against the applicable Mining Association of Canada's 'Toward Sustainable Mining' indicators. The
Company’s sustainability reporting period has now been aligned with its fiscal year ended August 31.
In addition to the safety performance improvements and Minister of AANDC approval for the Nechalacho
Project,  the  report  highlights  many  other  positive  accomplishments  such  as  the  risk  management  program,
management  system  development  and  environmental  leadership  in  the  development  of  REE  effluent  standards  to
name  a  few.  Avalon  is  committed  to  signing  a  Socio-Economic  agreement  with  the  Government  of  the  Northwest
Territories prior to starting construction and will continue to negotiate and implement Accommodation Agreements with
the Company’s Aboriginal partners.
To provide independent advice as to the efficacy of the Company’s CSR work, the Company maintains an
independent  Sustainability  Advisory  Committee  (“SAC”)  that  meets  regularly  to  review  all  of  the  Company’s
sustainability-oriented work related to Nechalacho. Mr. Phil Fontaine, former National Chief of the Assembly of First
Nations and a member of Avalon’s Board of Directors, acts as the SAC Chair. The SAC participated in the preparation
of the 2014 Sustainability Report.
C. Organizational Structure
The Company has four directly wholly-owned subsidiaries - Nolava Minerals Inc. (“Nolava”) (a Delaware
company),  Avalon  Rare  Metals  Ltd.  (a  Delaware  company),  Avalon  Rare  Metals  Processing  Inc.  (a  Mississippi
company), and 8110131 Canada Inc. (“8110131”) (a Canada company), and one indirectly-owned subsidiary – Avalon
Rare Metals Processing LLC (a Delaware limited liability company, wholly owned by Avalon Rare Metals Ltd.). None
of these subsidiaries has carried on any operations since their incorporation except for the staking and exploration of
certain mining claims in Utah, U.S.A. by Nolava and the acquisition of certain royalties by 8110131.
D. Property, Plants and Equipment
The Nechalacho Project is the Company’s only material tangible fixed asset.
Nechalacho Project
(I)        Property Description and Location
The Nechalacho Deposit is situated on the Company’s Thor Lake property, located in Canada’s Northwest
Territories (“NWT”), 100 kilometres southeast of the capital city of Yellowknife and five kilometres north of the Hearne
Channel on the East Arm of Great Slave Lake. The property is within the Mackenzie Mining District of the NWT and
Thor  Lake  is  shown  on  National  Topographic  System  (NTS)  map  sheet  85I/02  at  approximately  62°06’30”N  and
112°35’30”W (6,886,500N, 417,000E - NAD83).
28
The Thor Lake property consists of five contiguous mineral leases (totalling 4,249 hectares or 10,449 acres)
and  three  claims  (totalling  1,869  hectares,  or  4,597  acres).  The  claims  were  staked  in  2009  to  cover  favourable
geology to the west of the mining leases.
The mining leases have a 21-year life and each lease is renewable in 21-year increments. Annual payments of
$4.94 per hectare ($2.00 per acre) are required to keep the leases in good standing. Avalon owns the leases subject to
various legal agreements described below. The mineral claims are in good standing with the next renewal date being
October 24, 2015. As the required work is $5 per hectare, the total required annually on the claims is $9,301.31 and
the fee due is $465.07.
Two underlying royalty agreements were inherited with the title to the Thor Lake property: the Murphy Royalty
Agreement and the Calabras/Lutoda Royalty Agreement. The Murphy Royalty Agreement is a 2.5% NSR royalty and
has a provision for Avalon to buy out the royalty at the principal amount of $150,000 compounded annually at the
average  Canadian  prime  rate  from  May  2,  1982  to  the  buyback  date  (as  at  August  31,  2014  this  amounted  to
approximately $1.3 million). The Calabras/Lutoda Royalty Agreement totals 3% NSR. In June, 2012, 8110131 Canada
Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, acquired the NSR under the Calabras/Lutoda Royalty Agreement for
$2.0 million.
(II)       Permit Status and Environmental Issues
The  property  is  situated  in  an  area  known  as  the  Akaitcho  Territory,  an  area  which  is  subject  to  a
comprehensive land claim negotiation involving four communities of the Dene Nation. The area is also subject to a
settled Land Claim of the Tli Cho Government who refer to the area as the Monfwe overlap.
29
Under the Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Act (“MVRMA”) and Regulations, the Mackenzie Valley
Land and Water Board (“MVLWB”) administers land use permits and water licenses. Upon completion of a preliminary
screening  process,  projects  deemed  to  potentially  have  significant  adverse  impacts  are  referred  to  the  Mackenzie
Valley  Environmental  Impact  Review  Board  (“MVEIRB”)  to  initiate  an  environmental  assessment  process.  The
MVRMA allows local and particularly aboriginal input into land and water use permitting. The MVRMA establishes a
three-part environmental assessment process:
Preliminary screening (MVLWB)
Environmental assessment (MVEIRB)
Environmental impact review (MVEIRB, if necessary)
Subsequent to the acquisition of the Thor Lake property, and continuation of community engagement meetings,
Avalon applied to the MVLWB for an exploration permit, and a two year permit was granted as of July 2007. It was
under this permit that the drilling programs in 2007 to April 2009 were conducted. Avalon applied for an extension of
this permit in early 2009, and a two year extension was granted by the MVLWB making the permit valid to July 2011. In
December 2009, Avalon applied for an addendum to the existing exploration permit to allow for a second drill unit to be
added to the program and the construction of a short take-off and landing (STOL) airstrip. The permit addendum and a
separate airstrip land use permit were granted and issued in January 2010 and valid to July 2011. The land use permit
for the construction of the airstrip has since been satisfactorily concluded. Current exploration activities at Thor Lake
are under a new land use permit issued by the MVLWB on June 23, 2011, for a period of five years beginning on July
5, 2011.
On April 23, 2010, Avalon submitted a land use and water license permit application through the MVLWB, for
the  mining,  flotation  processing  and  hydrometallurgical  processing  in  the  NWT.  Upon  completion  of  the  MVLWB
preliminary  screening  process,  the  Nechalacho  Project  was  referred  to  the  MVEIRB  on  June  11,  2010,  for
environmental assessment.
On May 20, 2011, the Company submitted the Developers Assessment Report (“DAR”), (more commonly
referred to as an Environmental and Social Impact Statement). In November, 2011, the DAR was deemed by MVEIRB
to be in conformity with the terms of reference. First Round information requests were received and addressed from
November  2011  to  May  2012.  In  mid-August  2012,  Avalon  participated  in  the  environmental  assessment  process
technical sessions organized by MVEIRB for various regulators and community representatives. Subsequently, Avalon
completed  and  submitted  all  additional  work  and  undertakings  requested  by  MVEIRB  and  other  regulators  for
clarification purposes at the technical sessions. Avalon then entered and completed the Second Round Information
Requests stage. The environmental assessment process ended with public hearings held on February 18 – 20, 2013
in Yellowknife, NWT and February 22, 2013 in Fort Resolution, NWT. The final Report of Environmental Assessment
(the “Report of EA”) was released by MVEIRB on July 26, 2013, recommending approval by the responsible Ministers.
This approval was received on November 4, 2013. Applications for the necessary construction and operating permits
and licences were submitted in December 2013, and were subsequently amended into a two phase permitting process
of 1) low impact site preparation activities and; 2) the full construction and operations permits. A Class A Land Use
Permit and Class B Water Licence were approved on April 24, 2014 and May 22, 2014 respectively for identified low
impact activities including site preparation, early camp erection, portal development and associated infrastructure such
as roads, power and water treatment expected to take up to a full year, pending financing. Avalon submitted a $50,000
security payment for the first phase of this activity and completed the site clearing phase of the project. The additional
phases  may  proceed  with  the  filing  of  additional  site  security.  The  permitting  process  for  the  full  construction  and
operating permits continued to advance, including public Technical Review Session held in Yellowknife July 22-24,
2014.  The  Company  expects  that  the  necessary  permits  and  licences,  if  granted,  will  be  in  place  to  allow  site
construction activities to proceed as presently scheduled by mid-2015.
In its 220 page Report of EA, MVEIRB set out five measures that, when implemented, will mitigate any predicted
environmental impacts so that they are no longer significant. These measures require the Company to:
•
•
Ensure through comprehensive monitoring that the water released from the Project into the receiving
environment does not cause significant impacts;
30
Develop  and  implement  a  wildlife  and  wildlife  habitat protection plan and wildlife effects monitoring program,
with an emphasis on caribou, and mitigation if required; and
•
Complete  a  socio-economic  agreement  with  the  Government of  the  Northwest  Territories  ("GNWT")  before
construction begins.
Initial work on advancing plans to implement the measures identified above has been well advanced, including
engagement with the Company’s Aboriginal partners and regulators. As part of its philosophy of open and transparent
communications, engagement with aboriginal partners on the environmental management plans required as part of the
permitting process was initiated prior to submission to the regulators, helping to both improve the quality of the plans
and facilitate the permitting process. Following the technical review sessions with regulators and the communities of
interest, the Company has submitted proposed and updated water quality monitoring programs, wildlife and wildlife
habitat  protections  plan  and  a  wildlife  effects  monitoring  program  for  which  discussions  are  ongoing.  The  socio-
economic  agreement  has  been  put  on  hold  pending  the  GNWT  devolution  process  and  finalizing  of  the  project
designs.
A  copy  of  all  information  submitted  by  the  Company  can  be  found  on  MVEIRB’s  public  registry  at
www.reviewboard.ca.
Avalon has received a letter from Transport Canada that confirmed that the water bodies located within the tailings
management  facility  (TMF)  are  not  considered  navigable  and  do  not  require  any  additional  authorizations  from
Transport Canada. A section 35(2) fisheries authorization or letters of advice from the Department of Fisheries and
Oceans  (DFO)  under  the Fisheries  Act (Canada)  may  be  required,  though  the  ponds  within  the  TMF  are  not
considered as fisheries habitat (do not contain fish).
Avalon renewed its annual Quarry Permit on August 20, 2014. This permit allows Avalon to remove up to
72,000 cubic metres of stone/rock and 10,000 metres of sand and gravel for construction purposes. A prepayment of
$105,000 has been made for anticipated royalties for this material.
Past exploration activity on the Thor Lake property included underground bulk sampling, drilling and trenching
on  a  separate  rare  metals  resource  called  the  North  T  deposit.  Stockpiles  of  waste  rock  from  underground
development have been progressively reclaimed by Avalon without obligation. Three old construction camp trailers
have  been  sent  to  Yellowknife  for  disposal  while  three  remaining  trailers  have  been  refurbished  for  future  use  by
Avalon, and a building is being used to store equipment. There is little surface disturbance from historical exploration
activities apart from miscellaneous buildings, a 60,000 gallon capacity fuel tank farm (empty), a tent camp and a core
storage  area  left  on  the  Thor  Lake  property.  There  are  no  other  significant  environmental  liabilities  left  by  past
exploration activities. The diesel fuel remaining in the tank farm was consumed during the 2007 and 2008 exploration
programs. The Company has undertaken extensive general cleanup of material left from previous exploration utilizing
First  Nations  labour.  During  2014,  a  fire  break  was  constructed  around  the  property  and  a  fire  sprinkler  system
installed on the core storage area as a precaution against forest fires concerns during the year.
(III)      Accessibility, Climate, Physiography and Planned Infrastructure
The Thor Lake property is characterized by low relief, between 230 m and 255 m above sea level and relatively
subdued  topography.  The  area  is  a  typical  boreal  forest  of  the  Canadian  Shield  and  is  primarily  covered  by  open
growths of stunted spruce, birch, poplar and jack pine which mantle isolated, glaciated rocky outcrops. Approximately
one third of the property is occupied by lakes and swamps. Thor Lake is generally shallow with typical depths of the
order of three to four metres.
Topography is typical of the Canadian Shield, gently rolling with abundant bedrock exposure with glacial till
cover,  numerous  shallow  lakes.  Vegetation  is  dominated  by  spruce  and  poplar  which  do  not  grow  to  a  size  to  be
harvested economically.
Air temperature at the Nechalacho site recorded from June, 2008 to October, 2010 displayed typical seasonal
fluctuations,  with  warm  temperatures  occurring  from  late  May  to  August,  with  the  coldest  period  occurring  from
December to February. The monthly average temperatures expected at site range from -26°C in January to 16°C in
July.  Monthly  average  temperatures  rise  above  0°C  for  significant  periods  of  time  in  May  and  fall  below  0°C  for
significant periods in October.
31
Average annual total precipitation at Thor Lake is approximately 275 mm. Rainfall predominates during May to
October,  and  snowfall  predominates  during  October  to  April.  Six  snow  courses  were  established  throughout  the
Nechalacho  site  in  March,  2009.  Mean  snow  depths  varied  from  31.3  cm  to  66.6  cm  in  the  vicinity  of  Thor  Lake.
Forested areas that were generally less exposed to wind had a tendency to accumulate the thickest snowpacks.
Relative humidity is generally highest during the winter months, while summers are generally drier.
The dominant wind direction at the site is from the east-northeast during November to June. Wind directions had
a tendency to be more dispersed from July to October; however, an east-northeast trend was still evident. The average
hourly wind speed at 20 m above ground level is 4.54 m/s. Wind speeds at 20 m above ground are generally in the
range of 2 to 6 m/s, with occasional wind speeds exceeding 10 m/s.
The Thor Lake site has no road access from Yellowknife, although there is a historical 5 kilometre road from the
Thor Lake site to the shore of Great Slave Lake. This road is presently used to haul supplies shipped by barge or
trucked on an ice road to the Thor Lake site. At the present time year round access is primarily achieved by aircraft.
The use of winter ice roads on Great Slave Lake is also feasible, but is not included as an integral part of the Technical
Report (as defined herein). A temporary barge dock and a materials storage area will be constructed on the shore of
Great Slave Lake. A camp, offices, shops, yards, diesel tank farm, propane storage facility, and access roads to the
tailings management facility and the barge dock on Great Slave Lake will be developed. Electrical power at the site
will be initially provided by a diesel power generating station, supplemented if possible by renewable energy sources
including solar power. The diesel plant design is based upon having spare capacity at any given time.
The proposed location of the hydrometallurgical plant contemplated in the FS is at Pine Point, NWT, which is a
brownfield site formerly used as a lead/zinc mining operation located 90 kilometres east of Hay River in the NWT. This
proposed site is accessible by all-weather roads and highways. A temporary barge dock and yard at the shore of Great
Slave Lake would be developed for the movement of concentrate and supplies. Offices, shops, yards, and access
roads  to  the  tailings  management  facility  and  the  temporary  barge  dock  on  Great  Slave  Lake  would  need  to  be
developed. Electrical power would be obtained from the southern NWT power grid, from the Taltson Dam hydroelectric
facility.  The  use  of  diesel  generators  to  supplement  the  grid  power  is  planned  for  times  when  hydroelectric  power
availability is limited at the expanded production rate.
(IV)      Geology and Mineralization
The Nechalacho rare metals deposit is hosted by the peralkaline Blachford Lake intrusion, an Aphebian-age
ring complex emplaced in Archean-age supracrustal rocks of the Yellowknife Supergroup. The principal rock types in
the intrusion are syenites, granites and gabbros and associated pegmatitic phases hosting rare metal mineralization.
The  key  rock  units  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mineralization  are  the  Grace  Lake  Granite,  the  Thor  Lake  Syenite  and
nepheline-sodalite  syenite  referred  to  by  Avalon  as  the  “Nechalacho  Nepheline  Syenite”.  The  Grace  Lake  Granite
surrounds the Thor Lake Syenite with the two separated by the enigmatic "Rim Syenite". The host of the Nechalacho
Deposit mineralization, the Nechalacho nepheline syenite, is within and below the Thor Lake Syenite, and exposed
locally in the northwest part of the Thor Lake Syenite.
Five distinct zones or deposits of rare metal mineralization have been identified as being of potential economic
interest:  the  Nechalacho  Deposit  and  smaller  North  T,  South  T,  S  and  R  Zones.  The  Nechalacho  Deposit  is  the
largest,  containing  significant  yttrium,  tantalum,  niobium,  gallium  and  zirconium  mineralization.  The  Nechalacho
Deposit  is  particularly  notable  for  its  enrichment  in  the  more  valuable  HREEs  such  as  europium,  terbium  and
dysprosium, relative to light rare earth elements (“LREEs”) such as lanthanum and cerium.
The Nechalacho nepheline syenite that hosts the Nechalacho Deposit has the following key distinctive features
which contrast it to the Thor Lake Syenite and Grace Lake Granite:
32
It has a distinct chemical composition showing undersaturation in quartz, with nepheline and sodalite variously
as rock-forming minerals.
It has cumulate layering.
It contains zircono-silicates including eudialyte.
It is the host to the Nechalacho zirconium-niobium-tantalum-rare earth mineralization.
This syenite is only exposed at surface in a window through the Thor Lake Syenite in the area encompassing
Long Lake to Thor Lake. It is believed to dip underneath the Thor Lake Syenite in all directions. This is supported by
drilling  north  of  Thor  Lake,  within  and  close  to  Cressy  Lake.  Also,  the  Nechalacho  Deposit  mineralization,  which
occurs in the top, or apex, of the syenite, is also present in throughout this window through the Thor Lake Syenite. This
unnamed syenite is referred to in the AIF as the "Ore (Nechalacho) Nepheline Sodalite Syenite".
The Nechalacho Deposit is a tabular hydrothermal alteration zone extending typically from surface to depths of
approximately  200,  characterized  by  alternating  sub-horizontal  layers  of  relatively  high  and  lower  grade  REE
mineralization. HREEs are present in the Nechalacho Deposit in fergusonite ((Y, HREE) NbO4) and zircon (ZrSiO4),
whereas the LREEs are present in bastnaesite, synchysite, allanite and monazite. Niobium and tantalum are hosted in
columbite as well as fergusonite.
There is a gradual increase in HREE from surface to depth within the Nechalacho Deposit with the lowermost
sub-horizontal  layer,  which  is  also  the  most  laterally  continuous,  being  referred  to  as  the  Basal  Zone.  Accordingly
typical proportions of heavy rare earth oxides (“HREO”) relative to total rare earth oxides (“TREO”) in Upper Zone can
be 6% to 10% but in the Basal Zone averaging over 20% and reaching as high as 50% in individual samples. There is
also a tendency for the Basal Zone, which undulates to some extent, to increase in HREO with depth.
The Nechalacho Nepheline Syenite consists of a layered series of increasingly peralkaline rocks with depth. A
consistent  downward  progression  is  observed  from  hanging  wall  sodalite  cumulates,  through  coarse  grained  to
pegmatitic nepheline aegirine syenites which are locally enriched in zirconosilicates, to foayaitic syenite with a broad
zone of altered “pseudomorphs-after-eudialyte” cumulates (referred to above as the Basal Zone). This upper sequence
is  strongly  to  intensely  hydrothermally  altered  by  various  sodic  and  iron-rich  fluids.  Pre-existing  zircon-silicates
(eudialyte) are completely replaced by zircon, allanite, bastnaesite, fergusonite and other minerals. Below the Basal
Zone  cumulates,  mineralization  decreases  rapidly,  but  alteration  decreases  more  gradually,  with  relict  primary
mineralogy  and  textures  increasingly  preserved.  Aegirine  and  nepheline-bearing  syenites  and  foyaitic  syenites
progress downward to sodalite foyaites and naujaite. Drilling has not extended beyond this sodalite lithology to date.
Minerals related to agpaitic magmatism identified from this lower unaltered sequence include eudialyte, catapleite,
analcime, and possibly mosandrite.
The part of the Nechalacho Deposit alteration system that is enriched in REEs varies between 80 metres and
190 metres in vertical thickness, with the alteration usually starting from the surface. The whole alteration system is
enriched  to  varying  degrees  in  rare  earth  elements,  zirconium  (Zr),  niobium  (Nb)  and  tantalum  (Ta),  relative  to
unaltered  syenite,  with  average  values  over  the  whole  approximately  200  metres  thick  alteration  package  of
approximately 0.75% to 1.0% total rare earth oxides.
Within  this  alteration  envelope,  there  are  sub-horizontal  zones  of  increased  alteration  accompanied  by
increased REE enrichment alternating with less enriched REE zones. Within the more intensely altered zones, the
effect is that the original textures and mineralogy of the host rock are no longer apparent.
These zones of increased alteration, which can vary in thickness from a few metres to tens of metres, can
frequently contain TREO grades in the range of 2% and higher. The lowermost band, referred to as the Basal Zone,
contains  the  highest  proportion  of  HREO.  Overall,  the  HREO  proportion  of  the  TREO  within  the  80  metres  to  190
metres thick alteration system is typically between 7% and 15%. However, within the Basal Zone, this proportion is
typically greater than 20% and can locally exceed 30% over the full width.
33
(V)        Exploration History
The Thor Lake area was first mapped by J. F. Henderson and A. W. Joliffe of the Geological Survey of Canada
(“GSC”) in 1937 and 1938. According to National Mineral Inventory records of the Mineral Policy Sector, Department of
Energy, Mines and Resources, the first staking activity at Thor Lake dates from July 1970 when Odin 1-4 claims were
staked by K. D. Hannigan for uranium.
In 1971, the GSC commissioned an airborne radiometric survey over the Yellowknife region that outlined a
radioactive anomaly over the Thor Lake area (GSC Open File Report 124). Simultaneously, A. Davidson of the GSC
initiated mapping of the Blatchford Lake Intrusive  Complex.  It  has  subsequently  become  clear  that  this  radiometric
anomaly is largely due to elevated thorium levels in the T Zone.
In 1976, Highwood Resources Ltd., (“Highwood”) in the course of a regional uranium exploration program,
discovered niobium and tantalum on the Thor Lake property and the property was staked in 1976 and 1977. From
1976 and 1979, exploration programs included geological mapping, sampling trenching on the Lake, Fluorite, R, S
and T Zones. Twenty-two drill holes were also completed, seven of these on the Nechalacho Deposit (referred to as
the “Lake Zone” in the historic reports). This work resulted in the discovery of significant concentrations of niobium,
tantalum, yttrium and REEs.
Recognizing a large potential resource at Thor Lake, Placer Development Ltd. (“Placer”) optioned the property
from  Highwood  in  March  1980  to  further  investigate  the  tantalum  and  related  mineralization.  Placer  conducted
geophysical  surveys  on  the  Nechalacho  Deposit.  Eighteen  holes  were  drilled  in  1980  in  1981.  Preliminary
metallurgical scoping work was also conducted, but, when the mineralization did not prove amenable to conventional
metallurgical extractions of tantalum, Placer relinquished its option in April 1982.
From 1983 to 1985, work on the property was concentrated on the T Zone and included geochemical surveys,
surface  mapping,  significant  drilling,  surface  and  underground  bulk  sampling,  metallurgical  testing  and  a  detailed
evaluation of the property by Unocal Canada. Five holes were also drilled in the Nechalacho Deposit to test for high
grade tantalum-niobium mineralization and to determine zoning and geological continuity. Two additional holes were
completed at the northeast end of Long Lake to evaluate high yttrium and REE values obtained from nearby trenches.
In August 1986, the property was joint ventured with Hecla Mining Company of Canada Ltd. (“Hecla”). In 1988,
earlier holes were re-assayed and 19 more holes were drilled into the Nechalacho Deposit, primarily in the southeast
corner, to further test for yttrium and REE. However, in 1990, after completing this and considerable work on the T
Zone,  including  some  limited  in-fill  drilling,  extensive  metallurgical  testing  and  conducting  a  marketing  study  on
beryllium, Hecla withdrew from the project. In 1990, control of Highwood passed to Conwest Exploration Company Ltd.
(“Conwest”) until 1996, at which time Conwest divested itself of its mineral holdings. Mountain Minerals Company Ltd.
(“Mountain”),  a  private  company  controlled  by  Royal  Oak  Mines  Ltd.  (“Royal  Oak”),  acquired  the  34%  controlling
interest of Highwood.
In late 1999, the application was withdrawn. Royal Oak’s subsequent bankruptcy in 1999 resulted in the
acquisition of the control block of Highwood shares by Dynatec Company (“Dynatec”). In 2000, Highwood initiated
metallurgical, marketing and environmental reviews by Dynatec.
In 2001, Navigator Exploration Corp. (“Navigator”) entered into an option agreement with Highwood. Navigator's
efforts were focused on conducting additional metallurgical research at a third party geotechnical consultant firm in
order to define a process for producing a marketable tantalum concentrate from the Nechalacho Deposit. These efforts
produced  a  metallurgical  grade  tantalum  (Ta)/zirconium  (Zr)/niobium  (Nb)/yttrium  (Y)  /REE  bulk  concentrate.  The
option  was  dropped  in  2004,  however,  in  view  of  falling  tantalum  prices  and  low  tantalum  contents  in  the  bulk
concentrate.
Beta Minerals Inc. (“Beta”) acquired Highwood’s interest in the Thor Lake property in November 2002 under a
plan  of  arrangement  with  Dynatec.  No  work  was  conducted  at  Thor  Lake  by  Beta  and  in  May  of  2005  Avalon
purchased from Beta a 100% interest and full title, (subject to royalty interests), to the Thor Lake property.
34
In 2005, Avalon conducted extensive re-sampling of archived Nechalacho Deposit drill core to further assess
the yttrium and heavy REE resources on the property. In 2006, TetraTech-WEI (formerly Wardrop Engineering Inc.)
(“TetraTech”) was retained to conduct a Preliminary Economic Assessment of the Nechalacho Deposit (Preliminary
Economic Assessment on the Thor Lake Rare Metals Project, NT Wardrop Document No. 0551530201-REP-R0001-
03). In 2007, Avalon commenced further drilling of the Nechalacho Deposit.
(VI)        Drilling
Avalon has carried out the following drilling on the Nechalacho Deposit, summarized to August 31, 2014:
Year
2007
2008
Diameter
Drill holes
BTW
TOTAL
NQ2
13
13
70
Metres
2,440.47
2,440.47
14,033.65
2009
2009
2010
2010
2011
2011
2011
2012
2012
2013
2014
2014
Total to August 31,
2014
TOTAL
HQ
NQ
TOTAL
HQ
PQ
TOTAL
HQ
NQ
PQ
TOTAL
HQ
PQ
TOTAL
HQ
TOTAL
HQ
PQ
TOTAL
70
43
26
69
86
20
106
43
21
46
110
73
13
86
16
16
15
7
22
492
14,033.65
8,794.32
5,476.78
14,271.10
23,840.43
3,754.00
27,594.43
10,967.22
3,923.96
10,864.60
25,755.78
18,100.90
3,160.45
21,261.35
2,977.30
2,977.30
3,135.00
1,773.00
4,908.00
113,242.08
Minor differences to previous tables disclosing historic drilling statistics are due to previous errors and decisions
by the data compilers as whether to exclude or include abandoned holes with no assays.
Resource estimates with the effective date of May 3, 2013 included drill results up to August 27, 2012 and the
updated  resource  estimates,  completed  after  the  Technical  Report,  included  drill  results  up  to  March  2,  2013.  See
“Nechalacho Project - Mineral Resource Update”.
35
(VII)      Sampling, Analysis and Security of Samples
A comprehensive core logging and sampling protocol was established for the July 2007 drilling program. This
protocol has been strictly applied for all of the drilling programs since 2007. In addition, a comprehensive geotechnical
logging  protocol  was  introduced  at  the  start  of  the  summer  2009  drill  program.  The  Company's  Vice  President,
Exploration, William Mercer, Ph.D., P.Geo. (Ontario), P. Geo (NWT), provided overall direction on the project and is
responsible for monitoring the QA/QC protocol for the laboratory analyses and provided overall direction on the project.
Core sizes range from BTW diameter for the initial 2007 drill program to NQ2 in the winter/summer 2008
program  and  NQ2  or  HQ  in  2009  and  2010.  Since  2011,  a  second  rig  recovering  very  large  PQ  sized  core  was
mobilized to site to maximize the amount of material available for the bulk sample while the first rig continued with HQ
equipment.
Core is placed in standard wooden core boxes at the drill by the driller helper, with a wooden marker placed at
the end of each core run marking the metreage from the surface. Throughout the BTW-NQ programs drill rods were
imperial lengths of 10 feet, and core markers were written in feet on one side of the wooden block, and using a metric
conversion chart, written in metres on the opposite side of the block. The HQ drilling initially used both imperial and
metric rods, so markers were in both feet and metres to ensure proper measurement.
In general, in the mineralized zones, core recovery is very high, effectively 100%. As a result, core handling is
not  expected  to  materially  affect  the  results  in  terms  of  accuracy  or  reliability.  In  addition,  as  the  mineralization  is
disseminated, there is not expected to be a significant sampling effect on accuracy or reliability.
After inspection by the geologist at the drill, the boxes are closed with wooden lids and taken to the core logging
facility at the camp by snowmobile in the winter and by boat and ATV in the summer. At camp, the boxes are opened
by the geologist on outdoor racks. In good weather, logging and other geotechnical measurements are done outside;
in  poor  weather  and  in  winter,  core  is  processed  in  a  heated  core  shack.  Core  is  initially  measured  to  determine
recoveries, and marked incrementally every metre. This marking serves as a guide for magnetic susceptibility, rock
quality determinations (“RQD”), and density measurements. Magnetic susceptibility is measured every metre with a
hand-held ‘KT- 10 magnetic susceptibility meter’. Density is measured every five metres by weighing a section of drill
core  in  air  and  then  weighing  by  submersing  the  sample  in  water  and  comparing  the  difference  between  dry  and
submersed weight. A typical core sample for density measurement averages 10 centimetres in length. Geotechnical
logging, comprising RQD, are performed for each run.
Core is generally very clean when brought to camp, and requires no washing except for occasional sprays of
water when mud is present. The geologist marks out major rock units and completes a written description for the entire
core sequence. Frequent readings using a handheld Thermo-Scientific Niton® XLP-522K hand held analyzer act as a
guide to areas of mineralization and general chemistry of a specific interval. The final task is to mark out with a china
marker specific sample intervals for the length of the entire drill hole. On average, assay samples are two metres long
except where, in the geologist’s opinion, it is advisable to follow lithological boundaries. Due to the long widths of
mineralization with the Basal Zone averaging over 20m thick, even spaced sampling is not considered a significant
factor  in  resource  estimation.  Consequently,  individual  samples  can  vary  in  length  when  encountering  lithological
changes,  as  efforts  are  made  not  to  split  across  well-defined  lithological  boundaries.  A  list  is  made  of  all  sample
intervals as a record and also a guide to the core splitting technicians. All geological, geophysical and geotechnical
data was originally entered into a custom designed database, provided and maintained by an external consulting firm.
Subsequently, starting in 2012, Avalon started using Maxwell Geoservices software (LogChief and DataShed)
to enter and control data into the Datashed database.
At the first step of data entry, the data is checked for corrected and completed required fields which are
necessary  to  import  into  LogChief.  Adjusted  procedures  for  different  fields  in  LogChief  can  be  considered  control
manager on data entry and possible available errors. Those parts of the data which includes errors are rejected and
sent back to field geologists for correction. The data are then synchronized from LogChief to DataShed. An exception
to the sampling process described above is that for PQ core. Due to the weight of the core, about 18 kgs per metre, and
for safety reasons related to lifting heavy samples, samples were restricted to 1 metre core lengths.
36
Due to the strong hydrothermal alteration of all lithologies, identifying specific precursor lithologies has proven
quite  difficult,  particularly  in  the  early  drill  programs.  Early  lithological  coding  tended  to  incorporate  hydrothermal
alteration, commonly making it difficult to correlate units between drill holes. As more information became available
from  deeper  drilling  and  specific  textures  and  lithologies  were  compared  to  other  unaltered,  alkaline  deposits
elsewhere, such as Illimausaq in Greenland, a new lithological code was produced using, as a basis, the recognizable
precursor lithologies. This has greatly advanced the understanding of the lithology, mineralogy, and to a lesser degree
the petro-genesis of the deposit.
After all tests and core observations are completed, and prior to splitting, the core is photographed outdoors
using a hand-held digital camera. Down-hole distance and hole number are marked so as to be visible in all photos.
Core is generally photographed in groups of six boxes. Starting in the 2009 summer drill program, drill core was also
logged  for  geotechnical  characteristics.  This  was  initiated  with  the  guidance  of  external  geotechnical  consultants.
Some of the holes were logged from top to bottom, while others were logged above, below, and within the Basal Zone,
to determine rock quality characteristics of both the mineralized zones and country rocks. Efforts were made to select
holes with varying orientations to provide comprehensive orientation characteristics of planar structural features. The
geotechnical  logging  was  done  on  core  logging  sheets  and  entered  electronically  in  to  a  custom-designed  Excel
spreadsheet provided by the geotechnical consultants. A total of 385 holes were logged in whole or in part. Holes
which were partially logged included the Basal Zone and a minimum 10 metre interval above and below. When the
core has been logged and photographed, it is stored in core racks outside the core splitting tent, from which they are
then brought in to the core shack to be split and sampled. Core photos are stored on the camp computer in addition to
an external hard drive.
For all core except PQ, the core splitter would break the core into smaller lengths to fit into the mechanical core
splitter, split the core in half, and placed one half in a plastic sample bag with the other half placed back into the core
box in sequence to serve as a permanent record. In programs after 2009, for mineralized intervals, the core was split
initially into halves and then one half into quarters. One quarter was utilized as an assay sample, a second quarter
retained  as  a  library  sample,  and  the  full  half  core  bagged  in  intervals  identical  to  the  sample  interval,  as  a
metallurgical sample. The sample interval is marked on a sample tag in a three-part sample book and a tag with the
corresponding sample number is placed in the sample bag. The sample bag is also marked with the corresponding
sample number using a felt marker. The bag is then either stapled or zip-tied closed, and placed in a rice bag with two
other  samples.  Most  rice  bags  contain  three  samples  to  keep  weight  to  a  manageable  level.  The  rice  bag  is  then
marked on the outside with corresponding sample numbers contained within, and a second number identifying the rice
bag itself. A sample shipment form is then completed, generally in increments of 50 rice bags, which constitutes a
single shipment. The sample form is enclosed in an appropriately marked rice bag, with a duplicate paper copy kept in
camp, and also kept on electronic file.
Starting in winter 2010, a second drill was added, also using HQ core. This core was sampled as above. From
July 2010 on, this rig was converted to PQ diameter core in order to obtain more metallurgical sample. This core,
weighing about 18 kg per metre, was initially sawn in order to acquire an assay sample of about 1.5kgs, with a second
cut for a library sample of about 1.5 kg, leaving about 14 kg for metallurgical purposes. However, due to the hardness
of  the  rock,  it  was  deemed  that  sawing  the  core  was  impractical  due  to  low  productivity.  Consequently  a  test  was
completed of coarse crushing the whole core to 3.3 mm in 1 metre samples. Then an assay sample and a library
sample were split out and the remaining 3.3 mm material retained for metallurgical purposes. The results of the test
that  studied  the  particle  size  distribution  and  the  homogeneity  of  the  sample  indicated  that  this  was  a  satisfactory
procedure  for  both  assaying  and  metallurgy,  and  for  mineralized  intervals  this  PQ  core  procedure  continued  to  be
followed.  For  unmineralized  core,  a  section  was  sawn  off  weighing  about  3-5  kgs  per  sample  to  avoid  the  cost  of
crushing whole core and the remaining core stored at site.
Standards are inserted routinely every 15th sample with ALS Laboratory Group (“ALS”) and every 35th sample
with  Acme  Analytical  Laboratories  Ltd.  (“Acme”).  Blanks,  composed  of  split  drill  core  of  unaltered  and  un-veined
diabase dyke intersected in drilling beneath Thor Lake, are inserted every 40th sample. Samples are shipped by air
from Thor Lake to Yellowknife. The standard shipment is 50 rice bags, or a total of 150 samples per shipment. The rice
bags  are  zip-tied  for  security,  and  are  met  and  unloaded  in  Yellowknife  by  a  representative  of  Discovery  Mining
Services (“Discovery”). Discovery takes the samples to its warehouse and inventories all samples and produces a
manifest which is sent electronically to Thor Lake camp, and accompanies the shipment. The samples are then taken
by Discovery to the core processing lab facilities of either Acme or ALS. At this point, the laboratories take custody of
the  samples.  Core  is  sent  to  the  preparation  laboratory  with  specification  that  all  core  should  be  crushed  to  90%
passing 10 mesh with a supplementary charge if necessary. For samples from drill holes completed in 2007, every
sample pulp was duplicated and sent to a secondary laboratory for check analyses. Subsequent to this (2008 to 2009),
approximately every tenth pulp was sent for duplicate analysis in the secondary laboratory. Standards are inserted in
the duplicate sample stream by Avalon employees prior to shipping to the secondary laboratory.
37
All remaining drill core is stored on site at Thor Lake. Core is temporarily racked at the exploration camp while
being  logged.  In  summer  2012,  a  large  core  storage  facility  was  constructed  at  the  T  Zone  Mine  site  that  was
sufficiently large to store all drill core from the project. In addition, samples rejects were brought from Yellowknife in
wooden bins, each of about one tonne. Pulp samples and further sample rejects are stored in a locked secure facility
within Yellowknife airport. Historic core, particularly T-Zone core, is stored at the mine site, while Nechalacho Deposit
core is stored at the camp storage.
Any assay results obtained prior to 2007 (holes 1 to 51) are referred to as the “older holes”. These did not have
internal Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC) and were analyzed for a limited set of elements; however, six of
the old holes were reassayed in 2008 for the complete suite of elements. Avalon has changed the laboratories used for
analysis over time. For the first year of drilling by Avalon (2007), the primary laboratory was an independent laboratory
located in Ancaster, Ontario, and the secondary laboratory was Acme in Vancouver, British Columbia. Samples were
shipped to the facility in Ancaster, Ontario for preparation, and a duplicate pulp was submitted to Acme in Vancouver
for complete check analysis.
For the 2008 winter and summer programs, the preparation laboratory was Acme in Yellowknife, Northwest
Territories and the primary analytical laboratory was the Acme laboratory in Vancouver, British Columbia. A split of
every tenth sample reject was sent to ALS laboratory in Vancouver, British Columbia for check analyses. All core was
analyzed by Acme using two analytical packages: Group 4A and Group 4B. ALS analyzed the samples with the MS81
method. Acme’s Group 4A is a whole rock characterization package comprising four separate analytical tests. Acme’s
Group  4B  is  a  Total  Trace  Elements  by  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma-Mass  Spectrometry  (ICP-MS).  This  package
comprises  two  separate  analyses.  For  2008,  secondary  samples,  comprising  roughly  every  tenth  reject  sample
supplied  by  Acme,  were  shipped  to  ALS,  where  the  samples  were  analyzed  by  the  package  MS81.  This  is  a
combination  of  lithium  metaborate/ICP  atomic  emission  spectrometry  (ICP-AES)  for  whole  rock  values,  lithium
borate/ICP-MS for refractory mineral values and other elements, and aqua regia/ICP-MS for volatile elements.
Starting with the winter 2009 drilling campaign, all samples were prepared at the ALS preparation facility in
Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, and a subsample shipped and analyzed at ALS in Vancouver, British Columbia by
lithium metaborate/tetraborate fusion and dilute nitric acid digestion, followed by whole rock and 45 element multi-
element ICP analysis (ALS sample method ME-MS81). All samples contained within intercepts above the 1.6% cutoff
criteria and any additional samples exceeding analytical limits or of geological significance are re-run using similar
ALS method ME-MS81H for higher concentration levels. ME-MS81H is a similar method but with greater dilution in the
analytical procedure. Every tenth sample has a duplicate pulp prepared from the sample reject which, with inserted
standards and blanks, was sent to Acme Analytical in Vancouver, British Columbia for check analyses. Results were
monitored for key elements, and in cases of QA/QC issues, re-analysis was requested. Values were reported by the
laboratories in parts per million (“ppm”) and converted to rare earth and rare metal oxides by Avalon geologists.
Since 2007, Avalon has commissioned a specialist laboratory from British Columbia to generate standards
called AVL-H, AVL-M or AVL-L (2007), S0409 (2010) (sometime referred to as H2) and S229 and S236 (2010). For the
2007  standards  and  S0409,  Avalon  then  commissioned  an  independent  consultant  to  review  the  round  robin  and
assess the quality of the data and for S339 and S336 another independent consultant was similarly commissioned.
38
Statistics on QA/QC samples submitted during the period January 2011 to August 2012 are presented below.
QA/QC Samples Submitted From January, 2011 to August, 2012
QC Category
DH Sample Count
QC Sample Count
Company Standards
Company Blanks
Laboratory Duplicates
Field Duplicates
16,914
16,914
16,914
16,914
1,117
453
2,019
88
Ratio of QC Samples to 
DH Samples
1:15
1:37
1:8
1:192
The following table shows the interlab comparison for the period June 2010 and December 2011.
Laboratory Comparison Results for All Elements
Element
No. of 
Samples
453
451
453
453
453
453
453
453
452
453
Mean 1
(ALS)
1996.72
4398.52
558.23
2166.97
456.80
52.32
357.29
48.63
240.93
41.09
La
Ce
Pr
Nd
Sm
Eu
Gd
Tb
Dy
Ho
Mean 2
(Acme)
1882.70
4184.67
518.04
2069.39
422.45
49.91
359.70
48.37
235.89
38.98
SD 1
(ALS)
1153.64
2535.14
331.16
1297.18
290.66
34.33
257.90
44.61
258.54
50.96
SD 2
(Acme)
1076.56
2392.85
300.76
1223.40
265.58
32.65
256.03
43.68
252.82
50.06
CV 1
(ALS)
0.58
0.58
0.59
0.60
0.64
0.66
0.72
0.92
1.07
1.24
CV 2
(Acme)
0.57
0.57
0.58
0.59
0.63
0.65
0.71
0.90
1.07
1.28
RPHD%1
2.69
2.24
3.21
1.97
3.56
2.07
-0.80
0.01
1.05
5.24
Er
Tm
Yb
Lu
Y
Zr- 
ICPMSh
Zr-XRF
Nb- 
ICPMSh
Nb-XRF
Ta
Hf
453
453
453
453
453
451
497
452
228
453
453
101.74
13.25
80.59
11.37
964.62
16794.83
96.24
13.25
81.97
11.08
914.19
16441.79
137.84
18.48
112.45
15.76
1144.75
11635.23
132.60
18.48
112.15
15.32
1072.82
11661.55
1.35
1.39
1.40
1.39
1.19
0.69
39
22748.89
2045.91
20472.55
1937.76
11023.60
1173.36
9747.00
1158.36
0.48
0.57
3645.18
217.29
380.31
3169.35
207.36
369.85
1189.18
169.17
274.54
994.35
157.83
268.91
0.33
0.78
0.72
1.38
1.39
1.37
1.38
1.17
0.71
0.48
0.60
0.31
0.76
0.73
4.59
-0.44
-3.44
-0.39
2.22
1.51
5.16
2.82
7.00
1.45
1.47
RPHD: Relative Percent Half Difference
Avalon monitors the results of its internal standards during routine analysis of drill core. Due to the large number
of elements involved, it would be impractical to apply a normal logic table of failures where an analysis batch is failed
on  the  basis  of  issues  with  one  element.  Avalon  followed  the  following  procedure  for  assessing  analytical  data:
Batches were not failed if the samples analysed were clearly far below any economic levels (not mineralized), unless
the standards results were very grossly out.
The results of the standards were reviewed to see how many elements were out of acceptable range as
recommended  in  the  standard  certification,  and  if  four  elements  were  out  of  range  (greater  than  three  standard
deviations), but two high and two low, and the remaining 14 elements were in range, the batch was accepted.
If five elements or more elements were out of acceptable range (greater than three standard deviations), and all
in the same direction, either biased all high or all low, then the batch was re-analysed.
More recently, subsequent to the May 3, 2013 resource estimate, Avalon added an additional criterion as
follows: If the overall NMR (Net Metal Return) of the standard is outside the range of +/-10% of the recommended
value, then the batch is considered for reanalysis.
(VIII)        Feasibility Study
(i)              Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates
Resource Estimate
The mineral resource estimate for the Nechalacho Project presented in the FS based on the block model
prepared  by  Avalon  was  audited  originally  by  Roscoe  Postle  Associates  Inc.  (“RPA”)  on  November  21,  2012.
Subsequent  to  this,  Avalon  updated  the  database  and  re-estimated  the  resource  as  of  May  3,  2013.  The  update
included correction of some minor assay data entry errors and drill hole locations. The net effect of these changes is
considered immaterial as the resource change was less than 1% in most individual parameters. The largest changes
were for ZrO2 grade, and the effect was an increase in grade in Measured and Indicated resources of between 0.1%
and 3.2% of the overall grade in the various categories.
The resource estimated by Avalon and accepted by RPA that was the basis for the mineral reserves estimate
given below (See “Nechalacho Project – Mineral Reserve Estimate”) for the Nechalacho deposit is summarized in the
table below. The mineral resource is reported at a cut-off value of US$320/t. The effective date of the mineral resource
estimate  is  May  3,  2013.  This  resource  has  been  subsequently  updated  as  of  August  15,  2013  (See  “Nechalacho
Project  –  Mineral  Reserve  Estimate”).  The  tables  of  the  May  3,  2013  mineral  resource  have  been  provided  for
completeness purposes.
40
Nechalacho Deposit Mineral Resource Estimate as at May 3, 2013
HREO 
Category
(%)
Tonnes 
(million)
TREO 
(%)
Zone
Measured
1.67
-
1.67
1.55
1.42
1.49
1.57
1.42
1.50
1.29
1.26
1.27
0.38
-
0.38
0.33
0.14
0.24
0.34
0.14
0.25
0.25
0.12
0.17
ZrO2 
(%)
3.23
-
3.23
3.01
1.96
2.49
3.05
1.96
2.56
2.69
2.21
2.37
Nb2O5 
(%)
0.40
-
0.40
0.40
0.28
0.34
0.40
0.28
0.34
0.36
0.32
0.33
Ta2O5 
(%)
0.04
-
0.04
0.04
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
Basal
Upper
Total Measured
Indicated
10.86
-
10.86
55.81
54.59
110.40
66.67
54.59
Total Measured and Indicated 121.26
61.09
Inferred
122.28
183.37
Total Indicated
Measured and
Indicated
Basal
Upper
Basal
Upper
Basal
Upper
Total Inferred
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
CIM definitions were followed for Mineral Resources.
Mineral Resources are estimated at a NMR cut-off value of US$320/t. NMR is defined as “Net Metal Return” or
the in situ value of all payable metals, net of estimated metallurgical recoveries and off-site processing costs.
An exchange rate of US$1=CAD1.05 was used.
Heavy rare earth oxides (HREO) is the total concentration of: Y2O3, Eu2O3, Gd2O3, Tb2O3, Dy2O3, Ho2O3, Er2O3,
Tm2O3, Yb2O3 and Lu2O3.
Total rare earth oxides (TREO) is HREO plus light rare earth oxides (LREO): La2O3, Ce2O3, Pr2O3, Nd2O3 and
Sm2O3.
Rare earths were valued at an average net price of US$62.91/kg, ZrO2 at US$3.77/kg, Nb2O5 at US$56/kg, and
Ta2O5 at US$256/kg. Average REO price is net of metallurgical recovery and payable assumptions for contained
rare earths, and will vary according to the proportions of individual rare earth elements present. In this case, the
proportions of REO as final products were used to calculate the average price.
ZrO2 refers to zirconium oxide, Nb2O5 refers to niobium oxide and Ta2O5 refers to tantalum oxide.
41
42


4a


1
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
CIM definitions were followed for Mineral Resources.
Mineral  Resources  are  estimated  at  a  NMR  cut-off  value  of US$320/t.  NMR  is  defined  as  “Net  Metal
Return”  or  the  in  situ  value  of  all payable  metals,  net  of  estimated  metallurgical  recoveries  and  off-site
processing costs.
An exchange rate of US$1=CAD1.05 was used.
44
Heavy rare earth oxides (HREO) is the total concentration of: Y2O3, Eu2O3, Gd2O3, Tb2O3, Dy2O3, Ho2O3,
Er2O3, Tm2O3, Yb2O3 and Lu2O3.
Total  rare  earth  oxides  (TREO)  is  HREO  plus  light  rare earth  oxides  (LREO):  La2O3,  Ce2O3,  Pr2O3,
Nd2O3 and Sm2O3.
Rare  earths  were  valued  at  an  average  net  price  of US$62.91/kg,  ZrO2  at  US$3.77/kg,  Nb2O5  at
US$56/kg,  and  Ta2O5  at US$256/kg.  Average  REO  price  is  net  of  metallurgical  recovery  and  payable
assumptions for contained rare earths, and will vary according to the proportions of individual rare earth
elements  present.  The  proportions  are based  on  the  actual  planned  production  from  the  Nechalacho
project.
ZrO2 refers to zirconium oxide, Nb2O5 refers to niobium oxide, and Ta2O5 refers to tantalum oxide.
The cutoff grade was determined using both rare metals and rare earths as they all contribute to the total
revenue of the Nechalacho deposit. An economic model was created, using metal prices that were updated from those
used in the pre-feasibility study, flotation and hydrometallurgical recoveries, the effects of payable percentages, and
any payable Net Smelter Return (NSR) royalties. The payable percentages of elements (Zr, Nb, Ta) contained within
the Enriched Zirconium Concentrate (“EZC”) were also included. The net revenue generated by this model is termed
the NMR. The mineral resource estimate is based on the minimum NMR value being equal to an operating cost of
US$320/t, a break-even cut-off value.
Resource Database
The database for the November 21, 2012 mineral resource estimate for the Nechalacho deposit contained 490
drill holes totalling 104,918.7 m. The database included 51 historic drill holes amounting to 5,588 m and 439 recent
drill holes with a total length of 99,330.6 m. The estimate was based on 33,236 samples assayed for rare metals, rare
earths, and other elements, from 450 drill holes, 48 historical and 402 recent. Samples from 41 historical drill holes
have incomplete or no REE assays results. Only 21 of the historical drill holes sampled the Basal Zone, as it was not a
target at that time.
The up-dated database and re-estimated resource for the Nechalacho Deposit made by the Company as of May
3,  2013  are  based  upon  detailed  core  logging,  assays  and  geological  interpretation  by  Avalon  geologists  and
independently audited by RPA. The only change from the November 2012 Update is correction of some minor errors in
the database that had no material effect, except to change some numbers in the second decimal place as noted above.
The drill holes and their related assays form the basis for the creation of two domains of REE mineralization: an upper
LREE-enriched domain (Upper Zone) and a lower HREE enriched domain (Basal Zone).
Resource Classification
For all domains, blocks populated using a 240m X 240m X 120m search ellipse and up to 120m away from a
drill hole were classified as inferred.
Within the Upper Zone, blocks populated using a 60m X 60m X 30m search ellipse and a minimum of 2 drill
holes were classified as Indicated. A manually digitized contour was used to reclassify isolated blocks or patches of
Indicated material into the Inferred category. No Upper Zone material was classified as Measured.
Within the Basal Zone, blocks populated using a 60m X 60m X 30m search ellipse and up to 60 m away from a
drill hole were classified as Indicated. A manually digitized contour was used to select and reclassify isolated blocks or
patches of Indicated material to the Inferred category.
In the Basal Zone, two separate areas supported by diamond drilling spaced at 25m were manually digitized to
define the Measured blocks.
The classification details are outlined in the table below.
45
Zone
Basal
 
 
Upper
Classification Distance to Nearest Drill hole
Measured
Indicated
Inferred
Measured
Indicated
Inferred
≤30m (by manually digitized contour)
≤60m
≤120m
N/A
≤60m
≤120m
Minimum Number of Drill holes
1
1
1
N/A
2
1
Mineral Reserve Estimate
The mineral reserve estimate for the Nechalacho Project presented in the feasibility study was estimated from
the block model prepared by Avalon and audited originally by RPA on November 21, 2012 which was updated and re-
estimated  as  of  May  3,  2013.  The  mineral  reserve  estimate  is  derived  from  this  block  model  by  applying  the
appropriate technical and economic parameters to extraction of the REE with proven underground mining methods.
The mineral reserve has been estimated based on conversion of the high grade mineral resources at a cutoff
value greater than US$320/t NMR. Payable elements include the REE, zirconium, niobium and tantalum. No Inferred
mineral resources were converted to mineral reserves. The high grade mineral resources are 34.7% and 14.7% of the
total Measured and Indicated mineral resources, respectively.
The key design criteria set for the Nechalacho mine are:
Initial design based on a 20-year life-of-mine (LOM) of high grade material.
Mechanized cut or drift and fill and long hole mining methods with paste backfill.
Minimum mining thickness of 5 m.
Extraction ratio of 94.2%.
Internal dilution of 8.5%.
External dilution of 5% applied to all stopes.
Estimated total average dilution for the life of mine of approximately 11%.
Production rate of 2,000 t/d ore (730,000 t/y).
Ore bulk density of 2.91 t/m3.
The mineral reserve estimate for the Nechalacho Project shown in the table below has an effective date of May
3, 2013. The figures in the table are rounded to reflect that the numbers are estimates. The conversion of mineral
resources  to  mineral  reserves  includes  technical  information  that  requires  subsequent  calculations  or  estimates  to
derive  sub-totals,  totals  and  weighted  averages.  Such  calculations  or  estimations  inherently  involve  a  degree  of
rounding and consequently introduce a margin of error. Where these occur, Micon International Limited (“Micon”) does
not consider them to be material.
To the best of Micon’s knowledge there are no legal, political, environmental, or other issues which would
materially affect development of the estimated mineral reserve.
46
Mineral Reserve Estimate as at May 3, 2013
Description
Mineral Reserve Category
Proven
Probable
Tonnage (Mt)
TREO (%)
HREO (%)
HREO/TREO
La2O3
Ce2O3
Pr2O3
Nd2O3
Sm2O3
Eu2O3
Gd2O3
Tb2O3
Dy2O3
Ho2O3
Er2O3
3.68
1.7160
0.4681
27.28%
0.256%
0.570%
0.072%
0.284%
0.065%
0.008%
0.062%
0.010%
0.058%
0.011%
0.029%
10.93
1.6923
0.4503
26.61%
0.256%
0.567%
0.071%
0.283%
0.065%
0.008%
0.061%
0.010%
0.056%
0.010%
0.027%
Proven and
Probable
14.61
1.6980
0.4548
26.78%
0.256%
0.568%
0.071%
0.283%
0.065%
0.008%
0.061%
0.010%
0.056%
0.010%
0.028%
Tm2O3
Yb2O3
Lu2O3
Y2O3
ZrO2
Nb2O5
Ta2O5
0.004%
0.023%
0.003%
0.259%
3.440%
0.425%
0.046%
0.004%
0.022%
0.003%
0.249%
3.309%
0.413%
0.045%
0.004%
0.022%
0.003%
0.251%
3.342%
0.416%
0.045%
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
CIM definitions were followed for Mineral Reserves.
Mineral Reserves are based on Mineral Resources published by Avalon in News Release dated November 26th,
2012 and audited by Roscoe Postle Associates Inc., and modified as of May 3, 2013.
Mineral Reserves are estimated using price forecasts for 2016 for rare earth oxides given below.
HREO grade comprises Y2O3, Eu2O3, Gd2O3, Tb2O3, Dy2O3, Ho2O3, Er2O3, Tm2O3, Yb2O3,  and Lu2O3. TREO
grade comprises all HREO and La2O3, Ce2O3, Nd2O3, Pr2O3, and Sm2O3.
Mineral Reserves are estimated using a NMR cash cost cut-off value of US$320/t.
47
Rare earths were valued at an average net price of US$62.91/kg, ZrO2 at US$3.77/kg, Nb2O5 at US$56/kg, and
Ta2O5 at US$256/kg. Average REO price is net of metallurgical recovery and payable assumptions for contained
rare earths, and will vary according to the proportions of individual rare earth elements present. In this case, the
proportions of REO as final products were used to calculate the average price.
Mineral  reserves  calculation  includes  an  average  internal dilution  of  8.5%  and  external  dilution  of  5%  on
secondary stopes.
The  mine  plan  was  developed  by  Avalon  Rare  Metals  Inc. engineers  and  reviewed  by  Micon  International
Limited. The QP for this Mineral Reserve is Barnard Foo., P. Eng., M. Eng., MBA, Senior Mining Engineer, Micon
International Limited.
Micon believes the key assumptions, parameters and methods used to convert mineral resource to mineral
reserve are appropriate. To the best of Micon’s knowledge there are no known mining, metallurgical, infrastructure,
permitting or other relevant factors that may materially affect the mineral reserve estimate.
(ii)        Mining and Processing Operations
Mining
Underground mining of the Measured and Indicated mineral resource of the Basal Zone was investigated for the
FS. The majority of the mineral resource of the Basal Zone contemplated for development lies directly beneath and to
the  north  of  Long  Lake,  approximately  200  m  below  surface.  Thus,  the  deposit  is  to  be  mined  using  underground
mining methods.
The planned mine production rate is 2,000 t/d (730,000 t/y) of ore and the mine life based on that portion of the
Mineral Resources that have been defined in sufficient detail to qualify as Mining Reserves is 20 years.
Geotechnical  information  for  the  mine  design  was  based  on  geotechnical  data  collection  completed  in
conjunction with Avalon’s on-going exploration drill program. The analysis indicated that excavations 15 m wide, 5 m
high and 100 m in length will be stable with the proper installation of ground support and mitigation strategies.
The deposit at the Nechalacho Project is relatively flat lying and will be mined with a combination of longhole
stoping, and cut and fill methods. The mine will be accessed through a mine portal located near the concentrator. The
dimensions of the 1,600 metre main ramp were designed to accommodate the overhead conveyor system and access
for men and equipment.
Sub-zones less than 10 metres thick will be mined by cut or drift and fill methods in a primary and secondary
mining sequence. Sub-zones over 10 metres thick will be mined with longhole stoping. Secondary stopes would be
mined after the adjoining primary stopes have been filled. The mining of the secondary stopes would be the same as
the mining of the primary stope.
Blasted material would be mucked and transported by rubber tired equipment to the crusher station. The
crushed ore would be transported to the surface by conveyor.
Paste backfill will be used to improve the overall mine stability, reduce the surface footprint for the Nechalacho
TMF, and enable the extraction of secondary stopes for increased mining recovery.
Processing – Flotation Concentrator
The grinding circuit was designed to be a conventional rod mill/ball mill operation. The rod mill will be operated
in open circuit, and the ball mill in closed circuit with classifying hydrocyclones. A final grind p80 of 38µm is targeted.
The cyclone overflow was designed to gravitate to two stages of magnetic separation, followed by a desliming
circuit. The magnetics from the magnetic separation circuit and the fines from desliming will be routed to tailings. The
deslimed slurry will feed the flotation circuit.
48
This flotation circuit design comprises three stages of bulk flotation, four stages of cleaner flotation and a single
cleaner scavenger stage. Flotation concentrate would be pumped to a gravity separation circuit for further enrichment
before being thickened and filtered to final product concentrate. The light material (gravity tailings) would be recycled
to the bulk rougher flotation circuit.
Concentrate production will be stored in a covered bulk storage facility and shipped to the hydrometallurgical
processing plant each summer using barges to cross Great Slave Lake at the rate of 145,000 wet tonnes per year
(10% moisture is assumed).
The tailings will be thickened, the overflow from which will be pumped to the process water tank although a
portion will be fed to a water treatment plant to remove impurities. The tailings thickener underflow will be directed to
the  either  the  TMF  or  the  paste  backfill  plant.  The  paste  backfill  plant  has  been  designed  to  produce  1,738  t/d  of
backfill using concentrator tailings.
Processing – Hydrometallurgical Plant
A hydrometallurgical plant was designed to be built at Pine Point to produce mixed rare earth concentrate from
the flotation concentrate at the planned rate of 49,900 tonnes per year (at approximately 16.5% TREO and a secondary
product of EZC at the rate of approximately 103,800 tonnes per year (containing 12.5% Zr).
The hydrometallurgical plant designed for Pine Point comprises the following process sections:
Pre-leach.
Sulphuric acid bake.
Water leach.
Neutralization and impurity removal.
Impurity removal re-dissolution.
Rare earth precipitation.
Waste water treatment.
Tailings neutralization.
The concentrate barged from Nechalacho would be fed to the pre-leach section of the plant where excess
sulphuric acid produced in the water leach section will be used to neutralize the base materials. The product from the
pre-leach circuit would be filtered and the solids fed  to  the  acid  bake  system  while  the  filtrate  would  feed  the  iron
reduction circuit.
The filter cake from the pre-leach circuit would be mixed with concentrated sulphuric acid and fed into the acid
baking rotary kiln where the REE in the concentrate would be converted to sulphates at a temperature of 220oC. The
discharge from the acid bake kiln would be leached in water to recover approximately 80% of the LREEs and 50% of
the HREEs. The solids containing the balance of the REEs, along with most of the zirconium, niobium and tantalum,
would be filtered, washed, neutralized and dried to approximately 8% moisture. This dried product would be packaged
and shipped to customers as EZC.
The rare earth filtrate from the water leach process would be cleaned through several neutralization and
impurity removal steps. The resulting slurry would be filtered and washed and the final rare earth precipitate dried to
approximately 8% moisture.
In order to minimize process water usage in the plant, tailings water would be recycled into the water leach
circuit. Pilot plant results showed no negative changes in REE recoveries with recycled tailings water.
49
The mixed rare earth concentrate is envisioned to be shipped in 35-40 tonne capacity sealed containers and
taken by truck to the rail head at Hay River and then by rail to the REE Separation Plant and Refinery currently being
planned  for  Geismar,  Louisiana.  The  Company  has  been  investigating  the  potential  for  sales  of  EZC  directly  to
customers, primarily in China.
Tailings from the hydrometallurgical process would be stored in a tailings management facility to be constructed
within a historic open pit. Decant water from the tailings management facility will be discharged to an adjacent historic
open pit for natural infiltration into the groundwater aquifer.
Rare Earth Separation Plant and Refinery
In  August  2011,  the  Company  concluded  that  rare  earth  separation  and  refining  should  be  a  part  of  its
development plan and a PFS on the rare earth separation plant and refinery was commissioned and subsequently
completed in March 2012. The FS also included a rare earth separation plant and refinery.
In the FS, the separation plant and refinery is planned to be situated adjacent to an existing industrial facility in
Geismar, Louisiana where Avalon has a purchase option on a suitably-sized property. Electrical power, fresh water,
sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid would be supplied via tie-in to an adjacent third party chemical production
facility  and  rail  spurs  connected  to  the  existing  rail  line  in  the  adjacent  facility  would  accommodate  shipment  of
concentrate feed stock to and shipment of marketable product from the separation plant. The design capacity has been
based on the PFS capacity of 10,000 tonnes per year of TREO although forecast average annual production from the
FS would be approximately 6,800 tonnes of TREO.
The rare earth refinery design consists of two key sections, the leaching plant to remove impurities, and the
separation plant where products are separated and refined to the quality required for the customers.
The leaching plant design comprises a series of processes, including re-dissolution of the mixed rare earth
precipitate, re-precipitation, solvent extraction and selective precipitation. Impurities, principally uranium and thorium,
would be removed in a series of dissolution, selective precipitation, filtration and solvent extraction steps. The main
impurity removal steps include:
Selective re-dissolution with sulphuric acid. The solid residue, which contains most of the calcium, niobium,
tantalum, zirconium and silicon, would be neutralized, filtered and conveyed to the gypsum impoundment area.
Selective precipitation to remove some of the impurities and obtain the pH required for the subsequent SX step.
Once the remaining solution has been filtered and clarified to remove any entrained solids, solvent extraction
would be used to remove impurities comprising mainly zirconium, aluminium, uranium, thorium and iron.
The contaminants contained in the SX strip solution are recovered by selective precipitation. The precipitate
would be filtered and transferred to the gypsum/residue impoundment area.
The rare earths (both LREE and HREE) contained in the SX raffinate stream will be precipitated as carbonates
using sodium carbonate. This precipitate will contain less than 1% impurities.
The remaining light elements (Mg, Ca, K, Na) would remain in solution, and be combined with the SX strip
solution  for  treatment  in  the  waste  water  treatment  plant.  After  filtration,  the  waste  slurry  is  pumped  to  the  waste
gypsum impoundment located adjacent to the separation plant.
50
The precipitated rare earth carbonates will be leached using hydrochloric acid into an aqueous solution suitable
to feed the downstream rare earth separation circuits.
The separation plant design uses solvent extraction circuits based on the common Chinese configuration of
stages and is divided into 16 extraction steps, each with a specific number of stages for loading, extraction, washing
and stripping, and sized according to the feed composition. The design of entire extraction circuits comprises a total of
approximately 1,000 mixer/settlers.
The separation plant design will produce 10 different pure rare earth oxides products in accordance with the
specifications indicated in the following table.
List of Products from the Rare Earth Separation Plant and Refinery
Product
Design Plant 
Production (t/y)
Distribution (%)
Product
La Oxide
Ce Oxide
Pr Oxide
Nd Oxide
Sm Oxide
Eu Oxide
Gd Oxide
Tb Oxide
Dy Oxide
Y Oxide
Lu Oxide
Er/Ho/Tm/Yb 
Carbonate Mix2
Total
1,583
3,572
451
1,783
391
49
371
54
271
1,170
14
292
10,000
16
36
4
18
4
0.5
4
0.5
3
11
0.1
3
100
Feasibility Study
Specification1
3 N
3 N
3 N
3 N
2 N
4 N
3 N
4 N
4 N
5 N
3 N
2 N
Notes: “N” stands for the number of nines purity produced as final product, for example 3 N = 99.9% .
This stream containing four different rare earth carbonates for which there is limited market at the present time
will be stockpiled initially and eventually disposed of if markets are not forthcoming.
A kerosene mixture is used as the extracting agent for most separations. Hydrochloric acid is used as the
stripping  agent.  Deionized  water  is  added  in  the  washing  and  stripping  stages  to  dilute  and  adjust  the  reagent
concentrations.
The purified strip solution from the respective solvent extraction stage would feed the atmospheric precipitation
tanks  where  soda  ash  or  oxalic  acid  is  added  in  order  to  precipitate  the  pure  REE  as  carbonates  or  oxalates,
respectively. The slurry streams containing the precipitates are thickened, filtered, dried and calcined to produce pure
rare earth oxides. The filtrate is then forwarded to the water treatment facility. The mixed holmium, erbium, thulium, and
ytterbium stream will be precipitated as carbonate and, hence, would not be calcined.
The dry rare earth oxide or carbonate products are cooled and then packaged in drums ready for shipment to
customers. The product storage facility would provide two weeks capacity, to interface between plant production and
continuous product dispatch via rail, air or ocean transportation.
51
(iii)      Capital Cost Estimate
A summary of the FS capital cost estimate for the Nechalacho Project is presented in the following table.
Nechalacho Project Capital Cost Summary
Cost Category
NWT1
($ million)
81.58
351.24
150.68
119.27
175.56
36.76
120.91
13.00
Mine development
Main process facilities
Infrastructure
EPCM
Indirect construction costs
Owner's costs
Contingency
Closing costs / bond
Pre-production capital cost 1,049.00
Sustaining capital
Total capital cost
102.72
1,151.72
LA2
($ million)
-
192.51
78.82
38.57
27.25
18.95
44.90
3.16
404.16
19.12
423.28
Total
($ million)
81.58
543.75
229.50
157.84
202.81
55.71
165.81
16.16
1,453.16
121.84
1,575.00
Notes: 
1NWT – Costs applicable to the Nechalacho and Pine Point sites in the Northwest Territories. 
2LA – Costs applicable to Geismar, Louisiana.
The scope of the estimate encompasses the engineering, administration, procurement services, construction,
pre-commissioning  and  commissioning  of  the  Project.  The  estimate  was  completed  to  a  level  consistent  with  an
AACEI (Association of Advanced Cost Engineering International) Class 3 estimate with target accuracy level of ±15%,
based on second quarter 2012 prices, excluding escalation.
The total estimated pre-production capital cost is $1.453 million. The life-of-mine sustaining capital is estimated
at $122 million.
(iv)        Operating Cost Estimate
A summary showing the average annual and life-of-mine unit operating costs by project cost area is presented
below.
Life of Mine Average Operating Costs per Project Cost Area
Project Section
Reagents & Consumables
Fuel & power
Labour
Freight
G&A
Other
Project total
Average Annual
Costs
($ million)
97.2
50.7
36.7
29.4
26.8
23.7
264.5
LOM Average Unit
Costs
($/t milled)
133.20
69.48
50.26
40.31
36.74
32.29
362.28
The FS operating cost estimates have been prepared on an annual basis for the life of the mine. The operating
cost estimate has been prepared with an estimated level of accuracy of ±15% based on the design of the plant and
facilities as described in detail in the FS.
52
(v)        Cash Flow Analysis
An assessment of the project has been prepared on the basis of a discounted cash flow model, from which net
present value (NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), payback and other measures of project viability can be determined.
Assessments  of  NPV  are  generally  accepted  within  the  mining  industry  as  representing  the  economic  value  of  a
project after allowing for the cost of capital invested. A 10% discount rate is commonly used for the base case.
A summary of the Life of Mine cash flows and the cumulative discounted and undiscounted cash flows is
presented below.
The table below shows the results of the economic evaluation of the FS projected cash flows.
Feasibility Study Economic Evaluation
Undiscounted Cash Flow
Net Present Value
 
 
Internal Rate of Return
Discount rate
(%/year)
 
8
10
12
Pre-Tax 
$ million
6,052
1,833
1,351
981
22.5%
After Tax 
$ million
4,381
1,262
900
620
19.6%
Payback 
(years)
4.3
5.5
6.3
7.2
The FS estimates that the Nechalacho Project provides a payback of 4.3 years on the undiscounted cash flow,
or 6.3 years on the cash flow discounted at 10%/year, leaving a considerable reserve “tail”. The cash operating margin
is seen to remain positive over the whole Life of Mine period, and is particularly strong in the first four years of full
production.
In the Nechalacho Project Technical Report, Micon concludes that “the base case cash flow and sensitivity
studies  demonstrate  robust  economics  that  support  the  declaration  of  mineral  reserves  and  warrant  continued
development of the Nechalacho REE Project as described in this study”.
(vi)        Pricing
(a) Rare Earth Elements
53
The market for rare earths and yttrium products is small, and reliable, publicly available pricing information,
forecasts and refining terms are not readily accessible. The pricing methodology for the FS is based on that provided
in the Company’s August, 2011 technical report prepared by RPA in accordance with NI 43-101 with certain prices
updated as described below.
Prices for lanthanum, cerium and samarium were reduced by 50% from the August 2011 forecast since planned
production from Molycorp and Lynas is expected to have a downward influence on pricing for these elements. The
other  LREE,  neodymium  and  praseodymium,  are  used  in  magnet  applications  that  are  expected  to  expand  as  the
availability of these elements increases and, therefore, prices in the August 2011 forecast were retained for the FS,
with the exception of lutetium which is discussed in more detail below. The prices used in the economic analysis for
the FS are shown below.
Avalon Forecast Prices for Rare Earth Oxides
LREE
La2O3
CeO2
Pr6O11
Nd2O3
Sm2O3
HREE
Eu2O3
Gd2O3
Tb4O7
Dy2O3
Ho2O3
Er2O3
Lu2O3
Y2O3
Rare Earth Oxide
Feasibility Study Forecast
2016 Forecast
(US$/kg, FOB China)
8.75
6.23
75.20
76.78
6.75
1,392.57
54.99
1,055.70
688.08
66.35
48.92
1,313.60
67.25
Avalon increased its forecast price for the heavy rare earth, lutetium, compared with the August 2011 projection
since its price movement has been different from that of the other HREEs. Other heavy rare earth prices increased
early in 2011, peaked in mid-2011 and then began to fall immediately thereafter to reach a more stable level in the
latter part of 2012, as illustrated by the trend of europium prices shown below.
54
Price Trend for Europium Oxide
(99% minimum, FOB China, RMB/kg)
Source: Asian Metal™.
Prices for lutetium also peaked in mid-2011 but reached a higher peak in late 2011 and have since levelled-off
in late 2012 and early 2013 to a range that is well above the mid-2011 peak, as shown below. The price trend shown
below is based on domestic prices for lutetium published by Asian Metal™. There is little trade in lutetium outside
China and, in order to derive an estimated FOB price for the purpose of the FS, the 28-month average price for lutetium
in China from November, 2010 to February, 2013 was increased by 25% to account for the export tax and converted to
US dollars at a rate of RMB 6.2339:US$ 1.00. In order to check that the resulting US$1,313.60/kg is conservative,
Avalon compared it with European and Hong Kong trader quotes available as of February, 2013.
55
Price Trend for Lutetium Oxide
(99.9% minimum, FOB China, RMB/kg)
Source: Asian Metal™.
Prices for rare earths beyond 2016 have been held constant at 2016 levels for the purposes of the FS. Demand
is expected to continue to grow steadily and could be significantly higher if one or more of the potentially important
end-use sectors are adopted widely, for example, electric/hybrid electric vehicles and wind turbines. On the supply
side, there is insufficient information to predict accurately when, or if, new non-Chinese producers, other than those
mentioned  above  will  come  on-stream.  Avalon  believes  that  it  is  both  reasonable  and  conservative  to  hold  prices
constant from 2016 onwards. Micon agrees with this approach.
(b) Zirconium
A unique zirconium product will be produced in the hydrometallurgical plant. Referred to as EZC, it is expected
to have the following approximate composition:
ZrO2
Nb2O5
Ta2O5
LREO
HREO
15-19%
1.5-2.0%
0.1-0.2%
1.0-1.25%
0.8-1.25%
At present, it is only in China that zircon is “cracked” to produce intermediate zirconium products, such as
zirconium oxychloride (ZOC) and zirconium basic sulphate (ZBS), which are then upgraded or converted to a range of
zirconium  chemicals  or  to  zirconium  metal.  Zirconia  and  zirconium  chemicals  account  for  just  under  20%  of  total
zirconium  demand.  Zirconium  chemicals  are  used  in  a  wide  variety  of  applications  including  refractories,  ceramic
pigments, advanced ceramics and catalysts, abrasives and electronics.
The feedstock for the zirconium chemicals industry in China is zircon sand imported, principally, from Australia
and South Africa. Given the zirconium chemicals industry in China, Avalon considers that the logical destination for
EZC from the Nechalacho project is China. In January, 2013 the Company announced the signing of a memorandum
of understanding (“MOU”) with an Asian third party (see Avalon press release dated 29 January, 2013).
56
Projected revenue from EZC in the FS is based on the terms of the MOU, net of the freight cost to China.
Given the small number of players in this sector of the zirconium industry, Avalon considers pricing for EZC to be
sensitive and proprietary.
(c) Contracts
Avalon has entered into several MOUs for the sale of its rare earth products. Negotiations to convert these
MOUs  into  binding  agreements  are  ongoing.  Avalon  entered  into  MOUs  for  the  sale  of  EZC  in  January  2013.  In
Avalon’s opinion, these MOUs show that there is significant interest in its EZC product.
Micon concurs that the MOUs in hand for both rare earth products and EZC demonstrate the potential for firm
off-take agreements to be completed.
(vii) Optimization of the Technical Report Results
During the course of executing the FS, Avalon had identified a number of opportunities for project optimization
that  may  improve  project  economics,  reduce  technical  risk,  enhance  metallurgical  recoveries,  improve  operational
efficiencies and to meet environmental requirements. These include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Reviewing the current mine plan and design in particular the crusher location, access ramp and paste backfill
system
Optimization of the crushing and grinding circuit, plant layouts and materials of construction.
Laboratory testwork on the concentrator flowsheet to further improve reagent selection and flotation recoveries.
Improvements to the hydrometallurgical plant processes.
Alternative impurity removal scenarios.
Potential to separate lanthanum and cerium at the hydrometallurgical plant and stockpile for future sales.
Potential to reintroduce cracking of zircon to increase direct production of HREE and separate the by-products
from the EZC.
Potential sales of magnetite by-product from the concentrator.
Potential to defer construction of the refinery and toll process mixed rare earth concentrate through a refinery or
refineries built and operated by others.
Potential to use excess capacity in the refinery to toll process third party production and reduce operating costs.
Updated  environmental  studies,  including  water  treatment testing  to  demonstrate  compliance  with  regulatory
requirements.
These opportunities are under consideration and will continue to be investigated as the Nechalacho Project proceeds.
(IX)       Mineral Resource Update
Subsequent to the Technical Report, an internal resource update was completed and released on August 15,
2013. This update reflects the improved understanding of the geometry of the resource. It incorporates drill results from
the eight-hole winter 2013 drill program and the final 41 holes from the 2012 summer drill program. These holes were
not incorporated into the resource model used in the FS.
The estimated Measured Mineral Resources in the base case now stand at 12.56 million tonnes averaging
1.71%  TREO,  0.38%  HREO  and  22.5%  HREO/TREO.  The  only  change  of  consequence  in  methodology  from  the
November 26, 2012 Resource estimate was that the base case cut-off grade, expressed as Net Metallurgical Return
(“NMR”), increased from US$320 to US$345 per tonne due to minor changes in estimated operating costs, as per the
FS. Work is continuing on optimizing the mine plan to incorporate more of the high grade ore identifiable at higher
NMR cut-offs into the early years of production.
57
The mineral resource estimate was prepared by a senior resource geologist employed by Avalon Rare Metals
Inc., under the supervision of the Company's Vice-President, Exploration, William Mercer, Ph.D., P.Geo. (Ont), P. Geo.
(NWT) who is the qualified person for Avalon for this resource estimate. Dr. Mercer is also providing overall direction
on the project and monitoring of the QA/QC on the laboratory analyses.
Nechalacho Deposit Mineral Resources as at August 15, 2013 above a US$345/tonne NMR Cut-Off
Category
Zone
Tonnes
TREO
HREO
HREO/ 
TREO
ZrO2
Nb2O5
Ta2O5
Measured
Indicated
Basal
Upper
Total Measured
Basal
Upper
Total Indicated
Basal
Upper
Total Measured and
Indicated
Basal
Upper
Total Inferred
Inferred
Measured and
Indicated
(millions)
12.56
Nil
12.56
49.33
47.21
96.54
61.90
47.21
109.11
58.16
102.09
160.25
(%)
1.71
Nil
1.71
1.62
1.52
1.57
1.64
1.52
1.59
1.38
1.38
1.38
(%)
0.38
Nil
0.38
0.35
0.15
0.25
0.35
0.15
0.27
0.26
0.13
0.18
(%)
22.50
Nil
22.50
21.27
10.11
16.00
21.53
10.11
16.81
18.89
9.70
13.07
(%)
3.20
Nil
3.20
3.07
2.12
2.61
3.10
2.12
2.67
2.80
2.38
2.53
(%)
0.405
Nil
0.405
0.405
0.291
0.349
0.405
0.291
0.356
0.380
0.334
0.351
(%)
0.0404
Nil
0.0404
0.0398
0.0195
0.0299
0.0399
0.0195
0.0311
0.0351
0.0204
0.0257
NOTES:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
CIM definitions were followed for Mineral Resources.
The  Qualified  Person  for  this  Mineral  Resource  estimate is  William  Mercer,  PhD,  P.Geo.  (Ontario),  P.  Geo.
(NWT), VP, Exploration, Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
HREO  (Heavy  Rare  Earth  Oxides)  is  the  total  concentration of: Y2O3, Eu2O3,  Gd2O3,  Tb4O7,  Dy2O3,  Ho2O3,
Er2O3, Tm2O3, Yb2O3 and Lu2O3.
TREO (Total Rare Earth Oxides) is HREO plus: La2O3, CeO2, Pr6O11, Nd2O3 and Sm2O3.
Rare earths were valued at an average net price of US$62.91/kg, ZrO2 at US$3.77/kg, Nb2O5 at US$56/kg, and
Ta2O5 at US$256/kg. Average REO price is net of metallurgical recovery and payable assumptions for contained
rare earths, and will vary according to the proportions of individual rare earth elements present. In this case, the
proportions of REO as final products were used to calculate the average price.
The changes in methodology from the November 26, 2012 Resource were the cut-off grade and the interpolation
method. The cut-off grade, expressed as Net Metallurgical Return (“NMR”), increased from US$320 to US$345
per  tonne.  NMR  is  defined  as  "Net  Metal  Return"  or  the  in situ  value  of  all  payable  metals,  net  of  estimated
metallurgical recoveries, and in the case of Nb, Ta and Zr, off-site processing costs. The revised interpolation
method utilized the elevation above the lower contact of the Basal Zone to provide better geologic continuity of
the ore zone. The effect on overall tonnage and grade is not material.
ZrO2 refers to Zirconium Oxide, Nb2O5 refers to Niobium Oxide, Ta2O5 refers to Tantalum Oxide.
See the table below for individual rare earth oxide details.
See the table for Basal Zone tonnes and TREO grades at higher NMR cut-off values.
7)
8)
9)
10) Values for HREO/TREO may differ due to rounding.
58
59
Nechalacho Deposit Measured, Indicated and Inferred Mineral Resources for Basal Zone by NMR Cut-Off
Value as at August 15, 2013 at NMR Cut-off Values over $345/tonne
Zone
NMR Cut-
Tonnes
TREO
HREO
Off
($USD)
(millions)
(%)
(%)
Measured
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
≥345
≥600
≥800
≥1000
12.56
8.28
5.11
2.49
1.71
1.98
2.20
2.49
0.38
0.48
0.58
0.68
HREO/ 
TREO
(%)
22.50
24.29
26.17
27.38
ZrO2
(%)
3.20
3.79
4.23
4.77
Nb2O5
Ta2O5
(%)
(%)
0.405
0.468
0.520
0.586
0.0404
0.0480
0.0544
0.0620
Indicated
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
Basal
≥345
≥600
≥800
≥1000
≥345
≥600
≥800
≥1000
≥345
≥600
≥800
≥1000
49.33
28.66
16.15
6.99
61.90
36.94
21.27
9.48
58.16
22.41
6.68
1.81
0.35
0.45
0.55
0.66
1.62
1.95
2.20
2.52
   Measured and Indicated
1.64
1.96
2.20
2.52
0.35
0.46
0.55
0.66
21.27
23.21
24.87
26.03
21.53
23.46
25.19
26.38
Inferred
0.26
0.37
0.49
0.61
1.38
1.74
2.04
2.42
18.89
21.09
24.26
25.31
3.07
3.68
4.13
4.66
3.10
3.70
4.15
4.69
2.80
3.40
3.84
4.17
0.405
0.472
0.521
0.583
0.405
0.471
0.521
0.584
0.380
0.453
0.502
0.547
0.0398
0.0479
0.0542
0.0614
0.0399
0.0479
0.0543
0.0616
0.0351
0.0431
0.0506
0.0570
The  main  change  in  estimation  method  utilized  in  this  resource  estimate  was  relative  elevation.  This
methodology is one way to adapt the estimation method to the rolling nature of the bottom of the Basal Zone.
(X)        Current Work and Future Plans
Subsequent to the completion of the FS in April 2013, the Company has been investigating optimization
opportunities identified in the FS and conducting testwork/technical studies necessary to confirm potential benefits and
with a view to potentially updating the development model. A number of design optimization activities were initiated
that have focused primarily on improving project economics, improving operation efficiency and reducing project risk.
These include the following:
•
•
•
•
•
Underground mine plan, including mining method, underground equipment and facilities
Nechalacho site and concentrator building layout and design
Hydrometallurgical Plant location
Concentrate handling and shipping
Metallurgical process development
In addition two further drill programs were completed in winter (HQ rig) and summer (PQ rig), 2014. These
programs, totalling 22 holes and 4,908 metres, were mainly for the purpose of collecting further mineralized drill core
for metallurgical purposes. As a result of these programs, an aggregate of approximately eight tonnes of Basal Zone
core is now available for metallurgy. The geological drill database has been updated but no new resource has been
estimated.
60
Underground Mine and Concentrator
An initial study was carried out to determine the most appropriate mining method  to  be  used.  Particular
consideration was given to the mining cost, the undulating floor of the Basal Zone, the changing Basal Zone thickness,
and the need to be able to maintain a relatively constant grade of ore. A hybrid mining method consisting of “drift and
fill” primary stopes, and “up-hole” bulk mining (uppers for the secondary stopes) was selected.
The crushing and milling circuits were also examined. The milling circuit was revised to include a SAG mill
allowing  the  removal  of  secondary  and  tertiary  crushing.  A  further  study  concluded  that  there  were  both  cost  and
operability  advantages  in  moving  the  primary  crusher  from  the  underground  location  previously  considered,  to  an
above ground location near the SAG mill. This change also included replacing the conveyor system with haul trucks to
bring the ore to the surface.
Using all the results of the trade-off studies, the Company is working towards developing a new mine plan to
achieve the highest grade of ore over a 20 year life of mine at a mill throughput of 2,000 tonnes per day.
Nechalacho Site and Concentrator Building
As part of the optimization work, potential modifications are expected to be made to the site layout and the
concentrator  including  revising  the  milling  equipment  and  developing  the  surface  ore  handling/crushing  area,
modifying the equipment layout in the concentrator building and reducing the required size and volume of the building.
Hydrometallurgical Plant Location
Significant modifications will be required for the Hydrometallurgical Plant design to incorporate the potential
process changes being considered from the additional testwork undertaken over the past several months. Considering
the resulting increases in equipment, reagent and energy requirements, additional work is being performed to assess
the benefits of alternative locations for the plant in North America and Canada. While no decision has yet been made,
the  Geismar,  Louisiana  location  identified  for  the  Refinery  appears  to  offer  many  advantages  as  a  location  for  the
Hydrometallurgical Plant. These include lower capital cost for construction, lower energy costs, reagent availability,
rail and road and ocean shipping access. Other potential sites in western Canada with similar advantages are also
being investigated particularly in the region of Saskatchewan. Keeping the project entirely in Canada simplifies the
overall execution of the Project. A western Canadian location offers the added benefit of significantly reduced shipping
costs for the concentrate.
Concentrate Handling and Shipment
The potential for re-locating the Hydrometallurgical Plant outside the Pine Point, NWT area would likely require
the shipment of concentrate by rail from Hay River, NWT. The entire shipping process has been carefully looked at
including the containers required both for barge shipment and rail shipment, the concentrate loading requirements at
Nechalacho, barging across Great Slave Lake, rail car requirements for shipment from Hay River, and a storage/trans-
shipment facility at Hay River. A concept has been developed to include all of the shipping components from container
loading at Nechalacho to railcar loading in Hay River in a single contract, potentially reducing project capital costs and
simplifying the shipping operation.
It is noted that these changes have been presented to the regulators, aboriginal groups and other communities
of interest, and due to the environmental benefits of these changes associated with lower energy use, fewer reagents
and water treatment benefits, are not considered significant and will not impact on the permitting process in the NWT.
61
Metallurgical Process Development
Metallurgical testwork continued after the completion of the FS under the direction of the Company’s Senior
Vice  President,  Metallurgy  and  Interim  COO,  Mr.  David  Marsh.  Recent  work  has  focused  on  various  optimization
opportunities  within  the  FS  base  case  flowsheets  for  the  Concentrator  and  in  particular  for  the  Hydrometallurgical
Plant.
Bench and pilot scale flotation work at SGS Mineral Services (“SGS”) in Lakefield, Ontario investigating reagent
optimization  has  improved  upon  the  advances  reported  last  year  resulting  in  potentially  higher  flotation  recoveries
particularly for the valuable heavy rare earths. The work also led to a much simpler flowsheet with the removal of the
de-sliming and gravity up-grading circuits and “open-circuit” flotation cleaner circuits.
For the Hydrometallurgical Plant, development of a zircon cracking, HRE leaching with hydrochloric acid,
impurity removal and reagent recovery/recycling processes are essentially complete and flowsheets frozen. Plans are
currently  being  made  for  a  potential  final  pilot  plant  campaign  to  confirm  some  engineering  criteria  for  the  reagent
recycling, impurity removal and Ce/La recovery processes.
Efforts to recover the niobium and tantalum from the solid residue after acid leaching have so far proved
unsuccessful and work in this regard has been placed on hold.
This latest work has confirmed that total HREE recoveries of approximately 93% can be achieved in the
hydrometallurgical plant directly from the flotation concentrate.
The final economics for the revised process are still being determined. However, initial estimates of increased
power and reagent consumption associated with the processes and logistical issues have necessitated consideration
of alternative locations for the Hydrometallurgical Plant with better infrastructure and reagent availability.
Refinery
In early 2014 the Company entered into the Solvay Refining Agreement, to have Solvay toll-process the
Company’s rare earth concentrate into separated and purified rare earth oxides for an anticipated period of 10 years
from  the  start  of  deliveries  to  Solvay’s  rare  earth  refining  facility  located  in  La  Rochelle,  France  .  Commencing
December 31, 2014, Solvay will have certain termination rights until project financing is achieved. In addition, Solvay
has begun to provide Avalon with technical support for the further design optimization, engineering and commissioning
of Avalon’s Hydrometallurgical Plant.
Under the terms of the Solvay Refining Agreement, Avalon can ship a concentrate to La Rochelle containing
98.5%  “REO”  and  Solvay  will  return  separated  oxides  of  praseodymium  (Pr),  neodymium  (Nd),  europium  (Eu),
gadolinium (Gd), terbium (Tb), dysprosium (Dy), lutetium (Lu) and yttrium (Y) ranging in purity from 99.5% to 99.99% .
The agreement also provides Solvay with the opportunity to purchase selected REO from Avalon. All refined rare earth
products not purchased by Solvay can be sold by Avalon and delivered directly from the La Rochelle plant.
Avalon is continuing its feasibility study optimization work and it is integrating the Solvay Refining Agreement
into the project development model.
62
Markets Update
(i)          Demand
Total demand for rare earths in 2013 was estimated at 115,000 t TREO by IMCOA. For 2014 the forecast by
IMCOA is 123,500 tonnes.
(ii)         Outlook
By 2020, according to IMCOA, total demand is expected to grow to 190,000 t with supply at 200,000 t Despite
the apparent surplus, the reality is that there will be a surplus for elements such as lanthanum and cerium and a deficit
for elements such as praseodymium, neodymium, europium, terbium, dysprosium and yttrium. The last four elements
(Eu, Tb, Dy and Y) are heavy rare earths and are the truly rare rare earths that are not found in significant concentration
in many deposits except deposits like Avalon’s Nechalacho deposit.
(iii)        Rare Earth Element Pricing
In 2010, China reduced export quotas for rare earths by 70% initiating a period of increasing prices for rare
earths and significant concern in the rest of the world about the dominance of China in this market.
In 2010, global demand for rare earths was 123,000 t according to Dudley Kingsnorth of IMCOA. By 2013
demand had fallen to 115,000 t due to increased substitution, recycling, inventory drawdowns and more efficient use of
rare earths by consumers.
Prices for rare earths increased dramatically in 2010 and 2011. Today, prices are well above the pre-2010
levels but significantly below the 2011 peak as can be seen in the table below for selected light rare earth (neodymium
oxide) and heavy rare earth (dysprosium oxide)
Nd2O3
Dy4O7
Price in 2009 (US$/kg)
Price in 2011 (US$/kg)
Price Q2 2014 (US$/kg)
15
100
230
1,450
65
425
Source: IMCOA September 2014
(iv)         Contracts
Avalon entered into the Solvay Refining Agreement in March 2014 with Solvay, a Belgian based chemical
company with annual sales over $16 billion, who purchased Rhodia in 2011. Rhodia was the largest seller of rare
earths in the world (over 25% market share) with processing facilities in both China and France at La Rochelle.
The Solvay Refining Agreement includes a technical partnership, whereby Solvay is assisting Avalon with the
optimization of its flow sheet, and a 10 year toll refining agreement whereby Solvay will convert Avalon’s chemical
concentrate  at  La  Rochelle  into  individually  separated  rare  earth  oxides  of  chemical  purity  meeting  the  market
requirements.  Avalon  will  retain  the  ownership  of  the  separated  and  refined  rare  earth  products.  This  agreement
eliminates the need, and capital cost, of Avalon building its own separation plant and refinery and provides potential
customers with confidence that Avalon can provide quality products to the market.
Avalon continues discussions with potential off-take partners or investors with whom it has signed a MOU and/
or a Non-Disclosure Agreement and therefore can’t name them. Avalon believes that companies in Europe, Asia and
North American are concerned about the monopolistic nature of China’s control over the rare earth supply chain and
are seeking ways to secure rare earths (especially heavy rare earths) though a non-Chinese supply chain.
63
(XI)         Risks and Mitigations
The  Nechalacho  Project  development  model  as  contemplated  in  the  FS  consists  of  a  mine  and  three
processing plants located at the Nechalacho, Pine Point and Geismar sites. The Nechalacho site is considered to be
the most critical of the three sites from a schedule perspective, due primarily to limited seasonal access. A detailed
critical path schedule has been developed for each of the project sites.
Avalon will engage EPCM contractors at each site. These will have responsibility for design, procurement,
contracting, and project and construction management of the plants and infrastructure facilities. Site specific project
management will be the responsibility of each of the EPCM contractors, with overview by the Avalon Owner’s team.
Avalon has established a recruitment schedule and is working with project management companies to provide critical
personnel and project support to supplement as required.
The EPCM contractors will be responsible for all the EPCM work in order to complete the project up to
mechanical completion and hand-over to Avalon for commissioning. A management team from Avalon will facilitate
the  flow  of  information  and  approvals  as  the  work  progresses.  During  construction,  temporary  offices  and  support
facilities will be established at each of the three project sites.
The Nechalacho Project has been developed based on the following requirements:
•
•
•
•
Safety and protection of the environment cannot be compromised.
The project must be delivered in accordance with the schedule, budget and quality requirements established for
the site.
Completion of the project in a timely manner is considered critical to meet market requirements.
Training, hiring and purchasing from Northern and Aboriginal partners will be given priority.
Successful implementation of Avalon’s human resources policies and procedures will enable Avalon to achieve
its goals and objectives for its employees and contractors. Avalon’s goal of increasing local participation rates will be
facilitated through its training and development initiatives. Avalon is committed to worker training throughout the life of
the project.
Avalon’s program will initially be designed to fill apprenticeship and technological occupations. In addition, all
project  contractors  and  sub-contractors  will  be  required  to  adhere  to  Avalon’s  goal  of  maximizing  Northern  and
Aboriginal employment.
During preparation of the FS, two joint Owner and Contractor risk identification workshops were conducted to
systematically explore all critical processes and project areas in identifying potential risks and establishing the initial
risk  register.  The  areas  of  project  management,  project  controls,  procurement,  engineering,  construction,  mining,
geotechnical, environmental, and health and safety were represented. Following the workshops, mitigation plans and
actions were developed and carried out to the extent possible during the FS phase.
In addition, two risk reviews were conducted to update the status and reassess the risks identified in the earlier
workshops and analyze any newly identified risks, including a site specific review of the Geismar site which had not
been identified in earlier workshops. Going forward, a plan will be developed for the EPCM and execution phases of
the project that would start with the risk register developed in the FS and build on the basic process described below
and followed throughout the FS and into operations.
The key risks identified for construction, and for which mitigations have been developed, include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Safety and health, mitigated by comprehensive health and safety (HS) plan
Project delay due to permitting mitigated by existing permits, robust project and well-resourced permitting group.
64
Adequate work force mitigated by training and HR management plan.
Logistics  and  procurements,  particularly  for  the Nechalacho mine/concentrator sites mitigated by experienced
personnel and detailed planning.
Project delay due to Aboriginal negotiations mitigated by existing agreement and ongoing negotiations.
Hurricane risk in Louisiana mitigated by site selection and design.
Cold weather risk in the NWT mitigated by experience personnel and management plans.
Tailing dam failure mitigated by robust design, small structures and management plans at Nechalacho, and no
dams being required at Pine Point.
Project  delay  associated  with  the  perceived  risk associated  with  uranium  and  thorium  mitigated  by  low
concentrations, good science and open and transparent consultation.
For operations, some of the above will continue, with additional risks associated with:
•
•
•
•
•
Environmental  risks  causing  cost  or  production  delay mitigated  by  robust  design  and  management  and
monitoring plans.
Community  risks  causing  cost  or  production  delay mitigated  by  community  consultation,  well  managed
Aboriginal agreements and agreements with the NWT government.
Risk  of  cost  escalation/inflation  mitigated  by  long  term contracts,  contingency  and  potential  capital  cost
reductions.
Foreign  currency  risk  mitigated  by  investigation  and implementation  of  a  currency  hedging  strategy,  if
appropriate.
REE  price  fluctuations  mitigated  by  reliable  supply  and long  term  contracts  with  strategic  partners  and
customers. There will be a long term agreement in place for EZC.
Hazard analysis (HAZAN) was also performed as part of work in the FS phase and identified mitigations have
been incorporated into the FS design.
During detailed engineering, additional design reviews will be performed such as, but not necessarily limited to,
hazard  and  operability  (HAZOP)  studies,  and  constructability  reviews  that  will  contribute  to  risk  reductions  during
construction and operation phases.
Finally, timely availability of project financing is probably the most significant risk factor, given the current global
economic environment. The Company is working to mitigate this risk by seeking to arrange off-take agreements and to
attract investment from prospective consumers of rare earth elements and minerals, or other strategic partners.
To help manage technical risk the Company maintains a Technical Advisory Committee (“TAC”) to periodically
review  progress  on  technical  work  related  to  Nechalacho  Project  and  provide  advice  to  the  Company’s  senior
management.
Other Properties and Assets
In addition to the Nechalacho Project, the Company owns five other rare metals and minerals projects, two of
which are active. The Company’s two other active projects are the Separation Rapids Petalite Project and the East
Kemptville Tin Project. The Company’s other assets which are currently inactive are the Warren Township Calcium
Feldspar Project, the Miramichi Tin Project and the Lilypad Lakes Tantalum-Cesium Project. The Company also owns
royalty interests in two development projects which are not in production.
Unless otherwise stated, the technical information contained in this section of the Annual Report in respect of
other properties and assets of the Company has been reviewed and approved by Dr. William Mercer, P.Geo., Vice
President, Exploration who is a qualified person for the purposes of NI 43-101.
65
Separation Rapids Petalite Project
The Separation Rapids property consists of five mineral claims and one mining lease covering a combined area
of approximately 1,455 hectares (3,600 acres) in the Paterson Lake Area, Kenora Mining Division, Ontario, all of which
are owned 100% by Avalon. The lease covers an area of 421.44 hectares over the area of the Big Whopper deposit
and adjacent lands that may be used for mine development infrastructure. The original vendors retained a 2.0% “NSR”
interest in the property, which was acquired in 2012 by a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company for $220,000. The
deposit is a potential source of lithium minerals for use in the glass and ceramics industry and specialty composite
materials. There is also potential for production of tantalum and rubidium minerals and a pure form of sodium feldspar.
Since acquiring the property in October 1996, Avalon has expended approximately $5.0 million on exploration
and  development  work  primarily  focused  on  the  lithium  minerals  potential.  This  involved  geological  mapping,
trenching, ground magnetic surveys, mineralogical studies and diamond drilling totalling 10,152 metres in 69 holes.
This work culminated in 1999 with the completion of a pre-feasibility study on the viability of producing petalite with by-
product  feldspars,  prepared  in  accordance  with  NI  43-101  by  independent  consultant  Micon.  The  business  model
involved production of high purity concentrates of petalite for sale to glass-ceramics manufacturers. The Company was
unsuccessful in advancing the project on this basis following the cessation of the demand for the product in the U.S.A.
With increasing energy prices and concerns about climate change related to greenhouse gas emissions,
interest  in  lithium  additions  to  glass  formulations  is  increasing,  creating  new  opportunities  for  lithium  minerals
producers.
In 2013, the Company received expressions of interest from four international glass producers on the availability
of  petalite  concentrate  from  the  Separation  Rapids  property.  After  preliminary  discussions  with  each  of  these
prospective  customers,  Avalon  commenced  a  bench-scale  program  of  metallurgical  work  with  a  view  to  producing
petalite concentrate for delivery to the prospective customers for testing in the customers’ glass-ceramic manufacturing
processes.  The  current  testwork  program,  being  undertaken  at  a  commercial  laboratory  in  Europe,  is  nearing
completion with work focused on improving initial petalite recoveries from the fine grained ore. It has also successfully
produced a marketable feldspar product from the petalite tailings. A further work program targeting the production of
petalite concentrate samples was completed and sub-samples sent to a number of potential customers interested in
the  petalite  product.  Subsequent  to  Fiscal  2014,  all  these  customers  have  conducted  their  own  analyses  on  the
material and confirmed that it meets their requirements.
Several potential customers from the US, Europe and China have shown interest in the Separation Rapids
petalite  product.  Avalon  is  keeping  each  of  these  interested  potential  customers  up  to  date  on  process  test  work
results.
In anticipation of the resumption of operations at the site, the Company has re-started work on the permitting
process under the Mining Act (Ontario); including a Species at Risk Act (Canada) field survey. The Company has also
renewed its memorandum of understanding with the Wabaseemoong Independent Nations with a view towards the co-
operative development of the Separation Rapids Petalite Project.
East Kemptville Tin Project
The 100% owned East Kemptville Tin Project is located approximately 45 kilometres northeast of Yarmouth, in
Yarmouth County, southwestern Nova Scotia in the vicinity of the former East Kemptville Tin Mine. Highway #203,
which  connects  the  Town  of  Yarmouth  to  the  southwest  with  the  Town  of  Shelburne  to  the  east,  passes  a  short
distance to the northwest of the exploration licences.
66
During its six years of operations from 1985-1992, East Kemptville was North America’s only primary tin
producer. It was closed due to a sudden collapse in tin prices after the international cartel, that controlled the global tin
market up to that time, was disbanded. However, the tin market has been much stronger over the past 4 years, creating
an incentive to evaluate the potential for renewed tin mining at the site. The recent price strength reflects growing
global tin demand due to its increased application in electronics, where it is used in solders as a non-toxic alternative
to lead. China, Indonesia and Peru, the world’s largest producers of tin, have reduced production of tin concentrates in
recent years, increasing the demand for new primary supply sources such as East Kemptville.
Avalon holds mineral tenure for the East Kemptville resource under a Special Licence first granted to the
Company in 2005. This licence is currently in process with the Government of Nova Scotia to be replaced by a licence
covering a larger area encompassing all the known mineralization at East Kemptville. A recently completed drilling
program  was  carried  out  under  an  access  agreement  entered  into  with  surface  rights  holders  earlier  this  year.
Discussions  toward  obtaining  full  title  to  the  lands  that  would  ultimately  be  required  for  site  re-development  are  in
progress.
Avalon completed a resource estimate on this project in October, 2014 which it plans on using to complete a
Preliminary  Economic  Assessment  to  confirm  the  business  case  for  proceeding  with  a  comprehensive  Feasibility
Study to evaluate the potential for restarting tin-zinc-copper and potentially producing indium at East Kemptville.
Warren Township Calcium Feldspar Project
The Warren Township Calcium Feldspar Project is a mineral development opportunity located near the Village
of Foleyet, 100 kilometres west of Timmins, Ontario. The project consists of a mining lease totalling 687.736 hectares
which is 100% owned by the Company. The lease covers a portion of the Shawmere Anorthosite Complex hosting a
large historic resource (not prepared in accordance with NI 43-101) of a high purity anorthosite.
Anorthosite is an unusual mafic igneous intrusive rock consisting of greater than 90% plagioclase feldspar.
Previous work has demonstrated that this material can be processed to produce a high quality calcium feldspar raw
material for the manufacture of reinforcing glass fibre and other industrial products such as mineral fillers. The location
of the property near both road and rail transportation infrastructure and its proximity to markets in southern Ontario and
the northeastern United States offers the potential for development of a low-cost, highly profitable industrial minerals
operation.
In June 2012, Avalon received a permit under the Aggregate Resources Act (Ontario) to operate a quarry at
Warren Township on 240 hectares of land.
The Company does not plan any further work on the project until it identifies renewed market interest in the
calcium feldspar product.
Miramichi Tin Project
The Miramichi Tin Project consists of 196 claims in three groups all located in the Northwest Miramichi River
area, York County in central New Brunswick, Canada. The nearest major population centre is the city of Fredericton
located 80 km to the south. The topography is gently rolling and the area has been extensively logged in the past,
providing good access by a network of old logging haulage roads. The area is also extensively glacial drift-covered
and traversed by a number of small streams draining northeasterly toward the Northwest Miramichi River.
A total of 34 drill holes are known to have been drilled in the area. There has been very limited exploration
interest in the area since 1990.
An  airborne  geophysics  survey  was  completed  in  2012  including  magnetics  and  electro-magnetics.  An
exploration program consisting of mapping, sampling and geophysical surveys was proposed for 2013 to follow up on
this  airborne  survey  and  historic  work.  A  brief  field  program  of  prospecting  and  geochemistry  was  completed  in
summer of 2013 with the results filed with the Government of New Brunswick for assessment work purposes.
67
The Company does not plan any further work on the project for the foreseeable future.
Lilypad Lakes Tantalum-Cesium Project
The Lilypad Lakes project consists of 14 claims, totalling 3,107.99 hectares, covering a field of tantalum and
cesium mineralized pegmatites, and located 150 kilometres northeast of Pickle Lake, Ontario. The claims were staked
by the Company between January 1999 and October 2000 and are 100% owned by the Company with no underlying
royalties.
The project has been inactive since 2001 awaiting a recovery in tantalum prices or new demand for cesium
minerals  before  considering  further  expenditures.  The  Company  has  no  plans  for  the  work  on  the  project  for  the
foreseeable future.
Wolf Mountain Platinum-Palladium Property Royalty
The Wolf Mountain platinum-palladium project is located approximately 90 kilometres northeast of Thunder
Bay, Ontario. In November 2003, Avalon sold its 40% working interest in the project to its joint venture partners for
$20,000 and a 0.4% NSR interest in the two properties. The joint venture can purchase this NSR interest from the
Company at any time for $1,000,000. In August, 2014, Avalon purchased an additional 2% NSR, which was held by
the original vendor of the property, for $15,000, of which up to 1.0% can be purchased by the joint venture partners for
$1,000,000.
East Cedartree Gold Property Royalty
The Company holds a 2% NSR interest in five claims, which it retained after selling these claims to a third party,
comprising part of the East Cedartree gold property located 70 kilometres southeast of Kenora, Ontario. The title holder
to the claims can re-purchase a 1% NSR from the Company at any time for $1,000,000.
Item 4A. Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
Item 5. Operating and Financial Review and Prospects
(i)          Critical Accounting Policies
Some of our critical accounting policies are as follows. See Note 3 to the August 31, 2014 consolidated
financial statements for a detailed description of our accounting policies.
Exploration and evaluation assets
The  Company  is  in  the  exploration  and  development  stage  with  respect  to  its  mineral  properties.  The
exploration  and  evaluation  assets  on  the  Company’s  consolidated  statement  of  financial  position  relate  to  mineral
rights acquired and exploration and evaluation expenditures incurred in respect to resource projects that are in the
exploration and evaluation stage.
Exploration and evaluation expenditures include costs which are directly attributable to acquisition, surveying,
geological,  geochemical,  geophysical,  exploratory  drilling,  land  maintenance,  sampling,  and  assessing  technical
feasibility and commercial viability. These expenditures are capitalized until the technical feasibility and commercial
viability of extracting the mineral resource of a project are demonstrable. During the exploration period, exploration and
evaluation assets are not amortized.
68
Exploration and evaluation assets are allocated to cash generating units (“CGUs”) for the purpose of assessing
such assets for impairment and each project is identified as a separate CGU. A project is tested for impairment when
facts and circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of that project may exceed its recoverable amount, and the
recoverable amount of the project is estimated. If the recoverable amount of the project is estimated to be less than its
carrying  amount,  the  carrying  amount  of  the  project  is  reduced  to  its  recoverable  amount.  An  impairment  loss  is
recognized immediately in the consolidated statement of comprehensive loss.
Once  the  technical  feasibility  and  commercial  viability  of  extracting  a  mineral  resource  of  a  project  are
demonstrable, the relevant exploration and evaluation asset is assessed for impairment, and any impairment loss is
recognized, prior to the balance being reclassified as a development asset in property, plant and equipment.
The determination of the demonstration of technical feasibility and commercial viability is subject to a significant
degree of judgment and assessment of all relevant factors. In general, technical feasibility may be demonstrable once
a  positive  feasibility  study  is  completed.  When  determining  the  commercial  viability  of  a  project,  in  addition  to  the
receipt  of  a  feasibility  study,  the  Company  also  considers  factors  such  as  the  availability  of  project  financing,  the
existence of markets and/or long term contracts for the product, and the ability to obtain the relevant operating permits.
All subsequent expenditures to ready the property for production are capitalized within development assets,
other than those costs related to the construction of property, plant and equipment.
Once  production  has  commenced,  all  costs  included  in  development  assets  are  reclassified  to  mining
properties.
Exploration and evaluation expenditures incurred prior to the Company obtaining mineral rights related to the
property being explored are recorded as expense in the period in which they are incurred.
Impairment of Non-Financial Assets
At the end of each reporting period, the Company reviews the carrying amounts of its non-financial assets with
finite lives at the CGU level to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment
loss. If any such indication exists, the recoverable amount of the relevant CGU is estimated in order to determine the
extent of the impairment loss, if any. A CGU is the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash inflows that
are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets. The Company’s CGUs are typically
its significant individual exploration and evaluation assets, development projects or mines. In certain circumstances,
when the recoverable amount of an individual asset can be determined, impairment assessment is performed at the
individual asset level. Where a reasonable and consistent basis of allocation can be identified, corporate assets are
also  allocated  to  individual  CGUs,  or  otherwise  they  are  allocated  to  the  smallest  group  of  CGUs  for  which  a
reasonable and consistent allocation basis can be identified.
The recoverable amount of an asset is the higher of fair value less costs of disposal and value in use. In
assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pre-tax discount
rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the
estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
If the recoverable amount of an asset (or CGU) is estimated to be less than its carrying amount, the carrying
amount of the asset (or CGU) is reduced to its recoverable amount. An impairment loss is recognized immediately in
profit or loss.
69
At the end of each reporting period, the Company assesses whether there is any indication that an impairment
loss recognized in prior periods may no longer exist or have decreased. If such an indication exists, the estimated
recoverable amount of the asset (or CGU) is revised and the carrying amount of the asset (or CGU) is increased to the
revised  estimate  of  its  recoverable  amount,  to  the  extent  that  the  increased  carrying  amount  does  not  exceed  the
carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognized for the asset (or CGU) in
prior years. A reversal of an impairment loss is recognized immediately in profit or loss.
Site Closure and Reclamation Provision
The Company’s mining exploration activities are subject to various governmental laws and regulations relating
to  the  protection  of  the  environment.  These  environmental  regulations  are  continually  changing  and  are  generally
becoming more restrictive. The Company has made, and intends to make in the future, expenditures to comply with
such  laws  and  regulations  or  constructive  obligations.  Provision  for  site  closure  costs  is  recorded  at  the  time  an
environmental disturbance occurs, and is measured at the Company’s best estimate of the expected value of future
cash flows required to reclaim the disturbance upon site closure, discounted to their net present value. The net present
value is determined using a pre-tax discount rate that is specific to the liability. The estimated net present value is re-
measured  at  the  end  of  each  reporting  period,  or  when  changes  in  circumstances  occur  and/or  new  material
information becomes available. Increases or decreases to the provision arise due to changes in legal, constructive or
regulatory requirements, the extent of environmental remediation required and cost estimates. The net present value of
the estimated costs of these changes is recorded in the period in which the change is identified and quantifiable.
Upon initial recognition of site closure provision, there is a corresponding increase to the carrying amounts of
related assets and the cost is amortized as an expense on a unit-of-production basis over the life of the related assets.
The value of the provision is progressively increased over the life of the operation as the effect of discounting unwinds,
such increase is recognized as interest expense.
Critical accounting judgements and estimation uncertainties
The  preparation  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  IFRS  requires  that  the  Company’s
management make critical judgments, estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported
in the consolidated financial statements and related notes to the consolidated financial statements. Actual results may
differ  from  those  estimates.  Estimates  and  assumptions  are  reviewed  on  an  on-going  basis  based  on  historical
experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant under the circumstances. Revisions to estimates are
accounted for prospectively.
The Company has identified the following significant areas where critical accounting judgments, estimates and
assumptions  are  made  and  where  actual  results  may  differ  from  these  estimates  under  different  assumptions  and
conditions and may materially affect financial results or the financial position reported in future periods.
Further details of the nature of these assumptions and conditions may be found in the relevant notes to the
consolidated financial statements.
(ii)         Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty
Information about assumptions and estimation uncertainties that have a significant risk of resulting in material
adjustment are included in the following notes:
Recoverability of Exploration and Evaluation Assets, Development Assets and Property, Plant and Equipment
The Company assesses all exploration and evaluation assets, development assets and PPE at each reporting
date  to  determine  whether  any  indication  of  impairment  exists.  Where  an  indicator  of  impairment  exists,  a  formal
estimate of the recoverable amount is made, which is the higher of the fair value less costs of disposal and value in
use. These assessments require the use of estimates and assumptions such as long term commodity prices, discount
rates, foreign exchange rates, future capital requirements, exploration potential and operating performance.
70
Determination of Reserve and Resource Estimates
Mineral reserves and resources are estimates of the amount of ore that can be economically and legally
extracted  from  the  Company’s  exploration  and  development  properties.  The  estimation  of  recoverable  reserves  is
based  upon  factors  such  as  estimates  of  commodity  prices,  production  costs,  production  techniques,  future  capital
requirements and foreign exchange rates, along with geological assumptions and judgments made in estimating the
size  and  grade  of  the  ore  body.  Changes  in  the  reserve  or  resource  estimates  may  impact  the  carrying  value  of
exploration and evaluation assets, development assets, PPE, site closure and reclamation provision and amortization
expense.
Fair Value of Share Based Payments and Warrants
The Company follows IFRS 2, Share-based Payment, in determining the fair value of share based payments.
The calculated amount is not based on historical cost, but is derived based on subjective assumptions input into a
pricing model. The model requires that management make forecasts as to future events, including estimates of: the
average future hold period of issued stock options and compensation warrants before exercise, expiry or cancellation;
future volatility of the Company’s share price in the expected hold period; dividend yield; and the appropriate risk-free
rate of interest. The resulting value calculated is not necessarily the value that the holder of the option or warrant could
receive in an arm’s length transaction, given that there is no market for the options or compensation warrants and they
are not transferable. Similar calculations are made in estimating the fair value of the warrant component of an equity
unit.  The  assumptions  used  in  these  calculations  are  inherently  uncertain.  Changes  in  these  assumptions  could
materially affect the fair value estimates.
Site Closure and Reclamation Provision
The Company’s accounting policy for the recognition of a site closure and reclamation obligation requires
significant  estimates  and  assumptions  such  as:  requirements  of  the  relevant  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  the
magnitude  of  possible  disturbance  and  the  timing  thereof,  extent  and  costs  of  required  closure  and  rehabilitation
activity,  and  discount  rate.  These  uncertainties  may  result  in  future  actual  expenditures  differing  from  the  amounts
currently provided.
Site closure and reclamation provision recognized is periodically reviewed and updated based on the facts and
circumstances  available  at  the  time.  Changes  to  the  estimated  future  costs  are  recognized  in  the  Statement  of
Financial Position by adjusting both the site closure and reclamation asset and provision.
Property, Plant and Equipment - Estimated Useful Lives
Management estimates the useful lives of PPE based on the period during which the assets are expected to be
available for use. The amounts and timing of recorded expenses for depreciation of PPE for any period are affected by
these estimated useful lives. The estimates are reviewed at least annually and are updated if expectations change as
a result of physical wear and tear, technical or commercial obsolescence and legal or other limits to use. It is possible
that changes in these factors may cause significant changes in the estimated useful lives of the Company’s PPE in the
future.
(iii)        Critical Judgments
Information about critical judgments in applying accounting policies that have most significant effect on the
consolidated financial statements are as follows:
71
Capitalization of Exploration and Evaluation Costs
Exploration and evaluation costs incurred during the year are recorded at cost. Capitalized costs include costs
directly  attributable  to  exploration  and  evaluation  activities,  including  salaries  and  benefits  of  employees  who  are
directly engaged in the exploration and evaluation activities. Administrative and other overhead costs are expensed.
Management  has  determined  that  exploration  and  evaluation  costs  incurred  during  the  year  have  future  economic
benefits and are economically recoverable. In making this judgment, management has assessed various sources of
information  including  but  not  limited  to  the  geologic  and  metallurgic  information,  history  of  conversion  of  mineral
deposits  to  proven  and  probable  mineral  reserves,  scoping  and  feasibility  studies,  proximity  of  operating  facilities,
operating management expertise and existing permits.
A. Operating Results
The following discussion is intended to supplement the audited consolidated financial statements of the
Company  for  the  years  ended  August  31,  2014,  2013  and  2012,  and  the  related  notes  thereto,  which  have  been
prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the
audited  consolidated  financial  statements  contained  in  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  20-F.  This  contains  forward-
looking statements that are subject to risk factors set out under the heading “Item 3. Key Information – D. Risk Factors”.
See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Year ended August 31, 2014 compared with the year ended August 31, 2013
Revenue
Interest income
 
Expenses
Corporate and administrative expenses
Impairment loss on exploration and evaluation assets
Write-off of land acquisition option payments
General exploration
Depreciation
Share based compensation
Foreign exchange loss (gain)
Financing transaction costs
Decrease in fair value of warrants denominated in foreign currency
 
 
 
Net Loss before Income Taxes
Deferred Income Tax Recoveries
 
Net Loss and Total Comprehensive Loss for the year
$
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
$
2014
88,075  $
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 (5,730,581) $
5,211,051 
182,409 
175,104 
7,452 
167,680 
347,096 
20,097 
303,862 
(480,324)
 
5,934,427 
 
(5,846,352)
115,771
2013
374,281 
 
 
6,366,338 
2,897,867 
- 
53,119 
211,085 
2,063,145 
(18,109)
- 
- 
 
11,573,445 
 
(11,199,164)
- 
 
 (11,199,164)
During the year ended August 31, 2014 (“Fiscal 2014”), the Company’s net loss decreased by $5,468,583 from
a net loss of $11,199,164 for the year ended August 31, 2013 (“Fiscal 2013”) to a net loss of $5,730,581 for the Fiscal
2014. The overall decrease in the net loss as compared to the prior year was due to the factors discussed below:
Interest income
Lower cash balances resulted in interest income decreasing to $88,075 for Fiscal 2014 compared to $374,281
for Fiscal 2013.
72
Corporate and administrative expenses
Corporate and Administrative totalled $5,211,051 during Fiscal 2014, an 18% decrease over the amount
incurred in Fiscal 2013 ($6,366,338). This decrease reflects the Company’s continuing effort to reduce its overhead
costs. The main areas of decreased operating expenses for Fiscal 2014 were salaries and benefits, financial advisory
fees and expenses, sales and marketing expenses and legal fees. The decreases in these areas were partly offset by
the increase in transfer and filing fees.
Salaries and benefits for Fiscal 2014 decreased by approximately 18% to $2,349,904 compared to $2,865,972
in Fiscal 2013. The decrease in salary and benefits was primarily related to the reduced number of management team
members on payroll and the decrease in the provision in accrued vacation pay.
Financial advisory fees and expenses totalled $183,031 for Fiscal 2014 compared to $500,097 in Fiscal 2013.
This  decrease  related  to  a  decreased  amount  of  work  with  respect  to  financing  initiatives  related  to  the  Project
provided by third party consultants.
Marketing  and  sales  related  expenses  decreased  by  approximately  $215,000  (41%)  during  Fiscal  2014
compared to Fiscal 2013, which primarily related to decrease in fees paid to consultants in assisting the Company in
sales and market development and government relations resulting from a higher portion of the work being done in-
house.
Legal fees decreased by approximately $111,000 (45%) during Fiscal 2014 compared to Fiscal 2013. Higher
legal fees were incurred in Fiscal 2013 relating the preparation and due diligence work on the base shelf prospectus
which was filed on September 12, 2013 (the “Shelf Prospectus”), and the exploratory work on the potential enterprise
legal structure for the Project.
Filing and transfer fees increased by 118% to $382,292 during Fiscal 2014 compared to Fiscal 2013. This
increase was primarily related to costs incurred for the Shelf Prospectus.
Impairment loss on exploration and evaluation assets
In Fiscal 2013, after careful review of the drilling results from the 2012 drilling program and geological data
gathered from the 2013 field work program, the Company reduced the number of claims of its Spor Mountain Rare
Metals  Project  significantly  and  recognized  an  impairment  loss  of  $1,494,508  for  this  project.  The  Company  also
recognized  an  impairment  loss  of  $1,403,359  in  Fiscal  2013  on  its  Warren  Township  Anothosite  Project  as  no
substantial work had been carried out on the Warren Township project during the last four years and no work was
planned  or  budgeted  for  Fiscal  2014.  In  addition,  no  new  potential  customer  had  been  identified  for  the  project’s
calcium feldspar product.
During the Fiscal 2014, two properties, Spor Mountain and Apex were abandoned and impairment losses
related to the expenditures incurred during Fiscal 2014 on Warren Township ($6,802), Spor Mountain ($19,246) as
well as the expenditures incurred to-date of $156,361 on Apex have been recognized.
Share based Compensation
Share based compensation decreased to $347,096 from $2,063,145 during Fiscal 2014 compared to Fiscal
2013. This decrease is primarily related to the decrease in the estimated average fair values of the options and the
total number of options earned during Fiscal 2014 compared to Fiscal 2013.
73
Write-off of land acquisition option payments
The Company’s initial purchase option on a land parcel in Geismar, Louisiana expired on December 1, 2013,
and accordingly, the option payments made totaling $175,104 for the initial purchase option were written off during
Fiscal 2014. The Company has entered into a new purchase option with a different property owner on a different land
parcel in Geismar, Louisiana during Fiscal 2014. This new option will expire on December 14, 2014.
Decrease in fair value of warrants denominated in foreign currency and financing transaction costs
During Fiscal 2014, the Company completed the US$ Unit Offering as disclosed in Note 8 of the consolidated
financial statements and issued 9,237,875 Units of the Company at a price of $0.469 (US$0.433) per Unit pursuant to
the  security  purchase  agreement  for  gross  proceeds  of  $4,331,200  (US$4,000,000).  Each  Unit  is  comprised  of  a
common share and 0.70 of an US$ Warrant. Each whole warrant is exercisable into a common share of the Company
at an exercise price of US$0.56 per share commencing on December 13, 2014 until June 13, 2021, and is subject to
certain anti-dilution provisions, which may reduce the exercise price, with a limit of US$0.5095.
The fair value of the warrant component was estimated at US$0.220 and this amount was allocated to the
warrant  component  of  the  Unit,  with  the  residual  balance  of  US$0.213  being  allocated  to  the  common  share
component  of  the  Unit.  In  accordance  with  IAS  32  Financial  Instruments:  Presentation  and  IAS  39  Financial
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement, the fair value of the warrant component of the Unit totaling $2,200,746
has been classified and recorded as a financial liability. On August 31, 2014, the total fair value of these warrants has
been re-measured at $1,720,622 using the Black-Scholes pricing model and the resulting change in value of $480,324
has  been  recorded  as  decrease  in  fair  value  of  warrants  denominated  in  foreign  currency  in  the  statement  of
comprehensive loss.
The total transaction costs of $597,963 (including cash fee, the estimated fair value of the agent’s warrants and
other cash issuance costs) relating to the US$ Unit Offering has been allocated to the common shares and the US$
Warrants using the same ratio used to allocate the gross proceeds to the common shares and the US$ Warrants. The
total  amount  allocated  to  the  US$  Warrants  of  $303,862  has  been  recorded  as  financing  transaction  costs  on  the
statement of comprehensive loss.
Year ended August 31, 2013 compared with the year ended August 31, 2012
Revenue
Interest income
 
Expenses
Corporate and administrative expenses
Impairment loss on exploration and evaluation assets
General exploration
Depreciation
Share based compensation
Foreign exchange loss (gain)
 
 
 
Net Loss and Total Comprehensive Loss for the year
$
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
$
2013
374,281  $
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 (11,199,164) $
6,366,338 
2,897,867 
53,119 
211,085 
2,063,145 
(18,109)
 
11,573,445
2012
1,105,731 
 
 
6,244,988 
- 
40,201 
231,850 
5,786,249 
(45,363)
 
12,257,925 
 
 (11,152,194)
During Fiscal 2013, the Company’s net loss increased by $46,970 from a net loss of $11,152,194 for the year
ended  August  31,  2012  (“Fiscal  2012”)  to  a  net  loss  of  $11,199,164  for  Fiscal  2013.  Corporate  and  administrative
expenses  totalled  $6,366,338  during  Fiscal  2013,  a  slight  2%  increase  over  the  amount  incurred  in  Fiscal  2012
($6,244,988).  This  small  increase  reflects  the  Company’s  effort  in  controlling  its  overhead  costs  while  its  business
activities continued to expand.
74
The fluctuations of the various line items that had significant impact on the results of operations for Fiscal 2013
compared to Fiscal 2012 were due to the factors discussed below:
Interest Income
Lower cash balances resulted in interest income decreasing to $374,281 for the Fiscal 2013 compared to
$1,105,731 for Fiscal 2012.
Corporate and administrative expenses
Corporate and administrative expenses totalled $6,366,338 during Fiscal 2013, a slight 2% increase over the
amount incurred in Fiscal 2012 ($6,244,988). The main areas of increased corporate and administrative expenses for
Fiscal 2013 were financial advisory fees and expenses, and marketing and sales expenses, which were partly offset
by the decrease in public and investor relations expenses.
Financial advisory fees and expenses totalled $500,097 for the Fiscal 2013 compared to $116,403 in Fiscal
2012. Commencing in April 2012, the Company has retained financial advisors in assisting the Company to finalize
strategic partnerships and commercial off-take agreements and securing debt and equity financing.
Marketing  and  sales  related  expenses  increased  by  approximately  $170,000  (48%)  during  Fiscal  2013
compared to Fiscal 2012, which primarily related to increase in fees paid to consultants in assisting the Company in
sales and market development and identifying potential customers and strategic partners, and more travel to meetings
with potential customers throughout Fiscal 2013.
Expenditures on public and investor relations for Fiscal 2013 decreased by approximately $183,000 (27%)
compared to Fiscal 2012. The decrease is primary related to the reduced level of direct and web-based marketing
activities, and as well as reduced participation in investment conferences during the first half Fiscal 2013. Investor
interest in the junior resource sector remained low throughout Fiscal 2013, reducing the demand for proactive investor
relations programs.
Impairment loss on exploration and evaluation assets
In Fiscal 2013, after careful review of the drilling results from the 2012 drilling program and geological data
gathered from the 2013 field work program, the Company reduced the number of claims of its Spor Mountain Rare
Metals  Project  significantly  and  recognized  an  impairment  loss  of  $1,494,508  for  this  project.  The  Company  also
recognized  an  impairment  loss  of  $1,403,359  in  fiscal  2013  on  its  Warren  Township  Anothosite  Project  as  no
substantial work had been carried out on the Warren Township project during the last four years and no work was
planned  or  budgeted  for  fiscal  2014.  In  addition,  no  new  potential  customer  had  been  identified  for  the  project’s
calcium feldspar product. No impairment loss was recognized in Fiscal 2012.
Share based Compensation
Share based compensation decreased to $2,063,145 from $5,786,249 during the Fiscal 2013 compared to
Fiscal 2012. This decrease is primarily related to the decrease in the estimated average fair values of the options and
the total number of options earned during the Fiscal 2013 compared to Fiscal 2012.
B. Liquidity and Capital Resources
In management’s view, given the nature of the Company’s operations, which consist of the exploration and
development of mining properties, the most relevant financial information relates primarily to current liquidity, solvency,
and planned property expenditures. The Company’s financial success will be dependent on the economic viability of
its resource properties and the extent to which it can discover and develop new mineral deposits. Such development
may take several years to complete and the amount of resulting income, if any, is difficult to determine. The sales value
of  any  mineralization  discovered  by  the  Company  is  largely  dependent  on  factors  beyond  the  Company’s  control,
including the market value of the metals and minerals to be produced.
75
As at August 31, 2014, the Company had working capital of $5,607,733 (which is calculated by adding back the
liability for warrants denominated in foreign currency of $1,720,622 to the net current assets of $3,887,111), and cash
and cash equivalents on hand of $6,017,598. Substantially all of the Company’s cash and cash equivalents are held at
a major Canadian chartered bank in cashable guaranteed investment certificates bearing an annual interest rate of
1.45% . As at August 31, 2013, the Company had working capital of $8,989,684 and cash and cash equivalents on
hand of $10,313,798.
The Company’s current operating expenditures, excluding expenditures on resource property work programs,
are approximately $400,000 per month. The Company’s current anticipated resource property expenditures planned to
be incurred during the year ending August 31, 2015 are budgeted at approximately $1.5 million, with approximately
$1.0 million of these expenditures being allocated to Nechalacho primarily to continue the project optimization work
and ongoing permitting work.
The Company believes its present cash resources, along with anticipated funds to be raised through “at the
market” issuances pursuant to the Sales Agreement described below, are sufficient to meet all of its current contractual
obligations,  administrative  and  overhead  expenditures,  and  planned  exploration  programs  until  at  least  the  end  of
fiscal 2015. However, there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to raise additional funds required for
all planned 2015 expenditures. As a result, certain expenditures may have to be delayed until sufficient funding has
been raised
The Company continues to work on attracting more substantial project financing through the participation of one
or more strategic partners, a long term construction debt financing facility, and/or through the equity markets. If the
Company is not able to secure financing on satisfactory terms, expenditures on the development of Nechalacho may
need to be deferred with a corresponding deferral in the targeted production start date for the Project.
All of the Company’s resource properties are owned, leased or licenced with minimal holding costs. The most
significant  holding  costs  being  annual  lease  rental  fees  on  Nechalacho  of  $20,998  and  the  annual  expenditures
related to the mining leases at Separation Rapids and Warren Township totalling $3,327. In addition, the Company is
required to pay Euro 8,400 per month for the next twelve month to the service provider pursuant to a service contract
for the Nechalacho Project.
A joint venture with an industry partner or end-user may represent an attractive alternative for financing the
further  stages  in  the  development  of  the  Nechalacho  Project  as  well  as  the  projects  at  Separation  Rapids,  East
Kemptville, or Warren Township, once the capital requirements become relatively large.
The Company has three operating leases for its premises. As at the date of this Annual Report, the minimum
lease commitments under these leases are as follows:
2015
2016
2017
$             261,461
$             312,202
$             100,496
The Company is in the process of exploring and developing its mineral properties. To date, the Company has
not earned significant revenues.
The realization of amounts shown for its exploration and evaluation assets and its development asset – the
Nechalacho Project is dependent upon the discovery of economically recoverable reserves, the ability of the Company
to obtain the necessary financing to develop these assets, and future profitable production or proceeds of disposition
from these assets.
76
Mineral exploration and development is capital intensive and in order to continue exploration and development
on  its  mineral  properties,  the  Company  will  be  required  to  raise  new  equity  capital  in  the  future.  Based  on  the
Company’s current financial position, its plans for equity financing and its exploration and development plans for the
upcoming fiscal year, the Company will be able to meet its financial obligations through the next fiscal year. There is
no assurance that the Company will be successful in raising additional new equity capital.
Recent financing activities
During Fiscal 2014, the Company completed the following four major financing transactions:
During the quarter ended November 30, 2013, the Company entered into a sales agreement (the “Sales
Agreement”) with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”), pursuant to which the Company may, at its discretion and
from time to time during the term of the Sales Agreement, sell, through Cowen, as agent and/or principal, such number
of  common  shares  of  the  Company  as  would  result  in  aggregate  gross  proceeds  to  the  Company  of  up  to
US$25,000,000. Sales of common shares will be made through “at the market” issuances on the NYSE MKT at the
market price prevailing at the time of each sale, and, as a result, prices may vary.
The Company filed a prospectus supplement, dated September 24, 2013, pursuant to which the Company may
issue up to US$8,100,000 in common shares using the Sales Agreement. Each prospectus supplement is limited to
not more than 10% of the market value of the Company at the end of the month prior to filing, but the Company may file
additional prospectus supplements in the future to qualify the distribution of additional common shares up to the limit
US$25,000,000.
To date the Company has raised US$2,306,127 in gross proceeds by the issuance of 4,242,356 shares through
the at-the-market program.
In  addition,  during  the  quarter  ended  November  30,  2013,  the  Company  entered  into  a  share  purchase
agreement (the "Purchase Agreement") with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC ("LPC") pursuant to which the Company
may sell up to US$30,000,000 of its common shares to LPC over the 36 month term of the Purchase Agreement, and
completed  an  initial  purchase  of  4,375,000  common  shares  at  a  price  of  US$0.64  per  share  for  aggregate  gross
proceeds  of  US$2,800,000  (the  "Initial  Purchase").  The  Company  issued  918,521  common  shares  to  LPC  as  a
commitment fee for entering into the Purchase Agreement, and will issue up to an additional 918,521 common shares
as compensation on a pro rata basis as the US$30,000,000 purchase amount is funded (of which 85,729 common
shares were issued in conjunction with the Initial Purchase).
The Company has the right, in its sole discretion, to sell up to an additional US$27,200,000 worth of common
shares to LPC, from time to time and on such terms and conditions as are described in the Purchase Agreement. The
purchase price for any additional sales of common shares will be based on prevailing market prices of the common
shares  immediately  preceding  any  notice  of  sale  without  any  fixed  discount.  Under  the  terms  of  the  Purchase
Agreement,  the  Company  has  control  over  the  timing  and  amount  of  any  future  sale  of  common  shares  subject  to
certain conditions, and LPC is obligated to make such purchases, if and when the Company presents LPC with a valid
purchase notice. There are no upper price limitations but the closing price of the common shares on the NYSE MKT
must  not  be  less  than  US$0.50  on  the  purchase  date,  negative  covenants  or  restrictions  on  the  Company's  future
financing activities. Avalon may terminate the Purchase Agreement at any time, at its sole discretion, without any cost
or penalty. LPC has also agreed not to cause or engage in any manner whatsoever, any direct or indirect short selling
or hedging of the common shares.
The Company filed a prospectus supplement, dated November 27, 2013, pursuant to which the Company may
issue up to US$8,500,000 in common shares using the Purchase Agreement. Each prospectus supplement is limited
to not more than 10% of the market value of the Company at the end of the month prior to filing, but the Company may
file additional prospectus supplements in the future to qualify the distribution of the remaining common shares to be
issued under the Purchase Agreement.
77
To date the Company has raised US$3,137,060 in gross proceeds and has issued 5,989,570 common shares
through the Purchase Agreement.
During the quarter ended August 31, 2014, the Company issued 9,237,875 units of the Company pursuant to a
registered direct offering at a price of US$0.433 per unit (the “US$ Unit Offering”). Each unit is comprised of a common
share  and  0.70  of  a  common  share  purchase  warrant  (each  whole  warrant,  a  “US$  Warrant”).  Each  whole  US$
Warrant is exercisable into a common share of the Company at an exercise price of US$0.56 per share commencing
on December 13, 2014 until June 13, 2021 and is subject to certain anti-dilution provisions. The gross proceeds of this
offering were US$4.0 million. Net proceeds, after deducting the placement agent’s fee and other offering expenses
were US$3,561,889.
During  the  quarter  ended  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  completed  a  private  placement  (the  “Private
Placement”)  and  issued  1,653,866  flow-through  common  shares  (“Flow-Through  Shares”)  at  $0.60  per  share  and
2,445,000  non  flow-through  units  (“Non  Flow-Through  Units”)  at  $0.48  per  Non  Flow-Through  Unit  for  total  gross
proceeds of $2,165,920, of which an aggregate of 212,000 Flow-Through Shares and 60,000 Non Flow-Through Units
were  issued  to  certain  directors  and  officers  of  the  Company.  Each  Non  Flow-Through  Unit  is  comprised  of  one
common share and one-half of one share purchase warrant. Each whole warrant entitled the holder to purchase one
common share of the Company at an exercise price of $0.60 per share until July 2, 2017. In connection with the Private
Placement, the Company paid finders’ fees of $12,461 and incurred other issuance costs of $50,185.
C. Research and Development, Patents and Licenses, etc.
The Company has invested significant amounts of resources in researching, developing and optimizing the
metallurgical processes to recover the REEs from the Nechalacho ore body. Research and development expenditures
incurred  during  Fiscal  2014,  Fiscal  2013  and  Fiscal  2012  totalled  $2,026,367,  $5,122,900  and  $11,460,589
respectively.
The bulk of these R&D investigations have been conducted at a commercial laboratory in Lakefield Ontario,
although further work has also been conducted at other globally recognized research institutes elsewhere in Ontario,
USA and South Africa.
The areas investigated have included ore comminution and froth flotation to produce a mineral concentrate,
followed by numerous hydrometallurgical processes aimed at firstly leaching the REEs and then removing the various
impurities such that a high purity bulk REE precipitate can be produced for toll treating by others.
The Company made a condition of only using laboratories with extensive experiences in the processing of rare
earth containing materials in order to draw on their in-house experience and to maintain consistency in processing and
analytical techniques.
None of the processes developed or implemented are known to be protected by any third party patents or
licences as they are commonly applied to other metallurgical systems. However, Avalon is investigating the potential
merit of patenting the overall combination of processes for the treatment of similar ore bodies or mineral concentrates.
78
D. Trend Information
While the Company does not have any producing mines it is directly affected by trends in the metal industry. At
the present time global metal prices are extremely volatile. Demand for and the prices of REE have fluctuated widely,
particularly in recent years.
REE prices declined significantly between 2008 and late 2009 during the global economic crisis. Prices
increased significantly during 2010 and most of 2011 and experienced a significant drop in 2012, due in part to a
reported  reduction  in  speculative  buying  of  REE  products  as  concerns  about  continuing  price  escalation  abated.
Prices have not recovered materially in 2013 or 2014. Demand for REE products may be impacted by demand for
products  incorporating  rare  earths,  including  hybrid  and  electric  vehicles,  wind  power  equipment  and  other  clean
technology products, as well as demand in the general automotive and electronic industries. Lack of growth in these
markets may adversely affect the demand for REE products.
Overall market prices for securities in the mineral resource sector and factors affecting such prices, including
base metal prices, political trends in the countries such companies operate, and general economic conditions, may
have an effect on the terms on which financing is available to the Company, if at all.
Except as disclosed, the Company does not know of any trends, demand, commitments, events or uncertainties
that will result in, or that are reasonably likely to result in, its liquidity either materially increasing or decreasing at
present or in the foreseeable future. Material increases or decreases in liquidity are substantially determined by the
success or failure of the Company’s exploration and development programs. The Company currently does not and
also does not expect to engage in currency hedging to offset any risk of currency fluctuations.
E. Off-balance sheet arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
F. Tabular disclosure of contractual obligations
As of August 31, 2014, the Company had the following contractual obligations:
Trade payables and other payables $  1,785,745  $  1,785,745  $
Purchase contract
 
 
Operating Leases
143,922 
769,846
143,922 
357,148
<1 year
Total
Payment due by period
1-3
years
-  $
- 
 
 
412,698
3-5
years
-  $
- 
 
 
-
More
than 5
years
- 
- 
-
Total
G. Safe Harbor
$  2,699,513  $  2,286,815  $
412,698  $
-  $
-
The Company seeks safe harbor for our forward-looking statements contained in Items 5.E and F. See the
heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Item 6. Directors, Senior Management and Employees
A. Directors and Senior Management
The following is a list of the Company’s directors and senior management as of the date of this annual report.
The directors were elected by the Shareholders on February 25, 2014 and are elected for a term of one year, which
term expires at the election of the directors at the next annual meeting of shareholders.
79
Name, Present
Position 
with the Company and
Country of Residence
DONALD S. BUBAR 
Director, Chief
Executive 
Officer and President 
Ontario, Canada
ALAN FERRY (1) (2) 
Director 
Ontario, Canada
PHIL FONTAINE 
Director 
Ontario, Canada
BRIAN D.
MACEACHEN (1) 
Director and Chairman 
Nova Scotia, Canada
SERGIO MARCHI (2) 
Director 
Switzerland
PETER MCCARTER (1)
(2) 
Director 
Ontario, Canada
KENNETH G. THOMAS
Director 
Ontario, Canada
R. JAMES ANDERSEN
Chief Financial Officer 
and Vice President, 
Finance 
Ontario, Canada
DAVID MARSH 
Senior Vice President,
Principal Occupation
President and CEO of the Company
Director/Officer 
Since
February 17, 1995
Self-employed Businessperson since July 2007.
February 24, 2000
Retired; former Special Advisor to the Royal Bank of Canada from
1997 to 2009, and former National Chief of the Assembly of First
Nations.
Executive Consultant since July 2012; prior thereto, Executive Vice
President of Brigus Gold Corp. (formerly Linear Gold Corp., a mining
exploration company) since October 2009 and President and CEO of
Linear Metals Company (a mining exploration company) from January
2008 to April 2012; prior thereto, CFO and Vice-President of Finance
of Brigus Gold Corp. and Linear Metals Company.
Principal, Marchi Group, a global strategic consultancy company since
2008.
September 8, 2009
November 16, 1998
February 25, 2014
Retired mining executive.
November 16, 2007
President, Ken Thomas & Associates Inc., a consulting firm to the
mining industry since 2012 and Senior Vice President, Projects,
Kinross Gold Corporation from December 2009 to July 2012; prior
thereto Global Managing Director and Board Director, Hatch, an
international engineering and construction company.
Chief Financial Officer and Vice President, Finance of the Company
since June 2001; prior thereto, President of Andersen & Company, PC
(a chartered accounting firm) from January 2007 to October 2011.
February 25, 2014
June 11, 2001
Senior Vice President, Metallurgy of the Company since August 2012
and Interim Chief Operating Officer of the Company since June 2013;
August 1, 2012
Metallurgy and Interim 
Chief Operating Officer 
Ontario, Canada
WILLIAM MERCER
Vice President, 
Exploration 
Ontario, Canada 
PIERRE NEATBY 
Vice President, Sales
and 
Marketing 
Ontario, Canada 
MARK WISEMAN 
Vice President, 
Sustainability 
Ontario, Canada
prior thereto, General Manager- Technical Projects Development at
Paladin Energy from July 2006 to September 2011.
Vice President, Exploration of the Company since June 2007, prior
June 21, 2007
80
thereto, self-employed Geological Consultant from October 2006 to
December 2010.
Vice President, Sales and Marketing of the Company since July 2010;
prior thereto, Vice President of Noranda Inc. and Managing Director of
European Sales of Noranda Inc. (an international mining company).
July 1, 2010
Vice President, Sustainability of the Company since November 2011;
prior thereto, Director Health, Safety and Environment for Xstrata
Nickel’s Koniambo Project, a division of Xstrata plc (an international
mining company, presently Glencore) from 1990 to 2010.
November 7, 2011
(1) Member of the Audit Committee
(2) Member of the Compensation, Governance and Nominating Committee
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between any directors or executive officers of the Company.
Arrangements
There are no known arrangements or understandings with any major shareholders, customers, suppliers or
others,  pursuant  to  which  any  of  the  Company’s  officers  or  directors  was  selected  as  an  officer  or  director  of  the
Company.
Conflicts of Interest
There are no existing or potential conflicts of interest among the Company, its directors, officers or promoters as
a  result  of  their  outside  business  interests  with  the  exception  that  certain  of  the  Company’s  directors,  officers  and
promoters serve as directors, officers and promoters of other companies, and, therefore, it is possible that a conflict
may arise between their duties as a director, officer or promoter of the Company and their duties as a director or officer
of such other companies.
The directors and officers of the Company are aware of the existence of laws governing accountability of
directors and officers for corporate opportunity and requiring disclosures by directors of conflicts of interest and the
Company will rely upon such laws in respect of any directors’ and officers’ conflicts of interest or in respect of any
breaches of duty by any of its directors or officers. All such conflicts will be disclosed by such directors or officers in
accordance with the CBCA, and they will govern themselves in respect thereof to the best of their ability in accordance
with the obligations imposed upon them by law.
The majority of the Company’s directors are also directors, officers or shareholders of other companies that are
engaged in the business of acquiring, developing and exploiting natural resource properties. Such associations may
give rise to conflicts of interest from time to time. Such a conflict poses the risk that the Company may enter into a
transaction on terms which place the Company in a worse position than if no conflict existed. The directors of the
Company are required by law to act honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interest of the Company and to
disclose any interest which they may have in any project or opportunity of the Company. However, each director has a
similar obligation to other companies for which such director serves as an officer or director. The Company has no
specific internal policy governing conflicts of interest.
81
Cease Trade Orders, Bankruptcies, Penalties or Sanctions
To the Company’s knowledge, no director or executive officer of the Company is, as of the date of this hereof, or
was within ten years before the date hereof, a director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer of any company
(including the Company) that:
(i) was subject to a cease trade order, an order similar to a cease trade order, or an order that denied the
relevant company access to any exemption under securities legislation, that was in effect for a period of more than 30
consecutive days (an “Order”) that was issued while the director or executive officer was acting in the capacity as
director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer, other than Peter McCarter, who was a director and officer of
Compressario Corp. when it became subject to a cease trade order that was issued by the Ontario, British Columbia
and Alberta securities commissions in 2003 for failure to file financial statements; or
(ii) was subject to an Order that was issued after the director or executive officer ceased to be a director, chief
executive officer or chief financial officer and which resulted from an event that occurred while that person was acting
in the capacity as director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer.
To the Company’s knowledge, no director or executive officer of the Company, or a shareholder holding a
sufficient number of the Company’s securities of the Company to affect materially the control of the Company:
(i) is, as at of the date hereof, or has been, within the ten years before the date hereof, a director or executive
officer of any company (including the Company) that, while that person was acting in that capacity, or within a year of
that  person  ceasing  to  act  in  that  capacity,  became  bankrupt,  made  a  proposal  under  any  legislation  relating  to
bankruptcy or insolvency or was subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or compromise with creditors or
had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold its assets; or
(ii) has, within the ten years before the date hereof, become bankrupt, made a proposal under any legislation
relating to bankruptcy or insolvency, or become subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or compromise
with creditors, or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold the assets of the director, executive
officer or shareholder.
To the Company's knowledge, no director or executive officer of the Company, or a shareholder holding a
sufficient number of securities of the Company to affect material the control of the Company, has been subject to:
(i) any penalties or sanctions imposed by a court relating to securities legislation or by a securities regulatory
authority or has entered into a settlement agreement with a securities regulatory authority, or
(ii) any other penalties or sanctions imposed by a court or regulatory body that would likely be considered
important to a reasonable investor in making an investment decision.
Conflicts of Interest
To the best of the Company’s knowledge, and other than as disclosed in this annual report, there are no known
existing or potential conflicts of interest between the Company and any director or officer of the Company, except that
certain  of  the  directors  and  officers  serve  as  directors  and  officers  of  other  public  companies,  and  therefore  it  is
possible that a conflict may arise between their duties as a director or officer of the Company and their duties as a
director or officer of such other companies.
Legal Proceedings and Regulatory Actions
The Company is and has not been a party as a defendant to, and none of its properties are or were the subject
of, any legal proceedings during the financial year of the Company ended August 31, 2014 that involve a claim for
damages which exceeds ten per cent of the current assets of the Company, and no such legal proceedings are known
to Avalon to be contemplated.
82
There were no penalties or sanctions imposed against the Company by a court relating to securities legislation
or  by  a  securities  regulatory  authority  during  the  financial  year  of  the  Company  ended  August  31,  2014,  no  other
penalties or sanctions have been imposed by a court or regulatory body against the Company that would likely be
considered  important  to  a  reasonable  investor  in  making  an  investment  decision  with  respect  to  the  securities  of
Avalon,  and  no  settlement  agreements  were  entered  into  with  a  Court  relating  to  securities  legislation  or  with  a
securities regulatory authority during the financial year of the Company ended August 31, 2014.
Interest of Management and Others in Material Transactions
The Company is not aware of any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction within the three most
recently completed financial years involving any director, executive officer, proposed nominee for election as a director
or any shareholder holding more than 10% of the voting rights attached to the common shares or any associate or
affiliate of any of the foregoing that has materially affected or will materially affect the Company, other than as set forth
herein.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The Company’s transfer agent and registrar is TMX Equity Transfer Services Inc., with its principal office at 200
University  Avenue,  Suite  3400,  Toronto,  ON  M5H  4H1.  The  Company’s  U.S.  co-transfer  agent  is  Registrar  and
Transfer Company with its principal office at 10 Commerce Drive, Cranford, NJ 07016.
B. Compensation
During the last completed fiscal year of the Company, the Company had five named executive officers (“NEOs”),
namely, its Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and President, Donald Bubar, its Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”) and Vice
President, Finance, R. James Andersen, its Vice President, Metallurgy and Interim Chief Operating Officer (“COO”),
David  Marsh,  its  Vice  President,  Sales  and  Marketing,  Pierre  Neatby,  and  its  Vice  President,  Exploration  William
Mercer.
1) Compensation Discussion and Analysis
Compensation, Governance and Nominating Committee
The  Compensation,  Governance  and  Nominating  Committee  (the  “CGN  Committee”)  of  the  Board  is
responsible for making recommendations to the Board with respect to the compensation of the executive officers of the
Company as well as, among other things, with respect to the Company’s Stock Option Plan and any other employee
benefits and/or plans and with respect to directors’ compensation. The Board (exclusive of the CEO, who is also a
member of the Board) reviews such recommendations and gives final approval to the compensation of the executive
officers.
The CGN Committee currently consists of Peter McCarter (Chair), Alan Ferry and Sergio Marchi, each of whom
are independent, pursuant to the rules of the TSX and the NYSE MKT Each of Messrs. McCarter and Ferry has direct
and extensive experience in corporate management and compensation issues in either the mining industry and/or the
financial industry. Mr. McCarter was previously the Executive Vice-President, Corporate Affairs for Aur Resources Inc.
(“Aur”), a publicly listed international mining company, in which role he had responsibility for managing Aur’s human
resources matters. Mr. Ferry is a member of the committee responsible for compensation matters of Guyana Goldfields
Inc.,  GPM  Metals  Inc.,  and  Macusani  Yellowcake  Inc.,  all  publicly  listed  mineral  exploration  or  mining  companies.
While Mr. Marchi was a Cabinet Minister in the Government of Canada between 1993 and 1999, he was responsible
for  determining  the  compensation  of  his  political  staff,  which  numbered  approximately  25  people.  This  experience
relating  to  executive  compensation  matters  collectively  provides  members  of  the  Committee  with  a  suitable
perspective to make decisions on the appropriateness of the Company’s compensation policies and practices.
83
The CGN Committee has not to date felt it necessary to engage any compensation consultant or advisor to
assist it in the performance of its duties.
Compensation Objectives and Structure
The overall compensation objective adopted by the CGN Committee is to ensure that executive compensation
is fair and reasonable, rewards management performance and is, by being competitive, sufficient to attract and retain
experienced and talented executives. Due to the nature of the mining industry, executive talent has significant mobility
and, as a result, competition for experienced executives has been great. The Company’s compensation policies are
designed  to  recognize  the  foregoing.  The  foregoing  objective  also  recognizes  the  fundamental  value  added  by  a
motivated and committed management team in accomplishing the Company’s principal corporate objectives.
Historically, the compensation provided by the Company to its executive officers, including the CEO, has had
three components: base salary, bonuses and long term incentive compensation in the form of stock options (see “Stock
Option  Plan”).  Bonus  compensation  is  a  cash  component  of  management  compensation  in  order  to  permit  the
recognition of outstanding individual efforts, performance, achievements and/or accomplishments by members of the
Company’s  management  team.  Any  specific  bonus  amounts  are  awarded  on  the  recommendation  of  the  CGN
Committee  and  ultimately  at  the  discretion  of  the  Board,  with  bonus  amounts  for  members  of  the  Company’s
management  team  other  than  the  CEO  being  based  primarily  on  the  recommendations  of  the  CEO.  The
appropriateness  and  amount  of  any  bonuses  to  the  CEO  and/or  management  team  members  has  to  date  been
considered annually by the CGN Committee and Board on a discretionary basis as no formal bonus plan based on
quantitative and/or qualitative benchmarks has been established for the Company as yet.
Base salary is the principal component of each executive officer’s overall compensation and reflects the fixed
component of pay that compensates the relevant executive officer for fulfilling his day to day roles and responsibilities.
The CGN Committee annually reviews the setting of the base salaries and considers the individual performance of the
CEO and of each other executive officer and compares executive compensation for other companies operating in the
mining industry. It is important that the Company’s CEO and other members of its senior management team are paid
competitive base salaries that are in keeping with that offered by comparable companies within the industry. The CGN
Committee also noted that companies operating in the rare earths industry face unique and relatively difficult additional
challenges that need to be addressed, particularly in the financing, marketing and metallurgical processing areas, than
do other companies in the mining sector, such as gold and base metal companies.
In setting the salary and bonus, if any, to be awarded to the CEO for each year, the CGN Committee, in addition
to  reviewing  peer  group  data,  reviews  the  achievements  of  the  CEO  for  the  prior  year  and  looks  at  the  overall
performance of the Company in terms of the achievement of its corporate objectives, including the acquisition and
advancement of projects. Also typically included in such overall assessment are specific initiatives undertaken in the
year  by  the  Company  that  have  advanced  the  growth  and  progress  of  the  Company  and  the  enhancement  of
shareholder value during the year, including the reflection of such in the Company’s share price. Regard is also had to
the  overall  financial  condition  of  the  Company.  In  setting  the  compensation  of  the  other  executive  officers  of  the
Company, the CGN Committee reviews with the CEO, the CEO’s evaluation of each executive officer’s performance
during the year as well as the responsibilities, experience and qualifications of such executive officer and comparable
industry  compensation  data.  Given  the  nature  of  the  Company  as  an  exploration  and  development  stage  resource
company without existing mineral production and without any attendant revenues derived thereon, compensation is
generally based on comparative, qualitative or subjective measures, rather than quantitative benchmarks. No specific
benchmarks, weights or percentages are assigned to any of the measures or objectives upon which the executive
compensation is generally based.
Annual salary adjustments, if any, have historically been made on a calendar year basis, typically being
determined towards the end of each calendar year and made effective January 1 of the following year.
84
Compensation Risk Management
The CGN Committee evaluates the risks, if any, associated with the Company’s compensation policies and
practices. Implicit in the mandate of the Board is that the Company’s policies and practices respecting compensation,
including those applicable to the Named Executive Officers, be designed in a manner which is in the best interests of
the Company and its shareholders.
In particular, the Company’s executive compensation policies incorporate a balanced compensation program
design (see “Compensation Objectives and Structure”) and include elements of fixed and variable compensation and
short and longer term incentives.
The base salary component of the compensation provided by the Company to its executive officers is set
annually.  The  bonus  component  of  the  compensation  provided  by  the  Company  to  its  executive  officers  is
discretionary,  is  currently  based  on  qualitative  or  subjective  measures  rather  than  quantitative  benchmarks,  and  is
subject to the prior approval of the CGN Committee. Discretionary assessment of the performance of executive officers
by  the  Committee  ensures  that  bonus  awards  align  with  both  perceived  and  actual  performance  and  the  risks
associated with such performance and any bonus award.
The stock option component of the compensation provided by the Company to its executive officers is both
“longer term” and “at risk” and, accordingly, is directly linked to the achievement of longer term value creation. Since
the benefits of such compensation, if any, are generally not realized by the executive officers until a significant period
of time has passed and that there are typically deferred vesting provisions attached to each option grant (see “Stock
Option Plan” below), the incentive for executive officers to take inappropriate or excessive risks with regard to their
compensation that are financially beneficial to them at the expense of the Company and its shareholders is limited.
The CGN Committee believes that it is unlikely that an executive officer would take inappropriate or excessive
risks at the expense of the Company and its shareholders that would be beneficial to them with regard to their short
term compensation when their longer term compensation might be put at risk from their actions. Due to the size of the
Company, the CGN Committee is able to monitor and consider any risks which may be associated with the Company’s
compensation policies and practices. Risks, if any, may be identified and mitigated through regular meetings of the
Board during which financial and other information relating to the Company are reviewed, and which includes senior
executive compensation. The CGN Committee has not identified any risks arising from the Company’s compensation
policies and practices that it believes would be reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Although the Company has not as yet adopted any specific policies in this regard, in the event that a director or
an executive officer purchases financial instruments that are designed to hedge or offset a decrease in the market
value of the Company’s equity securities granted as compensation or held, directly or indirectly by the director or the
executive officer, such purchases must be disclosed in insider reporting filings. To date, no such purchases have been
disclosed by any director or executive officer of the Company.
Base Salary and Bonus
The  CGN  Committee,  in  respect  of  the  setting  of  salaries  for  the  Named  Executive  Officers  for  2014,
recommended to the Board and the Board determined that, as was generally the case in Fiscal 2013, there would be
no salary increases for the Named Executive Officers in 2014. This determination recognized the then current financial
situation of the Company and the overall depressed nature of the junior resource sector in Canada.
Further, given the foregoing, the Board has determined that there would be no salary increases for the Named
Executive Officers for 2015. In addition, each of the Named Executive Officers has agreed, for the seven month period
commencing November 2014 through to May 2015, to be granted, in lieu of receiving 20% of their respective salaries
during such period, additional stock options, being in the case of Mr. Bubar, options to purchase 150,000 common
shares of Avalon, in the case of Messrs. Andersen and Marsh, options to purchase 125,000 common shares and in the
case of Messrs. Mercer and Neatby, options to purchase 100,000 common shares. All of the foregoing options were
granted effective November 24, 2014, have an exercise price of $0.22 per share, have a five year term and vested
immediately.
85
No discretionary bonuses were awarded to any Named Executive Officers of the Company for 2014.
Options
The CGN Committee is of the view that the granting of options is an appropriate method of providing long-term
incentives  to  senior  management  of  the  Company  and,  in  general,  aligns  the  interests  of  senior  management  with
those of the shareholders by enabling senior management to participate in and be rewarded by an increase in the
market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares.  Participation  in  the  Stock  Option  Plan  also  provides  a  significant
incentive  to  the  Participants  to  enter  into  and  subsequently  to  continue  their  employment  with  the  Company,
particularly when the Company may not have the financial resources and/or pension and other benefit plans to attract
and retain experienced personnel. In addition, the CGN Committee is of the view that the Company’s compensation
mix  must  be  consistent  with  industry  norms  which  supports  the  provision  by  the  Company  of  a  longer  term
compensation incentive. This longer term compensation incentive is best realized by providing compensation linked to
share  price  performance  such  as  options.  The  number  and  terms  of  options  previously  granted  to  the  named
executives have been and are expected to continue to be taken into account, as well as the number and terms of
options granted by peer group companies in determining whether and in what quantity new option grants should be
made in any year.
The Company’s current objective under the Stock Option Plan is to allot to the CEO options to purchase
1,000,000 common shares, to the CFO and Chief Operating Officer options to purchase 600,000 common shares and
to  officers  at  the  Vice  President  level  options  to  purchase  400,000  common  shares  (the  “target  allotments”).  The
foregoing allotments do not include the additional options granted to the Named Executive Officers on November 24,
2014 as described under “Base Salary and Bonus” above.
In the past, the Company had typically granted all of an employee’s option allotment at the commencement of
the employee’s employment, with such options to vest periodically over the first four years of a five year option term.
During the 2012 calendar year, the Company switched to a methodology of annual grants of one fifth of the employee’s
target allotment (on a discretionary basis). Accordingly, over the next three years, as the number of options granted
under  the  former  methodology  are  exercised  or  expire,  each  employee  may  have  more  or  less  than  their  target
allotment at any given time. Over the next three years, all stock options granted to each employee will gravitate toward
the  employee’s  target  allotment.  The  methodology  applied  by  the  Company  permits  exceptions  to  be  made,  for
example,  to  recognize  exceptional  employee  contributions  and  to  permit  flexibility  in  negotiating  employment
contracts.
Circumstances Triggering Termination and Change of Control Benefits
As  noted  below  under  the  heading  “Employment  Contracts”,  there  are  certain  circumstances  that  trigger
payments and other benefits to the CEO upon termination and change of control. The CGN Committee views such
provisions as not only being fair and necessary to protect the CEO but also to encourage the CEO to pursue those
transactions such as mergers or take-overs that are beneficial to the Company and its shareholders but that may result
in the termination of the CEO’s employment with the Company.
Stock Option Plan
The Stock Option Plan, approved by shareholders on February 25, 2014, is a fixed percentage plan that
provides that the maximum number of options which may be outstanding at any time under the Stock Option Plan and
any  other  compensation  arrangement  of  the  Company  is  10%  of  the  Company’s  issued  and  outstanding  common
shares. Eligible Participants under the Stock Option Plan include insiders or employees of the Company or any of its
subsidiaries,  and  any  other  person  or  company  engaged  to  provide  ongoing  management,  consulting  or  advisory
services to the Company.
86
The Company maintains the Stock Option Plan in order to provide effective incentives to directors, officers and
senior  management  personnel  of  the  Company  and  to  enable  the  Company  to  attract  and  retain  experienced  and
talented  individuals  in  those  positions  by  permitting  such  individuals  to  directly  participate  in  an  increase  in  share
value created for the Company’s shareholders.
Incentive options granted under the Stock Option Plan entitle the purchase of shares at a price and for the
length of time determined by the Board provided that the price cannot be lower than the market price of the common
shares on the TSX on the day prior to or on the day of the grant and the expiry date cannot be more than 10 years after
the date of the grant. Further, the policies of the TSX also provide that the said exercise price of any options so granted
cannot be reduced without shareholder approval.
Options under the Stock Option Plan are typically granted in such numbers as reflect the level of responsibility
of the particular optionee and his or her contribution to the business and activities of the Company. Options may also
be granted under the Stock Option Plan to consultants. Options granted under the Stock Option Plan typically have a
five  year  term  and  are  typically  made  cumulatively  exercisable  by  the  holders  thereof  in  equal  proportions  of  the
aggregate  number  of  shares  subject  to  the  options  over  specified  time  periods.  Historically,  after  an  initial  grant,
options have been re-granted upon such having been exercised. In the event a take-over bid (within the meaning of
the Securities Act (Ontario)) is made for the common shares of the Company, then all unvested options thereupon
become exercisable by the holder. Options terminate immediately upon an optionee’s employment with the Company
being  terminated  (unless  otherwise  determined  by  the  Board)  or  unless  such  termination  is  a  result  of  the  death,
disability or retirement, in which case termination occurs 12 months from the occurrence of the relevant event (subject
to the earlier expiry of the options in the normal course). The terms of the Stock Option Plan further provide that the
exercise price at which common shares may be issued under the Stock Option Plan cannot be less than the current
market price of the common shares when the relevant options are granted.
As at November 24, 2014, 9,449,000 common shares, being 7.4% of the currently issued common shares of the
Company, were issuable pursuant to unexercised options granted to such date under the Stock Option Plan.
Incentives  to  Participants  under  the  Stock  Option  Plan  may  also  be  provided  by  the  granting  of  stock
appreciation rights. Stock appreciation rights, which can be attached to an option at the discretion of the Company at
any time, entitle a Participant in the Stock Option Plan to elect, in lieu of exercising an outstanding Option, to receive
the number of common shares equivalent in value to the difference between his or her option exercise price and the
then  existing  market  value  of  the  shares  multiplied  by  the  number  of  common  shares  over  which  he  or  she  could
otherwise exercise his or her option. No stock appreciation rights have been granted under the Stock Option Plan to
date.
The rules of the TSX require that all unallocated options, rights or other entitlements under plans such as the
Stock Option Plan must be re-approved by a majority of the relevant issuer’s directors and by shareholders every three
years  after  institution  of  the  relevant  plan.  Under  the  policies  of  the  TSX,  if  the  Company  wishes  to  make  certain
amendments to the Stock Option Plan, it must obtain shareholder approval.
2) Summary Compensation Table
The following table sets forth particulars concerning the compensation paid or accrued for services rendered to
the Company by its NEOs in all capacities during the last three most recently completed financial years ended August
31:
87
Option- 
based 
awards
Non-equity 
incentive plan
compensation
($)(1)
137,373
395,546
364,194
79,283
211,521
Nil
51,263
Nil
420,923
24,735
141,014
Nil
33,869
Nil
357,593
($)
Nil
Nil
35,000(5)
Nil
Nil
35,000(5)
Nil
50,000(7)
Nil
Nil
Nil
35,000(5)
Nil
Nil
35,000(5)
Pension
All other
Total
value
($)(2)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
compensation
compensation
($)(3)
1,938
923
1,265
($)
539,311
796,469
783,792
Nil
Nil
873
Nil
923
Nil
748
630
Nil
Nil
923
873
379,283
511,521
285,873
407,930
400,923
479,256
282,150
391,644
255,833
290,536
244,768
627,514
Name and 
principal 
position
Salary
($)
Year
Share- 
based 
awards
($)
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
DONALD
BUBAR 
(4) 
President
and 
CEO
R. JAMES 
ANDERSEN
CFO and
Vice 
President, 
Finance
DAVID
MARSH (6) 
Senior Vice 
President, 
Metallurgy
and 
Interim COO
PIERRE
NEATBY 
Vice
President, 
Sales and 
Marketing
WILLIAM 
MERCER 
Vice
President, 
Exploration
____________________
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
400,000
400,000
383,333
300,000
300,000
250,000
356,667
350,000
58,333
256,667
250,000
220,833
256,667
243,845
234,048
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
These  amounts  represent  the  “grant  date  fair  value”  of options  granted  to  the  respective  Named  Executive
(1)
These  amounts  represent  the  “grant  date  fair  value”  of options  granted  to  the  respective  Named  Executive
Officer, which have been determined by using the Black-Scholes model, a mathematical valuation model that
ascribes a value to an option based on a number of factors in valuing the option-based awards, including the
exercise  price  of  the option,  the  price  of  the  underlying  security  on  the  date  the  option  was granted,  and
assumptions with respect to the volatility of the price of the underlying security and the risk-free rate of return.
Calculating  the value  of  options  using  this  methodology  is  very  different  from  a  simple “in-the-money”  value
calculation. In fact, options that are well out-of-the-money can still have a significant “grant date fair value” based
in a Black-Scholes valuation, especially where, as in the case of the Company, the price of the common shares
underlying the option is highly volatile. Accordingly, caution must be exercised in comparing grant date fair value
amounts with cash compensation or an in-the-money option value calculation. The same caution applies to the
total compensation amounts shown in the last column above, which are based in part the grant date fair value
amounts set out in the column for Option-based awards. These values are consistent with the accounting values
used  in  the Company’s  financial  statements.  The  Company  selected  the  Black-Scholes model  given  its
prevalence of use within North America.
The Company does not have a pension plan.
(2)
(3) Medical expenses paid by the Company on behalf of the respective Named Executive Officer.
(4) Mr. Bubar does not receive any additional compensation for serving as a director of the Company.
(5)
The Company paid each of Messrs. Bubar, Andersen, Neatby and Mercer a bonus of $35,000 in 2012, each in
recognition of their performances in 2011.
(6) Mr. Marsh was appointed as Senior Vice-President, Metallurgy of the Company on August 1, 2012.
(7)
The Company paid Mr. Marsh a bonus of $50,000 in 2013 related to the completion of the feasibility study on the
Company’s Nechalacho Rare Earth Elements Project.
Base Salary for the NEOs are determined by the Board upon the recommendation of the CGN Committee and
its  recommendations  are  reached  primarily  by  informal  comparison  with  the  remuneration  paid  by  other  reporting
issuers  with  the  same  size  and  industry  and  with  publicly  available  information  on  remuneration  that  the  CGN
Committee feels is suitable.
88
The annual base salary paid to NEOs is, for the purpose of establishing appropriate increases, reviewed
annually by the Board upon the recommendation of the CGN Committee as part of the annual review of executive
officers. The decision on whether to grant an increase to the executive’s base salary and the amount of any such
increase is in the sole discretion of the Board and the CGN Committee.
Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation
One of the three components of the Company’s compensation package is a discretionary annual cash bonus,
paid to recognize individual performance in attaining corporate goals and objectives. The Company does not have a
long-term incentive plan.
Option Based Award
An Option Based Award is in the form of an incentive stock option plan. The objective of the incentive stock
option is to reward NEOs, employees’ and directors’ individual performance at the discretion of the Board upon the
recommendation of the CGN Committee.
The Company currently maintains a formal stock option plan, under which stock options have been granted and
may be granted to purchase shares equal to 10% of the Company’s issued capital from time to time. For details of the
stock option plan please review the Company’s Management Information Circular for the Annual and Special Meeting
of Shareholders held February 25, 2014 which is available on the Company’s SEDAR profile at www.sedar.com and
on the Company’s EDGAR profile at www.sec.gov.
The stock option plan is administered by the CGN Committee. The process the Company uses to grant option
based awards is outlined in the Company’s Stock Option Policy that was adopted by the Board on August 30, 2013.
3) Incentive Plan Awards
Outstanding share-based awards and option-based awards
The following table sets forth the options granted to the NEOs to purchase or acquire securities of the Company
outstanding at the end of the most recently completed financial year ended August 31, 2014:
Option-based Awards
Share-based Awards
Market
or
payout 
value
of
share- 
based 
awards
that 
have 
not
Market or 
payout 
value of 
vested 
share- 
based 
awards 
not paid 
out or
Number
of
shares 
or units
of
shares
that 
have 
not
vested
vested
distributed
(#)
Nil
($)
Nil
($)
Nil
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised
options
(#)
Option 
exercise
price
($)
300,000(3)
250,000(3)
200,000(2)
200,000(2)
150,000(3)
200,000(2)
8.62
2.62
1.75
1.19
0.59
0.81
Value of
unexercised
in-the- 
money 
options
($)(1)
Option
expiration
Date
Apr27/16
Nil
Nov28/16
Aug31/17
Feb28/18
Jan06/19
Mar04/19
89
150,000(3)
200,000(3)
120,000(2)
120,000(2)
150,000(3)
120,000(2)
400,000(2)
40,000(2)
120,000(2)
400,000(2)
80,000(2)
4.07
4.47
1.75
0.88
0.59
0.54
1.54
0.59
0.54
2.00
1.75
(2)
80,000(2)
80,000(2)
400,000 (3)
80,000 (2)
0.88
0.54
1.59
0.70
Dec21/15
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Aug31/16
Aug31/17
May31/18
Jan06/19
May31/19
Jul01/17
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Jan06/19
May31/19
Jun30/15
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Aug31/17
May31/18
May31/19
Jun20/17
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Dec01/18
Name
DONALD
BUBAR 
Director,
President 
and CEO
R. JAMES 
ANDERSEN 
CFO and Vice 
President,
Finance
DAVID MARSH 
Vice President, 
Metallurgy and 
Interim COO
PIERRE
NEATBY 
Vice President, 
Sales and 
Marketing
WILLIAM 
MERCER 
Vice President, 
Exploration
______________
(1)
In-the-Money Options is the difference between the market value of the underlying securities at August 31, 2014
In-the-Money Options is the difference between the market value of the underlying securities at August 31, 2014
and the exercise price of the option. The closing market price of the Company's common shares as at August 31,
2014 was $0.46 per common share.
These options vest as to 25% thereof on each of the first four anniversaries of the date of grant thereof and have
a term of five years.
(2)
90
(3)
These options vest as to 50% thereof on each of the date of grant and the first anniversary thereof and have a
term of five years.
Incentive plan awards – value vested or earned during the year
An “incentive plan” is any plan providing compensation that depends on achieving certain performance goals or
similar conditions within a specific period. An “incentive plan award” means compensation awarded, earned, paid or
payable under an incentive plan.
The following table sets forth the value vested or earned during the year of option-based awards, share-based
awards and non-equity incentive plan compensation paid to NEOs during the most recently completed financial year
ended August 31, 2014:
Option-based awards – 
Value vested during the
Share-based awards – 
Value vested during the
Non-equity incentive plan
compensation –
Value earned during the
Name
DONALD BUBAR 
Director, President and 
CEO
R. JAMES ANDERSEN 
CFO and Vice President, 
Finance
DAVID MARSH 
Vice President, Metallurgy 
and Interim COO
PIERRE NEATBY 
Vice President, Sales and 
Marketing
WILLIAM MERCER 
Vice President, Exploration
year 
($) (1)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
year 
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
year 
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
________________
(1)  The  value  of  the  options  vested  during  the  year  for  each  NEO  is  based  on  the  closing  market  price  of  the
Company’s common shares on the TSX on the vesting date less the option exercise price.
4) Pension Plan Benefits
No pension plan or retirement benefit plans have been instituted by the Company and none are proposed at this
time.
Use of Financial Instruments
The Company does not have in place policies which restrict the ability of directors or NEOs to purchase
financial instruments, such as prepaid variable forward contracts, equity swaps, collars, or units of exchange funds,
that are designed to hedge or offset a decrease in market value of equity securities granted as compensation or held,
directly  or  indirectly,  by  a  director  or  NEO.  Any  such  purchases  would  be  subject  to  applicable  insider  reporting
requirements.
5) Termination and Change of Control Benefits
91
The Company has entered into employment agreements with each of the NEOs. Employments agreement can
be terminated:
a)
 
b)
by the employee by providing a minimum of 30 days notice to the Company;
 
by the Company by payment of termination benefits that provide for a payment, which in the case of
Donald Bubar, President and CEO and R. James Andersen, CFO and Vice President, Finance, of an
amount equal to three years the then current salary for each of Donald Bubar and James Andersen
and, in the case of the other NEOs, equal to twelve months’ salary plus one month per year to a
maximum of 24 months;
A “change of control” shall be deemed to have occurred when any person, entity or group becomes the
beneficial owner of 50.1% or more of the combined voting power of the Company’s then outstanding voting securities
entitled to vote generally in the election of directors; or completion of the sale or other disposition by the Company of
all or substantially all of the Company’s assets or a reorganization or merger or consolidation of the Company with any
other  entity  or  corporation,  at  which  time  the  severance  payment  becomes  due  and  payable  on  closing  of  the
transaction, other than:
(i)
(ii)
a reorganization or merger or consolidation that would result in the voting securities of the Company outstanding
immediately prior  thereto  continuing  to  represent,  either  by  remaining  outstanding  or by  being  converted  into
voting securities of another entity, more than 50.1% of the combined voting power of the voting securities of the
Company or such other entity outstanding immediately after such reorganization or merger or consolidation; or
 
a  reorganization  or  merger  or  consolidation  effected  to implement  a  recapitalization  or  reincorporation  of  the
Company (or similar transaction) that does not result in a material change in beneficial ownership of the voting
securities of the Company or its successor.
The following amounts would have been required to be paid assuming a change of control event took place on
the last business day of the Company’s most recently completed financial year:
Name
DONALD BUBAR 
Director, President and CEO
R. JAMES ANDERSEN 
CFO and Vice President, Finance
DAVID MARSH 
Vice President, Metallurgy and 
Interim COO
PIERRE NEATBY 
Vice President, Sales and Marketing
WILLIAM MERCER 
Vice President, Exploration
6) Director Compensation
Change of Control
3x annual salary
3x annual salary
12 months +
1 month per year of employment
12 months +
1 month per year of employment
12 months +
1 month per year of employment
Amount ($)
1,200,000
900,000
450,000
368,333
346,667
During fiscal 2014, directors of the Company (excluding Donald Bubar, who is an officer of the Company) were
paid  a  base  yearly  fee  of  $24,000  plus  a  fee  of  $800  per  Board  or  Committee  meeting  attended  in  person  or  by
conference telephone. An additional fee of $6,000 was paid to each of the Chairman of the Board and the Chairman of
any other permanent committee of the Board. Directors are reimbursed for their out-of-pocket expenses incurred in
attending directors’ and committee meetings.
The Board has determined that, commencing January 1, 2015, the current directors’ fees will be halved with the
result that the directors thereafter will be paid a base yearly fee of $12,000 plus a fee of $400 per Board or committee
meeting  attended  in  person  or  by  conference  telephone.  An  additional  fee  of  $3,000  will  be  paid  to  each  of  the
Chairman of the Board and the Chairman of any other permanent committee of the Board. As partial compensation for
this  reduction,  each  director  (other  than  Mr.  MacEachen  and  Mr.  Bubar)  was  granted  options  to  purchase  50,000
common shares of Avalon and Mr. MacEachen was granted options to purchase 60,000 common shares of Avalon. All
of the foregoing options were granted effective November 24, 2014, have an exercise price of $0.22 per share, have a
five year term and vested immediately.
92
In addition, pursuant to the Stock Option Plan, the Company typically grants options to purchase common
shares to directors of the Company. An aggregate of 700,000 options were granted to the directors during the year
ended August 31, 2014.
The directors are indemnified by the Company against all costs, charges and expenses reasonably incurred by
such director in respect of any action or proceeding to which such director is made a party by reason of being a director
of the Company, subject to the limitations in respect thereof contained in the Canada Business Corporations Act.
The Company maintains insurance coverage with respect of directors’ and officers’ liability which is limited to
$30,000,000 per claim and $30,000,000 per policy period, subject to deductibles of $100,000 to $250,000 as defined
in  the  policy.  The  current  policy  is  for  a  one-year  term  and  expires  on  July  20,  2015.  The  premium  paid  by  the
Company in respect of said insurance in fiscal 2014 was $153,825.
The following table sets forth the value of all compensation paid to the directors, excluding Donald Bubar,
President and CEO who is paid as an officer and not as a director:
Fees 
earned
($)
38,400
38,800
52,000
19,600
44,400
20,600
17,200
Share- 
based 
awards
($)(1)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Option- 
based 
awards
($)(2)
35,810
Nil
32,899
107,093
Nil
Nil
107,093
Non-equity 
incentive
plan
Pension
All other
compensation
($)(3)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
value 
($)(4)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
compensation
($)(5)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Total
($)
74,210
38,800
84,899
126,693
44,400
20,600
124,293
Name
Alan Ferry *
Phil Fontaine *
Brian D.
MacEachen *
Sergio Marchi *
Peter McCarter *
Richard Morland
*(6)
Kenneth G.
Thomas *
_________________ 
*Independent and Non-Employee Directors.
(1)
(2)
The Company does not currently have any share-based award plans.
These  amounts  represent  the  “grant  date  fair  value”  of options  granted  to  the  respective  Named  Executive
Officer, which have been determined by using the Black-Scholes model, a mathematical valuation model that
ascribes a value to an option based on a number of factors in valuing the option-based awards, including the
exercise  price  of  the option,  the  price  of  the  underlying  security  on  the  date  the  option  was granted,  and
assumptions with respect to the volatility of the price of the underlying security and the risk-free rate of return.
Calculating  the value  of  options  using  this  methodology  is  very  different  from  a  simple “in-the-money”  value
calculation. In fact, options that are well out-of-the-money can still have a significant “grant date fair value” based
in a Black-Scholes valuation, especially where, as in the case of the Company, the price of the common shares
underlying the option is highly volatile. Accordingly, caution must be exercised in comparing grant date fair value
amounts with cash compensation or an in-the-money option value calculation. The same caution applies to the
total compensation amounts shown in the last column above, which are based in part the grant date fair value
amounts set out in the column for Option-based awards. These values are consistent with the accounting values
used  in  the Company’s  financial  statements.  The  Company  selected  the  Black-Scholes model  given  its
prevalence of use within North America.
The Company does not have a non-equity incentive plan.
The Company does not have any pension plans.
The Company does not have any other benefit plans for its directors.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6) Mr. Morland served as a director until February 25, 2014.
93
The Company may grant incentive stock options to Directors of the Company from time to time pursuant to the
stock option plan of the Company and in accordance with the policies of the TSX.
Outstanding share-based awards and option-based awards
The following table sets forth the options granted to the directors to purchase or acquire securities of the
Company outstanding at August 31, 2014:
Option-based Awards
Share-based Awards
Name(1)
Alan Ferry
Phil Fontaine
Brian D.
MacEachen
Sergio Marchi
Peter McCarter
Market or 
payout 
value of 
share- 
based 
awards 
that have
not vested
Number 
of shares 
units of 
shares 
that have 
not vested
Market or 
payout 
value of 
vested 
share- 
based 
awards 
not paid 
out or
distributed
(#)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Value of
unexercised
or
in-the- 
money 
options
($)(2)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised
options
(#)
Option 
exercise
price
($)
Option
expiration
date
50,000(4)
50,000(4)
50,000(4)
50,000(4)
75,000(4)
50,000(4)
175,000(3)
50,000(4)
50,000(4)
50,000(4)
50,000(4)
75,000(4)
225,000(3)
50,000(4)
175,000(4)
225,000(3)
3.43
1.99
0.99
0.84
0.48
3.43
2.80
3.43
1.01
0.99
0.72
0.48
0.81
3.43
1.44
0.81
Dec01/16
Aug27/17
Apr29/18
Mar05/19
Jul14/19
Dec01/16
Sep04/14
Dec01/16
Apr19/18
Apr29/18
Mar12/19
Jul14/19
Mar04/19
Dec01/16
Nov27/17
Mar04/19
Kenneth G.
Thomas
______________________
(1)
(2)
For the compensation of Donald Bubar who is a NEO of the Company, see “Incentive Plan Awards” above.
In-the-Money Options is the difference between the market value of the underlying securities at August 31, 2014
(3)
(4)
and the exercise price of the option. The closing market price of the Company's common shares as at August 31,
2014 was $0.46 per common share.
These options vest as to 25% thereof on each of the first four anniversaries of the date of grant thereof and have
a term of five years.
These options vest as to 50% thereof on each of the date of grant and the first anniversary thereof and have a
term of five years.
Incentive plan awards – value vested or earned during the year
94
An “incentive plan” is any plan providing compensation that depends on achieving certain performance goals or
similar conditions within a specific period. An “incentive plan award” means compensation awarded, earned, paid or
payable under an incentive plan.
The following table sets forth the value vested or earned during the year of option-based awards, share-based
awards and non-equity incentive plan compensation paid to directors during the year ended August 31, 2014:
Name(1)
Alan Ferry
Phil Fontaine
Brian D. MacEachen
Sergio Marchi
Peter McCarter
Richard Morland
Kenneth G. Thomas
_________________________
(1)
(2)
Option-based
awards – Value
vested during
the year
($) (2)
375
Nil
875
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Share-based
awards – Value  
vested during
the year
Non-equity
incentive plan
compensation –
Value earned
during the year
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
For the compensation of Donald Bubar who is a NEO of the Company, see “Incentive Plan Awards” above.
The value of the options  vested  during  the  year  for  each director is based on the closing market price of the
Company’s common shares on the TSX on the vesting date less the option exercise price.
C. Board Practices
The Board is currently comprised of seven directors. The size and experience of the Board is important for
providing the Company with effective governance in the mining industry. The Board’s mandate and responsibilities
can be effectively and efficiently administered at its current size. The Board has functioned, and is of the view that it
can continue to function, independently of management as required. Directors are elected for a term of one year at the
annual meeting of shareholders. At the Annual and Special Meeting, held on February 25, 2014, the shareholders
elected Messrs. Bubar, Ferry, Fontaine, Marchi, MacEachen, McCarter and Thomas as directors.
The Board has considered the relationship of each director to the Company and currently considers six of the
seven directors to be “unrelated” (Messrs. Ferry, Fontaine, Marchi, MacEachen, McCarter and Thomas). “Unrelated
director” means a director who is independent of management and free from any interest and any business or other
relationship which could reasonably be perceived to materially interfere with the director’s ability to act with a view to
the best interest of the Company, other than interests and relationships arising solely from shareholdings.
Procedures are in place to allow the Board to function independently. At the present time, the Board has
experienced directors that have made a significant contribution to the Company’s success, and are satisfied that it is
not constrained in its access to information, in its deliberations or in its ability to satisfy the mandate established by law
to  supervise  the  business  and  affairs  of  the  Company.  Committees  meet  independent  of  management  and  other
directors.
Mandate of the Board of Directors, its Committees and Management
The role of the Board is to oversee the conduct of the Company’s business, including the supervision of
management,  and  determining  the  Company’s  strategy.  Management  is  responsible  for  the  Company’s  day  to  day
operations,  including  proposing  its  strategic  direction  and  presenting  budgets  and  business  plans  to  the  Board  for
consideration and approval. The strategic plan takes into account, among other things, the opportunities and risks of
the  Company’s  business.  Management  provides  the  Board  with  periodic  assessments  as  to  those  risks  and  the
implementation  of  the  Company’s  systems  to  manage  those  risks.  The  Board  reviews  the  personnel  needs  of  the
Company  from  time  to  time,  having  particular  regard  to  succession  issues  relating  to  senior  management.
Management is responsible for the training and development of personnel. The Board assesses how effectively the
Company communicates with shareholders, but has not adopted a formal communications policy. Through the Audit
Committee, and in conjunction with its auditors, the Board assesses the adequacy of the Company’s internal control
and  management  information  systems.  The  Board  looks  to  management  to  keep  it  informed  of  all  significant
developments  relating  to  or  effecting  the  Company’s  operations.  Major  financings,  acquisitions,  dispositions  and
investments are subject to Board approval. The Board adopted a formal mandate for the Board, the Chair of the Board
and the CEO. The Board meets quarterly and additionally as required. The Board and committees may take action at
these meetings or at a meeting by conference call or by written consent.
95
Majority Voting Policy
The Board has adopted a policy providing that in an uncontested election of directors, any nominee who
receives a greater number of votes “withheld” than votes “for” will tender his or her resignation to the Chairman of the
Board  promptly  following  the  shareholders’  meeting.  The  Compensation,  Governance  and  Nominating  Committee
(“CGN Committee”) of the Board will consider the offer of resignation and will make a recommendation to the Board on
whether to accept it. In considering whether or not to accept the resignation, the CGN Committee will consider all
factors  deemed  relevant  by  members  of  such  Committee.  The  CGN  Committee  will  be  expected  to  accept  the
resignation except in situations where the considerations would warrant the applicable director continuing to serve on
the Board. The Board will make its final decision and announce it in a press release within 90 days following the
Meeting. A director who tenders his or her resignation pursuant to this policy will not participate in any meeting of the
Board or the CGN Committee at which the resignation is considered.
Board Effectiveness Assessment
The CGN Committee of the Board is in the process of implementing an annual process for assessing the
effectiveness of the Board as a whole, as well as its committees and individual directors. As part of the assessment
process, each director will receive a comprehensive survey which covers, among other matters, the overall functioning
of the Board and each Board committee, including its composition, structure and processes; the management structure
and reporting functions; the Company’s strategic direction and commitment to sustainability; the Board’s operational
oversight, the Board’s relationship with management; and other relevant aspects of the Board’s responsibilities and
processes. The completed surveys will then be compiled into a report which will be provided to the CGN Committee.
The  CGN  Committee  will  review  the  results  of  the  board  surveys  and  put  forward  any  recommendations  it  feels
appropriate 
the
recommendations of the CGN Committee, will then be presented to the Board for further discussion.
to  address  any  comments  or  concerns  expressed  by  directors.  The  report,  along  with
Committees
Audit Committee
The Audit Committee assists the Board in its oversight of the Company’s consolidated financial statements and
other related public disclosures, the Company’s compliance with legal and regulatory requirements relating to financial
reporting, the external auditors, qualifications and independence and the performance of the internal audit function and
the external auditors. The Audit Committee has direct communications channels with the Company’s auditors. The
Audit Committee reviews the Company’s financial statements and related management’s discussion and analysis of
financial and operating results. The Audit Committee can retain legal, accounting or other advisors.
The Audit Committee currently consists of three directors (Brian MacEachen (chair), Alan Ferry and Peter
McCarter). All of the members are unrelated, financially literate and at least one member has accounting or related
financial  expertise.  “Financially  literate”  means  the  ability  to  read  and  understand  statements  of  financial  position,
statements of operations and comprehensive loss, statements of shareholders’ equity, statements of cash flow and
notes to financial statements. “Accounting or related financial expertise” means the ability to analyze and interpret a full
set of financial statements, including the notes attached thereto.
96
Mr.  MacEachen  is  a  Chartered  Accountant  with  over  20  years  of  experience  in  overseeing  the  financial
management of publicly traded companies. He holds a BBA and CA.
Mr. Ferry is a retired Chartered Financial Analyst with over 25 years of experience as a mining analyst with
various investment dealers. He holds a B.Sc. and serves on the board of directors of five publicly traded companies
and the audit committee of four publicly traded companies.
Mr. McCarter is a retired mining executive and holds a B.A., LL.B. and M.B.A.
The Board has adopted a charter for the Audit Committee (which is attached as an exhibit to the annual report)
which is reviewed annually and sets out the role and oversight responsibilities of the Audit Committee with respect to:
its relationship with and expectation of the external auditors, including the establishment of the independence of
the external auditor and the approval of any non-audit mandates of the external auditor;
determination of which non-audit services the external auditor is prohibited from providing;
the engagement, evaluation, remuneration, and termination of the external auditors;
appropriate funding for the payment of the auditor’s compensation and for any advisors retained by the audit
committee;
its relationship with and expectation of the internal auditor;
its oversight of internal control;
disclosure of financial and related information; and
any other matter that the audit committee feels is important to its mandate or that which the board chooses to
delegate to it.
Compensation, Governance and Nominating Committee
The CGN Committee is responsible for reviewing the compensation of the Company’s directors and officers and
making recommendations to the Board with respect thereto.
The CGN Committee of the Board is responsible for making recommendations to the Board with respect to the
compensation of the executive officers of the Company as well as, among other things, with respect to the Company’s
Stock Option Plan and any other employee benefits and/or plans and with respect to directors’ compensation. The
Board (exclusive of the CEO, who is also a member of the Board) reviews such recommendations and gives final
approval to the compensation of the executive officers.
The CGN Committee currently consists of Peter McCarter (Chair), Alan Ferry and Sergio Marchi, each of whom
are independent. Each of Messrs. McCarter and Ferry has direct and extensive experience in corporate management
and compensation issues in either the mining industry and/or the financial industry. Mr. McCarter was previously the
Executive  Vice-President,  Corporate  Affairs  for  Aur  Resources  Inc.  (“Aur”),  a  publicly  listed  international  mining
company, in which role he had responsibility for managing Aur’s human resources matters. Mr. Ferry is a member of
the  committee  responsible  for  compensation  matters  of  Guyana  Goldfields  Inc.,  GPM  Metals  Inc.,  and  Macusani
Yellowcake Inc., all publicly listed mineral exploration or mining companies. While Mr. Marchi was a Cabinet Minister
in the Government of Canada between 1993 and 1999, he was responsible for determining the compensation of his
political staff, which numbered approximately 25 people.
The CGN Committee has not to date felt it necessary to engage any compensation consultant or advisor to
assist  it  in  the  performance  of  its  duties.  This  experience  relating  to  executive  compensation  matters  collectively
provides  members  of  the  Committee  with  a  suitable  perspective  to  make  decisions  on  the  appropriateness  of  the
Company’s compensation policies and practices.
97
The CGN Committee of the Board is responsible for recommending candidates for nomination to the Board, and
governing the desirable characteristics for directors. In making such recommendations, the CGN Committee considers:
(a)
(b)
the  competencies  and  skills  that  the  Board  considers  to be  necessary  for  the  Board,  as  a  whole,  to
possess;
the competencies and skills that the Board considers each existing director to possess; and
(c)
the competencies and skills that the Board considers each existing director to possess; and
the competencies and skills each new nominee will bring to the boardroom.
The CGN Committee reviews compensation levels for all officers and in particular compensation levels for the
CEO. The CGN Committee is responsible for, among other things, developing or approving performance indicators
and corporate objectives which the President and CEO is responsible for meeting, determining or recommending to
the Board the compensation of the President and CEO, and reviewing the adequacy and form of compensation of the
Board and members of the committees of the Board in light of the responsibilities and risks involved in being a director,
in the case of the Board, and a chairman, in the case of Board committees. The CGN Committee meets as often as is
necessary to carry out its responsibilities.
The CGN Committee is permitted access to all records and corporate information that it determines are required
in  order  to  perform  its  duties.  The  CGN  Committee  has  the  authority  to  engage  independent  counsel  and  other
advisors  as  it  determines  necessary  to  carry  out  its  duties  and  to  set  and  pay  the  compensation  for  any  advisors
engaged by it.
The CGN Committee currently consists of three directors (Messrs. McCarter, Alan Ferry and Sergio Marci). All of
the members are unrelated directors.
D. Employees
As at August 31, 2014, the Company has 17 employees. All of these employees are located in Ontario, and
there have been no significant change in the number of employees during Fiscal 2014.
E. Share Ownership
As of November 24, 2014, the Company had 127,725,653 common shares issued and outstanding. The
following table sets forth the share ownership of the individuals referred to in “Compensation” as of November 24,
2014:
Name of Beneficial Owner
R. James Andersen
Donald Bubar
Alan Ferry
Phil Fontaine
Brian D. MacEachen
Sergio Marchi
David Marsh
Peter McCarter
William Mercer
Pierre Neatby
Kenneth G. Thomas
Outstanding Options
Number of
Shares
Percent
300,000  
1,750,000  
225,000  
10,000  
340,000  
10,000  
8,000  
80,000  
106,234  
23,500  
42,000
0.2
1.4
0.2
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
98
The following information, as of November 24, 2014, reflects outstanding options held by the individuals
referred to in “Compensation”:
Number of common 
shares underlying 
unexercised options
Name
(#)
DONALD BUBAR
300,000
250,000
200,000
Grant Date
Apr27/11
Nov28/11
Sep01/12
200,000
Mar01/13
Exercise Price ($)
Expiration Date
8.62
2.62
1.75
1.19
Apr27/16
Nov28/16
Aug31/17
Feb28/18
R. JAMES
ANDERSEN
DAVID MARSH
PIERRE NEATBY
WILLIAM MERCER
ALAN FERRY
PHIL FONTAINE
BRIAN D.
MACEACHEN
SERGIO MARCHI
PETER MCCARTER
150,000
200,000
150,000
150,000
200,000
120,000
120,000
150,000
120,000
125,000
400,000
40,000
120,000
125,000
400,000
80,000
80,000
80,000
100,000
400,000
80,000
100,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
75,000
50,000
50,000
175,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
75,000
60,000
225,000
50,000
50,000
Jan07/14
Mar05/14
Nov24/14
Dec21/10
Aug31/11
Sep01/12
Jun01/13
Jan07/14
Jun05/14
Nov24/14
Jul01/12
Jan07/14
Jun05/14
Nov24/14
Jun30/10
Sep01/12
Jun01/13
Jun05/14
Nov24/14
Jun20/12
Dec02/13
Nov24/14
Dec01/11
Aug27/12
Apr29/13
Mar06/14
Jul15/14
Nov24/14
Dec01/11
Sep04/14
Nov24/14
99
Dec01/11
Apr19/13
Apr29/13
Mar13/14
Jul15/14
Nov24/14
Mar05/14
Nov24/14
Dec01/11
0.59
0.81
0.22
4.07
4.47
1.75
0.88
0.59
0.54
0.22
1.54
0.59
0.54
0.22
2.00
1.75
0.88
0.54
0.22
1.59
0.70
0.22
3.43
1.99
0.99
0.84
0.48
0.22
3.43
0.47
0.22
3.43
1.01
0.99
0.72
0.48
0.22
0.81
0.22
3.43
Jan06/19
Mar04/19
Nov23/19
Dec21/15
Aug31/16
Aug31/17
May31/18
Jan06/19
May31/19
Nov23/19
Jul01/17
Jan06/19
May31/19
Nov23/19
Jun30/15
Aug3/17
May31/18
May31/19
Nov23/19
Jun20/17
Dec01/18
Nov23/19
Dec01/16
Aug27/17
Apr29/18
Mar5/19
Jul14/19
Nov23/19
Dec01/16
Sep3/19
Nov23/19
Dec01/16
Apr19/18
Apr29/18
Mar12/19
Jul14/19
Nov23/19
Mar04/19
Nov23/19
Dec01/16
175,000
50,000
175,000
50,000
225,000
50,000
Nov28/12
Nov24/14
Sep01/11
Dec01/11
Mar05/14
Nov24/14
1.44
0.22
4.36
3.43
0.81
0.22
Nov27/17
Nov23/19
Sep01/16
Dec01/16
Mar04/19
Nov23/19
RICHARD MORLAND
KENNETH G.
THOMAS
Outstanding Warrants
The following information, as of November 24, 2014, reflects outstanding share purchase warrants held by the
individuals referred to in “Compensation”:
Number of common 
shares underlying
unexercised 
warrants (#)
Issuance Date
Exercise Price ($)
Expiration Date
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
5,000
25,000
Nil
Nil
Jul02/14
Jul02/14
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.60
0.60
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Jul02/17
Jul02/17
n/a
n/a
Name
DONALD BUBAR
R. JAMES
ANDERSEN
DAVID MARSH
PIERRE NEATBY
WILLIAM MERCER
ALAN FERRY
PHIL FONTAINE
BRIAN D.
MACEACHEN
SERGIO MARCHI
PETER MCCARTER
RICHARD MORLAND
KENNETH G.
THOMAS
Item 7. Major Shareholders and Related Party Transactions
A. Major Shareholders
100
As far as it is known to the Company, it is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by any other corporation
or by the Canadian Government, or any foreign government, or by any other natural or legal person.
To the knowledge of the Company’s directors and senior officers, no shareholder is the direct and/or indirect
owner of more than five (5%) percent of the Company’s common shares, who owned more than five percent of the
outstanding shares of each class of the Company’s voting securities.
Changes in ownership by major shareholders
To the best of the Company’s knowledge there have been no changes in the ownership of the Company’s
shares by its significant shareholders other than as disclosed herein.
Voting Rights
The Company’s major shareholders do not have different voting rights.
Shares Held in the United States
As of November 24, 2014, there were approximately 248 registered holders of the Company’s shares in the
United States, with combined holdings of 38,610,431 common shares.
Change of Control
As of the date of this annual report, there were no arrangements known to the Company which may, at a
subsequent date, result in a change of control of the Company.
Control by Others
To the best of the Company’s knowledge, the Company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by
another corporation, any foreign government, or any other natural or legal person, severally or jointly.
B. Related Party Transactions
There had been no material trading transactions with related parties (except for the 212,000 Flow-Through
Shares and 60,000 Non Flow-Through Units issued to certain directors and officers as part of the Private Placement)
during the year ended August 31, 2014. The Company did not make any loans (including guarantees of any kind) to
any  related  parties  throughout  fiscal  2014  and  there  were  no  amounts  outstanding  due  from  or  due  to  any  related
parties as at November 24, 2014.
Management transactions
The Company has identified its directors and key members of its senior management team. The compensation
costs for key management personnel for the years ended August 31, 2014 and 2013 are as follows:
Salaries, benefits and directors’ fees
Share-based compensation (1)
$
 
$
2014
   
 2,539,867  $
 
 2,778,888  $
239,021
2013
 
 3,282,444 
1,946,091 
 5,228,535
(1)
Fair value of stock options earned and recognized as share based compensation during the respective reporting
period.
101
Share-based compensation decreased by $1,707,070 to $239,021 during fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2013.
This decrease is primarily related to the decrease in the estimated average fair values of the options and the total
number of options earned by key management personnel during Fiscal 2014 compared to Fiscal 2013.
C. Interests of Experts and Counsel
Unless otherwise stated, the technical information set forth herein relating to the Nechalacho Project under the
heading “Nechalacho Project”, is substantially derived from and in some instances extracted from: (a) the technical
report  entitled  “Technical  Report  Disclosing  the  Results  of  the  Feasibility  Study  on  the  Nechalacho  Rare  Earth
Elements  Project”  dated  May  31,  2013,  effective  April  17,  2013  (the  “Technical  Report”)  and  prepared  by  Tudorel
Ciuculescu, M.Sc., P.Geo. of RPA, Kevin Hawton, P.Eng. of Knight Piesold Limited, and Bernard Foo, P.Eng., Richard
Gowans, P.Eng., Christopher Jacobs, C.Eng., MIMMM, and Jane Spooner, P.Geo., all of Micon, each of whom is a
qualified person pursuant to NI 43-101; and (b) the Company’s news release dated August 15, 2013 each of which is
available  for  review  on  the  Company’s  SEDAR  profile  at  www.sedar.com  and  on  the  Company’s  website  at
www.avalonraremetals.com, and on the Company’s EDGAR profile at www.sec.gov.
Dr. William Mercer, P.Geo., Vice President, Exploration of the Company, David Marsh, Senior Vice President,
Metallurgy and Interim COO of the Company, and Donald S. Bubar, P. Geo., President and Chief Executive Officer of
the Company, are the qualified persons who prepared or supervised the preparation of, or reviewed and approved, as
applicable, the technical information (including the technical information relating to mineral processing and metallurgy)
contained  under  the  headings  "Nechalacho  Project"  and  Mr.  Mercer  also  reviewed  and  approved  the  technical
information contained in "Other Properties and Assets".
Other than 1,750,000 common shares of the Company held by Mr. Bubar, the aforementioned firms and persons
held either less than one percent or no securities of the Company or of any associate or affiliate of the Company at or
following  the  time  when  they  prepared  the  Technical  Report,  or  prepared  or  supervised  the  preparation  of,  or
approved,  as  applicable,  the  technical  information  contained  under  the  headings  "Nechalacho  Project"  and  "Other
Properties and Assets", as applicable, and either did not receive any or received less than a one percent direct or
indirect interest in any securities of the Company or of any associate or affiliate of the Company in connection with the
preparation, supervision of the preparation, or approval, of such disclosure.
Other  than  Messrs.  Mercer,  Marsh  and  Bubar,  who  are  currently  officers  of  the  Company,  none  of  the
aforementioned  persons,  nor  any  directors,  officers  or  employees  of  such  the  aforementioned  firms,  is  currently
expected to be elected, appointed or employed as a director, officer or employee of the Company or of any associate
or affiliate of the Company.
Deloitte LLP, Chartered Accountants are the independent auditors of the Company in respect of the audited
consolidated  financial  statements  of  the  Company  for  the  year  ended  August  31,  2014,  and  the  auditor’s  report
thereon. Deloitte LLP has advised the Company that it is independent within the meaning of the Rules of Professional
Conduct of the Chartered Professional Accountants of Ontario.
Item 8. Financial Information
A. Consolidated Statements and Other Financial Information
The following financial statements of the Company are attached to this Annual Report:
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms;
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as at August 31, 2014, and August 31, 2013;
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss, change in equity and cash flows for the years ended August
31, 2014, 2013 and 2012;
Notes to Financial Statements for the years ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.
Legal Proceedings
102
The Company is not involved in any legal or arbitration proceedings, including those relating to bankruptcy,
receivership or similar proceedings and those involving any third party, which may have, or had in the recent past,
significant effects on the Company’s financial position or profitability, including governmental proceedings pending or
known to be contemplated.
Dividend Policy
The Company has never paid any dividends and does not intend to in the near future.
B. Significant Changes
None.
Item 9. The Offer and Listing
A. Price History of Stock
The common shares of Avalon are listed on the TSX and the NYSE MKT under the symbol "AVL" and the
Frankfurt Stock Exchange under the symbol “OU5”.
As of November 24, 2014, there were 248 holders of record in the United States holding 38,610,431 of the
Company’s common shares representing approximately 70% of the total number of shareholders, and approximately
30%  of  the  total  number  of  common  shares  issued.  The  common  shares  are  issued  in  registered  form  and  the
percentage of shares reported to be held by record holders in the United States is taken from the records of the TMX
Equity Transfer Services Inc. in the City of Toronto, the registrar and transfer agent for our common shares.
The following table sets forth the high and low prices expressed in Canadian dollars on TSX in Canada and in
United States dollars on the NYSE MKT for the Company’s common shares for the past five years, for each quarter for
the last two fiscal years, and for the last six months.
Last Five Fiscal Years
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2013- 2014
Fourth Quarter ended August 31, 2014
Third Quarter ended May 31, 2014
Second Quarter ended February 28, 2014
First Quarter ended November 30, 2013
2012- 2013
Fourth Quarter ended August 31, 2013
Third Quarter ended May 31, 2013
Second Quarter ended February 28, 2013
First Quarter ended November 30, 2012
High
                     
 0.57
                     
 0.89
                     
 0.76
                     
 1.09
High
                     
 0.99
                     
 1.23
                     
 1.61
                     
 2.40
103
TSX
(Canadian Dollars)
 High
Low
                     
 1.09
                     
 2.40
                     
 4.45
                     
 9.65
                     
 4.24
0.45
0.52
1.39
2.97
1.89
NYSE MKT
(United States
Dollars)
High
Low
1.07
2.47
4.54
10.11
n/a
0.53
0.81
0.70
1.07
Low
High
Low
0.97
1.21
1.64
2.47
Low
0.45
High
0.53
0.48
0.63
Low
0.52
0.88
1.02
1.21
0.40
0.50
1.36
3.64
n/a
0.40
0.49
0.46
0.60
0.50
0.88
1.01
1.20
0.18
0.22
 0.31
 0.40
 0.44
 0.44
 0.49
Last Six Months
November 2014 (from November 1 through 24,
2014)
October 2014
September 2014
August 2014
July 2014
June 2014
May 2014
High
0.24
Low
0.21
0.38
                     0.50
                     0.49
                     0.52
                     0.57
                     0.65
0.25  
   0.36  
   0.45  
   0.47  
   0.46  
   0.53
High
Low
0.23
0.34
     0.46
     0.46
     0.48
     0.53
     0.60
________________
*The Company was initially listed on the TSX Venture Exchange and graduated to the TSX on February 28, 2008. 
**The Company listed on the NYSE MKT on December 21, 2010.
B. Plan of Distribution
Not Applicable.
C. Markets
Common Shares
Avalon’s common shares became listed and posted for trading on the TSX on February 28, 2008 under the
trading symbol “AVL”, prior to which they were listed on the TSX Venture Exchange under the same trading symbol.
Effective December 22, 2010, the Company’s common shares were listed on the NYSE MKT LLC in the United States
also under the trading symbol AVL. The Company’s common shares are also traded on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange
in Germany under the symbol “OU5”.
The following table sets out the range of the market price and trading volumes of the common shares on the
TSX for the periods indicated:
Period
November (1)
   October
   September
   August
   July
   June
   May
   April
   March
   February
   January
2013
   December
High
$0.24
$0.38
$0.50
$0.49
$0.52
$0.57
$0.65
$0.74
$0.89
$0.76
$0.68
$0.72
2014
104
Period
   November
   October
   September
Note:
 
(1) November 1, 2014 through November 24, 2014.
High
$0.90
$1.04
$1.09
Low
$0.21
$0.25
$0.36
$0.45
$0.47
$0.46
$0.53
$0.62
$0.65
$0.57
$0.57
$0.48
Low
$0.63
$0.85
$0.77
Volume
2,553,111
 2,082,842
2,056,233
1,661,214
2,056,991
3,288,017
1,663,765
2,874,234
3,871,033
3,132,357
3,831,400
5,619,370
Volume
1,593,553
1,755,192
3,628,527
The following table sets out the range of the market price and trading volumes of the common shares on the
NYSE MKT for the periods indicated:
Period
High (US$)
Low (US$)
2014
November (1)
   October
   September
   August
   July
   June
   May
   April
   March
   February
$0.23
$0.34
$0.46
$0.46
$0.48
$0.53
$0.60
$0.67
$0.81
$0.70
$0.18
$0.20
$0.31
$0.40
$0.44
$0.44
$0.49
$0.56
$0.58
$0.51
Volume
6,126,549
5,759,245
4,699,696
3,047,365
3,347,866
5,551,914
4,035,562
6,206,692
13,032,617
9,293,068
January
$0.62
2013
December
   November
   October
   September
Note:
(1) November 1, 2014 through November 24, 2014.
$0.68
$0.85
$1.02
$1.07
Prior Sales
$0.51
$0.46
$0.60
$0.81
$0.72
11,948,788
16,200,443
5,058,422
7,153,935
12,112,561
As of November 24, 2014, the only securities that the Company has outstanding that are not listed or quoted on
a  marketplace  are:  9,449,000  stock  options  granted  under  the  Company’s  Stock  Option  Plan,  7,719,013  warrants
issued  to  various  stakeholders  and  554,273  brokers’  compensation  warrants.  Set  forth  in  the  following  tables  is
information with respect to the stock options, warrants and brokers’ compensation warrants issued during the most
recently completed financial year.
105
The Plan provides for the issuance of up to 10% of the number of issued and outstanding common shares of the
Company to eligible employees, directors and service providers of the Company. The number of options available to
be granted under the Plan was 1,794,448 as of September 1, 2013 and 4,004,118 as of August 31, 2014.
There has been no change to the exercise price of any outstanding options during the fiscal year ended August
31, 2014.
Stock Options
The following table sets out the stock options granted during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2014.
Date
of Grant
September 1, 2013
October 16, 2013
December 2, 2013
December 16, 2013
January 7, 2014
March 5, 2014
March 6, 2014
March 13, 2014
May 1, 2014
June 5, 2014
July 14, 2014
July 15, 2014
Warrants
Date
of Expiry
August 31, 2018
October 15, 2015
November 30, 2018
December 15, 2018
January 6, 2019
March 4, 2019
March 5, 2019
March 12, 2019
April 30, 2019
June 4, 2019
July 13, 2016
July 14, 2019
Number of
Exercise Price of
Options Granted
Options Granted
95,000
50,000
95,000
200,000
340,000
795,000
50,000
50,000
100,000
405,000
200,000
150,000
$0.83
$0.89
$0.70
$0.54
$0.59
$0.81
$0.84
$ 0.72
$0.62
$0.54
$0.49
$0.48
The following table sets out the warrants issued during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2014
Date of Issuance
Date of Expiry
Number of Warrants
June 13, 2014 (1)
July 2, 2014 (2)
July 31, 2014 (3)
June 13, 2021
July 2, 2017
July 31, 2019
Issued
6,466,513
1,222,500
10,000
Exercise Price of 
Warrants Issued
US$0.56
CDN$0.60
CDN$0.49
Note:
 
         (1)
         (2)
         (3)
Issued pursuant to the US$ Unit Offering completed on June 13, 2014
Issued pursuant to the Private Placement completed on July 2, 2014
Issued pursuant to the Accommodation Agreement with the Deninu K’ue First Nation.
Brokers’ Compensation Warrants
106
The following table sets out the warrants issued during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2014
Date of Issuance
Date of Expiry
Number of Warrants
June 13, 2017
554,273
Issued
June 13, 2014 (1)
Note:
         (1)
Issued pursuant to the US$ Unit Offering completed on June 13, 2014
Exercise Price of 
Warrants Issued
US$0.56
D. Selling Shareholders
Not Applicable.
E. Dilution
Not Applicable.
F. Expenses of the Issue
Not Applicable.
Item 10. Additional Information
Additional information relating to the Company can be found under the Company’s profile on the SEDAR
website at www.sedar.com. Additional information, including directors’ and officers’ remuneration and indebtedness,
principal holders of the Company’s securities and securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans,
if applicable, is contained in the Company’s information circular for its most recent annual meeting of shareholders.
Additional  financial  information  is  provided  in  the  Company’s  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  and
management’s discussion and analysis for its most recently completed financial year.
A. Share Capital
Avalon’s authorized share structure consists of an unlimited number of common shares, of which 126,343,686
common  shares  were  outstanding  as  at  August  31,  2014  and  25,000,000  preferred  shares,  none  of  which  were
outstanding as at August 31, 2014. As of November 24, 2014, Avalon had 127,725,653 common shares issued and
outstanding and no preferred shares issued and outstanding.
B. Memorandum and Articles of Association
Common Shares
All issued and outstanding common shares are fully paid and non-assessable. Holders of common shares of
the Company are entitled to receive notice of any meetings of shareholders of the Company, to attend and to cast one
vote per common share of the Company at all such meetings. Holders of common shares of the Company do not have
cumulative voting rights with respect to the election of directors and, accordingly, holders of a majority of the common
shares of the Company entitled to vote in any election of directors may elect all directors standing for election. Holders
of common shares are entitled to receive on a pro-rata basis such dividends, if any, as and when declared by the
Board of Directors of the Company at its discretion from funds legally available therefore and upon the liquidation,
dissolution or winding up of the Company are entitled to receive on a pro-rata basis the net assets of the Company
after payment of debts and other liabilities, in each case subject to the rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions
attaching to any other series or class of shares ranking senior in priority to or on a pro-rata basis with the holders of
common shares of the Company with respect to dividends or liquidation. The common shares of the Company do not
carry any pre-emptive, subscription, redemption or conversion rights, nor do they contain any sinking or purchase fund
provisions.
107
Powers and Duties of Directors
The directors manage or supervise the management of the affairs and business of the Company and have
authority to exercise all such powers of the Company as are not, by the Canada Business Corporations Act or by the
Articles of Continuance, required to be exercised by the Company in a general meeting.
Directors will serve as such until the next annual meeting. A director who is, in any way, directly or indirectly
interested in an existing or proposed contract or transaction with the Company whereby a duty or interest might be
created to conflict with his duty or interest as a director, shall declare the nature and extent of his interest in such
contract or transaction or the conflict or potential conflict with his duty and interest as a director. Such director shall not
vote in respect of any such contract or transaction with the Company in which he is interested and if he shall do so, his
vote shall not be counted, but he shall be counted in the quorum present at the meeting at which such vote is taken.
However, notwithstanding the foregoing, directors shall have the right to vote on determining the remuneration of the
directors. The Company is not aware of any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction within the three most
recently  completed  financial  years  involving  any  director,  executive  officer,  or  proposed  nominee  for  election  as  a
director or any associate or affiliate of any of the foregoing.
The directors may from time to time on behalf of the Company: (a) borrow money upon the credit of the
Company;  (b)  issue,  re-issue,  sell  or  pledge  debt  obligations  of  the  Company;  (c)  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the
Canada Business Corporations Act, as now enacted or as the same may from time to time be amended, re-enacted or
replaced, give a guarantee on behalf of the Company to secure performance of an obligation of any person; and (d)
mortgage, hypothecate, pledge or otherwise create a security interest in all or any property of the Company owned or
subsequently acquired, to secure any obligation of the Company.
The directors may from time to time delegate to a director, a committee of directors or an officer of the Company
any or all of the powers conferred on the board as set out above, to such extent and in such manner as the board shall
determine at the time of such delegation. Except in the case of any class or series of shares of the Company listed on a
stock exchange, the Company shall have a lien on the shares registered in the name of a shareholder or his legal
representative for a debt of that shareholder to the Company. Between annual and general meetings of the Company,
the directors of the Company may appoint one or more additional directors to serve until the next annual and general
meeting but the number of additional directors shall not at any time exceed one-third of the number of directors who
held office at the expiration of the last annual and general meeting.
Every director shall be an individual 18 or more years of age, and no one who is of unsound mind and has been
so found by a court in Canada or elsewhere, or who has the status of a bankrupt shall be a director. A director need not
be a shareholder. At least 25% of the directors of the Company must be resident Canadians.
Shareholders
An annual general meeting is held once in every calendar year at such time and place as may be determined
by the directors. A quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of shareholders is two persons present in
person,  each  being  a  shareholder  entitled  to  vote  thereat  or  a  duly  appointed  proxy  or  proxyholder  for  an  absent
shareholder so entitled, holding or representing in the aggregate not less than 25% of the issued and outstanding
shares of the Company carrying voting rights at the meeting of shareholders. There is no limitation imposed by the
laws of Canada or by the charter or other constituent documents of the Company on the right of a non-resident to hold
or vote the common shares, other than as provided in the Investment Canada Act (the “Investment Act”) discussed
below under “Item 10. Additional Information, D. Exchange Controls.”
108
In accordance with the laws of Canada, directors shall be elected annually by an “ordinary resolution” which
means a resolution passed by the shareholders of the Company at an annual meeting by a simple majority of the votes
cast in person or by proxy. A director's term of office shall be from the date of the meeting at which he is elected or
appointed until the close of the annual meeting next following, or until his successor is elected or appointed.
Under the laws of Canada Business Corporations Act and the Securities Act (Ontario) certain items such as an
amendment  to  the  Company’s  articles  or  entering  into  a  merger  requires  approval  by  a  special  resolution  which
means: (a) a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the votes cast by the shareholders of the
Company  who,  being  entitled  to  do  so,  vote  in  person  or  by  proxy  at  a  general  meeting  of  the  Company;  or  (b)  a
resolution  consented  to  in  writing  by  every  shareholder  of  the  Company  who  would  have  been  entitled  to  vote  in
person or by proxy at a general meeting of the Company, and a resolution so consented to is deemed to be a special
resolution passed at a general meeting of the Company.
C. Material Contracts
The Company has not entered into any material contracts within the last two years immediately preceding the
date of this annual report, other than contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business or that are summarized
elsewhere in this annual report.
D. Exchange Controls
Canada has no system of exchange controls. There are no Canadian restrictions on the repatriation of capital or
earnings  of  a  Canadian  public  company  to  non-resident  investors.  There  are  no  laws  in  Canada  or  exchange
restrictions affecting the remittance of dividends, profits, interest, royalties and other payments to nonresident holders
of the Issuer’s securities, except as discussed below under “Item 10. Additional Information, E. Taxation.”
There are no limitations under the laws of Canada or in the organizing documents of the Company on the right
of foreigners to hold or vote securities of the Company, except that the Investment Canada Act may require review and
approval by the Minister of Industry (Canada) of certain acquisitions of “control” of the Company by a “non-Canadian”.
The threshold for acquisitions of control is generally defined as being one-third or more of the voting shares of the
Company. “Non-Canadian” generally means an individual who is not a Canadian citizen, or a corporation, partnership,
trust or joint venture that is ultimately controlled by non-Canadians.
E. Taxation
Certain Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations
The following summarizes the principal Canadian federal income tax considerations generally applicable to the
holding  and  disposition  of  common  shares  in  the  capital  of  the  Company  by  a  United  States  resident,  who  holds
common  shares  solely  as  capital  property,  and  does  not  use  or  hold,  and  will  not  be  deemed  to  use  or  hold,  the
common shares in carrying on a business in Canada, referred to as a "U.S. Holder". This summary is based on the
current  provisions  of  the Income  Tax  Act  (Canada),  referred  to  as  the  "Tax  Act",  the  regulations  thereunder,  all
amendments thereto publicly proposed by the government of Canada, the published administrative practices of the
Canada  Revenue  Agency,  and  the  current  provisions  of  the Canada-United  States  Tax  Convention,  1980,  as
amended, referred to as the "Treaty". Except as otherwise expressly provided, this summary does not take into account
any  provincial,  territorial  or  foreign  (including  without  limitation,  any  United  States)  tax  law  or  treaty.  It  has  been
assumed that all currently proposed amendments to the Tax Act will be enacted substantially as proposed and that
there  is  no  other  relevant  change  in  any  governing  law  or  practice,  although  no  assurance  can  be  given  in  these
respects.
Each  U.S.  Holder  is  advised  to  obtain  tax  and  legal  advice  applicable  to  such  U.S.  Holder’s  particular
circumstances.
109
A U.S. Holder will be liable to pay a Canadian withholding tax on every dividend that is or is deemed to be paid
or credited to the U.S. Holder on the U.S. Holder’s common shares. The statutory rate of withholding tax is 25% of the
gross amount of the dividend. The Treaty reduces the statutory rate with respect to dividends paid to a U.S. Holder, if
that U.S. Holder is the beneficial owner of the dividend and is eligible for benefits under the Treaty. Where applicable,
the general rate of withholding tax under the Treaty is reduced to 15% of the gross amount of the dividend, but if the
U.S.  Holder  is  a  company  that  beneficially  owns  at  least  10%  of  the  voting  stock  of  the  Company,  the  rate  of
withholding  tax  is  reduced  to  5%  for  dividends.  The  Company  is  required  to  withhold  the  applicable  tax  from  the
dividend payable to the U.S. Holder, and to remit the tax to the Receiver General of Canada for the account of the U. S.
Holder.
A U.S. Holder generally will not be subject to tax under the Tax Act in respect of a capital gain realized on the
disposition  or  deemed  disposition  of  a  common  share  unless  the  common  share  constitutes  “taxable  Canadian
property” of the U.S. Holder for purposes of the Tax Act and the gain is not exempt from tax pursuant to the terms of the
Treaty.
Provided that the common shares are listed on a “designated stock exchange” for purposes of the Tax Act
(which currently includes the TSX) at the time of disposition, the common shares generally will not constitute “taxable
Canadian  property”  of  a  U.S.  Holder,  unless  at  any  time  during  the  60  month  period  immediately  preceding  the
disposition: (i) the U.S. Holder, persons with whom the U.S. Holder did not deal at “arm’s length” for the purposes of
the Tax Act, partnerships in which the U.S. Holder or a person with whom the U.S. Holder did not deal at arm’s length
held a membership interest directly or indirectly through one or more partnerships, or the U.S. Holder together with all
such persons, owned 25% or more of the issued shares of any class of the Company and; (ii) more than 50% of the fair
market value of the common shares was derived directly or indirectly from one or any combination of real or immovable
property situated in Canada, “Canadian resource properties” (as defined in the Tax Act), “timber resource properties”
(as defined in the Tax Act), or options in respect of, or interests in, or for civil law rights in, such property whether or not
such property exists.
U.S. Holders who may hold common shares as “taxable Canadian property” should consult their own tax
advisors.
Certain United States Federal Income Tax Consequences
The following is a general summary of certain material U.S. federal income tax considerations applicable to a
U.S. Holder (as defined below) arising from and relating to the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of common
shares of the Company.
This summary is for general information purposes only and does not purport to be a complete analysis or listing
of all potential U.S. federal income tax considerations that may apply to a U.S. Holder arising from and relating to the
acquisition, ownership, and disposition of common shares. In addition, this summary does not take into account the
individual  facts  and  circumstances  of  any  particular  U.S.  Holder  that  may  affect  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax
consequences to such U.S. Holder, including specific tax consequences to a U.S. Holder under an applicable tax
treaty. Accordingly, this summary is not intended to be, and should not be construed as, legal or U.S. federal income
tax advice with respect to any U.S. Holder. This summary does not address the U.S. federal alternative minimum, U.S.
federal  estate  and  gift,  U.S.  state  and  local,  and  non-U.S.  tax  consequences  to  U.S.  Holders  of  the  acquisition,
ownership, and disposition of common shares. Except as specifically set forth below, this summary does not discuss
applicable tax reporting requirements. Each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal,
U.S. federal alternative minimum, U.S. federal estate and gift, U.S. state and local, and non-U.S. tax consequences
relating to the acquisition, ownership and disposition of common shares.
No legal opinion from U.S. legal counsel or ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has been
requested, or will be obtained, regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the acquisition, ownership, and
disposition of common shares. This summary is not binding on the IRS, and the IRS is not precluded from taking a
position that is different from, and contrary to, the positions taken in this summary. In addition, because the authorities
on which this summary is based are subject to various interpretations, the IRS and the U.S. courts could disagree with
one or more of the positions taken in this summary.
110
Scope of this Summary
Authorities
This summary is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, Treasury Regulations
(whether final, temporary, or proposed), published rulings of the IRS, published administrative positions of the IRS, the
Convention Between Canada and the United States of America with Respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital,
signed  September  26,  1980,  as  amended,  or  the  Canada-U.S.  Tax  Convention,  and  U.S.  court  decisions  that  are
applicable and, in each case, as in effect and available, as of the date of this document. Any of the authorities on which
this summary is based could be changed in a material and adverse manner at any time, and any such change could
be  applied  on  a  retroactive  or  prospective  basis  which  could  affect  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  considerations
described in this summary. This summary does not discuss the potential effects, whether adverse or beneficial, of any
proposed legislation that, if enacted, could be applied on a retroactive or prospective basis.
U.S. Holders
For purposes of this summary, the term “U.S. Holder” means a beneficial owner of common shares that is for
U.S. federal income tax purposes:
an individual who is a citizen or resident of the U.S.;
a corporation (or other entity taxable as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes) organized under the
laws of the U.S., any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
a trust that (1) is subject to the primary supervision of a court within the U.S. and the control of one or more U.S.
persons for all substantial decisions or (2) has a valid election in effect under applicable Treasury Regulations to
be treated as a U.S. person.
Non-U.S. Holders
For purposes of this summary, a “non-U.S. Holder” is a beneficial owner of common shares that is not a U.S.
Holder. This summary does not address the U.S. federal income tax consequences to non-U.S. Holders arising from
and relating to the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of common shares. Accordingly, a non-U.S. Holder should
consult its own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal, U.S. federal alternative minimum, U.S. federal estate and gift,
U.S.  state  and  local,  and  non-U.S.  tax  consequences  (including  the  potential  application  of  and  operation  of  any
income tax treaties) relating to the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of common shares.
U.S. Holders Subject to Special U.S. Federal Income Tax Rules Not Addressed
This summary does not address the U.S. federal income tax considerations applicable to U.S. Holders that are
subject to special provisions under the Code, including, but not limited to, the following: (a) U.S. Holders that are tax-
exempt  organizations,  qualified  retirement  plans,  individual  retirement  accounts,  or  other  tax-deferred  accounts;  (b)
U.S.  Holders  that  are  financial  institutions,  underwriters,  insurance  companies,  real  estate  investment  trusts,  or
regulated  investment  companies;  (c)  U.S.  Holders  that  are  broker-dealers,  dealers,  or  traders  in  securities  or
currencies that elect to apply a mark-to-market accounting method; (d) U.S. Holders that have a “functional currency”
other  than  the  U.S.  dollar;  (e)  U.S.  Holders  that  own  common  shares  as  part  of  a  straddle,  hedging  transaction,
conversion transaction, constructive sale, or other arrangement involving more than one position; (f) U.S. Holders that
acquired common shares in connection with the exercise of employee stock options or otherwise as compensation for
services; (g) U.S. Holders that hold common shares other than as a capital asset within the meaning of Section 1221 of
the Code (generally, property held for investment purposes); or (h) U.S. Holders that own or have owned (directly,
indirectly, or by attribution) 10% or more of the total combined voting power of the outstanding shares of the Company.
This summary also does not address the U.S. federal income tax considerations applicable to U.S. Holders who are:
(a) U.S. expatriates or former long-term residents of the U.S.; (b) persons that have been, are, or will be a resident or
deemed to be a resident in Canada for purposes of the Income Tax Act (Canada) (the “Tax Act”); (c) persons that use
or hold, will use or hold, or that are or will be deemed to use or hold common shares in connection with carrying on a
business in Canada; (d) persons whose common shares constitute “taxable Canadian property” under the Tax Act; or
(e) persons that have a permanent establishment in Canada for the purposes of the Canada-U.S. Tax Convention.
U.S.  Holders  that  are  subject  to  special  provisions  under  the  Code,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  U.S.  Holders
described immediately above, should consult their own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal, U.S. federal alternative
minimum, U.S. federal estate and gift, U.S. state and local, and non-U.S. tax consequences relating to the acquisition,
ownership and disposition of common shares.
111
If an entity or arrangement that is classified as a partnership (or “pass-through” entity) for U.S. federal income tax
purposes holds common shares, the U.S. federal income tax consequences to such partnership and the partners of
such partnership generally will depend on the activities of the partnership and the status of such partners (or owners).
This  summary  does  not  address  the  tax  consequences  to  any  such  partnership  or  partner.  Partners  of  entities  or
arrangements that are classified as partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes should consult their own tax
advisors regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences arising from and relating to the acquisition, ownership,
and disposition of common shares.
Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules
If the Company were to constitute a “passive foreign investment company” under the meaning of Section 1297
of the Code, or a PFIC, as defined below, for any year during a U.S. Holder’s holding period, then certain different and
potentially  adverse  rules  will  affect  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  to  a  U.S.  Holder  resulting  from  the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of common shares. In addition, in any year in which the Company is classified
as a PFIC, such holder will be required to file an annual report with the IRS containing such information as Treasury
Regulations and/or other IRS guidance may require. A failure to satisfy such reporting requirements may result in an
extension of the time period during which the IRS can assess a tax. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors
regarding the requirements of filing such information returns under these rules, including the requirement to file an IRS
Form 8621.
PFIC Status of the Company
The Company generally will be a PFIC if, for a tax year, (a) 75% or more of the gross income of the Company is
passive income (the “income test”) or (b) 50% or more of the value of the Company’s assets either produce passive
income or are held for the production of passive income, based on the quarterly average of the fair market value of
such assets (the “asset test”). “Gross income” generally includes all sales revenues less the cost of goods sold, plus
income  from  investments  and  from  incidental  or  outside  operations  or  sources,  and  “passive  income”  generally
includes,  for  example,  dividends,  interest,  certain  rents  and  royalties,  certain  gains  from  the  sale  of  stock  and
securities, and certain gains from commodities transactions.
Active business gains arising from the sale of commodities generally are excluded from passive income if
substantially all (85% or more) of a foreign corporation’s commodities are stock in trade of such foreign corporation or
other property of a kind which would properly be included in inventory of such foreign corporation, or property held by
such  foreign  corporation  primarily  for  sale  to  customers  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  and  certain  other
requirements are satisfied.
For purposes of the PFIC income test and asset test described above, if the Company owns, directly or
indirectly, 25% or more of the total value of the outstanding shares of another corporation, the Company will be treated
as if it (a) held a proportionate share of the assets of such other corporation and (b) received directly a proportionate
share  of  the  income  of  such  other  corporation.  In  addition,  for  purposes  of  the  PFIC  income  test  and  asset  test
described above, and assuming certain other requirements are met, “passive income” does not include certain interest,
dividends, rents, or royalties that are received or accrued by the Company from certain “related persons” (as defined in
Section 954(d)(3) of the Code), to the extent such items are properly allocable to the income of such related person
that is not passive income.
112
In addition, under certain attribution rules, if the Company is a PFIC, U.S. Holders will be deemed to own their
proportionate share of the stock of any subsidiary of the Company that is also a PFIC, or a Subsidiary PFIC, and will
be subject to U.S. federal income tax on their proportionate share of (a) a distribution on the stock of a Subsidiary PFIC
and (b) a disposition or deemed disposition of the stock of a Subsidiary PFIC, both as if such U.S. Holders directly held
the shares of such Subsidiary PFIC.
The Company believes that it was classified as a PFIC during the tax year ended August 31, 2014, and may be
a  PFIC  in  future  tax  years.  The  determination  of  whether  any  corporation  was,  or  will  be,  a  PFIC  for  a  tax  year
depends,  in  part,  on  the  application  of  complex  U.S.  federal  income  tax  rules,  which  are  subject  to  differing
interpretations. In addition, whether any corporation will be a PFIC for any tax year depends on the assets and income
of such corporation over the course of each such tax year and, as a result, cannot be predicted with certainty as of the
date of this document. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the IRS will not challenge any determination made
by  the  Company  (or  a  Subsidiary  PFIC)  concerning  its  PFIC  status.  Each  U.S.  Holder  should  consult  its  own  tax
advisor regarding the PFIC status of the Company and any Subsidiary PFIC.
Default PFIC Rules Under Section 1291 of the Code
If the Company is a PFIC, the U.S. federal income tax consequences to a U.S. Holder of the acquisition,
ownership, and disposition of common shares will depend on whether such U.S. Holder makes an election to treat the
Company and each Subsidiary PFIC, if any, as a “qualified electing fund” or “QEF” under Section 1295 of the Code, or
a QEF Election, or a mark-to-market election under Section 1296 of the Code, or a Mark-to-Market Election. A U.S.
Holder that does not make either a QEF Election or a Mark-to-Market Election will be referred to in this summary as a
“Non-Electing U.S. Holder.”
A Non-Electing U.S. Holder will be subject to the rules of Section 1291 of the Code with respect to (a) any gain
recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition of common shares and (b) any excess distribution received on our
common shares. A distribution generally will be an “excess distribution” to the extent that such distribution (together
with all other distributions received in the current tax year) exceeds 125% of the average distributions received during
the three preceding tax years (or during a U.S. Holder’s holding period for our common shares, if shorter).
Under Section 1291 of the Code, any gain recognized on the sale or other taxable disposition of common
shares (including an indirect disposition of the stock of any Subsidiary PFIC), and any “excess distribution” received
on  common  shares,  must  be  ratably  allocated  to  each  day  in  a  Non-Electing  U.S.  Holder’s  holding  period  for  the
respective common shares. The amount of any such gain or excess distribution allocated to the tax year of disposition
or  distribution  of  the  excess  distribution  and  to  years  before  the  entity  became  a  PFIC,  if  any,  would  be  taxed  as
ordinary  income.  The  amounts  allocated  to  any  other  tax  year  would  be  subject  to  U.S.  federal  income  tax  at  the
highest tax rate applicable to ordinary income in each such year, and an interest charge would be imposed on the tax
liability for each such year, calculated as if such tax liability had been due in each such year. A Non-Electing U.S.
Holder that is not a corporation must treat any such interest paid as “personal interest,” which is not deductible.
If the Company is a PFIC for any tax year during which a Non-Electing U.S. Holder holds common shares, the
Company will continue to be treated as a PFIC with respect to such Non-Electing U.S. Holder, regardless of whether
the Company ceases to be a PFIC in one or more subsequent tax years. A Non-Electing U.S. Holder may terminate
this deemed PFIC status by electing to recognize gain (which will be taxed under the rules of Section 1291 of the
Code discussed above), but not loss, as if such common shares were sold on the last day of the last tax year for which
the Company was a PFIC.
QEF Election
113
A U.S. Holder that makes a timely and effective QEF Election for the first tax year in which its holding period of
its common shares begins generally will not be subject to the rules of Section 1291 of the Code discussed above with
respect to its common shares. A U.S. Holder that makes a timely and effective QEF Election will be subject to U.S.
federal income tax on such U.S. Holder’s pro rata share of (a) the net capital gain of the Company, which will be taxed
as long-term capital gain to such U.S. Holder, and (b) the ordinary earnings of the Company, which will be taxed as
ordinary income to such U.S. Holder. Generally, “net capital gain” is the excess of (a) net long-term capital gain over
(b) net short-term capital loss, and “ordinary earnings” are the excess of (a) “earnings and profits” over (b) net capital
gain. A U.S. Holder that makes a QEF Election will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on such amounts for each tax
year in which the Company is a PFIC, regardless of whether such amounts are actually distributed to such U.S. Holder
by the Company. However, for any tax year in which the Company is a PFIC and has no net income or gain, U.S.
Holders that have made a QEF Election would not have any income inclusions as a result of the QEF Election. If a
U.S. Holder that made a QEF Election has an income inclusion, such a U.S. Holder may, subject to certain limitations,
elect to defer payment of current U.S. federal income tax on such amounts, subject to an interest charge. If such U.S.
Holder is not a corporation, any such interest paid will be treated as “personal interest,” which is not deductible.
A U.S. Holder that makes a timely and effective QEF Election with respect to the Company generally (a) may
receive a tax-free distribution from the Company to the extent that such distribution represents “earnings and profits” of
the Company that were previously included in income by the U.S. Holder because of such QEF Election and (b) will
adjust such U.S. Holder’s tax basis in our common shares to reflect the amount included in income or allowed as a tax-
free distribution because of such QEF Election. In addition, a U.S. Holder that makes a QEF Election generally will
recognize capital gain or loss on the sale or other taxable disposition of common shares.
The procedure for making a QEF Election, and the U.S. federal income tax consequences of making a QEF
Election, will depend on whether such QEF Election is timely. A QEF Election will be treated as “timely” if such QEF
Election is made for the first year in the U.S. Holder’s holding period for our common shares in which the Company
was a PFIC. A U.S. Holder may make a timely QEF Election by filing the appropriate QEF Election documents at the
time such U.S. Holder files a U.S. federal income tax return for such year. If a U.S. Holder does not make a timely and
effective QEF Election for the first year in the U.S. Holder’s holding period for our common shares, the U.S. Holder may
still  be  able  to  make  a  timely  and  effective  QEF  Election  in  a  subsequent  year  if  such  U.S.  Holder  also  makes  a
“purging” election to recognize gain (which will be taxed under the rules of Section 1291 of the Code discussed above)
as if such common shares were sold for their fair market value on the day the QEF Election is effective.
A QEF Election will apply to the tax year for which such QEF Election is timely made and to all subsequent tax
years, unless such QEF Election is invalidated or terminated or the IRS consents to revocation of such QEF Election. If
a U.S. Holder makes a QEF Election and, in a subsequent tax year, the Company ceases to be a PFIC, the QEF
Election will remain in effect (although it will not be applicable) during those tax years in which the Company is not a
PFIC. Accordingly, if the Company becomes a PFIC in another subsequent tax year, the QEF Election will be effective
and the U.S. Holder will be subject to the QEF rules described above during any subsequent tax year in which the
Company qualifies as a PFIC.
U.S.  Holders  should  be  aware  that  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  Company  will  satisfy  record  keeping
requirements  that  apply  to  a  QEF,  or  that  the  Company  will  supply  U.S.  Holders  with  information  that  such  U.S.
Holders require to report under the QEF rules, in event that the Company is a PFIC and a U.S. Holder wishes to make
a QEF Election. Thus, U.S. Holders may not be able to make a QEF Election with respect to their common shares.
Each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the availability of, and procedure for making, a QEF
Election.
Mark-to-Market Election
A U.S. Holder may make a Mark-to-Market Election only if the common shares are marketable stock. Our
common  shares  generally  will  be  “marketable  stock”  if  our  common  shares  are  regularly  traded  on  (a)  a  national
securities exchange that is registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, (b) the national market system
established pursuant to section 11A of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, or (c) a foreign securities exchange
that is regulated or supervised by a governmental authority of the country in which the market is located, provided that
(i) such foreign exchange has trading volume, listing, financial disclosure, and meets other requirements and the laws
of the country in which such foreign exchange is located, together with the rules of such foreign exchange, ensure that
such  requirements  are  actually  enforced  and  (ii)  the  rules  of  such  foreign  exchange  ensure  active  trading  of  listed
stocks. If such stock is traded on such a qualified exchange or other market, such stock generally will be “regularly
traded” for any calendar year during which such stock is traded, other than in de minimis quantities, on at least 15 days
during each calendar quarter.
114
A U.S. Holder that makes a Mark-to-Market Election with respect to its common shares generally will not be
subject to the rules of Section 1291 of the Code discussed above with respect to such common shares. However, if a
U.S. Holder does not make a Mark-to-Market Election beginning in the first tax year of such U.S. Holder’s holding
period for our common shares or such U.S. Holder has not made a timely QEF Election, the rules of Section 1291 of
the Code discussed above will apply to certain dispositions of, and distributions on, our common shares.
A U.S. Holder that makes a Mark-to-Market Election will include in ordinary income, for each tax year in which
the Company is a PFIC, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of (a) the fair market value of our common shares, as of
the close of such tax year over (b) such U.S. Holder’s tax basis in such common shares. A U.S. Holder that makes a
Mark-to-Market Election will be allowed a deduction in an amount equal to the excess, if any, of (a) such U.S. Holder’s
adjusted tax basis in our common shares, over (b) the fair market value of such common shares (but only to the extent
of the net amount of previously included income as a result of the Mark-to-Market Election for prior tax years).
A U.S. Holder that makes a Mark-to-Market Election generally also will adjust such U.S. Holder’s tax basis in
our common shares to reflect the amount included in gross income or allowed as a deduction because of such Mark-
to-Market Election. In addition, upon a sale or other taxable disposition of common shares, a U.S. Holder that makes a
Mark-to-Market Election will recognize ordinary income or ordinary loss (not to exceed the excess, if any, of (a) the
amount included in ordinary income because of such Mark-to-Market Election for prior tax years over (b) the amount
allowed as a deduction because of such Mark-to-Market Election for prior tax years).
A Mark-to-Market Election applies to the tax year in which such Mark-to-Market Election is made and to each
subsequent tax year, unless our common shares cease to be “marketable stock” or the IRS consents to revocation of
such election. Each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the availability of, and procedure for
making, a Mark-to-Market Election.
Although a U.S. Holder may be eligible to make a Mark-to-Market Election with respect to our common shares,
no  such  election  may  be  made  with  respect  to  the  stock  of  any  Subsidiary  PFIC  that  a  U.S.  Holder  is  treated  as
owning, because such stock is not marketable. Hence, the Mark-to-Market Election will not be effective to eliminate the
application of the default rules of Section 1291 of the Code described above with respect to deemed dispositions of
Subsidiary PFIC stock or distributions from a Subsidiary PFIC.
Other PFIC Rules
Under Section 1291(f) of the Code, the IRS has issued proposed Treasury Regulations that, subject to certain
exceptions, would cause a U.S. Holder that had not made a timely QEF Election to recognize gain (but not loss) upon
certain  transfers  of  common  shares  that  would  otherwise  be  tax-deferred  (e.g.,  gifts  and  exchanges  pursuant  to
corporate reorganizations). However, the specific U.S. federal income tax consequences to a U.S. Holder may vary
based on the manner in which common shares are transferred.
Certain additional adverse rules will apply with respect to a U.S. Holder if the Company is a PFIC, regardless of
whether such U.S. Holder makes a QEF Election. For example under Section 1298(b)(6) of the Code, a U.S. Holder
that uses common shares as security for a loan will, except as may be provided in Treasury Regulations, be treated as
having made a taxable disposition of such common shares.
115
Special rules also apply to the amount of foreign tax credit that a U.S. Holder may claim on a distribution from a
PFIC. Subject to such special rules, foreign taxes paid with respect to any distribution in respect of stock in a PFIC are
generally  eligible  for  the  foreign  tax  credit.  The  rules  relating  to  distributions  by  a  PFIC  and  their  eligibility  for  the
foreign  tax  credit  are  complicated,  and  a  U.S.  Holder  should  consult  with  their  own  tax  advisor  regarding  the
availability of the foreign tax credit with respect to distributions by a PFIC.
The PFIC rules are complex, and each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the PFIC rules
and  how  the  PFIC  rules  may  affect  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  of  the  acquisition,  ownership,  and
disposition of common shares.
Ownership and Disposition of common shares
The  following  discussion  is  subject  to  the  rules  described  above  under  the  heading  “Passive  Foreign
Investment Company Rules.”
Distributions on common shares
Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, a U.S. Holder that receives a distribution, including a constructive
distribution, with respect to an Offered Share will be required to include the amount of such distribution in gross income
as  a  dividend  (without  reduction  for  any  Canadian  income  tax  withheld  from  such  distribution)  to  the  extent  of  the
current or accumulated “earnings and profits” of the Company, as computed for U.S. federal income tax purposes. A
dividend generally will be taxed to a U.S. Holder at ordinary income tax rates if the Company is a PFIC. To the extent
that a distribution exceeds the current and accumulated “earnings and profits” of the Company, such distribution will be
treated first as a tax-free return of capital to the extent of a U.S. Holder's tax basis in our common shares and thereafter
as  gain  from  the  sale  or  exchange  of  such  common  shares.  (See  “Sale  or  Other  Taxable  Disposition  of  common
shares” below). However, the Company may not maintain the calculations of earnings and profits in accordance with
U.S.  federal  income  tax  principles,  and  each  U.S.  Holder  should  therefore  assume  that  any  distribution  by  the
Company with respect to our common shares will constitute ordinary dividend income. Dividends received on common
shares  generally  will  not  be  eligible  for  the  “dividends  received  deduction”.  Subject  to  applicable  limitations  and
provided the Company is eligible for the benefits of the Canada-U.S. Tax Convention, dividends paid by the Company
to non-corporate U.S. Holders, including individuals, generally will be eligible for the preferential tax rates applicable
to long-term capital gains for dividends, provided certain holding period and other conditions are satisfied, including
that the Company not be classified as a PFIC in the tax year of distribution or in the preceding tax year. The dividend
rules are complex, and each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the application of such rules.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of common shares
Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, upon the sale or other taxable disposition of common shares, a U.S.
Holder generally will recognize capital gain or loss in an amount equal to the difference between the amount of cash
plus the fair market value of any property received and such U.S. Holder's tax basis in such common shares sold or
otherwise  disposed  of.  Subject  to  the  PFIC  rules  discussed  above,  gain  or  loss  recognized  on  such  sale  or  other
disposition generally will be long-term capital gain or loss if, at the time of the sale or other disposition, our common
shares have been held for more than one year.
Preferential tax rates apply to long-term capital gain of a U.S. Holder that is an individual, estate, or trust. There
are currently no preferential tax rates for long-term capital gain of a U.S. Holder that is a corporation. Deductions for
capital losses are subject to significant limitations under the Code.
Additional Considerations
Additional Tax on Passive Income
116
Individuals, estates and certain trusts whose income exceeds certain thresholds will be required to pay a 3.8%
Medicare surtax on “net investment income” including, among other things, dividends and net gain from disposition of
property  (other  than  property  held  in  certain  trades  or  businesses).  U.S.  Holders  should  consult  with  their  own  tax
advisors regarding the effect, if any, of this tax on their ownership and disposition of common shares.
Receipt of Foreign Currency
The amount of any distribution paid to a U.S. Holder in foreign currency, or on the sale, exchange or other
taxable disposition of common shares, generally will be equal to the U.S. dollar value of such foreign currency based
on the exchange rate applicable on the date of receipt (regardless of whether such foreign currency is converted into
U.S. dollars at that time). A U.S. Holder will have a basis in the foreign currency equal to its U.S. dollar value on the
date of receipt. Any U.S. Holder who converts or otherwise disposes of the foreign currency after the date of receipt
may have a foreign currency exchange gain or loss that would be treated as ordinary income or loss, and generally will
be U.S. source income or loss for foreign tax credit purposes. Each U.S. Holder should consult its own U.S. tax advisor
regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences of receiving, owning, and disposing of foreign currency.
Foreign Tax Credit
Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, a U.S. Holder that pays (whether directly or through withholding)
Canadian income tax with respect to dividends paid on our common shares generally will be entitled, at the election of
such U.S. Holder, to receive either a deduction or a credit for such Canadian income tax paid. Generally, a credit will
reduce a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability on a dollar-for-dollar basis, whereas a deduction will reduce a
U.S. Holder’s income subject to U.S. federal income tax. This election is made on a year-by-year basis and applies to
all foreign taxes paid (whether directly or through withholding) by a U.S. Holder during a year.
Complex limitations apply to the foreign tax credit, including the general limitation that the credit cannot exceed
the proportionate share of a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability that such U.S. Holder’s “foreign source”
taxable  income  bears  to  such  U.S.  Holder’s  worldwide  taxable  income.  In  applying  this  limitation,  a  U.S.  Holder’s
various items of income and deduction must be classified, under complex rules, as either “foreign source” or “U.S.
source.” Generally, dividends paid by a foreign corporation should be treated as foreign source for this purpose, and
gains recognized on the sale of stock of a foreign corporation by a U.S. Holder should be treated as U.S. source for
this purpose, except as otherwise provided in an applicable income tax treaty, and if an election is properly made
under  the  Code.  However,  the  amount  of  a  distribution  with  respect  to  our  common  shares  that  is  treated  as  a
“dividend” may be lower for U.S. federal income tax purposes than it is for Canadian federal income tax purposes,
resulting in a reduced foreign tax credit allowance to a U.S. Holder. In addition, this limitation is calculated separately
with respect to specific categories of income. The foreign tax credit rules are complex, and each U.S. Holder should
consult its own U.S. tax advisor regarding the foreign tax credit rules.
Backup Withholding and Information Reporting
Under U.S. federal income tax law and Treasury Regulations, certain categories of U.S. Holders must file
information returns with respect to their investment in, or involvement in, a foreign corporation. For example, U.S. return
disclosure  obligations  (and  related  penalties)  are  imposed  on  individuals  who  are  U.S.  Holders  that  hold  certain
specified foreign financial assets in excess of certain threshold amounts. The definition of specified foreign financial
assets  includes  not  only  financial  accounts  maintained  in  foreign  financial  institutions,  but  also,  unless  held  in
accounts  maintained  by  a  financial  institution,  any  stock  or  security  issued  by  a  non-U.S.  person,  any  financial
instrument or contract held for investment that has an issuer or counterparty other than a U.S. person and any interest
in a foreign entity. U.S. Holders may be subject to these reporting requirements unless their common shares are held
in  an  account  at  certain  financial  institutions.  Penalties  for  failure  to  file  certain  of  these  information  returns  are
substantial. U.S. Holders should consult with their own tax advisors regarding the requirements of filing information
returns, including the requirement to file an IRS Form 8938.
117
Payments made within the U.S. or by a U.S. payor or U.S. middleman, of dividends on, and proceeds arising
from the sale or other taxable disposition of, common shares will generally be subject to information reporting and
backup withholding tax, at the rate of 28%, if a U.S. Holder (a) fails to furnish such U.S. Holder’s correct U.S. taxpayer
identification number (generally on Form W-9), (b) furnishes an incorrect U.S. taxpayer identification number, (c) is
notified by the IRS that such U.S. Holder has previously failed to properly report items subject to backup withholding
tax,  or  (d)  fails  to  certify,  under  penalty  of  perjury,  that  such  U.S.  Holder  has  furnished  its  correct  U.S.  taxpayer
identification number and that the IRS has not notified such U.S. Holder that it is subject to backup withholding tax.
However, certain exempt persons generally are excluded from these information reporting and backup withholding
rules. Any amounts withheld under the U.S. backup withholding tax rules will be allowed as a credit against a U.S.
Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability, if any, or will be refunded, if such U.S. Holder furnishes required information
to the IRS in a timely manner. Each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the information reporting
and backup withholding rules.
F. Dividends and Paying Agents
Not Applicable.
G. Statement by Experts
Not Applicable.
H. Documents on Display
We are subject to the informational requirements of the Exchange Act and file reports and other information with
the SEC. You may read and copy any of our reports and other information at, and obtain copies upon payment of
prescribed fees from, the Public Reference Room maintained by the SEC at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C.
20549. In addition, the SEC maintains a Website that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other
information  regarding  registrants  that  file  electronically  with  the  SEC  at  http://www.sec.gov.  The  public  may  obtain
information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330.
We are required to file reports and other information with the securities commissions in Canada. You are invited
to  read  and  copy  any  reports,  statements  or  other  information,  other  than  confidential  filings,  that  we  file  with  the
provincial  securities  commissions.  These  filings  are  also  electronically  available  from  the  Canadian  System  for
Electronic  Document  Analysis  and  Retrieval  ("SEDAR")  (www.sedar.com),  the  Canadian  equivalent  of  the  SEC's
electronic document gathering and retrieval system.
As a foreign private issuer, we are exempt from the rules under the Exchange Act prescribing the furnishing and
content of proxy statements to shareholders.
We will provide without charge to each person, including any beneficial owner, to whom a copy of this annual
report has been delivered, on the written or oral request of such person, a copy of any or all documents referred to
above  which  have  been  or  may  be  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  annual  report  (not  including  exhibits  to  such
incorporated information that are not specifically incorporated by reference into such information). Requests for such
copies should be directed to us at the following address: 130 Adelaide St. West, Suite 1901, Toronto, ON, M5H 3P5.
The Company is required to file financial statements and other information with the Securities Commission in each of
the  Provinces  and  Territories  of  Canada,  except  Quebec,  electronically  through  SEDAR  which  can  be  viewed  at
www.sedar.com.
The Company files annual reports and furnishes other information with the SEC. You may read and copy any
document that we file at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 450 Fifth Street, N.W., Room 1024, Washington, D.C.
20549 or by accessing the Commission’s website (http://www.sec.gov).
118
I. Subsidiary Information
Not Applicable.
Item 11. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
(a) Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk that one party to a financial instrument will cause a financial loss for the other party by
failing to discharge an obligation.
The Company is not exposed to any significant credit risk as at August 31, 2014. The Company’s cash and
cash equivalents are either on deposit with two major Canadian chartered banking groups in Canada or invested in
bankers  acceptance  notes  or  guaranteed  investment  certificates  issued  by  two  major  Canadian  chartered  banking
groups. The Company’s receivables primarily consist of Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax receivable
and  refundable  security  deposits  with  various  federal  and  provincial  governments  and  are  therefore  not  subject  to
significant credit risk. The Company’s financial assets that are exposed to credit risk are as follows:
Cash and cash equivalents held at major financial institutions
Other receivables
(b) Liquidity risk
2014
2013
August 31,
 
   
$
August 31,  
 
   
   
 
10,313,798 
6,017,598  $
388,969
416,923
Liquidity risk is the risk that an entity will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they come due. The
Company has in place a planning and budgeting process to assist in determining the funds required to support the
Company’s  normal  operating  requirements  on  an  on-going  basis  and  its  plans  for  exploration  and  development
expenditures.  The  Company  ensures  that  there  are  sufficient  funds  to  meet  its  short-term  requirements,  taking  into
account its anticipated cash flows from operations and its holdings of cash and cash equivalents.
The  Company  has  cash  and  cash  equivalents  at  August  31,  2014  in  the  amount  of  $6,017,598  (2013  -
$10,313,798)  in  order  to  meet  short-term  business  requirements.  At  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  had  current
liabilities of $1,785,745 (excluding the liability for warrants denominated in foreign currency of ($1,720,622) (2013 -
$2,642,031). Accounts payable have contractual maturities of less than 30 days and are subject to normal trade terms.
(c) Market risk
Market risk consists of interest rate risk and foreign currency risk. The Company is exposed to interest rate risk
and foreign currency risk.
Interest rate risk
Interest rate risk consists of two components:
(i)
(ii)
To  the  extent  that  payments  made  or  received  on  the Company’s  monetary  assets  and  liabilities  are
affected by changes in the prevailing market interest rates, the Company is exposed to interest rate cash
flow risk.
 
To  the  extent  that  changes  in  prevailing  market  rates differ  from  the  interest  rate  in  the  Company’s
monetary assets and liabilities, the Company is exposed to interest rate price risk.
119
Considering the Company’s budget expenditures for the next twelve months and its current cash and cash
equivalents of $6,017,598 as at August 31, 2014, with other variables held constant, sensitivity to a plus or minus 25
basis points change in interest rates would not have any significant effect on the Company’s net loss over a twelve
month period.
Foreign currency risk
Foreign currency risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate due
to changes in foreign exchange rates. The Company is exposed to foreign currency risk to the extent that monetary
assets and liabilities are denominated in foreign currency.
The Company’s functional currency is the Canadian dollar. The majority of the Company’s purchases are
transacted in Canadian dollars. As at August 31, 2014, the Company had cash held in bank accounts of US$408,663
(August 31, 2013 - US$146,524) and accounts payable of US$35,621 (August 31, 2013 - US$85,642) denominated in
US currency.
The Company’s anticipated on-going expenditures to be transacted in US dollars for the next twelve month
period are approximately US$450,000. If the Canadian dollar weakens (or strengthens) 5% against the US dollar with
other variables held constant, it would not have any significant effect on the Company’s expenditures over a twelve
month period.
(d) Other price risk
Other price risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate due to
changes in market prices, other than those arising from interest rate risk or foreign currency risk. The Company is not
exposed to other price risk with respect to its financial instruments.
The prices of metals and minerals fluctuate widely and are affected by many factors outside of the Company’s
control.  The  prices  of  metals  and  minerals  and  future  expectation  of  such  prices  have  a  significant  impact  on  the
market sentiment for investment in mining and mineral exploration companies. This in turn may impact the Company’s
ability to raise equity financing for its long term working capital requirements.
Item 12. Description of Securities Other than Equity Securities
A. to C.
Not Applicable.
D. American Depository Receipts
The Company does not have securities registered as American Depository Receipts.
Item 13. Defaults, Dividend Arrearages and Delinquencies
None.
Part II
Item 14. Material Modifications to the Rights of Security Holders and Use of Proceeds
A. to D.
None.
E. Use of Proceeds
Not Applicable.
Item 15. Controls and Procedures
A. Disclosure Controls and Procedures
120
An evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of the Company’s management,
including  the  Company’s  CEO  and  the  Company’s  CFO  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  design  and  operation  of  the
Company’s disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to Rules 13a-15(b) and 15d-15(b) of the Exchange Act as of
August  31,  2014.  Based  on  their  evaluation,  the  Company’s  CEO  and  CFO  have  concluded  that  the  disclosure
controls and procedures were effective to give reasonable assurance that the information required to be disclosed by
the Company in reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is (i) recorded, processed, summarized and
reported, within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, and (ii) accumulated and communicated to
management, including its principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions,
as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
B. Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management, including the Company’s CEO and CFO, is responsible for establishing and
maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  as  such  term  is
defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the Exchange Act. The Company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of
consolidated financial statements for external purposes in accordance with IFRS. The Company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes policies and procedures that: pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
detail  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the  transactions  and  disposition  of  assets;  provide  reasonable  assurance  that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance
with IFRS and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorization of management
and  directors  of  the  Company;  and  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of
unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of assets that could have a material effect on the consolidated financial
statements.
Because of their inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting can provide only reasonable
assurance and may not prevent or detect misstatements. Furthermore, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to
future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
The Company’s management, (with the participation of the CEO and the CFO), conducted an evaluation of the
effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of August 31, 2014. This evaluation was
based  on  the  criteria  set  forth  in  Internal  Control-Integrated  Framework  (COSO  1992  Framework)  issued  by  the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on its assessment, management has
concluded  that  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  was  effective  as  at  August  31,  2014,  and
management’s assessment did not identify any material weaknesses.
The registered public accounting firm that audited the financial statements included in this annual report has
issued an attestation report on management’s assessment of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
C. Attestation Report of the Registered Public Accounting Firm
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of August 31, 2014, has been audited by our
independent  registered  public  accounting  firm,  Deloitte  LLP,  Chartered  Professional  Accountants,  Chartered
Accountants, which also audited our consolidated financial statements for the year ended August 31, 2014. Deloitte
LLP,  Chartered  Professional  Accountants,  Chartered  Accountants,  have  expressed  an  unqualified  opinion  on  the
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of August 31, 2014, and their report is included with the
Company’s consolidated financial statements.
121
D. Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Based upon their evaluation of our controls, our CEO and CFO have concluded that, there were no significant
changes in our internal control over financial reporting or in other factors during our last fiscal year that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 16. [Reserved]
Item 16A. Audit Committee Financial Expert
The Board determined that Mr. Brian MacEachen, Mr. Alan Ferry and Mr. Peter McCarter are qualified as Audit
Committee Financial Experts and all members are independent as determined by the NYSE MKT listing rules.
Item 16B. Code of Ethics
The Company has adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics (the “Code”) and requires its directors,
officers, employees and consultants to maintain the highest level of integrity in their dealings with each other and with
the Company’s shareholders, business partners, prospective investors and other stakeholders. This Code is intended
to document some of the specific principles of conduct and ethics which will be followed by our directors, officers and
employees in the performance of their responsibilities with respect to the Company's business. It is intended to:
promote honest and ethical conduct and manage conflicts that may arise;
promote full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure to the public including our periodic reports
required to be filed with the Canadian securities regulatory authorities;
promote compliance with applicable governmental rules and regulations;
provide guidance to directors, officers and employees of the Company to help them recognize and deal with
ethical issues;
provide a mechanism to report unethical conduct; and
help foster a culture of honesty and accountability.
Our directors have committed that they will comply at all times with the principles set forth in this Code and they
expect  each  of  our  officers  and  employees  to  do  likewise.  The  Company  has  posted  the  Code  on  its  website  at
www.avalonraremetals.com. There were no amendments to or waivers granted from any provision of the Code during
the fiscal year ended August 31, 2014.
Item 16C. Principal Accountant Fees and Services
The  independent  auditor  for  the  year  ended  August  31,  2014  was  Deloitte  LLP,  Chartered  Professional
Accountants, Chartered Accountants, and the independent auditor for the years ended August 31, 2013 and 2012 was
McCarney Greenwood LLP, Chartered Accountants.
The following table provides detail in respect of audit, audit related, tax and other fees billed by the Company’s
external auditors for professional services:
122
Reporting
Period
August 31, 2014
August 31, 2013
Auditor
Audited-Related
All Other Fees
Audit Fees (1)
$60,000
$64,335(5)
Fees (2)
$39,000
$Nil
$60,000
$26,500
Tax Fees (3)
$Nil
$Nil
$Nil
(4)
$14,600
$30,562
$Nil
Deloitte 
LLP
McCarney 
Greenwood 
LLP
McCarney 
Greenwood 
LLP
Notes:  
(1)
“Audit Fees” include the aggregate professional fees billed by the Company’s auditor for the audit of the annual
financial statements and other regulatory audits and filings.
“Audit-Related  Fees”  include  professional  fees  billed  by the  Company’s  auditor  related  to  assurances  and
related  services  related to  the  performance  of  the  audit  or  review  (including  interim  reviews)  of financial
statements not included in “Audit Fees”.
“Tax Fees” include the aggregate fees billed for professional services rendered for tax compliance, tax advice
and tax planning.
“All Other Fees” include the aggregate fees billed for products and services other than as set out under the
headings  “Audit Fees”, “Audit Related Fees” and “Tax Fees”. The other fees billed during fiscal years 2014
were  for  services  rendered  in  connection  with  the preparation  and  issuance  of  comfort  letters  for  the
Company’s SEC related filings, and for the Company’s prospectus equity offerings completed in fiscal 2014.
Fees billed during the reporting period relating to the prior reporting period.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The Audit Committee approved 100% of the fees paid to the principal accountant for audit-related, tax and other
fees in the fiscal year 2014. The Audit Committee pre-approves all non-audit services to be performed by the auditor in
accordance  with  the  Audit  Committee  Charter.  There  were  no  hours  expended  on  the  principal  accountant's
engagement to audit the Company's financial statements for the most recent fiscal year that were attributed to work
performed by persons other than the principal accountant's full-time, permanent employees.
Item 16D. Exemptions from the Listing Standards for Audit Committees
Not applicable.
Item 16E. Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
None.
Item 16F. Changes in Registrants Certifying Accountant
At the Company’s request, the Company’s former independent auditor, McCarney Greenwood LLP, Chartered
Accountants,  resigned  effective  December  13,  2013  and  Deloitte  LLP  was  engaged  as  the  Company’s  new
independent auditor effective December 13, 2013. The disclosure required pursuant to this Item 16F was included in
the Company’s Current Report on Form 6-K filed with the SEC on January 10, 2014, including Exhibits 99.2, 99.3 and
99.4, which are hereby incorporated by reference into this Annual Report.
Item 16G. Corporate Governance
The Company’s common shares are listed on NYSE MKT. Section 110 of the NYSE MKT Company Guide permits the
NYSE MKT to consider the laws, customs and practices of foreign issuers, and to grant exemptions from NYSE MKT
listing criteria based on these considerations. A company seeking relief under these provisions is required to provide
written certification from independent local counsel that the non-complying practice is not prohibited by home country
law. A description of the significant ways in which the Company’s governance practices differ from those followed by
domestic companies pursuant to NYSE MKT standards is as follows:
123
Shareholder Meeting Quorum Requirement: NYSE MKT minimum quorum requirement for a shareholder meeting is
one-third of the outstanding shares of common stock. In addition, a company listed on is required to state its quorum
requirement in its bylaw. The Company’s quorum requirement is set forth in its by-law, which provides that a quorum
for the transaction of business at any meeting of shareholders shall be two persons present in person, each being a
shareholder entitled to vote thereat or a duly appointed proxy or proxyholder for an absent shareholder so entitled,
holding or representing in the aggregate not less than 25% of the issued and outstanding shares of the Company
carrying voting rights at the meeting of shareholders.
Proxy Delivery Requirement: NYSE MKT requires the solicitation of proxies and delivery of proxy statements for all
shareholder meetings, and requires that these proxies be solicited pursuant to a proxy statement that conforms to SEC
proxy rules. The Company is a “foreign private issuer” as defined in Rule 3b-4 under the Exchange Act, and the equity
securities of the Company are accordingly exempt from the proxy rules set forth in Sections 14(a), 14(b), 14(c) and
14(f)  of  the  Exchange  Act.  The  Company  solicits  proxies  in  accordance  with  applicable  rules  and  regulations  in
Canada.
Shareholder Approval Requirements: NYSE MKT requires a listed company to obtain the approval of its shareholders
for  certain  types  of  securities  issuances,  including  private  placements  that  may  result  in  the  issuance  of  common
shares (or securities convertible into common shares) equal to 20% or more of presently outstanding shares for less
than the greater of book or market value of the shares. In general, the rules of the Toronto Stock Exchange are similar,
but there are some differences including the threshold for shareholder approval set at 25% of outstanding shares. The
Company  will  seek  a  waiver  from  NYSE  MKT’s  shareholder  approval  requirements  in  circumstances  where  the
securities issuance does not trigger such a requirement under the rules of the TSX.
The foregoing are consistent with the laws in Canada.
The Company has elected not to adopt Section 805(c) of the NYSE MKT Company Guide applicable to charters and
independence of Compensation Committees of U.S. domestic issuers. As a foreign private issuer, the Company is not
required to comply with these rules.
In addition, the Company may from time-to-time seek relief from NYSE MKT corporate governance requirements on
specific  transactions  under  Section  110  of  the  NYSE  MKT  Company  Guide  by  providing  written  certification  from
independent local counsel that the non-complying practice is not prohibited by our home country law, in which case,
we shall make the disclosure of such transactions available on our website at www.avalonraremetals.com. Information
contained on our website is not part of this Annual Report.
Item 16H. Mine Safety Disclosure.
Pursuant to Section 1503(a) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010,
issuers that are operators, or that have a subsidiary that is an operator, of a coal or other mine in the United States are
required  to  disclose  in  their  periodic  reports  filed  with  the  SEC  information  regarding  specified  health  and  safety
violations, orders and citations, related assessments and legal actions, and mining-related fatalities with respect to
mining operations and properties in the United States that are subject to regulation by the Federal Mine Safety and
Health Administration (“MSHA”) under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (the “Mine Act”). During the
year ended August 31, 2014, our U.S. exploration properties were not subject to regulation by the MSHA under the
Mine Act.
Item 17. Financial Statements
Not Applicable.
Item 18. Financial Statements
Part III
124
The Company’s financial statements are stated in Canadian Dollars and are prepared in accordance with International
Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”),  as  issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“IASB”).  The
Consolidated  Financial  Statements  and  Notes  appear  on  Pages  F-1  through  F-46  of  this  Annual  Report,  are
incorporated herein by reference, and include the following:
•
•
•
•
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms;
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as at August 31, 2014, and August 31, 2013;
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss, change in equity and cash flows for the years ended August
31, 2014, 2013 and 2012; and
Notes to Financial Statements for the years ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.
Item 19. Exhibits
Financial Statements
Description 
Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes
 
Exhibits
 
Number
1.1
1.2
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
Name
Articles of Continuance of Avalon Rare Metals Inc.(1)
By-law #1 of Avalon Rare Metals Inc.(2)
Mining lease #3178 dated July 6, 2006
Mining lease #3179 dated July 6, 2006
Mining lease #3265 dated April 28, 2008
Mining lease #3266 dated April 28, 2008
Mining lease #3267 dated April 28, 2008
Sales Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC dated September 24, 2013 (3)
Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC dated November 27, 2013(4)
Engagement Letter with Bayridge Securities, LLC dated November 27, 2013(4)
Engagement Letter with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC dated May 21, 2014(5)
Amendment to H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC Engagement Letter dated June 10, 2014(5)
Form of Securities Purchase Agreement(5)
Form of Warrant(6)
Form of Agent Warrant(6)
6.1
12.1
12.2
13.1
Stock Option Plan(7)
Certification of the Principal Executive Officer pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a)
Certification of the Principal Financial Officer pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a)
Certificate of Principal Executive Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350
Page
F-1 – F-46
13.2
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
15.7
15.8
15.9
15.10
15.11
15.12
15.13
15.14
15.15
15.16
15.17
15.18
15.19
Certificate of Principal Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350
Consent of Deloitte LLP
Consent of McCarney Greenwood LLP
Consent of Donald Bubar
Consent of Dr. William Mercer
Consent of David Marsh
Consent of Donald Hains
Consent of Roscoe Postle Associates Inc.
125
Consent of Tudorel Ciuculescu
Consent of Acme Analytical Laboratories Ltd.
Consent of ALS Laboratory Group
Consent of Micon International Limited
Consent of Jane Spooner
Consent of Richard Gowans
Consent of Christopher Jacobs
Consent of Bernard Foo
Consent of Knight Piesold Limited
Consent of Kevin Hawton
Charter of the Audit Committee
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Statements for the year ended August 31, 2014
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Incorporated by reference from the Company’s Form 6-K filed with the SEC on February 14, 2011
Incorporated by reference from the Company’s Form 6-K filed with the SEC on February 15, 2011
Incorporated by reference from the Company’s Form 6-K filed with the SEC on September 25, 2013
Incorporated by reference from the Company’s Form 6-K filed with the SEC on November 27, 2013
Incorporated by reference from the Company’s Form 6-K filed with the SEC on June 10, 2014
Incorporated by reference from the Company’s Form 6-K filed with the SEC on June 13, 2014
Incorporated by reference from the Company’s Form 6-K filed with the SEC on January 27, 2014
126
SIGNATURES
The registrant hereby certifies that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form 20-F and that it has duly caused
and authorized the undersigned to sign this annual report on its behalf.
Dated: December 1, 2014
AVALON RARE METALS INC.
 
 
 
/s/ R. James Andersen
R. James Andersen
Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer
127
Consolidated Financial Statements
For the years ended
August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
INDEX
Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting and Report on Internal Control over Financial
Reporting
 
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
 
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss
 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
F-1
F-2-F-7
F-8
 
F-9
F-10
F-11
F-12 -
F-46
Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  by  and  are  the  responsibility  of  the
management  of  the  Avalon  Rare  Metals  Inc.  (the  “Company”).  The  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been
reviewed and approved by the Company's Audit Committee and Board of Directors.
The  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting
Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and reflect management’s best estimates and
judgments based on currently available information. The Company has developed and maintains a system of internal
controls in order to ensure, on a reasonable and cost effective basis, the reliability of its financial information.
The consolidated financial statements have been audited by Deloitte LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting
Firm.  Their  report  on  the  following  pages  outlines  the  scope  of  their  examination  and  opinion  on  the  consolidated
financial statements.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial
reporting.
The Company’s management assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as
at August 31, 2014. The Company’s management used the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (COSO 1992) framework to evaluate the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting. Based on management’s assessment, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective as
of August 31, 2014.
The effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of August 31, 2014 has been audited by
Deloitte LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm, as stated in their report which follows this page.
“Donald S. Bubar”                                          
President and CEO
“R. James Andersen”                                     
CFO and Vice President Finance
Toronto, Ontario 
December 1, 2014
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-1
Deloitte LLP
Brookfield Place
181 Bay Street
Suite 1400
Toronto ON M5J 2V1
Canada
 
Tel: 416-601-6150
Fax: 416-601-6151
www.deloitte.ca
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of 
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial statements of Avalon Rare Metals Inc. and subsidiaries
(the  “Company”),  which comprise  the  consolidated  statement  of  financial  position  as  at  August  31,  2014 and  the
consolidated  statement  of  comprehensive  loss,  consolidated  statement  of changes  in  equity,  and  consolidated
statement  of  cash  flows  for  the  year  then ended,  and  a  summary  of  significant  accounting  policies  and  other
explanatory information.
Management's Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements
Management  is  responsible  for  the  preparation  and  fair presentation  of  these  consolidated  financial
statements  in  accordance  with International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as  issued  by  the  International
Accounting Standards Board, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable
the preparation of consolidated financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error.
Auditor's Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audit. We
conducted our audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards and the standards of
the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States).  Those standards  require  that  we  comply
with ethical requirements and plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
consolidated financial statements are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the
consolidated financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgment, including the
assessment  of  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  consolidated financial  statements,  whether  due  to
fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the entity's
preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures
that  are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances.  An audit  also  includes  evaluating  the  appropriateness  of
accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our
audit opinion.
Page F-2
Opinion
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  present fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial
position of the Company as at August 31, 2014, and their financial performance and their cash flows for the
year then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International
Accounting Standards Board.
Emphasis of Matter
Without  modifying  our  opinion,  we  draw  attention  to  Note  1  in the  consolidated  financial  statements  which
indicates that there exists an uncertainty as to the Company’s ability to raise additional funds on favourable
terms in order to finance its planned activities. This condition, along with the other matters as set forth in Note
1, indicate the existence of a material uncertainty that may raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability
to continue as a going concern.
Other Matters
The consolidated statement of financial position as at August 31, 2013, and the consolidated statements of
comprehensive  loss,  consolidated statements  of  changes  in  equity,  and  consolidated  statements  of  cash
flows  for the  two  years  then  ended  were  audited  by  another  auditor  who  issued  an unmodified  opinion  on
November 28, 2013.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(United States), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of August 31, 2014, based on the
criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (1992) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated December 1, 2014 expressed an unqualified
opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Chartered Professional Accountants, Chartered Accountants 
Licensed Public Accountants 
December 1, 2014
Page F-3
Deloitte LLP
Brookfield Place
181 Bay Street
Suite 1400
Toronto ON M5J 2V1
Canada
 
Tel: 416-601-6150
Fax: 416-601-6151
www.deloitte.ca
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of Avalon Rare Metals Inc. and subsidiaries (the
“Company”)  as  of  August 31,  2014,  based  on  the  criteria  established  in Internal Control—Integrated
Framework (1992) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. The
Company's management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and
for  its  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial reporting,  included  in  the
accompanying Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility
is to express an opinion on the Company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
We  conducted  our  audit  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight
Board  (United  States).  Those  standards require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable
assurance  about whether  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  was  maintained  in all  material
respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing
the  risk  that  a  material  weakness exists,  testing  and  evaluating  the  design  and  operating  effectiveness  of
internal  control  based  on  the  assessed  risk,  and  performing  such  other procedures  as  we  considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
A company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of,
the  company's  principal executive  and  principal  financial  officers,  or  persons  performing  similar functions,
and effected by the company's board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable
assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for
external purposes  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as issued  by  the
International  Accounting  Standards  Board.  A  company's  internal control  over  financial  reporting  includes
those  policies  and  procedures  that  (1) pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that,  in  reasonable  detail,
accurately  and fairly  reflect  the  transactions  and  dispositions  of  the  assets  of  the  company; (2)  provide
reasonable  assurance  that  transactions  are  recorded  as  necessary  to permit  preparation  of  financial
statements  in  accordance  with  International Financial  Reporting  Standards  as  issued  by  the  International
Accounting Standards  Board,  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being made  only  in
accordance  with  authorizations  of  management  and  directors  of  the company;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable
assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or  disposition  of  the
company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Page F-4
Because  of  the  inherent  limitations  of  internal  control  over financial  reporting,  including  the  possibility  of
collusion or improper management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not
be  prevented  or  detected  on  a  timely  basis.  Also,  projections  of  any evaluation  of  the  effectiveness  of  the
internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become
inadequate  because  of  changes  in  conditions,  or  that  the  degree  of  compliance with  the  policies  or
procedures may deteriorate.
In  our  opinion,  the  Company  maintained,  in  all  material respects,  effective  internal  control  over  financial
reporting as of August 31, 2014, based on the criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework
(1992) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  Canadian  generally accepted  auditing  standards  and  the
standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting Oversight  Board  (United  States),  the  consolidated  financial
statements as of and for the year ended August 31, 2014 of the Company and our report dated December 1,
2014 expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.
Chartered Professional Accountants, Chartered Accountants 
Licensed Public Accountants 
December 1, 2014
Page F-5
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Shareholders of Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  of  Avalon  Rare  Metals  Inc.  (“the
Company”),  which  comprise  the  consolidated  statements  of  financial  position  as  at  August  31,  2013  and
August 31, 2012, and the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss, changes in shareholders' equity
and  cash  flows  for  the  years  then  ended  and  a  summary  of  significant  accounting  policies  and  other
explanatory information.
Management's Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements
Management  is  responsible  for  the  preparation  and  fair  presentation  of  these  consolidated  financial
statements  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as  issued  by  the  International
Accounting Standards Board, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable
the preparation of consolidated financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error.
Auditor's Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with Canadian auditing standards and the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we comply with ethical
requirements and plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated
financial statements are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the
consolidated financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgment, including the
assessment  of  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements,  whether  due  to
fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the entity's
preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures
that  are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances.  An  audit  also  includes  evaluating  the  appropriateness  of
accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained in our audits is sufficient and appropriate to provide a
basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
McCarney Greenwood LLP
  Chartered Accountants
 
10 Bay Street, Suite 600
Toronto, ON M5J 2R8
 
T 416 362 0515 F 416 362
 
0539
www.mgca.com
Page F-6
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial
position of the Company as of August 31, 2013 and August 31, 2012, and its financial performance and its
cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued
by the International Accounting Standards Board.
Emphasis of matter
Without  qualifying  our  opinion,  we  draw  attention  to  note  1  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements  which
describes  that  the  Company  will  require  additional  financing  in  order  to  fund  its  planned  activities.  This
condition, along with other matters set out in note 1, indicates the existence of material uncertainties that may
cast significant doubt upon the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Other matter
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(United States), the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of August 31, 2013 based on the
criteria  established  in Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated November 28, 2013 on internal control over
financial  reporting  expressed  an  unqualified  opinion  on  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial
reporting.
Toronto, Canada
November 28, 2013
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
(expressed in Canadian Dollars)
As at August 31, 2014 and August 31, 2013
Assets
 
     Current Assets
             Cash and cash equivalents (note 5)
             Other receivables
             Prepaid expenses and deposits
 
 
     Non-Current Assets
               Exploration and evaluation assets (note 6)
               Property, plant and equipment (note 7)
“McCarney Greenwood LLP”
 
   McCarney Greenwood LLP
   Chartered Accountants
   Licensed Public Accountants
McCarney Greenwood LLP
  Chartered Accountants
10 Bay Street, Suite 600
 
 
Toronto, ON M5J 2R8
T 416 362 0515 F 416 362
 
0539
www.mgca.com
Page F-7
2014
2013
$
 
416,923 
 
958,957 
 
7,393,478 
   
 
   
 
 
7,139,990 
  102,303,899
6,017,598  $  10,313,798 
388,969 
928,948 
11,631,715 
 
 
6,298,833 
93,915,398
Liabilities
 
     Current Liabilities
             Accounts payable
             Accrued liabilities
             Warrants denominated in foreign currency (note 8)
 
 
     Non-Current Liabilities
               Site closure and reclamation provisions (note 9)
 
 
 
Shareholders’ Equity
 
     Share Capital (note 10b)
     Reserve for Warrants (note 10c)
     Reserve for Share Based Payments (note 10d)
     Reserve for Brokers’ Compensation Warrants (note 10e)
     Accumulated Deficit
100,214,231 
  109,443,889 
   
 
   
 
$  116,837,367  $  111,845,946 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
   
 
   
 1,463,225 
$
 1,099,413  $
686,332 
1,178,806 
 
 
1,720,622 
- 
 
 
3,506,367 
2,642,031 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
236,600 
236,600 
 
 
 
   
 
   
3,742,967 
2,878,631 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
  149,379,724 
  158,553,485 
3,661,080 
 
3,863,018 
 
14,912,475 
 
15,270,866 
 
 
123,576 
 
- 
(58,985,964)
 
(64,716,545)
 
   
   
 
 
  108,967,315 
  113,094,400 
   
 
   
 
$  116,837,367  $  111,845,946
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Approved on behalf of the Board
“Donald S. Bubar”
“Brian MacEachen”
, Director
 
, Director
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-8
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss 
(expressed in Canadian Dollars, except number of shares) 
For the years ended August 31
Revenue
 
     Interest
 
Expenses
 
     Corporate and administrative expenses
 
     Impairment loss on exploration and evaluation assets (note 6)  
     Write-off of land acquisition option payments (note 11)
 
 
     General exploration
 
     Depreciation (note 7)
 
     Share based compensation (note 10)
     Foreign exchange loss (gain)
$
2014
88,075  $
5,211,051 
182,409 
175,104 
7,452 
167,680 
347,096 
20,097
2013
374,281  $
6,366,338 
2,897,867 
- 
53,119 
211,085 
2,063,145 
(18,109)
2012
1,105,731 
 
 
 
6,244,988 
- 
- 
40,201 
231,850 
5,786,249 
(45,363)
Financing transaction costs (note 10)
303,862
-
-
Decrease in fair value of warrants denominated in foreign
currency (note 8)
 
 
 
Net Loss before Income Taxes
Deferred Income Tax Recoveries (note 16)
 
Net Loss and Total Comprehensive Loss for the year
 
 
Loss per Share - Basic and Diluted (note 17)
 
Weighted Average Number of Common Shares Outstanding,
Basic and Diluted
$
 
 
$
(480,324)
 
5,934,427 
 
(5,846,352)
115,771
- 
 
11,573,445 
 
(11,199,164)
-
- 
 
12,257,925 
 
(11,152,194)
- 
 
 (5,730,581) $  (11,199,164) $  (11,152,194)
 
 
 (0.11)
(0.05) $
(0.11) $
112,724,520
103,683,356
103,224,070
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity
(expressed in Canadian Dollars, except number of shares)
For the years ended August 31
Number of
Share Capital
Reserves (note 10)
Compensation    Accumulated
Brokers’
Share
Based
Page F-9
Shares
Amount
Warrants     Payments     Warrants
Deficit
Total
102,617,912 $ 146,244,597 $ 3,670,248 $  6,646,427 $
96,688 $  (36,634,606)$ 120,023,354
10,000
14,800
10,057
64,991
198,508
-
-
24,573
(24,573)
855,000
1,312,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
968,585
-
(968,585)
74,083
185,420
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24,857
198,508
-
-
1,312,500
-
-
-
185,420
Balance at
September 1,
2011
     Issued for
other
consideration
(note 10b)
     Exercise of
warrants (note
10b)
     Reserve
transferred on
exercise of
warrants
     Exercise of
options (note
10b)
     Reserve
transferred on
exercise of
options
     Exercise of
compensation
warrants (note
10b)
     Reserve
transferred on
exercise of
-
-
-
96,688
-
-
(96,688)
-
-
-
-
-   6,684,009
-
-
-
-
-
6,684,009
(11,152,194)
(11,152,194)
103,621,986 $ 149,045,671 $ 3,655,732 $ 12,361,851 $
- $  (47,786,800)$ 117,276,454
-
-
5,348
175,000
210,000
-
-
-
-
124,053
-
(124,053)
-
-
-
-
-   2,674,677
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5,348
210,000
-
-
2,674,677
(11,199,164)
(11,199,164)
103,796,986 $ 149,379,724 $ 3,661,080 $ 14,912,475 $
- $  (58,985,964)$ 108,967,315
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-   10,355,617
-
-
-
9,220
252,500
-
compensation
warrants
Share based
compensation
(note 10d)
Net loss for
the year
 
Balance at
August 31,
2012
     Issue for
other
considerations
(note 10b)
     Exercise of
options (note
10b)
     Reserve
transferred on
exercise of
options
     Share
based
compensation
(note 10d)
     Net loss for
the year
 
Balance at
August 31,
2013
     Equity
offerings (note
10b)
     Issue for
other
considerations
(note 10b)
     Exercise of
options (note
10b)
     Reserve
transferred on
exercise of
options
Compensation
warrants
issued on on
equity
          offerings
(note 10b)
     Share
based
compensation
(note 10d)
22,186,700   10,151,705
203,912
10,000
6,371
2,849
350,000
252,500
-
-
190,981
-
(190,981)
-
-
-
-
-
-
123,576
-
123,576
-
549,372
-
-
549,372
-
(682,542)
(4,823)
-
(684,474)
-
-
-
(60,780)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(687,365)
-
(684,474)
-
(60,780)
(5,730,581)
(5,730,581)
123,576 $  (64,716,545)$ 113,094,400
Share
issuance
costs - cash
     Share
issuance
costs –
common
shares issued  
     Share
issuance
costs –
compensation
warrants 
             issued  
     Net loss for
the year
 
Balance at
August 31,
2014
126,343,686 $ 158,553,485 $ 3,863,018 $ 15,270,866 $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-10
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
(expressed in Canadian Dollars) 
For the years ended August 31
Operating Activities
 
     Cash paid to employees
     Cash paid to suppliers
     Interest received
 
Cash Used by Operating Activities
 
 
Financing Activities
 
     Proceeds from equity offerings
     Proceeds from exercise of stock options
     Proceeds from exercise of warrants
     Proceeds from exercise of brokers’ compensation warrants
     Share issuance costs
 
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
 
Investing Activities
 
     Exploration and evaluation assets
     Property, plant and equipment
 
Cash Used by Investing Activities
 
Change in Cash and Cash Equivalents
$
2014
(2,539,675) $
(2,849,685)
 
 
84,080 
   
 
 
(5,305,280)
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
10,847,422 
 
 
252,500 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
 
   
 
 
11,099,922 
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
(1,233,618)
(8,837,127)
 
   
 
 
(10,070,745)
   
 
(4,276,103)
2013
(2,945,267) $
(3,359,555)
 
 
370,286 
   
 
 
(5,934,536)
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
- 
 
 
210,000 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
 
   
 
 
210,000 
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
(21,727,380)
(537,643)
 
   
 
 
(22,265,023)
   
 
(27,989,559)
2012
(2,335,074)
(3,852,967)
1,102,502 
 
(5,085,539)
 
 
 
 
- 
1,312,500 
198,508 
185,420 
(314,438)
 
1,381,990 
 
 
 
(28,491,378)
(358,288)
 
(28,849,666)
 
(32,553,215)
Foreign Exchange Effect on Cash
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents – beginning of year
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents – end of year
Supplemental Cash Flow Information (note 15)
$
(20,097)
 
10,313,798
(5,465)
 
70,858,678 
 
 6,017,598  $  10,313,798  $  38,299,998
3,359 
 
38,299,998
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-11
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
1.
Nature of Operations
 
Avalon Rare Metals Inc. (the “Company”) is a publicly listed company incorporated in Canada and continued
under the Canada Business Corporations Act. The Company’s common shares are listed on the Toronto Stock
Exchange (TSX: AVL), on the NYSE MKT (NYSE MKT: AVL), and the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in Germany.
 
The registered address, principal address and records office of the Company is located at 130 Adelaide Street
West, Suite 1901, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5H 3P5.
 
The  Company  is  in  the  process  of  exploring  and  developing its  mineral  resource  properties.  To  date,  the
Company has not earned significant revenues.
 
The  realization  of  amounts  shown  for  its  exploration  and evaluation  assets  and  its  development  asset  -
Nechalacho Rare Earth Elements Project (the “Nechalacho REE Project”) is dependent upon the discovery of
economically  recoverable  reserves,  the  ability  of  the  Company to  obtain  the  necessary  financing  to  develop
these assets, and future profitable production or proceeds of disposition from these assets.
 
The Company is principally engaged in the acquisition, exploration, evaluation and development of rare metal
and mineral properties located principally in Canada.
 
These  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Financial
Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) applicable to a going concern, which assumes the Company will continue to meet
its obligations and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business for the foreseeable future. Different
bases  of measurement  may  be  appropriate  when  a  company  is  not  expected  to  continue operations  for  the
foreseeable future. The Company is in the exploration and development stage and, as is common with many
exploration  and development companies, raises funds in the equity markets to conduct its business activities.
The Company has incurred losses in the current and prior periods, with a net loss of $5,730,581 for the year
ended August 31, 2014 and an accumulated deficit of $64,716,545 as at that August 31, 2014.
 
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents balance at August 31, 2014 is $6,017,598 and working capital is
$5,607,733 (calculated by adding back the liability for warrants denominated in foreign currency of $1,720,622 to
the  net  current  assets  of  $3,887,111).  Management  intends  to finance  operating  expenditures  over  the  next
twelve  months  with  funds currently  on  hand  and/or  through  equity  financing.  Given  the  continuation of  weak
investor sentiment and capital market conditions in the junior resource sector, there exists a material uncertainty
as to the Company’s ability to raise additional funds on favorable terms. However, the Company’s discretionary
exploration  and  development  activities  have  some scope for flexibility in terms  of  amount  and  timing  of  such
expenditures, which can be adjusted accordingly.
 
These  consolidated  financial  statements  do  not  reflect the  adjustments  to  the  carrying  values  of  assets  and
liabilities and the reported expenses and balance sheet classifications that would be necessary should the going
concern assumption be inappropriate, and those adjustments could be material.
 
These consolidated financial statements have been reviewed and approved by the Company’s Audit Committee
and the Board of Directors on December 1, 2014.
2.
Basis of Presentation
 
a)
Statement of Compliance and Basis of Presentation
 
These  consolidated  financial  statements,  including comparatives, have been prepared using accounting
policies in compliance with IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”).
 
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis using the historical
cost basis, except for certain financial instruments which are measured at fair value in accordance with the
policies disclosed in Note 3.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-12
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
2.
3.
Basis of Presentation (continued)
 
b)
Basis of Consolidation
 
These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and the entities controlled
by the Company. Control exists when the Company is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its
involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date
that control commences until the date that control ceases.
 
These  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the accounts  of  the  Company  and  its  wholly-owned
subsidiaries,  8110131  Canada Inc., Nolava Minerals Inc. (“Nolava”), Avalon Rare Metals Ltd. (“ARML”),
Avalon  Rare  Metals  Processing  Inc.  (“ARMP”)  and  Avalon  Rare  Metals Processing  LLC  (“ARMLLC”).
Nolava,  ARML,  ARMP  and  ARMLLC  are  incorporated in  the  United  States  of  America  (“USA”).  ARML,
ARMP and ARMLLC have not carried on any significant operations since their inception. During the year
ended August 31, 2012, 8110131 Canada Inc. acquired certain net smelter returns (“NSR”) royalty interests
in the Company’s properties which were held by third parties. Nolava had held certain mining claims in
Utah, USA and had conducted exploration work on those mining claims during fiscal year 2011 to fiscal
year  2014.  All  intercompany  transactions  and balances  have  been  eliminated  on  consolidation  of  the
accounts.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
 
The principal accounting policies followed by the Company are summarized as follows:
 
a)
Foreign Currency Transactions
 
Functional and Presentation Currency
 
Items included in the consolidated financial statements of the Company and each of its subsidiaries (the
“Group”)  are  measured using  the  currency  of  the  primary  economic  environment  in  which  the  entity
operates  (the  “functional  currency”).  The  functional  and  presentation currency  of  the  Company  and  its
subsidiaries is the Canadian dollar (“$”). The consolidated financial statements of the Group are presented
in Canadian dollars.
 
Transactions and Balances
 
In  preparing  the  financial  statements  of  the  individual entities,  transactions  in  currencies  other  than  the
entity’s  functional currency  (foreign  currencies)  are  recorded  at  the  rates  of  exchange prevailing  at  the
dates of the transactions. At each statement of financial position date, monetary assets and liabilities are
translated using the foreign exchange rates prevailing at the end of each reporting period. Non- monetary
assets and liabilities are translated using the historical rate on the date of the transaction. Non-monetary
assets and liabilities that are stated at fair value are translated using the historical rate on the date that the
fair value was determined. All gains and losses on translation of these foreign currency transactions are
included in foreign exchange loss (gain) in the statement of comprehensive loss.
 
On  consolidation,  exchange  differences  arising  from  the translation  of  the  net  investment  in  foreign
operations, and of borrowings and other currency instruments designated as hedges of such investments,
are  taken  to  shareholders’  equity.  When  a  foreign  operation  is  partially disposed  of  or  sold,  exchange
differences that were recorded in equity are recognized in profit or loss as part of the gain or loss on sale.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-13
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
3.
c)
d)
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
b)
Business Combinations
 
Acquisitions of businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method. The consideration transferred
in a business combination is measured at fair value, which is calculated as the sum of the acquisition-date
fair  values  of  the  assets  transferred  by  the  Company, liabilities  incurred  by  the  Company  to  the  former
owners  of  the  acquiree and  the  equity  interests  issued  by  the  Company  in  exchange  for  control  of the
acquiree.  Any  excess  of  the  purchase  price  over  fair  value  is  recorded as  goodwill.  Acquisition-related
costs are recognized in profit or loss as incurred.
 
Share Based Payments
 
Equity-settled share based payments to employees (including directors and senior executives) and others
providing similar services are measured at the fair value of the equity instruments at the grant date. The fair
value  of  the  share-based  payment  is  measured  by reference  to  the  fair  value  of  the  equity  instrument
granted, which in turn is determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model on the date of the grant,
with  management’s  assumptions  for  the  risk-free  rate, dividend  yield,  volatility  factors  of  the  expected
market  price  of  the Company’s  common  shares,  exercise  price,  current  market  price  of  the underlying
equity to be settled with, expected forfeitures and the life of the options.
 
The fair value of the equity-settled share based payments is recognized over the vesting period in which
the service conditions are fulfilled, ending on the date in which the grantee becomes fully entitled to the
award,  based  on  the  Company's  estimate  of  equity  instruments  that will  eventually  vest,  and  is  either
expensed  or  capitalized  to  exploration and  evaluation  assets  or  property,  plant  and  equipment,  with  a
corresponding increase in equity.
 
Equity-settled share-based payment transactions with parties other than employees are measured at the
fair value of the goods or services received, except where that fair value cannot be estimated reliably, in
which case they are measured at the fair value of the equity instruments granted, measured at the date the
Company obtains the goods or the counterparty renders the service.
 
Leases
 
Leases are classified as finance leases whenever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks
and rewards of ownership to the lessee. All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Assets held under finance leases are initially recognized as assets of the Company at their fair value at the
inception of the lease or, if lower, at the present value of the minimum lease payments.
 
Lease payments are apportioned between finance expenses and reduction of the lease obligation so as to
achieve  a  constant  rate  of interest  on  the  remaining  balance  of  the  liability.  Finance  expenses  are
recognized immediately in profit or loss, unless they are directly attributable to qualifying assets, in which
case they are capitalized in accordance with the Company's general policy on borrowing costs.
 
Operating  lease  payments  are  recognized  as  an  expense  on a  straight-line  basis  over  the  lease  term,
except  where  another  systematic basis  is  more  representative  of  the  time  pattern  in  which  economic
benefits from the leased asset are consumed.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-14
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
3.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
e)
Income Taxes
 
Current Income Taxes
 
The tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the year. Taxable profit differs from profit as reported
in  the consolidated  statements  of  comprehensive  loss  because  of  items  of  income or  expense  that  are
taxable or deductible in other years and items that are never taxable or deductible. The Company's liability
for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of
the reporting period.
 
Deferred Income Taxes
 
Deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  represent  income taxes  expected  to  be  payable  or  recoverable  on
differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the Company’s consolidated financial
statements and the corresponding tax basis used in the computation of taxable profit. Deferred tax assets
also represent income taxes expected to be recoverable on unclaimed losses carried forward.
 
Deferred  taxes  are  calculated  using  the  asset  and liability  method.  Deferred  tax  liabilities  are  generally
recognized  for all  taxable  temporary  differences,  with  some  exceptions  described  below. Deferred  tax
assets are recognized to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which
deductible temporary differences can be used. Neither deferred tax liabilities, nor deferred tax assets, are
recognized  as  a  result  of  temporary  differences  that  arise from  the  initial  recognition  of  goodwill  or  a
transaction,  other  than  a business  combination,  that  affects  neither  accounting  profit  nor  taxable profit.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset the current tax
assets against the current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation
authority and the Company intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
 
Deferred tax asset and liabilities are measured using the enacted or substantively enacted tax rates as of
the date of the statement of financial position that are expected to be in effect when the differences reverse
or when unclaimed losses are utilized.
 
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at the end of each reporting period and adjusted to
the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow the benefit of all
or part of the asset to be utilized. To the extent that an asset not previously recognized fulfils the criteria for
asset recognition, a deferred tax asset is recognized.
 
Deferred tax is recognized in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss, unless it relates to items
recognized  directly  in equity,  in  which  case  the  deferred  tax  related  to  those  items  is  also recognized
directly in equity.
f)
Flow-through Shares
 
The Company will, from time to time, issue flow-through shares to finance a portion of its exploration and
development programs. Pursuant to the terms of the flow-through share agreements, the Company agrees
to  incur  eligible  flow-through  expenditures  and  renounce  the  tax deductions  associated  with  these
qualifying expenditures to the subscribers at an agreed upon date.
 
The excess of cash consideration received over the market price of the Company’s shares at the date of
the announcement of the flow-through share financing (“Flow-through Share Premium”) is recorded in the
consolidated  statement  of  financial  position  as  a  deferred flow-through  premium  liability  when  the  flow-
through  shares  are  issued. The  Company  recognizes  a  pro  rata  amount  of  the  Flow-through  Share
Premium through the consolidated statement of comprehensive loss as a reduction of deferred income tax
expense with a corresponding reduction to the deferred flow-through premium liability as the eligible flow-
through expenditures are incurred.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-15
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
g)
3.
h)
i)
j)
to
translation  of
the
financial  statements  of
Loss per Share
 
The basic loss per share is computed by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of common
shares  outstanding  during the year. The diluted loss per share reflects the potential dilution of common
share  equivalents,  such  as  outstanding  stock  options  and  share purchase  warrants,  in  the  weighted
average number of common shares outstanding during the year, if dilutive. The “treasury stock method” is
used for the assumed proceeds upon the exercise of the options and warrants that are used to purchase
common shares at the average market price during the year.
 
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
 
Other  Comprehensive  income  (loss)  is  the  change  in  the Company’s  net  assets  that  results  from
transactions,  events  and circumstances  that  are  not  related  to  the  Company’s  shares  and  that  are not
included  in  net  profit  or  loss.  Such  items  include  unrealized  gains  or losses  on  available-for-sale
investments,  gains  or  losses  on  certain hedging  derivative  instruments  and  foreign  currency  gains  or
l osses related 
foreign  operations. The  Company’s
comprehensive  income  (loss)  and  components  of  other comprehensive  income  are  presented  in  the
consolidated statements of comprehensive loss and the consolidated statements of changes in equity.
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents include bank deposits and highly liquid short-term money market investments
that  are  readily convertible  to  known  amounts  of  cash  and  which  are  subject  to  an insignificant  risk  of
changes in value, such as bankers’ acceptance notes, treasury bills and guaranteed investment certificates
(“GICs”).
 
Exploration and Evaluation Assets
 
These  assets  relate  to  mineral  rights  acquired  and exploration  and  evaluation  expenditures  incurred  in
respect to resource projects that are in the exploration and evaluation stage.
 
Exploration  and  evaluation  expenditures  include  costs which  are  directly  attributable  to  acquisition,
surveying,  geological, geochemical,  geophysical,  exploratory  drilling,  land  maintenance, sampling,  and
assessing  technical  feasibility  and  commercial  viability. These  expenditures  are  capitalized  until  the
technical 
feasibility  and commercial  viability  of  extracting  the  mineral  resource  of  a  project  are
demonstrable. During the exploration period, exploration and evaluation assets are not amortized.
 
Exploration  and  evaluation  assets  are  allocated  to  cash generating  units  (“CGUs”)  for  the  purpose  of
assessing such assets for impairment and each project is identified as a separate CGU. A project is tested
for impairment when facts and circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of that project may exceed
its recoverable amount, and the recoverable amount of the project is estimated. If the recoverable amount
of the project is estimated to be less than its carrying amount, the carrying amount of the project is reduced
to its recoverable amount. An impairment loss is recognized immediately in the consolidated statement of
comprehensive loss.
 
Once  the  technical  feasibility  and  commercial  viability of  extracting  a  mineral  resource  of  a  project  are
demonstrable, 
the relevant  exploration  and  evaluation  asset  is  assessed  for  impairment,  and any
impairment loss is recognized, prior to the balance being reclassified as a development asset in property,
plant and equipment.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-16
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
3.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
The  determination  of  the  demonstration  of  technical feasibility  and  commercial  viability  is  subject  to  a
significant degree of judgment and assessment of all relevant factors. In general, technical feasibility may
be demonstrable once a positive feasibility study is completed. When determining the commercial viability
of a project, in addition to the receipt of a feasibility study, the Company also considers factors such as the
availability of project financing, the existence of markets and/or long term contracts for the product, and the
ability to obtain the relevant operating permits.
 
All  subsequent  expenditures  to  ready  the  property  for production  are  capitalized  within  development
assets, other than those costs related to the construction of property, plant and equipment.
 
Once  production  has  commenced,  all  costs  included  in development  assets  are  reclassified  to  mining
properties.
 
Exploration and evaluation expenditures incurred prior to the Company obtaining mineral rights related to
the property being explored are recorded as expense in the period in which they are incurred.
 
Property, plant and equipment
 
Property, plant and equipment (“PPE”) are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated
impairment losses. The cost of an item of PPE consists of the purchase price, any costs directly attributable
to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for its intended use by management and an
initial  estimate  of  the  costs  of dismantling  and  removing  the  item  and  restoring  the  site  on  which  it  is
located.
 
Depreciation is provided over the estimated useful lives of the Company’s assets on the following basis
and rates per annum:
k)
Airstrip
Computer and office equipment
Exploration equipment
Leasehold improvements
-      8% on a declining balance basis
-      25% to 33 1/3% on a declining balance basis
-      30% on a declining balance basis
-      straight line basis over the term of the lease
An item of PPE is derecognized upon disposal, when held for sale or when no future economic benefits are
expected  to  arise  from  the  continued  use  of  the  asset.  Any  gain  or  loss  arising  on  disposal  of  the  asset,
determined  as  the  difference  between  the  net  disposal  proceeds  and  the  carrying  amount  of  the  asset,  is
recognized in income or loss for the period.
The  Company  conducts  an  annual  assessment  of  the  residual  balances,  useful  lives  and  depreciation
methods  being  used  for  PPE  and  any  changes  arising  from  the  assessment  are  applied  by  the  Company
prospectively as a change in estimate.
Where  an  item  of  plant  and  equipment  comprises  major  components  with  different  useful  lives,  the
components are accounted for as separate items of plant and equipment. Expenditures incurred to replace a
component  of  an  item  of  PPE  that  is  accounted  for  separately,  including  major  inspection  and  overhaul
expenditures, are capitalized.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-17
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
l)
Impairment of Non-Financial Assets
 
At the end of each reporting period, the Company reviews the carrying amounts of its non-financial assets
with  finite  lives  at  the CGU  level  to  determine  whether  there  is  any  indication  that  those  assets have
suffered an impairment loss. If any such indication exists, the recoverable amount of the relevant CGU is
estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss, if any. A CGU is the smallest identifiable
group  of  assets  that  generates  cash  inflows  that  are  largely independent of the cash inflows from other
assets or groups  of  assets.  The Company’s CGUs are typically its significant individual exploration and
evaluation assets, development projects or mines. In certain circumstances, when the recoverable amount
of  an  individual  asset  can  be determined,  impairment  assessment  is  performed  at  the  individual  asset
level. Where a reasonable and consistent basis of allocation can be identified, corporate assets are also
allocated to individual CGUs, or otherwise they are allocated to the smallest group of CGUs for which a
reasonable and consistent allocation basis can be identified.
 
The recoverable amount of an asset is the higher of fair value less costs of disposal and value in use. In
assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pre-
tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific
to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
 
If the recoverable amount of an asset (or CGU) is estimated to be less than its carrying amount, the carrying
amount  of  the asset  (or  CGU)  is  reduced  to  its  recoverable  amount.  An  impairment  loss  is recognized
immediately in profit or loss.
 
At  the  end  of  each  reporting  period,  the  Company  assesses whether  there  is  any  indication  that  an
impairment loss recognized in prior periods may no longer exist or have decreased. If such an indication
exists, the estimated recoverable amount of the asset (or CGU) is revised and the carrying amount of the
asset  (or  CGU)  is  increased  to  the  revised estimate  of  its  recoverable  amount,  to  the  extent  that  the
increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no
impairment loss been recognized for the asset (or CGU) in prior years. A reversal of an impairment loss is
recognized immediately in profit or loss.
 
Financial Instruments
 
Financial  assets  and  financial  liabilities  are  recognized when  the  Company  becomes  a  party  to  the
contractual provisions of the instrument. Financial assets and financial liabilities are initially measured at
fair value. Transaction costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or issue of financial assets and
financial liabilities (other than financial assets and financial liabilities recorded at fair value through profit or
loss)  are  added  to  or  deducted  from  the  fair  value of  the  financial  assets  or  financial  liabilities,  as
appropriate,  on initial  recognition.  Transaction  costs  directly  attributable  to  the acquisition  of  financial
assets or financial liabilities recorded at fair value through profit or loss are recognized immediately in the
statement of comprehensive loss.
3.
m)
Financial Assets
The  Company  recognizes  all  financial  assets  initially  at fair  value  and  classifies  them  into  one  of  the
following  specified categories:  fair  value  through  profit  or  loss  (“FVTPL”),  held-to-maturity (“HTM”),
available-for-sale  (“AFS”)  and  loans  and  receivables.  HTM instruments  and  loans  and  receivables  are
measured at amortized cost. AFS instruments are measured at fair value with unrealized gains and losses
recognized in other comprehensive income. Instruments classified as FVTPL are measured at fair value
with unrealized gains and losses recognized in profit or loss for the period.
 
The  fair  value  of  financial  instruments  traded  in  active markets  (such  as  FVTPL  and  AFS  securities)  is
based on quoted market prices at the date of the Statement of Financial Position. The quoted market price
used for financial assets held by the Company is the current bid price.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-18
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
3.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
Impairment of Financial Assets
Financial  assets,  other  than  those  at  FVTPL,  are  assessed  for  indicators  of  impairment  at  the  end  of  each
reporting  period.  Financial  assets  are  considered  to  be  impaired  when  there  is  objective  evidence  of  an
incurred loss, as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the financial asset,
and the estimated future cash flows of the investment have been affected.
Financial Liabilities and Equity Instruments
Financial liabilities
Financial liabilities are classified as either financial liabilities at FVTPL or other financial liabilities. Financial
liabilities classified as FVTPL are measured at fair value with unrealized gains and losses recognized in profit
or loss for the period. Other financial liabilities including borrowings are initially measured at fair value net of
transaction costs, and subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method.
The  effective  interest  method  is  a  method  of  calculating  the  amortized  cost  of  a  financial  liability  and  of
allocating  interest  expense  over  the  relevant  period.  The  effective  interest  rate  is  the  rate  that  exactly
discounts estimated future cash payments (including all fees and points paid or received that form an integral
part of the effective interest rate, transaction costs and other premiums or discounts) through the expected life
of  the  financial  liability,  or  (where  appropriate)  a  shorter  period,  to  the  net  carrying  amount  on  initial
recognition.
Equity instruments
An  equity  instrument  is  any  contract  that  evidences  a  residual  interest  in  the  assets  of  an  entity  after
deducting  all  of  its  liabilities.  Equity  instruments  issued  by  the  Company  are  recognized  at  the  proceeds
received, net of direct issuance costs.
Repurchase of the Company's own equity instruments is recognized and deducted directly in equity. No gain
or loss is recognized in the Statement of Comprehensive Loss on the purchase, sale, issue or cancellation of
the Company's own equity instruments.
Offsetting financial instruments
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount reported in the Statement of Financial
Position if, and only if, there is a currently enforceable legal right to offset the recognized amounts and there is
an intention to settle on a net basis, or to realize the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
The Company’s financial assets and liabilities are classified and subsequently measured as follows:
Classification
Asset/Liability
 
 
Loans and receivables
Cash and cash equivalents
Loans and receivables
Receivables
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities Other financial liabilities
Warrants denominated in Foreign
Currency
FVTPL
Subsequent Measurement
 
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
Fair value
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-19
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
3.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
n)
Site Closure and Reclamation Provision
 
The  Company’s  mining  exploration  activities  are  subject to  various  governmental  laws  and  regulations
relating  to  the  protection  of the  environment.  These  environmental  regulations  are  continually  changing
and are generally becoming more restrictive. The Company has made, and intends to make in the future,
expenditures  to  comply  with  such  laws  and regulations  or  constructive  obligations.  Provision  for  site
closure  costs is  recorded  at  the  time  an  environmental  disturbance  occurs,  and  is measured  at  the
Company’s best estimate of the expected value of future cash flows required to reclaim the disturbance
upon site closure, discounted to their net present value. The net present value is determined using a pre-
tax discount rate that is specific to the liability. The estimated net present value is re-measured at the end of
each reporting period, or when changes in circumstances occur and/or new material information becomes
available. Increases or decreases to the provision arise due to changes in legal, constructive or regulatory
requirements, the extent of environmental remediation required and cost estimates. The net present value
of the estimated costs of these changes is recorded in the period in which the change is identified and
quantifiable.
 
Upon initial recognition of site closure provision, there is a corresponding increase to the carrying amounts
of related assets and the cost is amortized as an expense on a unit-of-production basis over the life of the
related assets. The value of the provision is progressively increased over the life of the operation as the
effect of discounting unwinds, such increase is recognized as interest expense.
 
Other Provisions
 
Provisions are recognized when the Company has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of
a  past  event,  it  is probable  that  the  Company  will  be  required  to  settle  the  obligation,  and  a reliable
estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
 
Provisions  are  measured  at  the  present  value  of  the expenditures  expected  to  be  required  to  settle  the
obligation using a pre-tax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the
risks  specific  to  the  provision.  The  increase  in  the provision  due  to  passage  of  time  is  recognized  as
interest expense.
 
Related Party Disclosure
 
Parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability, directly or indirectly, to control the other
party  or  exercise significant  influence  over  the  other  party  in  making  financial  and operating  decisions.
Parties  are  also  considered  to  be  related  if  they  are subject  to  common  control  or  common  significant
influence.  Related  parties may  be  individuals  or  corporate  entities.  A  transaction  is  considered  to be  a
related  party  transaction  when  there  is  a  transfer  of  resources  or obligations  between  related  parties.
Related party transactions that are in the normal course of business and have commercial substance are
measured at fair value.
o)
p)
q)
Segment Reporting
 
An operating segment is a component of the Company that engages in business activities from which it
may earn revenues and incur expenses. In determining the Company’s segment structure, consideration is
given to the similar operational and political risks to which the Company’s current operations within the
same business and regulatory environment are exposed.
 
The  Company’s  current  operations  comprise  a  single reporting  operating  segment  engaged  in  the
acquisition,  exploration, evaluation  and  development  of  rare  metal  and  mineral  properties  located
principally  in  Canada.  The  Company  has  conducted  exploration  work  on certain  mineral  claims  in  the
United States since 2011, and considers Canada and the United States as a single geographical segment
as the Company is exposed to similar operational and political risks when conducting mineral exploration
and evaluation activities in both Canada and the United States.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-20
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
3.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
r)
Critical Accounting Judgments and Estimation Uncertainties
 
The  preparation  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements in  conformity  with  IFRS  requires  that  the
Company’s  management  make critical  judgments,  estimates  and  assumptions  about  future  events  that
affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and related notes to the consolidated
financial  statements.  Actual  results  may differ  from  those  estimates.  Estimates  and  assumptions  are
reviewed on an on-going basis based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to be
relevant under the circumstances. Revisions to estimates are accounted for prospectively.
 
The Company has identified the following significant areas where critical accounting judgments, estimates
and  assumptions  are made  and  where  actual  results  may  differ  from  these  estimates  under different
assumptions and conditions and may materially affect financial results or the financial position reported in
future periods.
 
Further details of the nature of these assumptions and conditions may be found in the relevant notes to the
consolidated financial statements.
 
Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty
 
Information  about  assumptions  and  estimation uncertainties  that  have  a  significant  risk  of  resulting  in
material adjustment are included in the following notes:
 
Recoverability  of  Exploration  and  Evaluation Assets,  Development  Assets  and  Property,  Plant  and
Equipment
 
The  Company  assesses  all  exploration  and  evaluation assets,  development  assets  and  PPE  at  each
reporting date to determine whether any indication of impairment exists. Where an indicator of impairment
exists, a formal estimate of the recoverable amount is made, which is the higher of the fair value less costs
of disposal and value in use. These assessments require the use of estimates and assumptions such as
long  term  commodity  prices,  discount  rates,  foreign  exchange  rates, future  capital  requirements,
exploration potential and operating performance.
 
Determination of Reserve and Resource Estimates
Mineral reserves and resources are estimates of the amount of ore that can be economically and legally
Mineral reserves and resources are estimates of the amount of ore that can be economically and legally
extracted  from  the Company’s  exploration  and  development  properties.  The  estimation  of recoverable
reserves  is  based  upon  factors  such  as  estimates  of  commodity prices,  production  costs,  production
techniques,  future  capital requirements  and  foreign  exchange  rates,  along  with  geological  assumptions
and judgments made in estimating the size and grade of the ore body. Changes in the reserve or resource
estimates may impact the carrying value of exploration and evaluation assets, development assets, PPE,
site closure and reclamation provision and amortization expense.
 
Fair Value of Share Based Payments and Warrants
 
The  Company  follows  IFRS  2, Share-based  Payment, in  determining  the  fair  value  of  share  based
payments.  The  calculated amount  is  not  based  on  historical  cost,  but  is  derived  based  on  subjective
assumptions input into a pricing model. The model requires that management make forecasts as to future
events, including estimates of: the average future hold period of issued stock options and compensation
warrants before  exercise,  expiry  or  cancellation;  future  volatility  of  the Company’s  share  price  in  the
expected  hold  period;  dividend  yield;  and  the appropriate  risk-free  rate  of  interest.  The  resulting  value
calculated  is not necessarily the value that the holder of the option or warrant could receive in an arm’s
length transaction, given that there is no market for the options or compensation warrants and they are not
transferable. Similar  calculations  are  made  in  estimating  the  fair  value  of  the  warrant component  of  an
equity  unit.  The  assumptions  used  in  these  calculations are  inherently  uncertain.  Changes  in  these
assumptions could materially affect the fair value estimates.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-21
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
3.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
Site Closure and Reclamation Provision
The Company’s accounting policy for the recognition of a site closure and reclamation obligation requires
significant estimates and assumptions such as: requirements of the relevant legal and regulatory framework,
the  magnitude  of  possible  disturbance  and  the  timing  thereof,  extent  and  costs  of  required  closure  and
rehabilitation activity, and discount rate. These uncertainties may result in future actual expenditures differing
from the amounts currently provided.
Site closure and reclamation provision recognized is periodically reviewed and updated based on the facts
and  circumstances  available  at  the  time.  Changes  to  the  estimated  future  costs  are  recognized  in  the
Statement of Financial Position by adjusting both the site closure and reclamation asset and provision.
Property, Plant and Equipment - Estimated Useful Lives
Management estimates the useful lives of PPE based on the period during which the assets are expected to be
available for use. The amounts and timing of recorded expenses for depreciation of PPE for any period are
affected  by  these  estimated  useful  lives.  The  estimates  are  reviewed  at  least  annually  and  are  updated  if
expectations change as a result of physical wear and tear, technical or commercial obsolescence and legal or
other limits to use. It is possible that changes in these factors may cause significant changes in the estimated
useful lives of the Company’s PPE in the future.
Critical Judgments
Information about critical judgments in applying accounting policies that have most significant effect on the
consolidated financial statements are as follows:
Capitalization of Exploration and Evaluation Costs
Exploration  and  evaluation  costs  incurred  during  the  year  are  recorded  at  cost.  Capitalized  costs  include
costs directly attributable to exploration and evaluation activities, including salaries and benefits of employees
who are directly engaged in the exploration and evaluation activities. Administrative and other overhead costs
are expensed. Management has determined that exploration and evaluation costs incurred during the year
have future economic benefits and are economically recoverable. In making this judgment, management has
assessed various sources of information including but not limited to the geologic and metallurgic information,
history of conversion of mineral deposits to proven and probable mineral reserves, scoping and feasibility
studies, proximity of operating facilities, operating management expertise and existing permits.
4.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
 
The Company adopted the following new standards in preparing these consolidated financial statements:
 
a)
IFRS 2, Share-based Payment
 
In the second quarter of calendar 2014, the IASB issued Amendments to IFRS 2, Share-based Payment.
The amendments changed the definitions of “vesting condition” and “market condition” in the Standard, and
added  definitions  for  “performance  condition”  and  “service condition”.  It  also  clarified  that  any  failure  to
complete  a  specified service  period,  even  due  to  the  termination  of  an  employee’s  employment  or a
voluntary departure, would result in a failure to satisfy a service condition. This would result in the reversal,
in the current period, of compensation expense previously recorded reflecting the fact that the employee
failed to complete a specified service condition. These amendments are effective for transactions with a
grant date on or after July 1, 2014. The amendment did not have a significant impact on the Company’s
consolidated financial statements.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-22
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
4.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements (continued)
b)
c)
d)
IFRS 3, Business Combinations (contingent consideration)
 
In the second quarter of calendar 2014, the IASB issued Amendments to IFRS 3, Business Combinations.
The amendments clarify the guidance in respect of the initial classification requirements and subsequent
measurement  of  contingent  consideration.  This  will  result  in the  need  to  measure  the  contingent
consideration at fair value at each reporting date, irrespective of whether it is a financial instrument or a
non-financial asset or liability. Changes in fair value will need to be recognized in profit and loss. These
amendments are effective for transactions with acquisition dates on or after July 1, 2014. The amendment
did not have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
 
IFRS 7, Financial Instruments: Disclosures
 
IFRS  7, Financial  instruments:  disclosure,  was amended  by  the  IASB  in  December  2011.  The
amendments contain new disclosure requirements for financial assets and financial liabilities that are offset
in  the  statement  of  financial  position  or  subject  to master  netting  arrangements  or  similar  agreements.
These  disclosure requirements  enable  users  of  the  financial  statements  to  better  compare financial
statements  prepared  in  accordance  with  IFRS  and  US  GAAP.  The Company  adopted  the  amended
standards  effective  September  1,  2013.  The amendments  did  not  have  a  significant  impact  on  the
Company’s consolidated financial statements.
 
IFRS 10, Consolidated Financial Statements
 
The  IASB  issued  a  new  standard,  IFRS  10, Consolidated Financial  Statements (“IFRS  10”),  which
establishes the principles for the presentation and preparation of consolidated financial statements when
an entity controls one or more other entities. IFRS 10 establishes control as the basis for consolidation and
defines the principle of control. An investor controls an investee if the investor has power over the investee,
exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and the ability to use its power
over the investee to affect the amount of the investor's returns. IFRS 10 was issued as part of the IASB's
broader project on interests in all types of entities. This project also resulted in the issuance of additional
standards  as  described  below.  IFRS 10 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1,
e)
f)
2013 and  must  be  applied  retrospectively.  The  adoption  of  IFRS  10  did  not  have an  impact  on  the
Company's consolidated results of operations, financial position and disclosures.
 
IFRS 11, Joint Arrangements
 
The  IASB  issued  a  new  standard,  IFRS  11, Joint Arrangements (“IFRS  11”),  which  establishes  the
principles for financial reporting by parties to a joint arrangement. IFRS 11 supersedes IAS 31,
 
Interests  in  Joint  Ventures and  SIC 
Interpretation 1 3 , Jointly  Controlled  Entities –  Non  Monetary
Contributions  by Venturers.  The  standard  defines  a  joint  arrangement  as  an  arrangement where  two  or
more  parties  have  joint  control,  with  joint  control  being defined  as  the  contractually  agreed  sharing  of
control where decisions about relevant activities require unanimous consent of the parties sharing control.
The standard classifies joint arrangements as either joint operations or joint ventures and the classification
determines the accounting treatment. IFRS 11 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after January
1,  2013  and  must  be  applied  retrospectively.  The  adoption of  IFRS  11  did  not  have  an  impact  on  the
Company's consolidated results of operations, financial position and disclosures.
 
IFRS 12, Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities
 
The  IASB  issued  a  new  standard,  IFRS  12, Disclosure  of Interests  in  Other  Entities (“IFRS  12”),  which
integrates  and  provides consistent  disclosure  requirements  for  all  interests  in  other  entities such  as
subsidiaries, joint arrangements, associates and unconsolidated structured entities. IFRS 12 is effective for
annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013 and must be applied retrospectively. The adoption of
IFRS 12 did not have an impact on the Company's consolidated results of operations, financial position
and disclosures.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-23
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
4.
h)
i)
Recent Accounting Pronouncements (continued)
 
g)
IFRS 13, Fair Value Measurement
 
The  IASB  issued  a  new  standard,  IFRS  13, Fair  Value Measurement (“IFRS  13”),  which  provides  a
standard  definition  of  fair value,  sets  out  a  framework  for  measuring  fair  value  and  provides  for specific
disclosures about fair value measurements. IFRS 13 applies to all IFRS that require or permit fair value
measurements  or  disclosures.  IFRS 13 defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an
asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement
date. IFRS 13 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013 and must be applied
retrospectively. The Company determined that this new standard has no significant accounting impact on
the Company given the Company’s existing asset and liability mix to which fair value accounting applies.
 
IAS 1 – Presentation of financial statements
 
An amendment to IAS 1, Presentation  of  financial statements requires separate presentation for items of
other comprehensive income that would be reclassified to profit or loss in the future if certain conditions are
met,  from  those  that  would  never  be reclassified  to  profit  or  loss.  The  Company  adopted  the  standard
effective September  1,  2013.  The  amendments  did  not  have  a  significant  impact  on  the Company’s
consolidated financial statements.
 
IAS 27, Separate Financial Statements
The IASB issued a revised standard, IAS 27, Separate Financial Statements (“IAS 27”), which contains the
j)
k)
accounting  and disclosure  requirements  for  investments  in  subsidiaries,  joint  ventures and  associates
when an entity prepares separate (non-consolidated) financial statements. IAS 27 is effective for annual
periods  beginning  on or after January 1, 2013 and must be applied retrospectively. The adoption of the
revised  IAS  27  did  not  have  an  impact  on  the  Company's  consolidated results  of  operations,  financial
position and disclosures.
 
IAS 28, Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures
 
The  IASB  issued  a  revised  standard,  IAS  28, Investments  in  Associates  and  Joint  Ventures (“IAS  28”),
which prescribes  the  accounting  for  investments  in  associates  and  sets  out  the requirements  for  the
application of the equity method when accounting for investments in associates and joint ventures. IAS 28
is effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013 and must be applied retrospectively.
The  adoption  of  the  revised  IAS  28  did  not  have  an  impact on  the  Company's  consolidated  results  of
operations, financial position and disclosures.
 
IAS 19, Employee Benefits
 
The  IASB  issued  a  revised  standard,  IAS  19, Employee Benefits (“IAS  19”),  which  prescribes  the
accounting  requirements  for employee  benefits  and  establishes  the  principle  that  the  cost  of  providing
employee  benefits  should  be  recognized  in  the  period  in  which  the  benefit is  earned  by  the  employee,
rather than when it is paid or payable. IAS 19 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after January
1, 2013 and must be applied retrospectively. The adoption of the revised IAS 19 did not have an impact on
the Company's consolidated results of operations, financial position and disclosures.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-24
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
4.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements (continued)
 
l)
IFRIC 20, Stripping Costs in the Production Phase of a Surface Mine
 
The IASB issued a new standard, IFRIC 20, Stripping Costs in the Production Phase of a Surface Mine
(“IFRIC  20”),  which prescribes  the  accounting  for  the  costs  of  stripping  activity  in accordance  with  the
principles of IAS 2, Inventories, to the extent that the benefit from the stripping activity is realized in the form
of inventory produced. A stripping activity asset is initially measured at cost and subsequently carried at
cost or its revalued amount less depreciation or amortization and impairment losses. IFRIC 20 is effective
for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013 and must be applied retrospectively. The adoption
of IFRIC 20 did not have an impact on the Company's consolidated results of operations, financial position
and disclosures.
The following pronouncements are issued but not yet effective for the year ended August 31, 2014:
a)
b)
IFRS 9, Financial Instruments
 
IFRS  9, Financial  instruments (“IFRS  9”)  was issued by the IASB in July 2014 and will replace IAS 39,
Financial Instruments:  recognition  and  measurement”  (“IAS  39”).  IFRS  9  utilizes a  single  approach  to
determine  whether  a  financial  asset  is  measured  at amortized  cost  or  fair  value  and  a  new  mixed
measurement model for debt instruments having only two categories: amortized cost and fair value. The
approach  in  IFRS  9  is  based  on  how  an  entity  manages  its  financial instruments  in  the  context  of  its
business model and  the  contractual  cash flow characteristics of the financial assets. Final amendments
released  in July 2014 also introduce a new expected loss impairment model and limited changes to the
classification and measurement  requirements  for  financial assets. IFRS 9 is effective for annual periods
beginning on or after January 1, 2018. The Corporation is currently evaluating the impact of this standard
and amendments on its consolidated financial statements.
IFRS 15, Revenue from Contracts and Customers
c)
IFRS 15, Revenue from Contracts and Customers (“IFRS 15”) was issued by the IASB in May 2014, and
will  replace  IAS 18, Revenue,  IAS  11, Construction  Contracts,  and  related interpretations  on  revenue.
IFRS  15  sets  out  the  requirements  for recognizing  revenue  that  apply  to  all  contracts  with  customers,
except for contracts that are within the scope of the standards on leases, insurance contracts and financial
instruments. IFRS 15 uses a control based approach to recognize revenue which is a change from the risk
and  reward  approach under  the  current  standard.  Companies  can  elect  to  use  either  a  full  or modified
retrospective approach when adopting this standard and it is effective for annual periods beginning on or
after January 1, 2017. The Corporation is currently evaluating the impact of IFRS 15 on its consolidated
financial statements.
 
IAS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation
 
IAS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation (“IAS 32”) was amended by the IASB in December 2011. The
amendment  clarifies that an entity has a legally enforceable right to offset financial assets and  financial
liabilities if that right is not contingent on a future event and it is enforceable both in the normal course of
business  and  in the  event  of  default,  insolvency  or  bankruptcy  of  the  entity  and  all counterparties.  The
amendments to IAS 32 are effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2014.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-25
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
4.
e)
Recent Accounting Pronouncements (continued)
 
d)
IAS 36, Impairment of Assets
 
IAS 36, Impairment of Assets (“IAS 36”) was amended by the IASB in May 2013. The amendments require
the  disclosure  of the  recoverable  amount  of  impaired  assets  when  an  impairment  loss  has  been
recognized  or  reversed  during  the  period  and  additional  disclosures  about the  measurement  of  the
recoverable amount of impaired assets when the recoverable amount is based on fair value less costs of
disposal, including the discount rate when a present value technique is used to measure the recoverable
amount. The amendments to IAS 36 are effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2014.
 
IFRIC 21, Levies
 
IFRIC 21, Levies (“IFRIC 21”) was amended by the IASB in June 2013. IFRIC 21 provides guidance on the
accounting for levies within the scope of IAS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets.
The main features of IFRIC 21 are: (i) the obligating event that gives rise to a liability to pay a levy is the
activity that triggers the payment of the levy, as identified by legislation, and (ii) the liability to pay a levy is
recognized progressively  if  the  obligating  event  occurs  over  a  period  of  time.  IFRIC 21  is  effective  for
annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2014. The Corporation is currently evaluating the impact of
the amendments on its consolidated financial statements.
5.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents are comprised of the following:
Cash held in bank accounts
Guaranteed investment certificates
$
 
   
$
August 31,   
2014   
     
 1,336,002  $
4,681,596   
     
 6,017,598  $
August 31, 
2013 
 
 700,503 
9,613,295 
 
 10,313,798
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-26
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
6.
Exploration and Evaluation Assets
September
1,
Transferred
to
Property,
Plant
and
Equipment
Impairment     August 31,
2012
Expenditures    
 
   
   
   
$ 74,356,108  $
17,127,088  $ (91,483,196) $
(note 7)
Loss
-  $
2013
-
-
4,582,324
(1,403,359)
-
-
1,416,242
314,857
10,302
24,235
-
-
-
49,668 
72,698 
37,070
- 
125,246 
175,021 
 
 17,635,918  $ (91,483,196) $  (2,897,867) $  6,298,833
(1,494,508)
 
-
- 
- 
-
Transferred
to
Property,
Plant
and
Equipment
Expenditures
(note 7)
Impairment     August 31,
Loss
2014
-
5,089,720
(6,802)
-
-
1,857,161
(19,246)
(156,361)
- 
-
-
-
-
- 
-
4,582,324
-
1,416,242
- 
125,246
507,396
6,802
440,919
19,246 
31,115
Nechalacho REE Project (a)
Separation Rapids Lithium-
Tantalum Project (b)
Warren Township Anorthosite
Project (c)
East Kemptville Tin-Indium
Project (d)
Spor Mountain Rare Metals
Project (e)
Apex Rare Metals Project (f)
Miramichi Tin Project (g)
Separation Rapids Lithium-
Tantalum Project (b)
Warren Township Anorthosite
Project (c)
East Kemptville Tin-Indium
Project (d)
Spor Mountain Rare Metals
Project (e)
Apex Rare Metals Project (f)
Miramichi Tin Project (g)
Other (h)
4,267,467
1,393,057
1,392,007
1,444,840 
 
 
52,548 
 
137,951 
 
   
   
 
$ 83,043,978  $
September
1,  
2013
175,021 
-
$ 6,298,833  $
3,088 
15,000
1,023,566  $
- 
 
- 
 
   
 -  $
- 
-
178,109 
15,000 
 
 (182,409) $  7,139,990
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-27
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
6.
b)
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
Exploration and Evaluation Assets (continued)
 
a)
Nechalacho REE Project, Northwest Territories
 
During  the  year  ended  August  31,  2005,  the  Company acquired  a  100%  interest  in  five  mining  leases
covering the Nechalacho rare earth elements deposit (“Nechalacho Deposit”) located at Thor Lake in the
Mackenzie  Mining  District  of  the  Northwest  Territories.  In  addition, three  mineral  claims  were  staked  in
2009 to cover favourable geology to the west of the mining leases.
 
The property was subject to two underlying net smelter returns (“NSR”) royalty agreements, one for a 3.0%
royalty and one for a 2.5% royalty. During the year ended August 31, 2012, the Company bought out the
3.0% NSR royalty for a cash payment of $2.0 million. The remaining 2.5% NSR royalty can be bought back
at the principal amount of $150,000 compounded annually at the average Canadian prime rate from May 2,
1982 to the buyback date, which currently approximates $1.3 million.
 
During  the  year  ended  August  31,  2012,  the  Company entered  into  an  accommodation  agreement  (the
“Accommodation  Agreement”) with  the  Deninu  K’ue  First  Nation  (“DKFN”).  The  DKFN  is  one  of  three
Akaitcho bands who have used, occupied and have constitutionally protected aboriginal rights with respect
to the lands on which the Nechalacho Deposit in the Northwest Territories is located.
 
The Accommodation Agreement provides for business and employment opportunities for the DKFN related
to the Nechalacho Deposit and associated facilities in the Northwest Territories and contains measures to
mitigate  environmental  and  cultural  impacts  that  may  result from  the  project  development.  The
Accommodation Agreement also commits the DKFN to supporting timely completion of the environmental
assessment, permitting and development processes of the Nechalacho REE Project, and provides for the
DKFN to participate in the project economics.
 
In  conjunction  with  the  Accommodation  Agreement,  the Company  has  issued  an  aggregate  of  10,000
common shares of the Company and agreed to grant an aggregate of 50,000 non-transferrable common
share purchase  warrants  of  the  Company  to  the  DKFN.  The  common  shares  are subject  to  certain
contractual  restrictions  on  transfer  pending  receipt  of certain  regulatory  permits  and  approvals  for  the
Nechalacho  REE  Project. As  at  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  has  issued  30,000  warrants  with  a
weighted  average  exercise  price  of  $0.91  per  share  to  the  DKFN  and  these warrants  have  a  weighted
average  remaining  contract  life  of  3.9  years.  The remaining  20,000  warrants  will  be  issued  in  two
installments of 10,000 warrants per year over the next two years on the anniversary of the effective date
(July 31, 2012) of the Accommodation Agreement. These warrants will have a term of five years and will
have an exercise price based on the then current market price of the Company’s common shares at the
date of issue of the warrants, and will be subject to statutory restrictions on resale.
 
On April 17, 2013, the Company completed a positive feasibility study for the Nechalacho REE Project and
on  July  26,  2013,  the Mackenzie  Valley  Environmental  Impact  Review  Board  completed  its  Report  of
Environmental  Assessment  and  recommended  approval  of  the  Nechalacho  REE Project,  therefore
reducing the permitting risk substantially. The achievement of these two major milestones resulted in the
transfer  of  the exploration  and  evaluation  costs  of  the  Nechalacho  REE  Project  to development  asset
under Property, Plant and Equipment.
 
Separation Rapids Lithium-Tantalum Project, Ontario
 
The Company owns a 100% interest in certain claims and a mining lease in the Paterson Lake area of
Ontario. The claims were subject to a 2.0% NSR, which was bought back by the Company for $220,000
during the year ended August 31, 2012.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-28
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
Exploration and Evaluation Assets (continued)
 
c) Warren Township Anorthosite Project, Ontario
6.
d)
e)
The Company owns a 100% interest in certain claims located near Foleyet, Ontario, which were staked by
the  Company  during  the year  ended  August  31,  2003.  During  the  year  ended  August  31,  2013,  the
Company  entered  into  a  Mining  Lease  with  the  Province  of  Ontario  under  the Mining  Act  of  Ontario
covering these claims.
 
No substantial work has been carried out on the Warren Township project during the last four years and no
work was planned or budgeted for fiscal 2014. In addition, no new potential customer has been identified
for the project’s calcium feldspar product. Accordingly, it is management’s view that the fair value of this
project has been significantly impaired. The Company estimated the recoverable amount of this project as
at August 31, 2013 to be $nil, and accordingly, the costs incurred to that date of $1,403,359 were written off
as an impairment loss during the year ended August 31, 2013. The current outlook as at August 31, 2014
for the Warren Township project remains unchanged, and accordingly the expenditures of $6,802 incurred
during the year ended August 31, 2014 have been written off as an impairment loss.
 
East Kemptville Tin-Indium Project, Nova Scotia
 
During the year ended August 31, 2007, the Company was granted a special exploration licence to search
and  prospect  for  all minerals  except  for  coal,  salt,  potash  and  uranium  within  four  claims  in the  East
Kemptville area of Yarmouth, Nova Scotia.
 
On  December  11,  2012,  the  Province  of  Nova  Scotia  granted the  Company  a  new  special  licence  (the
“2012 Licence”) and the Company is required to incur additional exploration expenditures of $1,500,000 by
November 1, 2014 (of which $454,708 has been incurred as at August 31, 2014). Subsequent to the year
ended August 31, 2014, the Company has submitted an application for a new Special Licence covering the
whole  East Kemptville  closure  area.  This  application,  which  remains  active,  is  being processed  by  the
Government of Nova Scotia. Although the Company did not fulfil the expenditure requirement under the
2012  Licence,  it  is  expected that the new special licence being processed will require the Company to
incur additional exploration expenditures. Similar to the previous Special Licence applications obtained by
the Company, the new licence requires approval by an Order in Council of Government of Nova Scotia.
The Company has no reason to believe this approval will not be granted.
 
The  Company  also  has  a  number  of  regular  exploration licences  covering  certain  claims  in  the  same
proximity to the claims covered under the special exploration licence.
 
Spor Mountain Rare Metals Project, Utah
 
The Company owned a 100% interest in certain claims located in Juab County, Utah, USA, which were
staked by the Company during the year ended August 31, 2011.
 
No  economically  significant  mineralization  was encountered  during  the  2012  drilling  program  and  after
careful  review  of the drilling results and geological data gathered from the 2013 field work program, the
Company  reduced  the  number  of  claims  significantly  at  the  end of  August  2013.  No  additional  work
program was planned or budgeted for fiscal 2014. The Company estimated the recoverable amount (which
is the fair value less costs of disposal) of this project as at August 31, 2014 to be $nil and accordingly, the
costs incurred to that date on this project of $1,494,508 had been written off as an impairment loss during
the year ended August 31, 2013. On August 31, 2014, the Company abandoned the remaining claims of
this project, and accordingly the expenditures of $19,246 incurred during the year ended August 31, 2014
have been written off as an impairment loss.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-29
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
6.
Exploration and Evaluation Assets (continued)
 
f)
Apex Rare Metals Project, Utah
 
The Company owned a 100% interest in certain claims located in Washington County, Utah, USA, which
were staked by the Company during the year ended August 31, 2011. On August 31, 2014, the Company
abandoned these claims, and accordingly the expenditures incurred to-date of $156,361 have been written
off as an impairment loss.
 
Miramichi Tin Project, New Brunswick
 
The Company owns a 100% interest in certain claims located in York County, New Brunswick, which were
staked by the Company during the year ended August 31, 2012.
 
Other Resource Properties
 
The Company has a 100% interest in several claims in the Lilypad Lakes Tantalum Property, a 2.0% NSR
interest in certain claims of the East Cedartree Gold Property located near Kenora, Ontario, and a 2.4%
NSR interest in the Wolf Mountain Platinum-Palladium Project.
g)
h)
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-30
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
7.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Nechalacho    
   
  REE Project     Airstrip     Equipment     Equipment     Improvements
Computer    
    and Office     Exploration     Leasehold
Total
-  $  540,064  $
316,514  $
671,583  $
58,771  $
1,586,932
$
Cost
     As at
September 1,
2012
 
     Transferred
from
Exploration and
          
Evaluation
Assets (note 6)   91,483,196 
1,485,997 
     Additions
- 
     Disposals
 
 
     As at August
31, 2013
 
     Additions
     Disposals
 
     As at August
31, 2014
 
Accumulated
92,969,193 
   
 
8,537,809 
 
-
- 
  106,796 
-
646,860 
   
 
- 
 
-
- 
11,363 
(2,635)
325,242 
 
18,372 
(12,955)
- 
- 
-
671,583 
 
- 
-
- 
40,025 
-
91,483,196 
1,644,181 
 
(2,635)
98,796 
 
- 
-
94,711,674 
   
 
8,556,181 
 
(12,955)
$ 101,507,002  $  646,860  $
330,659  $
671,583  $
98,796  $ 103,254,900
-  $  98,085  $
112,795  $
343,392  $
33,554  $
587,826
- 
-
-
- 
-
34,013 
-
132,098
31,292 
-
64,640 
(2,635)
174,800
51,693 
(12,955)
98,458 
-
441,850
68,920 
-
13,974 
-
47,528
15,775 
-
211,085 
(2,635)
796,276
167,680 
(12,955)
-  $  163,390  $
213,538  $
510,770  $
63,303  $
951,001
$
Depreciation    
     As at
September 1,
2012
 
     Depreciation
expense
     Disposals
 
     As at August
31, 2013
 
     Depreciation
expense
     Disposals
 
     As at August
31, 2014
 
Net Book
Value
     As at August
31, 2013
     As at August
31, 2014
$
$  92,969,193  $  514,762  $
$ 101,507,002  $  483,470  $
150,442  $
229,733  $
51,268  $  93,915,398
117,121  $
160,813  $
35,493  $ 102,303,899
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-31
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
8. Warrants Denominated in Foreign Currency
The  following  table  reconciles  the  outstanding  warrants (with  an  exercise  price  in  a  currency  that  is  not  the
functional currency of the Company) to purchase common shares of the Company at the beginning and end of
the respective years:
Balance – September 1, 2011, August 31, 2012 and August 31, 2013
Issued pursuant to prospectus offering
Decrease in fair value
 
Balance – August 31, 2014
Number
of Warrants     Amount
-  $
 
 
   
6,466,513  $
- 
2,200,946 
(480,324)
 
 1,720,622
6,466,513 
-
During the year ended August 31, 2014, as further disclosed in Note 10(b)(iii), the Company issued 9,237,875
units of the Company at a price of $0.469 (US$0.433) per unit (“Unit”) pursuant to a security purchase agreement
(the “US$ Unit Offering”) for gross proceeds of $4,331,200 (US$4,000,000). Each Unit is comprised of a common
share and 0.70 of a common share purchase warrant (each whole warrant, a “US$ Warrant”). Each US$ Warrant
is exercisable into a common share of the Company at an exercise price of US$0.56 per share commencing on
December 13, 2014 until June 13, 2021, and is subject to certain anti-dilution provisions, which may reduce the
exercise price, with a floor of US$0.5095 per share.
 
In  accordance  with IAS 32 Financial Instruments: Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition
and Measurement, the fair value of the warrant component of the Unit has been classified as a financial liability
at FVTPL and recorded at fair value at the time of issuance, and was re-measured at August 31, 2014. The fair
value  of  these  warrants  has  been  re-measured  using  the  Black-Scholes pricing  model  with  the  following
assumptions:  expected  dividend  yield  of Nil;  risk  free  interest  rate  of  2.11%;  expected  life  of  6.8  years;  and
expected volatility of 66%, and the resulting change in value has been recorded as decrease in fair value of
warrants denominated in foreign currency in the statement of comprehensive loss.
 
Site Closure and Reclamation Provision
 
A summary of the changes in the site closure and reclamation provision is set out below:
9.
Balance - beginning of year
Increase in provision for site closure and reclamation costs
 
Balance – end of year
2013
2014
August 31,
 
   
$
 
   
$
August 31,
   
   
 236,600  $
 
   
 236,600  $
103,600 
133,000 
 
 236,600
-
As at August 31, 2014, the current estimated closure costs to reclaim the Company’s Nechalacho exploration
camp site at Thor Lake and the Warren Township exploration site are $223,000 and $13,600 respectively. The
closure costs for the Nechalacho exploration camp site are expected to be incurred over the years of 2037 and
2038. The expected undiscounted future cash flow is estimated to be $453,000 for the Nechalacho exploration
camp site, assuming an annual inflation rate of 3%.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-32
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
10. Share Capital
a)
b)
Authorized
 
The Company is presently authorized to issue an unlimited number of common shares without par value.
The Company is also authorized to issue up to 25,000,000 preferred shares without par value, of which
none have been issued.
 
Common Shares Issued and Outstanding:
Balance – September 1, 2011
Issued pursuant to:
     other arrangement
     exercise of warrants
     exercise of options
     exercise of brokers’ compensation warrants
 
Balance – August 31, 2012
Issued pursuant to exercise of options
 
Balance – August 31, 2013
Issued pursuant to:
     prospectus offerings (i) (ii) (iii) (iv)
     other arrangement (v)
     exercise of options
Issuance costs – common shares issued
Issuance costs – compensation warrants issued
Other issuance costs - cash
Number
Amount
10,000 
64,991 
855,000 
74,083
102,617,912  $  146,244,597 
   
 
14,800 
 
223,081 
 
 
2,281,085 
282,108 
 
   
 
  103,621,986  $  149,045,671 
 
334,053 
   
 
  103,796,986  $  149,379,724 
   
 
10,267,476 
 
6,371 
 
443,481 
 
(684,474)
 
 
(60,780)
(682,542)
22,186,700 
10,000 
350,000 
- 
- 
-
175,000
Price premium of flow-through shares issued
 
Balance – August 31, 2014
(115,771)
 
   
 
  126,343,686  $  158,553,485
-
During the year ended August 31, 2012, the Company issued an aggregate of 10,000 common shares to the
DKFN pursuant to the Accommodation Agreement described in note 6(a).
During the year ended August 31, 2014, the Company:
i)
entered into a sales agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”),
pursuant to which the Company may, at its discretion and from time to time during the term of the
Sales Agreement, sell, through Cowen, as agent and/or principal, such number of the  Company’s
common  shares  as  would  result  in  aggregate  gross  proceeds  to the  Company  of  up  to
US$25,000,000.  Sales  of  common  shares  will  be  made through  “at  the  market”  issuances  on  the
NYSE MKT at the market price prevailing at the time of each sale, and, as a result, prices may vary.
 
The  Company  filed  a  prospectus  supplement,  dated September  24,  2013,  pursuant  to  which  the
Company  may  issue  up  to US$8,100,000  in  common  shares  using  the  Sales  Agreement  (each
prospectus supplement is limited to 10% of the market value of the Company at the end of the month
prior to filing) (the “First Supplement”). The Company may file additional prospectus supplements in
the future to qualify the distribution of additional common shares up to the limit US$25,000,000.
 
The  Company  will  pay  Cowen  a  commission,  or  allow  a discount,  equal  to  3.0%  of  the  gross
proceeds of all common shares sold under the Sales Agreement.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-33
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
10. Share Capital (continued)
Pursuant  to  the  Sales  Agreement,  as  at  August  31,  2014, the  Company  has  issued  2,860,389
common  shares  for  gross  proceeds  of $2,166,337  (US$2,001,401)  and  paid  cash  commissions
totaling  $64,990 (US$60,042). The Company has also incurred other costs (primarily related to the
preparation of the Sales Agreement and the First Supplement) of $399,032, of which $162,568 has
been  recognized  as  share  issuance  costs, and  the  balance  of  $236,464  has  been  recorded  as
prepaid  transaction costs.  These  costs  will  be  charged  as  share  issuance  costs  against  future
proceeds  raised  on  a  pro  rata  basis  as  the  balance  of  the  US$6,098,599  in additional  common
shares are sold and issued under the First Supplement.
 
entered  into  a  share  purchase  agreement  (the  "Purchase Agreement")  with  Lincoln  Park  Capital
Fund, LLC ("LPC") pursuant to which the Company may sell up to US$30,000,000 of the Company’s
common shares to LPC over the 36 month term of the Purchase Agreement, and completed an initial
purchase of 4,375,000 common shares at a price of US$0.64 per share for aggregate gross proceeds
of  $2,954,000  (US$2,800,000)  (the "Initial  Purchase")  plus  additional  purchases  totaling  600,000
common shares for additional proceeds of $370,403 (US$337,060). The Company issued 918,521
common  shares  to  LPC  as  a  commitment  fee  for  entering  into the  Purchase  Agreement,  and  will
issue  up  to  an  additional  918,521  common shares  as  compensation  on  a  pro  rata  basis  as  the
US$30,000,000 purchase amount is funded (of which 96,049 common shares have been issued as
at August 31, 2014).
 
The Company has the right, in its sole discretion, to sell up to an additional US$26,862,940 worth of
common shares to LPC, from time to time and on such terms and conditions as are described in the
Purchase Agreement. The purchase price for any additional sales of common shares will be based
on prevailing market prices of the common shares immediately preceding any notice of sale without
any fixed discount. Under the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company has control over the
ii)
timing and amount of any future sale of common shares subject to certain conditions, and LPC is
obligated to make such purchases, if and when the Company presents LPC with a valid purchase
notice. There are no upper price limitations but the closing price of the common share on the NYSE
MKT must not be less than US$0.50 on the purchase date), negative covenants or restrictions on the
Company's future financing activities. The Company may terminate the Purchase Agreement at any
time, at its sole discretion, without any cost or penalty. LPC has also agreed not to cause or engage
in any manner whatsoever, in any direct or indirect short selling or hedging of the common shares.
 
The  Company  filed  a  prospectus  supplement,  dated  November 27,  2013,  pursuant  to  which  the
Company may issue up to US$8,500,000 in common shares using the Purchase Agreement (each
prospectus supplement is limited to 10% of the market value of the Company at the end of the month
prior to filing). The Company may file additional prospectus supplements in the future to qualify the
distribution of the remaining common shares to be issued under the Purchase Agreement.
 
The  Company  has  also  incurred  other  issuance  costs (primarily  related  to  the  preparation  of  the
Purchase Agreement and prospectus supplement) of $163,840 in connection with the completion of
the Initial Purchase which have been recognized as share issuance costs.
 
completed the US$ Unit Offering as disclosed in Note 8 and issued 9,237,875 Units of the Company
at  a  price  of  $0.469  (US$0.433) per  Unit  pursuant  to  the  security  purchase  agreement  for  gross
proceeds of $4,331,200 (US$4,000,000). Each Unit is comprised of a common share and 0.70 of one
US$ Warrant. Each US$ Warrant is exercisable into a common share of the Company at an exercise
price of US$0.56 per share commencing on December 13, 2014 until June 13, 2021, and is subject
to certain anti-dilution provisions, which may reduce the exercise price, with a floor of US$0.5095 per
share.
iii)
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-34
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
10. Share Capital (continued)
The fair value of the warrant component was estimated at US$0.220 and this amount was allocated
to the warrant component of the Unit, with the residual balance of US$0.213 being allocated to the
common share component of the Unit. The fair value of the US$ Warrant was estimated using the
Black-Scholes pricing model, with the following assumptions: expected dividend yield of Nil; risk free
interest rate of 2.26%; expected life of 7.0 years; and expected volatility of 69%.
 
In  connection  with  the  US$  Unit  Offering,  the  Company paid  the  placement  agent  a  cash  fee  of
$259,872  (US$240,000)  and  issued 554,273  broker  warrants.  Each  broker  warrant  is  exercisable
into one common share of the Company at an exercise price of US$0.56 per share commencing on
December 13, 2014 until June 13, 2017. The estimated fair value of the broker’s warrants totalled
$123,576. The fair values of these broker’s warrants were estimated using the Black-Scholes pricing
model, with the following assumptions: expected dividend yield of Nil; risk free interest rate of 1.03%;
expected  life  of  3.0  years;  and  expected volatility of 69%. The Company also incurred other cash
issuance costs of $214,515.
 
The total transaction costs of $597,963 (including cash fee, the estimated fair value of the agent’s
warrants  and  other  cash issuance costs) has been allocated to the common shares and the US$
Warrants using the same ratio used to allocate the gross proceeds to the common shares and the
US$  Warrants.  The  total  amount  allocated  to  the  US$ Warrants  has  been  recorded  as  financing
transaction costs on the statement of comprehensive loss.
completed a private placement (the “Private Placement”) and issued 1,653,866 flow-through common
shares  (“Flow-Through  Shares”)  at $0.60  per  share  and  2,445,000  non  flow-through  units  (“Non
iv)
Flow-Through Units”) at $0.48 per Non Flow-Through Unit for total gross proceeds of $2,165,920, of
which  an  aggregate  of  212,000  Flow-Through  Shares  and 60,000  Non  Flow-Through  Units  were
issued to certain directors and officers of the Company. Each Non Flow-Through Unit is comprised of
one common share and one half share purchase warrant. Each whole warrant entitled the holder to
purchase one common share of the Company at an exercise price of $0.60 per share commencing
on January 2, 2015 until July 2, 2017.
 
Of the Non Flow-through Unit price of $0.48, $0.3966 was allocated to the common share component
of the Non Flow-through Unit and the balance of $0.0834 was allocated to the warrant component of
the  Non Flow-through Unit. These values were allocated on a pro rata basis based on the closing
trading  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  on  the  TSX  on the  date  the  terms  of  the  Private
Placement  was  announced,  which  was $0.53,  and  the  estimated  fair  value  of  a  whole  warrant  of
$0.2230. The fair value of the warrant was estimated using the Black-Scholes pricing model, with the
following assumptions: expected dividend yield of Nil; risk free interest rate of 1.16%; expected life of
3.0 years; and expected volatility of 68%.
 
In connection with the Private Placement, the Company paid finders’ fees of $12,461 and incurred
other issuance costs of $50,185.
 
As  at  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  has  incurred sufficient  eligible  flow-through  expenditures  to
renounce  the  tax deduction  of  $992,320  to  the  subscribers  of  its  flow-through  shares  and has
accordingly recognized a deferred tax recovery of $115,771.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-35
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
10. Share Capital (continued)
v)
entered into a  participation  agreement  (the "Participation Agreement") with the Northwest Territory
Métis Nation ("NWTMN") for the Nechalacho REE Project. Pursuant the Participation Agreement, the
Company issued an aggregate of 10,000 common shares of the Company (at a value of $6,371) and
agreed to grant an aggregate of 20,000 non-transferrable common share purchase warrants of the
Company  to  the NWTMN.  The  common  shares  are  subject  to  certain  contractual  restrictions on
transfer pending receipt of certain regulatory permits and approvals for the Nechalacho REE Project.
The common share purchase warrants will be issued in two equal installments of 10,000 warrants
upon  the  Nechalacho REE  Project  meeting  certain  milestones,  will  have  a  term  of  five  years, will
have an exercise price based on the then current market price of the Company's common shares at
the date of issue of the warrants, and will be subject to certain restrictions on resale. To date, none of
the common share purchase warrants have been issued. The fair values of these shares have been
capitalized as part of the costs for the Nechalacho REE Project.
c) Warrants
The following table reconciles the warrants outstanding to purchase common shares of the Company at the
beginning and end of the respective years:
 
 
 
 
 
Balance - September 1, 2011
Issued pursuant to Accommodation Agreement (note 6a)
Issued upon exercise of brokers’ compensation warrants
Exercised
Expired
Weighted  
 
    Average
 
 
  of Warrants     Exercise
3.60
1.48
3.05
3.05
3.60
Number
Price
3,917,583  $
10,000 
37,041 
(64,991)
(3,889,633)
Balance – August 31, 2012
Issued pursuant to Accommodation Agreement (note 6a)
 
Balance – August 31, 2013
Issued pursuant equity offerings (b(iv))
Issued pursuant to Accommodation Agreement (note 6a)
 
Balance – August 31, 2014
(1) Does not include the 6,466,513 US$ Warrants as disclosed below.
10,000  $
 
10,000 
 
 
20,000  $
 
 
 
1,252,500(1)$
1,222,500 
10,000
1.48
0.75
1.12
0.60
0.49
0.61
The outstanding warrants have a weighted average remaining contract life of 2.9 years.
The warrants reserve, included as a component of the consolidated statement of changes in equity, relates to
equity settled instruments issued by the Company to various stakeholders.
As disclosed in Note 8, the Company also has 6,466,513 US$ Warrants outstanding as at August 31, 2014, with
an exercise price of US$0.56 per share. The US$ Warrants will be exercisable from December 13, 2014 until
June 13, 2021.
The Company is also required to issue the following warrants:
i)
ii)
as disclosed in Note 6(a), issue 20,000 warrants to the DKFN in two installments of 10,000 warrants
per  year  over  the  next  two years  on  the  anniversary  of  the  effective  date  of  the  Accommodation
Agreement (July 31); and
as disclosed in Note 10(b), issue 20,000 warrants to the NWTMN in two equal installments of 10,000
warrants upon the Nechalacho REE Project meeting certain milestones.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-36
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
10. Share Capital (continued)
d)
Share Based Payments
 
The shareholders have approved a Stock Option Plan (the “Plan”) that provides for the issue of up to 10%
of the number of issued and outstanding common shares of the Company to eligible employees, directors
and service providers of the Company.
 
The Plan authorizes the granting of options to purchase common shares of the Company at a price equal
to or greater than the closing price of the shares on either the trading day prior to the grant or the day of the
grant. The options generally vest over a period of one to four years, and generally have a term of two to five
years (but can have a maximum term of up to 10 years).
 
The following table reconciles the stock options outstanding at the beginning and end of the respective
years:
Balance – September 1, 2011
Granted
Number
of Options
Weighted  
  Average
 
Exercise  
 
 
 
 
 
6,305,250  $
 
 
 
3,150,000
3.38
2.44
Price
Exercised
Expired
Forfeited
 
Balance – August 31, 2012
Granted
Exercised
Expired
Forfeited
 
Balance – August 31, 2013
Granted
Exercised
Expired
Forfeited
 
Balance – August 31, 2014
(855,000)
(100,000)
(500,000)
8,000,250  $
 
2,240,000 
 
(175,000)
(625,000)
 
 
(855,000)
 
 
8,585,250  $
2,530,000 
 
 
(350,000)
 
(825,000)
 
(1,310,000)
 
 
8,630,250  $
1.54
2.08
3.62
3.21
1.31
1.20
5.64
2.14
2.59
0.66
0.72
1.50
3.78
2.02
As at August 31, 2014, there were 4,990,250 options vested (August 31, 2013 – 4,994,000, August 31, 2012 –
3,812,750) with an average exercise price of $2.63 per share (August 31, 2013 - $2.85, August 31, 2012 - $3.13),
that were exercisable.
During the year ended August 31, 2014, an aggregate of 350,000 (2013 – 175,000, 2012 - 855,000) stock options
were exercised at the weighted average exercise price of $0.72 per share (2013 – $1.20, 2012 - $1.54) . The
weighted average closing market share price on the date preceding the date of exercise was $0.80 per share
(2013 – $1.01, 2012 - $2.21) .
The share based payments reserve, included as a component of the consolidated statement of changes in
equity,  relates  to  equity  settled  compensation  options  issued  by  the  Company  to  its  directors,  officers,
employees and consultants.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-37
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
10. Share Capital (continued)
The  estimated  fair  value  of  options  earned  during  the  year  ended  August  31,  2014  was  $549,372  (2013  -
$2,674,677, 2012 - $6,684,009), of which $172,125 (2013 - $36,227, 2012 - $Nil) was capitalized to property, plant
and  equipment,  $30,018  (2013  -  $567,453,  2012  -  $897,760)  was  capitalized  as  exploration  and  evaluation
assets, $133 (2013 - $7,852, 2012 - $Nil) was charged to operations as general exploration expenses, with the
balance of $347,096 (2013 - $2,063,145, 2012 - $5,786,249) charged to operations as share based compensation
expense.
The fair value of each option granted is estimated at the time of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing
model.  The  Black-Scholes  option-pricing  model  requires  the  input  of  subjective  assumptions,  including
expected life of the option award, share price volatility and other assumptions. The expected life of options
granted  is  derived  from  historical  data  on  employee  exercises  and  post-vesting  employment  termination
behavior. Expected volatility is based on the historic volatility of the Company’s shares. These assumptions
involve  inherent  uncertainties  and  the  application  of  management  judgment.  In  addition,  the  Company  is
required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those options expected to
vest.
The weighted average assumptions for grants during the years ended August 31, 2014, August 31, 2013 and
August 31, 2012 are as follows:
August 31,
August 31,
August 31,
2014
2013
2012
Exercise price
Closing market price on day preceding date of grant
Risk-free interest rate
Expected life (years)
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
Grant date fair value
Forfeiture rate
$0.66
$0.66
1.45%
3.9
73%
Nil
$0.36
15%
$1.31
$1.31
1.26%
3.9
85%
Nil
$0.80
11%
$2.44
$2.44
1.16%
3.4
88%
Nil
$1.43
11%
The following table summarizes information concerning outstanding and exercisable options as at August 31,
2014:
Exercise Price Range
 
$8.00 - $8.62
$4.00 - $4.99
$3.00 - $3.99
$2.00 - $2.99
$1.00 - $1.99
$0.48 - $0.99
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Number of Options
Outstanding
Exercisable
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Life
300,000
700,000
625,000
1,725,250
2,150,000
3,130,000
8,630,250
300,000
587,500
481,250
1,569,000
1,337,500
715,000
4,990,250
1.7 years
1.9 years
2.1 years
1.3 years
2.9 years
4.0 years
Page F-38
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
10. Share Capital (continued)
e)
Brokers’ Compensation Warrants
 
The following table summarizes information concerning outstanding brokers’ compensation warrants as at
August 31, 2012, August 31, 2013 and August 31, 2014:
Balance - September 1, 2011
Exercised
 
Balance – August 31, 2012 and August 31, 2013
Issued pursuant equity offerings (b(iii))
 
Balance – August 31, 2014
Price
Number of
  Compensation     Average
  Warrants
Weighted  
 
    Exercise  
 
   
 
   
 
74,083  $
(74,083)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
554,273 
 
 
 
 
554,273  $
2.50
2.50
-
0.61
0.61
The  brokers’  compensation  warrants  reserve,  included  as  a  component  of  the  consolidated  statement  of
changes  in  equity,  relates  to  equity  settled  compensation  instruments  issued  by  the  Company  to  external
service providers.
As  at  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  has  554,273  brokers’  compensation  warrants  outstanding,  with  an
exercise  of  US$0.56  per  common  share.  These  brokers’  compensation  warrants  will  be  exercisable  from
December 13, 2014 until June 13, 2017.
Write-off of Land Acquisition Option Payments
11. Write-off of Land Acquisition Option Payments
The Company’s initial purchase option on a land parcel in Geismar, Louisiana expired on December 1, 2013,
and  accordingly,  the option  payments  made  totaling  $175,104  for  the  initial  purchase  option were  written  off
during the year ended August 31, 2014. The Company has entered into a new purchase option with a different
property owner on a different land parcel in Geismar, Louisiana during the year ended August 31, 2014. This
new  option  will  expire  on  December  14,  2014.  Payments totaling  $212,960  were  paid  for  the  new  purchase
option  and  have  been included  in  prepaid  expenses  and  deposits  on  the  consolidated  statement  of financial
position as at August 31, 2014.
12. Capital Management
Capital of the Company consists of the components of shareholders’ equity.
 
The Company’s objectives when managing capital are as follows:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
to  safeguard  the  Company’s  assets  and  ensure  the Company’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going
concern;
to raise sufficient capital to finance its development activities on its Nechalacho REE Project; and
to  raise  sufficient  capital  to  meet  its  general  and administrative  expenditures,  and  to  explore  and
develop its other resource properties.
The Company manages its capital structure and makes adjustments to it based on the funds available to the
Company  in  light  of  changes  in  general  economic  conditions,  the  Company’s  short  term  working  capital
requirements, and its planned exploration and development program expenditure requirements.
As the Company is in the development stage, its principal source of capital is from the issuance of common
shares. In order to achieve its objectives, the Company expects to spend its existing working capital and raise
additional funds as required.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-39
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
12. Capital Management (continued)
The Company does not have any externally imposed capital requirements and there were no changes to the
Company’s approach to capital management during the year ended August 31, 2014.
13. Related Party Disclosures
Balances and transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries have been eliminated on consolidation
and are not disclosed in this note. Details of the transactions between the Company and other related parties are
disclosed below:
 
a)
Trading transactions
 
There had been no material trading transactions (other than those disclosed in Note 10(b)(iv) with related
parties during each of the years ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.
 
Compensation of key management personnel
 
The remuneration of directors and other key members of the Company’s senior management team during
the years ended August 31, 2014, August 31, 2013 and August 31, 2012:
b)
August 31,
August 31,
August 31,
Salaries, benefits and directors’ fees
Share based compensation(1)
$
 
   
$
2014
2,539,867  $
 
   
 2,778,888  $
239,021
2013
3,282,444  $
1,946,091 
 
   
 
 5,228,535  $
2012
2,945,471 
5,978,861 
 
 8,924,332
(1) Fair value of stock options earned and recognized as share based compensation during the respective
reporting period.
14. Financial Instruments
IFRS  7  establishes  a  fair  value  hierarchy  that  reflects the  significance  of  inputs  used  in  making  fair  value
measurements as follows:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability,
either directly (i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e. from derived prices); and
inputs for the asset or liability that are not based upon observable market data.
Assets  are  classified  in  their  entirety  based  on  the  lowest  level  of  input  that  is  significant  to  the  fair  value
measurement. As at August 31, 2014, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents are categorized as Level 1
measurement. The fair value of the Company’s warrants denominated in a currency that is not the functional
currency of the Company is based on Level 2 inputs that are observable for the liability such as interest rate,
dividend yield and historical volatility.
Fair Values
Except  as  disclosed  elsewhere  in  these  consolidated  financial  statements,  the  carrying  amounts  for  the
Company’s financial instruments approximate their fair values because of the short-term nature of these items.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-40
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
14. Financial Instruments (continued)
The Company’s risk exposures and the impact on the Company’s financial instruments are summarized below:
 
Credit risk
 
The Company is not exposed to any significant credit risk as at August 31, 2014. The Company’s cash and cash
equivalents are either on deposit with two major Canadian chartered banking groups in Canada or invested in
bankers  acceptance  notes  or  guaranteed  investment  certificates issued  by  two  major  Canadian  chartered
banking  groups.  The  Company’s receivables primarily consist of Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales
Tax  receivable  and  refundable  security  deposits  with  various  federal  and provincial  governments  and  are
therefore not subject to significant credit risk.
 
Liquidity risk
 
Liquidity risk is the risk that an entity will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they come due. The
Company has in place a planning and budgeting process to assist in determining the funds required to support
the  Company’s  normal  operating  requirements  on an  on-going  basis  and  its  plans  for  exploration  and
development expenditures.  The  Company  ensures  that  there  are  sufficient  funds  to  meet its  short-term
requirements, taking into account its anticipated cash flows from operations and its holdings of cash and cash
equivalents.
As  at  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  has  current  assets  of $7,393,478  and  current  liabilities  of  $3,506,367.
As  at  August  31,  2014,  the  Company  has  current  assets  of $7,393,478  and  current  liabilities  of  $3,506,367.
Working capital of the Company is $5,607,733 (calculated by adding back the liability for warrants denominated
in foreign currency of $1,720,622 to the net current assets of $3,887,111).
 
Repayments due by period as of August 31, 2014
Within
1 Year
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities $  1,785,745  $
 
Purchase contract
 
 
Operating lease obligations
 
 
   
   
$  2,286,815  $
143,922 
357,148
Years
1-3
-  $
 
- 
 
412,698 
 
   
 412,698  $
4-5
Years
Total
-  $  1,785,745 
143,922 
- 
769,846 
- 
 
 
 -  $  2,699,513
Market risk
(i)
(ii)
Interest rate risk
 
The Company has significant cash and cash equivalents balances and it has no interest-bearing debt. The
Company’s current policy is to invest its excess cash in highly liquid money market investments such as
bankers  acceptance  notes,  treasury  bills  and  GICs.  These  short term  money  market  investments  are
subject to interest rate fluctuations.
 
Foreign currency risk
 
The Company’s functional currency is the Canadian dollar. The majority of the Company’s purchases are
transacted in Canadian dollars. As at August 31, 2014, the Company had cash held in bank accounts of
US$408,663 and accounts payable of US$35,621 denominated in US currency.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-41
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
14. Financial Instruments (continued)
(iii) Price risk
15.
The  prices  of  metals  and  minerals  fluctuate  widely  and are  affected  by  many  factors  outside  of  the
Company’s  control.  The  prices of  metals  and  minerals  and  future  expectation  of  such  prices  have  a
significant impact on the market sentiment for investment in mining and mineral  exploration  companies.
This  in  turn  may  impact  the  Company’s ability to raise equity financing for its long term working capital
requirements.
Sensitivity analysis
 
Considering  the  Company’s  budget  expenditures  for  the next  twelve  months  and  its  current  cash  and  cash
equivalents  of $6,017,598,  with  other  variables  held  constant,  sensitivity  to  a  plus  or minus  25  basis  points
change in interest rates would not have any significant effect on the Company’s net loss over a twelve month
period.
 
The  Company  had  cash  of  US$408,663  in  cash  and  accounts payable  of  US$35,621  denominated  in  US
currency as at August 31, 2014 and its anticipated on-going expenditures to be transacted in US dollars for the
next  twelve  month  period  is  approximately  US$450,000.  If  the  Canadian dollar  weakens  (or  strengthens)  5%
against  the  US  dollar  with  other variables  held  constant,  it  would  not  have  any  significant  effect  on  the
Company’s expenditures over a twelve month period.
Supplemental Cash Flow Information
Non-cash financing and investing transactions not reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for
the years ended August 31, 2014, August 31, 2013 and August 31, 2012 are as follows:
August 31,
2014
August 31,
2013
August 31,
2012
Common shares issued pursuant to the
Participation Agreement and capitalized as
property, plant and equipment (note 10b)
Common shares issued pursuant to the
Accommodation Agreement and capitalized as
exploration and evaluation assets (note 6a)
Warrants issued pursuant to the Accommodation
Agreement and capitalized as property, plant
and equipment (note 6a)
Warrants issued pursuant to the Accommodation
Agreement and capitalized as exploration and
evaluation assets (note 6a)
Share based compensation capitalized as
property, plant and equipment (note 10d)
Share based compensation capitalized as
exploration evaluation assets (note 10d)
$
$
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
6,371  $
-  $
-
2,849
-
172,125
-
5,348
-
36,227
30,018
211,363  $
567,453 
 
 609,028
-
14,800
-
10,057
-
897,760 
 
922,617
Page F-42
16.
Income Taxes
 
a)
Provision for Income Taxes
 
The following table reconciles the income tax provision from the expected income tax amount based on the
statutory rates to the amount recognized in the statements of comprehensive loss:
Net loss for the year before income taxes $
Combined Canadian federal and
provincial tax rate
 
Expected income tax recovery at statutory
$
rates
 
Share based compensation
 
Non-deductible expenses
Non-allowable portion of capital loss
 
Exploration expenditures to be renounced  
Share issuance costs
 
Non-taxable decrease in fair value of
warrants denominated in foreign currency  
Effect of different income tax rates than
Canadian tax rate related to impairment
loss of a foreign subsidiary
Impact of tax rate reductions
August 31,
2014
5,846,352  $
August 31,
2013
11,199,164  $
August 31,
2012
11,152,194
25.2%
25.2%
25.5%
1,473,281  $
(87,468)
(9,144)
(22,063)
(134,294)
-
2,822,189 
(519,913)
(11,709)
- 
- 
354,751
121,042
-
24,528 
-
206,612 
-
2,843,809 
(1,475,493)
(13,775)
- 
- 
428,122
-
- 
(34,941)
Losses and other deductions for which no
benefit has been recognized
Deferred income tax recoveries
$
(1,250,111)
115,771  $
(2,851,930)
-  $
(1,747,722)
-
b)
Deferred Income Tax Assets Not Recognized
 
The  tax  effects  of  temporary  differences  that  give  rise to  significant  portions  of  the  deferred  income  tax
assets and liabilities at August 31, 2014, 2013 and have not been recognized are as follows:
Difference in exploration and evaluation assets
Difference in property, plant and equipment
Difference in share issuance costs
Non-capital loss carry forwards
Capital loss carry forwards
Non-refundable investment tax credit carry forwards
 
Deferred income tax assets and investment Tax credits
not recognized
2014
August 31,
 
   
$
August 31,
   
     
 28,288,227  $
(25,338,055)  
622,586   
5,379,982   
262,278   
4,351,370
2013
2,942,771 
200,246 
631,003 
3,692,259 
241,169 
5,639,970
$
13,566,388  $
13,347,418
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-43
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
16.
Income Taxes (continued)
 
c)
Non-Capital Losses
 
The Company has non-capital losses carried forward of approximately $18,768,000 (2013 - $14,582,000,
2012 - $10,428,000) available to reduce future years’ Canadian taxable income. These losses will expire
as follows:
2015
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
4,000
156,000
232,000
847,000
914,000
1,584,000
3,050,000
3,601,000
4,151,000
4,229,000
The  Company  also  has  net  operating  losses  of  approximately  $1,668,000  (2013  -  $10,000,  2012  -  $7,000)  to
reduce future years’ U.S. taxable income. These losses will expire as follows:
2031
2032
2033
2034
d)
Capital Losses
5,000
2,000
3,000
1,658,000
The Company has capital losses carried forward of approximately $2,082,000 (2013 - $1,906,000, 2012 -
e)
f)
The Company has capital losses carried forward of approximately $2,082,000 (2013 - $1,906,000, 2012 -
$1,906,000) available to reduce future years’ Canadian taxable capital gains.
 
Exploration and Development Expenses
 
The Company has cumulative Canadian development expenses of $5,427,000 (2013 - $5,412,000, 2012 -
$5,412,000),  cumulative  Canadian exploration  expenses  of  $86,534,000  (2013  -  $76,812,180,  2012  -
$61,827,000)  and  cumulative  foreign  resource  expenses  of  $66,000  (2013  - $66,000,  2012  -  $66,000)
available  to  reduce  future  years’  Canadian taxable  income.  The  Company  also  has  cumulative  U.S.
exploration expenses of $Nil (2013 - $1,605,000, 2012 - $1,488,000) available to reduce future years’ U.S.
taxable income.
 
Scientific Research and Experimental Expenditures (“SR&ED”)
 
The  Company  has  SR&ED  expenditures  carry  forward  of $27,368,000  (2013  -  $26,204,000,  2012  -
$19,865,000) available to reduce future years’ Canadian taxable income.
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-44
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
16.
Income Taxes (continued)
 
g)
Non-refundable Investment Tax Credits
 
The  Company  has  non-refundable  investment  tax  credits  of $5,817,000  (2013  -  $5,640,000,  2012  -
$4,572,000)  available  to  reduce future  years’  Canadian  federal  income  tax  payable.  These  credits  will
expire as follows:
2018
2019
2020
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
$
44,000 
72,000 
14,000 
24,000 
19,000 
63,000 
133,000 
72,000 
361,000 
490,000 
1,045,000 
2,235,000 
1,006,000 
239,000
17. Loss per Share
The weighted average number of common shares for the purposes of diluted loss per share reconciles to the
weighted average number of common shares used in the calculation of basic loss per share as follows:
Weighted average number of common shares used in 
   the calculation of basic loss per share
Diluted impact of warrants
Diluted impact of stock options
August 31,
2014
August 31     August 31,
2013
2012
112,724,520 
 
- 
-
103,683,356 
 
- 
-
103,224,070 
 
- 
-
Weighted average number of common used in the 
    calculation of diluted loss per share
112,724,520
103,683,356
103,224,070
The loss used to calculate the basic and diluted loss per common share for the year ended August 31, 2014 was
$5,730,581 (2013 - $11,199,164, 2012 - $11,152,194).
 
As at August 31, 2014, the Company had 8,273,286 (2013 – 20,000, 2012 – 10,000) warrants and 8,630,250
stock options (2013 - 8,585,250, 2012 - 8,000,250) outstanding. These warrants and options could potentially
dilute  earnings  per  share  in  the  future,  but  have  not  been included  in  the  diluted  loss  per  share  calculation
because they were antidilutive for the years ended August 31, 2014, August 31, 2013 and August 31, 2012.
The  Company  has  entered  into  commercial  leases  on  its premises  and  the  future  minimum  lease  payments
under non-cancellable operating leases are as follows:
18. Operating Lease Arrangements
2015
2016
2017
357,148
312,202
100,496
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-45
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended August 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012
19. Commitments
Pursuant to a service contract for the Nechalacho REE Project, the Company is required to pay Euro 8,400 per
month  for  the  next twelve  month  to  the  service  provider.  The  Company  does  not  have  any  other material
contractual  commitments  except  for  the  commitments  disclosed elsewhere  in  the  notes  to  the  financial
statements.
20. Events After the Reporting Period
Subsequent to the year ended August 31, 2014, the Company:
 
a)
issued  1,381,967  common  shares  for  gross  proceeds  of $343,210  (US$304,726)  and  paid  cash
commissions totaling $10,297 (US$9,142) pursuant to the Sales Agreement;
 
granted an aggregate of 1,325,000 stock options with a weighted average exercise price of $0.28 per share
to  certain  employees, consultants,  and  directors  and  officers  of  the  Company.  The  weighted average
contract life of these options was 4.9 years;
 
had 225,000 options with a weighted average exercise price of $2.51 forfeited; and
 
had 281,250 stock options with a weighted average exercise price of $2.56 per share expire unexercised.
b)
c)
 
d)
Avalon Rare Metals Inc.
Page F-46