
EX-99.1 2 exhibit991-8x1x2016.htm EXHIBIT 99.1 - 8-1-2016 Exhibit
Exhibit 99.1
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
SAEXPLORATION ANNOUNCES SECOND QUARTER 2016 EARNINGS RELEASE AND
CONFERENCE CALL SCHEDULE
August 1, 2016 – HOUSTON, TX – SAExploration Holdings, Inc. (NASDAQ: SAEX) today
announced plans to release its unaudited consolidated financial results for the second quarter
ended June 30, 2016 on Wednesday, August 3, 2016 after close of trading. SAE has scheduled
a conference call for Thursday, August 4, 2016 at 10:00 a.m. ET to discuss these results and
other related matters.
SAExploration Holdings, Inc. Q2 2016 Earnings Call
Date: Thursday, August 4, 2016
Time: 10:00 a.m. ET (9:00 a.m. CT)
Phone:(855) 433-0934 (Toll-Free) or (484) 756-4291 (Toll)
The conference call will also be broadcast live on the Investors section of SAE’s website at
www.saexploration.com. To listen to the live call via the Company’s website, please go to the
website at least 15 minutes early to register and download any necessary audio software. If you
are unable to listen live, the webcast of the conference call will be archived on the Company’s
website for approximately 90 days.
About SAExploration Holdings, Inc.
SAE is an internationally-focused oilfield services company offering a full range of vertically-
integrated seismic data acquisition and logistical support services in remote and complex
environments throughout Alaska, Canada, South America, and Southeast Asia. In addition to the
acquisition of 2D, 3D, time-lapse 4D and multi-component seismic data on land, in transition
zones and offshore in depths up to 3,000 meters, SAE offers a full suite of logistical support and
in-field processing services, such as program design, planning and permitting, camp services
and infrastructure, surveying, drilling, environmental assessment and reclamation and community
relations. SAE operates crews around the world, performing major projects for its blue-chip
customer base, including major integrated oil companies, national oil companies and large
independent oil and gas exploration companies. Operations are supported through a multi-
national presence in Houston, Alaska, Canada, Peru, Colombia, Bolivia, Brazil, New Zealand
and Malaysia. For more information, please visit SAE’s website at www.saexploration.com.
The information on SAE’s website is not, and shall not be deemed to be, a part of this press
release or incorporated in filings SAE makes with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Safety. Acquisition. Experience saexploration.com
Forward Looking Statements
This press release contains certain "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the U.S.
federal securities laws with respect to SAE. These statements can be identified by the use of
words or phrases such as “expects,” “estimates,” “projects,” “budgets,” “forecasts,” “anticipates,”
“intends,” “plans,” “may,” “will,” “will,” “could,” “should,” “believes,” “predicts,” “potential,”
“continue,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include statements
regarding SAE's financial condition, results of operations and business and SAE's expectations
or beliefs concerning future periods and possible future events. These statements are subject to
significant known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ
materially from those stated in, and implied by, this press release. Risks and uncertainties that
could cause actual results to vary materially from SAE’s expectations are described under “Risk
Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in SAE’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015, as amended by Amendment No. 1
thereto. Except as required by applicable law, SAE is not under any obligation to, and expressly
disclaims any obligation to, update or alter its forward looking statements, whether as a result of
new information, future events, changes in assumptions or otherwise.
Contact
SAExploration Holdings, Inc.
Ryan Abney
Vice President, Capital Markets & Investor Relations
(281) 258-4409
rabney@saexploration.com
Safety. Acquisition. Experience2saexploration.com