
10-Q 1 d30003e10vq.htm FORM 10-Q e10vq
Table of Contents
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 10-Q
þ
Quarterly Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934
For the quarterly period ended September 30, 2005
or
o
Transition Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934
For the transition period from ___to ___
Commission File Number: 001-11335
DOMINION RESOURCES BLACK WARRIOR TRUST
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation or organization)
75-6461716
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
Bank of America, N.A.
901 Main Street
17th Floor
Dallas, Texas 75202
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip code)
(214) 209-2400
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports) and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. þ No o
     Indicate by a check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in Rule 12b-
2 of the Exchange Act). Yes þ No o
     Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of
the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ
     Number of units of beneficial interest outstanding at November 1, 2005: 7,850,000.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I — FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Item 1. Financial Statements
Item 2. Trustee’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations
Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Item 4. Controls and Procedures
PART II — OTHER INFORMATION
Item 6. Exhibits
SIGNATURES
Index to Exhibits
Certification Required by Rule 13a-14(a)
Certification Required by Rule 13a-14(b)
Table of Contents
PART I — FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Item 1. Financial Statements.
     The condensed financial statements included herein have been prepared by Bank of America,
N.A., as Trustee (the “Trustee”) of Dominion Resources Black Warrior Trust (the “Trust”),
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Certain
information and footnote disclosures normally included in annual financial statements have been
condensed or omitted pursuant to such rules and regulations, although the Trustee believes that
the disclosures are adequate to make the information presented not misleading. The condensed
financial statements of the Trust presented herein are unaudited except for the balances as of
December 31, 2004, and, therefore, are subject to year-end adjustments. It is suggested that
these condensed financial statements be read in conjunction with the financial statements and
notes thereto in the Trust’s Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004. The
December 31, 2004 balance sheet is derived from the audited balance sheet as of that date. In
the opinion of the Trustee, all adjustments consisting of normal recurring adjustments necessary
to present fairly the assets, liabilities and trust corpus of the Trust as of September 30, 2005, the
distributable income for the three-month and the nine-month periods ended September 30, 2005
and 2004 and the changes in trust corpus for the nine-month periods ended September 30, 2005
and 2004, have been included. The distributable income for such interim periods are not
necessarily indicative of the distributable income for the full year.
     The condensed financial statements as of September 30, 2005, and for the three-month and
the nine-month periods ended September 30, 2005 and 2004 included herein have been
reviewed by Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated
in their report appearing herein.
1
Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
Unit Holders of Dominion Resources Black Warrior Trust and
Bank of America, N.A., Trustee
We have reviewed the accompanying condensed statement of assets, liabilities and trust corpus
of Dominion Resources Black Warrior Trust as of September 30, 2005, and the related
condensed statements of distributable income for the three-month and the nine-month periods
ended September 30, 2005 and 2004 and changes in trust corpus for the nine-month periods
ended September 30, 2005 and 2004. These condensed financial statements are the
responsibility of the Trustee.
We conducted our reviews in accordance with standards established by the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). A review of interim financial information consists
principally of applying analytical procedures to financial data and of making inquiries of persons
responsible for financial and accounting matters. It is substantially less in scope than an audit
conducted in accordance with standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(United States), the objective of which is the expression of an opinion regarding the financial
statements taken as a whole. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.
As described in Note 2 to the condensed financial statements, these condensed financial
statements have been prepared on a modified cash basis of accounting, which is a
comprehensive basis of accounting other than accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
Based on our reviews, we are not aware of any material modifications that should be made to
such condensed financial statements for them to be in conformity with the basis of accounting
described in Note 2.
We have previously audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the statement of assets, liabilities and trust corpus of
Dominion Resources Black Warrior Trust as of December 31, 2004, and the related statements of
distributable income and changes in trust corpus for the year then ended (not presented herein);
and in our report dated March 14, 2005, we expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial
statements. In our opinion, the information set forth in the accompanying condensed statement of
assets, liabilities and trust corpus as of December 31, 2004, is fairly stated, in all material
respects, in relation to the statement of assets, liabilities and trust corpus from which it has been
derived.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Dallas, Texas
November 7, 2005
2
Table of Contents
DOMINION RESOURCES BLACK WARRIOR TRUST
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF ASSETS,
LIABILITIES AND TRUST CORPUS
 
 
 
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Royalty interests in gas properties (less
accumulated amortization of $119,363,927 and
September 30, 2005   December 31, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
126,590 
  $
94,061   $
(unaudited)
(unaudited)
$115,997,561, respectively)
 
TOTAL ASSETS
 
 
LIABILITIES AND TRUST CORPUS
 
Trust administration expenses payable
Trust corpus - 7,850,000 units of beneficial
interest authorized, issued and outstanding
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND TRUST CORPUS
$
 
 
 
 
  $
$
36,453,573
36,547,634   $
118,601   $
36,429,033
36,547,634   $
39,819,940 
  
39,946,530 
  
 
 
  
126,949
39,819,581 
  
39,946,530
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.
3
Table of Contents
For
For
the Three
DOMINION RESOURCES BLACK WARRIOR TRUST
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF DISTRIBUTABLE INCOME (UNAUDITED)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Royalty income
Interest income
 
 
General and administrative expenses
 
Distributable income
 
Distributable income per unit (7,850,000 units)
September 30, 2005   September 30, 2004 
6,577,070 
  $
 
 
5,480 
 
  
6,582,550 
 
 
(221,864)
 
  
6,360,686 
  $
 
  
.81 
  $
14,057  
   
6,824,133  
(180,599)
6,810,076   $
6,643,534   $
Months Ended
Months Ended
the Three
.85   $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.
4
Table of Contents
DOMINION RESOURCES BLACK WARRIOR TRUST
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF DISTRIBUTABLE INCOME (UNAUDITED)
the Nine
For
For
the Nine
September 30, 2005   September 30, 2004
Months Ended
Months Ended
Royalty income
Interest income
 
 
General and administrative expenses
 
Distributable income
 
Distributable income per unit (7,850,000 units)
$
 
 
 
  $
 
 
 
  $
 
  $
20,884,000   $
37,758
20,921,758   $
(739,481)
20,182,277   $
2.57   $
17,869,050 
10,850 
  
17,879,900 
(750,453)
  
17,129,447 
  
2.18
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.
5
Table of Contents
For
the Nine
DOMINION RESOURCES BLACK WARRIOR TRUST
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN TRUST CORPUS (UNAUDITED)
 
 
 
 
 
Trust corpus, beginning of period
Amortization of royalty interests
Distributable income
Distributions to unitholders
 
Trust corpus, end of period
 
Distributions per unit (7,850,000 units)
September 30, 2005   September 30, 2004 
44,689,580 
  $
(3,945,083)
 
 
 
 
17,129,447 
(17,125,813)
 
 
 
  
40,748,131 
  $
 
  
2.18 
  $
39,819,581   $
 
(3,366,366) 
20,182,277  
 
(20,206,459)
36,429,033   $
Months Ended
Months Ended
For
the Nine
2.57   $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.
6
Table of Contents
DOMINION RESOURCES BLACK WARRIOR TRUST
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
1. TRUST ORGANIZATION AND PROVISIONS
     Dominion Resources Black Warrior Trust (the “Trust”) was formed as a Delaware business
trust pursuant to the terms of the Trust Agreement of Dominion Resources Black Warrior Trust (as
amended, the “Trust Agreement”) entered into effective as of May 31, 1994, by and among
Dominion Black Warrior Basin, Inc., an Alabama corporation (the “Company”), as grantor,
Dominion Resources, Inc., a Virginia corporation (“Dominion Resources”), and Bank of America,
N.A., a national banking association (the “Trustee”), and Mellon Bank (DE) National Association,
a national banking association (the “Delaware Trustee”), as trustees. The trustees are
independent financial institutions.
     The Trust is a grantor trust formed to acquire and hold certain overriding royalty interests (the
“Royalty Interests”) burdening proved natural gas properties located in the Pottsville coal
formation of the Black Warrior Basin, Tuscaloosa County, Alabama (the “Underlying Properties”)
owned by the Company. The Trust was initially created by the filing of its Certificate of Trust with
the Delaware Secretary of State on May 31, 1994. In accordance with the Trust Agreement, the
Company contributed $1,000 as the initial corpus of the Trust. On June 28, 1994, the Royalty
Interests were conveyed to the Trust by the Company pursuant to the Overriding Royalty
Conveyance (the “Conveyance”) dated effective as of June 1, 1994, from the Company to the
Trust, in consideration for all the 7,850,000 authorized units of beneficial interest (“Units”) in the
Trust. The Company transferred its Units to its parent, Dominion Energy, Inc., a Virginia
corporation, which in turn transferred such Units to its parent, Dominion Resources, which sold
6,850,000 of such Units to the public through various underwriters (the “Underwriters”) in
June 1994 and an additional 54,000 Units through the Underwriters in August 1994. The
remaining 946,000 Units held by Dominion Resources were sold to the public through certain of
the Underwriters in June 1995 pursuant to Post-Effective Amendment No. 1 to the Form S-3
Registration Statement relating to the Units.
     Royalty income to the Trust is attributable to the sale of depleting assets. All of the Underlying
Properties consist of producing properties. Accordingly, the proved reserves attributable to the
Underlying Properties are expected to decline substantially during the term of the Trust and a
portion of each cash distribution made by the Trust will, therefore, be analogous to a return of
capital. Accordingly, cash yields attributable to the Units are expected to decline over the term of
the Trust.
     The Trustee has all powers to collect and distribute proceeds received by the Trust and to pay
Trust liabilities and expenses. The Delaware Trustee has only such powers as are set forth in the
Trust Agreement or are required by law and is not empowered to otherwise manage or take part
in the management of the Trust. The Royalty Interests are passive in nature and neither the
Delaware Trustee nor the Trustee has any control over, or any responsibility relating to, the
operation of the Underlying Properties or the Company’s interest therein.
7
Table of Contents
The Trust is subject to termination under certain circumstances described in the Trust
Agreement. Upon the termination of the Trust, all Trust assets will be sold and the net proceeds
therefrom distributed to holders of units of beneficial interest in the Trust (“Unitholders”).
     The only assets of the Trust, other than cash and temporary investments being held for the
payment of expenses and liabilities and for distribution to Unitholders, are the Royalty Interests.
The Royalty Interests consist of overriding royalty interests burdening the Company’s interest in
the Underlying Properties. The Royalty Interests generally entitle the Trust to receive 65 percent
of the Company’s Gross Proceeds (as defined below). The Royalty Interests are non-operating
interests and bear only expenses related to property, production and related taxes (including
severance taxes). “Gross Proceeds” consist generally of the aggregate amounts received by the
Company attributable to the interests of the Company in the Underlying Properties from the sale
of coal seam gas at the central delivery points in the gathering system for the Underlying
Properties. The definitions, formulas and accounting procedures and other terms governing the
computation of the Royalty Interests are set forth in the Conveyance.
     Because of the passive nature of the Trust and the restrictions and limitations on the powers
and activities of the Trustee contained in the Trust Agreement, the Trustee does not consider any
of the officers and employees of the Trustee to be “officers” or “executive officers” of the Trust as
such terms are defined under applicable rules and regulations adopted under the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934.
2. BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
     The financial statements of the Trust are prepared on a modified cash basis and are not
intended to present financial position and results of operations in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of the Trust’s financial
statements on such basis includes the following:
     
-
Royalty income and interest income are recorded in the period in which amounts are received
by the Trust rather than in the period of production and accrual, respectively.
General and administrative expenses recorded are based on liabilities paid and cash reserves
established out of cash received.
-
-
Amortization of the Royalty Interests is calculated on a unit-of-production basis and charged
directly to trust corpus when revenues are received.
-  Distributions to Unitholders are recorded when declared by the Trustee (see Note 4).
     The financial statements of the Trust differ from financial statements prepared in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America because royalty
income is not accrued in the period of production, general and administrative expenses recorded
are based on liabilities paid and cash reserves established rather than on an accrual basis, and
amortization of the Royalty Interests is not charged against operating results. This
comprehensive basis of accounting other than accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America corresponds to the accounting permitted for royalty trusts by the
8
Table of Contents
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, as specified by Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 12:E,
Financial Statements of Royalty Trusts.
     The net amount of royalty interests in gas properties is limited to the fair value of these assets,
which would likely be measured by discounting projected cash flows attributable to the Trust’s
gas reserves. If the net cost of royalty interests in gas properties exceeds the aggregate of these
amounts, an impairment provision is recorded and charged to the trust corpus.
     The preparation of financial statements in conformity with the basis of accounting described
above requires the Trustee to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts
of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses as of and for the reporting period. Actual
results may differ from such estimates.
3. FEDERAL INCOME TAXES
     The Trust is a grantor trust for Federal income tax purposes. As a grantor trust, the Trust is not
required to pay Federal income taxes. Accordingly, no provision for income taxes has been made
in these financial statements.
     Because the Trust is treated as a grantor trust, and because a Unitholder is treated as directly
owning an interest in the Royalty Interests, each Unitholder is taxed directly on his per Unit pro
rata share of income attributable to the Royalty Interests consistent with the Unitholder’s taxable
year and method of accounting and without regard to the taxable year or accounting method
employed by the Trust.
     Coal seam gas produced and sold after December 31, 2002, no longer generates a
Section 29 tax credit under the Internal Revenue Code (the “Code”). Therefore, Unitholders are
not entitled to claim Section 29 credits for coal seam gas produced and sold after 2002. However,
a Unitholder may benefit from unused Section 29 credits for alternative minimum tax purposes.
Before its expiration, the Section 29 credit could be used only to the extent that a Unitholder’s
regular tax liability exceeded the Unitholder’s tentative minimum tax liability after the regular tax
liability had been reduced by the foreign tax credit and certain nonrefundable personal credits.
Any part of the Section 29 credit not allowed for the tax year solely because of this alternative
minimum tax limitation was subject to certain carryover provisions relating to the alternative
minimum tax calculation. Except for the foregoing, there were no other Code provisions that
allowed for the carryback or carryforward of Section 29 credits. As the carryforward of unused
Section 29 credits is related to the alternative minimum tax calculation for succeeding years,
carryforwards should continue to be allowed this year, even though the Section 29 credit is no
longer allowed for coal seam gas produced and sold after 2002.
     Each Unitholder should consult his tax advisor regarding Trust tax compliance matters.
4. DISTRIBUTIONS TO UNITHOLDERS
     The Trustee determines for each calendar quarter the amount of cash available for distribution
to Unitholders. Such amount (the “Quarterly Distribution Amount”) is an amount equal to the
excess, if any, of the cash received by the Trust attributable to production from the Royalty
Interests during such quarter, provided that such cash is received by the Trust on or
9
Table of Contents
before the last business day prior to the 45th day following the end of such calendar quarter, plus
the amount of interest expected by the Trustee to be earned on such cash proceeds during the
period between the date of receipt by the Trust of such cash proceeds and the date of payment to
the Unitholders of such Quarterly Distribution Amount, plus all other cash receipts of the Trust
during such quarter (to the extent not distributed or held for future distribution as a Special
Distribution Amount (as defined below) or included in the previous Quarterly Distribution Amount)
(which might include sales proceeds not sufficient in amount to qualify for a special distribution
as described in the next paragraph and interest), over the liabilities of the Trust paid during such
quarter and not taken into account in determining a prior Quarterly Distribution Amount, subject to
adjustments for changes made by the Trustee during such quarter in any cash reserves
established for the payment of contingent or future obligations of the Trust. An amount which is
not included in the Quarterly Distribution Amount for a calendar quarter because such amount is
received by the Trust after the last business day prior to the 45th day following the end of such
calendar quarter will be included in the Quarterly Distribution Amount for the next calendar
quarter. The Quarterly Distribution Amount for each quarter will be payable to Unitholders of
record on the 60th day following the end of such calendar quarter unless such day is not a
business day in which case the record date is the next business day thereafter. The Trustee will
distribute the Quarterly Distribution Amount for each calendar quarter on or prior to 70 days after
the end of such calendar quarter to each person who was a Unitholder of record on the record
date for such calendar quarter.
     The Royalty Interests may be sold under certain circumstances and will be sold following
termination of the Trust. A special distribution will be made of undistributed net sales proceeds
and other amounts received by the Trust aggregating in excess of $10 million (a “Special
Distribution Amount”). The record date for a Special Distribution Amount will be the 15th day
following the receipt by the Trust of amounts aggregating a Special Distribution Amount (unless
such day is not a business day, in which case the record date will be the next business day
thereafter) unless such day is within 10 days or less prior to the record date for a Quarterly
Distribution Amount, in which case the record date will be the date that is established for the next
Quarterly Distribution Amount. Distribution to Unitholders of a Special Distribution Amount will be
made no later than 15 days after the Special Distribution Amount record date.
5. CONTINGENCIES
     Contingencies related to the Underlying Properties that are unfavorably resolved would
generally be reflected by the Trust as reductions to future royalty income payments to the Trust
with corresponding reductions to cash distributions to Unitholders. The Trustee is aware of no
such items as of September 30, 2005.
Item 2. Trustee’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
     The Trust makes quarterly cash distributions to Unitholders. The only assets of the Trust, other
than cash and cash equivalents being held for the payment of expenses and liabilities and for
distribution to Unitholders, are the Royalty Interests burdening the Underlying Properties.
10
Table of Contents
The Royalty Interests owned by the Trust burden the interest in the Underlying Properties that is
owned by the Company, an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Dominion Resources.
     Distributable income of the Trust consists of the excess of royalty income plus interest income
over the administrative expenses of the Trust. Upon receipt by the Trust, royalty income is
invested in short-term investments in accordance with the Trust Agreement until its subsequent
distribution to Unitholders.
     The amount of distributable income of the Trust for any quarter may differ from the amount of
cash available for distribution to Unitholders in such quarter due to differences in the treatment of
the expenses of the Trust in the determination of those amounts. The financial statements of the
Trust are prepared on a modified cash basis pursuant to which the expenses of the Trust are
recognized when they are paid or reserves are established for them. Consequently, the reported
distributable income of the Trust for any quarter is determined by deducting from the income
received by the Trust the amount of expenses paid by the Trust during such quarter. The amount
of cash available for distribution to Unitholders is determined as adjusted for changes in reserves
for unpaid liabilities in accordance with the provisions of the Trust Agreement. (See Note 4 to the
financial statements of the Trust appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-Q for additional information
regarding the determination of the amount of cash available for distribution to Unitholders.)
Results of Operations
Three and Nine Month Periods Ended September 30, 2005 Compared to Three and Nine Month
Periods Ended September 30, 2004
     The Trust’s Royalty Interests consist of overriding royalty interests burdening the Company’s
interest in the Underlying Properties. The Royalty Interests generally entitle the Trust to receive
65 percent of the Company’s Gross Proceeds (as defined below) during the preceding calendar
quarter. The Royalty Interests are non-operating interests and bear only expenses related to
property, production and related taxes (including severance taxes). “Gross Proceeds” consist
generally of the aggregate amounts received by the Company attributable to the interests of the
Company in the Underlying Properties from the sale of coal seam gas at the central delivery
points in the gathering system for the Underlying Properties. The definitions, formulas and
accounting procedures and other terms governing the computation of the Royalty Interests are
set forth in the Overriding Royalty Conveyance from the Company to the Trust.
     The Trust received royalty income amounting to $6,810,076 during the third quarter of 2005
compared to $6,577,070 during the third quarter of 2004. This revenue was derived from the
receipt of cash on production of 1,064 Mmcf at an average price received of $6.40 per mcf after
deducting production taxes of $439,142 compared to 1,146 Mmcf with an average price of $5.74
per mcf after deducting production taxes of $442,292 in the third quarter of 2004. The Trust
received royalty income amounting to $20,884,000 during the nine months ended September 30,
2005 compared to $17,869,050 during the nine months ended September 30, 2004. This
revenue was derived from the receipt of cash on production of 3,306 Mmcf at an average price
received of $6.32 per mcf after deducting production taxes of $1,346,714 compared to 3,636
Mmcf with an average price of $4.91 per mcf after deducting production
11
Table of Contents
taxes of $1,200,363 in the nine months ended September 30, 2004. For the nine-month period
ended September 30, 2005, the Trust was positively impacted by the increase in natural gas
prices, as compared with the nine-month period ending September 30, 2004. Natural gas prices
are influenced by many factors such as seasonal temperatures, domestic demand and other
factors that are beyond the control of the Trustee. The decrease in production volumes is
attributed to normal depletion of existing available reserves. Production taxes are based on
revenues rather than production volumes. Accordingly, production taxes did not fluctuate
proportionately to the decrease in volumes.
     Interest income during the third quarter of 2005 amounted to $14,057 compared to $5,480 for
the same period in 2004. Interest income during the nine months ended September 30, 2005
amounted to $37,758 compared to $10,850 for the nine months ended September 30, 2004. This
increase is a result of the higher interest rates.
     Administrative expenses during the third quarter of 2005 amounted to $180,599 compared to
$221,864 in the third quarter of 2004. Administrative expenses during the nine months ended
September 30, 2005 amounted to $739,481 compared to $750,453 for the nine months ended
September 30, 2004. For this period, these expenses were primarily related to administrative
services provided by Dominion Resources and the Trustee and Mellon Bank (DE) National
Association, a national banking association, and the preparation of year-end reports for
submission to the Securities and Exchange Commission and to Unitholders during the period.
The decrease in administrative expenses in the third quarter of 2005 as compared to the third
quarter of 2004 is primarily due to controlling the higher expenses related to compliance with the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 in 2005.
Distributable income for the third quarter of 2005 was $6,643,534 , or $.85 per Unit, compared
to distributable income for the third quarter of 2004 of $6,360,686, or $.81 per Unit. Distributable
income for the nine months ended September 30, 2005 was $20,182,277 , or $2.57 per Unit,
compared to $17,129,447, or $2.18 per Unit, for the nine months ended September 30, 2004. The
Trust made a distribution on September 8, 2005 of $0.851136 per Unit compared to a distribution
of $0.806256 per Unit made during the third quarter of 2004.
Gulf of Mexico Hurricanes
     In late August and September 2005, hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico disrupted a significant
portion of U.S. oil and gas production, leading to higher prices. The duration of these higher
prices cannot be predicted. These increased prices will affect distributions to Unitholders
beginning with the fourth quarter of 2005 distribution. The Trust does not have properties in the
affected areas, so the Trustee believes that the effect on the Trust with respect to any disruption
in production will be minimal, if at all.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
     The Trust’s financial statements reflect the selection and application of accounting policies
that require the Trust to make significant estimates and assumptions. The following are some of
the more critical judgment areas in the application of accounting policies that currently affect the
Trust’s financial condition and results of operations.
Basis of Accounting
     The financial statements of the Trust are prepared on a modified cash basis and are not
intended to present financial position and results of operations in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of the Trust’s financial
statements on such basis includes the following:
     
-
Royalty income and interest income are recorded in the period in which amounts are received
by the Trust rather than in the period of production and accrual, respectively.
12
Table of Contents
-
-
General and administrative expenses recorded are based on liabilities paid and cash reserves
established out of cash received.
Amortization of the Royalty Interests is calculated on a unit-of-production basis and charged
directly to trust corpus when revenues are received.
-  Distributions to Unitholders are recorded when declared by the Trustee (see Note 4).
     The financial statements of the Trust differ from financial statements prepared in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America because royalty
income is not accrued in the period of production, general and administrative expenses recorded
are based on liabilities paid and cash reserves established rather than on an accrual basis, and
amortization of the Royalty Interests is not charged against operating results. This
comprehensive basis of accounting other than accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America corresponds to the accounting permitted for royalty trusts by the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, as specified by Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 12:E,
Financial Statements of Royalty Trusts.
Impairment
     The net amount of royalty interests in gas properties is limited to the fair value of these assets,
which would likely be measured by discounting projected cash flows. If the net cost of royalty
interests in gas properties exceeds the aggregate of these amounts, an impairment provision is
recorded and charged to the trust corpus.
Revenue Recognition
     Revenues from Royalty Interests are recognized in the period in which amounts are received
by the Trust. Royalty income received by the Trust in a given calendar year will generally reflect
the proceeds, on an entitlements basis, from natural gas produced and sold for the twelve-month
period ended September 30th in that calendar year. Royalty income received by the Trust in the
first quarter of 2005 generally reflects the proceeds, on an entitlements basis, from natural gas
produced and sold in the fourth quarter of 2004.
Reserve Disclosure
     Independent petroleum engineers estimate the net proved reserves attributable to the Royalty
Interests. In accordance with Statement of Financial Standards No. 69, “Disclosures About Oil
and Gas Producing Activities”, estimates of future net revenues from proved reserves have been
prepared using year-end contractual gas prices and related costs. Numerous uncertainties are
inherent in estimating volumes and the value of proved reserves and in projecting future
production rates and the timing of development of non-producing reserves. Such reserve
estimates are subject to change as additional information becomes available. The reserves
actually recovered and the timing of production may be substantially different from the reserve
estimates.
13
Table of Contents
Contingencies
     Contingencies related to the Underlying Properties that are unfavorably resolved would
generally be reflected by the Trust as reductions to future royalty income payments to the Trust
with corresponding reductions to cash distributions to Unitholders. The Trustee is aware of no
such items as of September 30, 2005.
Use of Estimates
     The preparation of financial statements in conformity with the basis of accounting described
above requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported
amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses as of and for the reporting period.
Actual results may differ from such estimates.
Forward-Looking Statements
     This report on Form 10-Q includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section
27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as amended. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form
10-Q, including, without limitation, statements contained in this “Trustee’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Trust’s financial
position and industry conditions, are forward-looking statements. Although the Trustee believes
that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are reasonable, it can give no
assurance that such expectations will prove to have been correct.
Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
The Trust invests in no derivative financial instruments, and has no foreign operations or long-
term debt instruments. Other than the Trust’s ability to periodically borrow money as necessary to
pay expenses, liabilities and obligations of the Trust that cannot be paid out of cash held by the
Trust, the Trust is prohibited from engaging in borrowing transactions. The amount of any such
borrowings is unlikely to be material to the Trust. The Trust periodically holds short-term
investments acquired with funds held by the Trust pending distribution to Unitholders and funds
held in reserve for the payment of Trust expenses and liabilities. Because of the short-term nature
of these borrowings and investments and certain limitations upon the types of such investments
which may be held by the Trust, the Trustee believes that the Trust is not subject to any material
interest rate risk. The Trust does not engage in transactions in foreign currencies which could
expose the Trust or Unitholders to any foreign currency related market risk.
Item 4. Controls and Procedures.
     As of the end of the period covered by this report, the Trustee carried out an evaluation of the
effectiveness of the design and operation of the Trust’s disclosure controls and procedures
pursuant to Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15. Based upon that evaluation, the Trustee
concluded that the Trust’s disclosure controls and procedures are effective in timely alerting the
Trustee to material information relating to the Trust required to be included in the Trust’s periodic
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. In its evaluation of disclosure controls and
procedures, the Trustee has relied, to the extent considered reasonable, on
14
Table of Contents
information provided by the Company. There has not been any change in the Trust’s internal
control over financial reporting during the period covered by this report that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the Trust’s internal control over financial
reporting.
15
Table of Contents
PART II — OTHER INFORMATION
31.1  Certification required by Rule 13a-14(a) or Rule 15d-14(a).
Item 6. Exhibits.
32.1
Certification required by Rule 13a-14(a) or Rule 15d-14(b) and Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Table of Contents
16
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
DOMINION RESOURCES BLACK
WARRIOR TRUST
By: BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., TRUSTEE
By:
/s/ RON E. HOOPER
 
Ron E. Hooper
Senior Vice President and
Administrator
Date: November 8, 2005
(The Trust has no directors or executive officers.)
Table of Contents
Exhibit
   
Number    
31.1
 
32.1
17
Index to Exhibits
Exhibit
—   Certification required by Rule 13a-14(a) or Rule 15d-14(a).
—
Certification required by Rule 13a-14(a) or Rule 15d-14(b) and Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
18