
VANGO MINING LTD 
ACN 108 737 711
ENTITLEMENT ISSUE PROSPECTUS
For  a  non-renounceable  entitlement  issue  of  1  Option  for  every  2  Shares  held  by  those 
Shareholders registered at the Record Date at an issue price of $0.001 per Option to raise 
up to $187,792 (before expenses) (based on the number of Shares on issue as at the date 
of this Prospectus) (Offer).
The Offer is fully underwritten by K S Capital Pty Limited ACN 124 761 557 AFSL No. 316880 
(Underwriter).    Refer  to  Section  11.4  for  details  regarding  the  terms  of  the  Underwriting 
Agreement.
This  Offer  closes  at  5:00pm  AEST  on  30 September 2016.    Valid  acceptances  must  be 
received before that date.
IMPORTANT NOTICE
This  document  is  important  and  should  be  read  in  its  entirety.    If  after  reading  this 
Prospectus  you  have  any  questions  about  the  securities  being  offered  under  this 
Prospectus or any other matter, then you should consult your stockbroker, accountant or 
other professional adviser.
The  Options  offered  by  this  Prospectus  should  be  considered  as  speculative.
C O N T E N T S
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
CORPORATE DIRECTORY .............................................................................................. 2
TIMETABLE ..................................................................................................................... 3
IMPORTANT NOTES ....................................................................................................... 4
INVESTMENT OVERVIEW ............................................................................................... 6
BRIEF INSTRUCTIONS FOR ELIGIBLE SHAREHOLDERS .................................................. 14
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER ................................................................................................... 15
DETAILS OF THE OFFER ................................................................................................ 16
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER ......................................................................... 24
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SECURITIES ................................................. 28
RISK FACTORS ............................................................................................................ 33
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ...................................................................................... 43
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION .................................................................................... 57
GLOSSARY .................................................................................................................. 58
1
1.
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Directors
Mr Bruce McInnes (Executive Chairman) 
Mr Shengqiang (Sean) Zhou (Non-Executive 
Director) 
Dr Zhenzhu (Carol) Zhang (Non-Executive  
Director) 
 
Company Secretary
Mr Mark Camilleri
Registered Office
Suite 2, Level 5 
71 Macquarie Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
 
Telephone: + 61 2 9251 6012 
Facsimile: +61 2 9247 6728 
Website:  www.vangomining.com
Share Registry*
Boardroom Pty Limited 
Level 12, 225 George Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
 
Telephone: 1300 737 760/+61 2 9290 9600 
Facsimile: + 61 2 9279 0664
Auditor*
Ernst & Young 
Ernst & Young Centre 
200 George Street 
Sydney NSW 2000
Principal Place of Business
Suite 2, Level 5 
71 Macquarie Street 
Sydney NSW 2000
ASX Code:
VAN
Solicitors
Gilbert + Tobin 
1202 Hay Street 
West Perth WA 6005
Underwriter
K S Capital Pty Limited AFSL No 316880 
Level 2,  
22 Pitt Street 
SYDNEY NSW 2000
*These entities are included for information purposes only.  They have not been involved 
in  the  preparation  of  this  Prospectus  and  have  not  consented  to  being  named  in  this 
Prospectus.
2
2.
TIMETABLE
Important dates*
Announcement  of  Offer  and  lodgement  of 
Appendix 3B
Lodgement  of  Prospectus  with  the  ASIC  and 
the ASX
Notice sent to Shareholders
Ex date (date Shares are quoted ex-rights)
26 August 2016
5 September 2016
6 September  2016
8 September 2016
Record Date for determining Entitlements
5:00pm AEST 9 September 2016
Prospectus/Entitlement and Acceptance Form 
sent out to Shareholders and Opening Date of 
the Offer
13 September 2016
Closing Date**
5:00pm AEST 30 September 2016
Options quoted on a deferred settlement basis
ASX notified of undersubscriptions
Allotment Date of the Options
Despatch of holding statements
Quotation  on  normal  settlement  basis  of 
Options issued under the Offer**
4 October 2016
4 October 2016
10 October 2016
11 October 2016
11 October 2016
*  These  dates  are  indicative  only.    The  Directors  reserve  the  right  to  vary  these  dates 
without prior notice, subject to the ASX Listing Rules. 
**The Directors may extend the Closing Date by giving at least 3 Business Days’ notice to 
ASX  prior  to  the  Closing  Date.    As  such  the  date  the  Options  are  expected  to 
commence trading on the ASX may vary.
3
3.
IMPORTANT NOTES
This Prospectus is dated 5 September 2016 and was lodged with the ASIC on that date.  The ASIC and 
the  ASX  and  their  respective  officers  take  no  responsibility  for  the  contents  of  this  Prospectus  or  the 
merits of the investment to which this Prospectus relates.
No  Options  may  be  issued  on  the  basis  of  this  Prospectus  later  than  13  months  after  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus.  Options issued pursuant to this Prospectus will be issued on the terms and conditions set out 
in this Prospectus.
The  Company  will  apply  to  the  ASX  for  Official  Quotation  of  the  Options  offered  pursuant  to  this 
Prospectus.
No  person  is  authorised  to  give  information  or  to  make  any  representation  in  connection  with  this 
Prospectus.    Any  information  or  representation  not  contained  in  this  Prospectus  or  disclosed  by  the 
Company  pursuant  to  its  continuous  disclosure  obligations  may  not  be  relied  on  as  having  been 
authorised by the Company in connection with this Prospectus.
It is important that Eligible Shareholders read this Prospectus in its entirety and seek professional advice 
where necessary.  The Options the subject of this Prospectus should be considered highly speculative.
Applications  for  Options  offered  pursuant  to  this  Prospectus  can  only  be  submitted  on  an  original 
Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  accompanying  this  Prospectus  as  described  in  Section  7.4  of  this 
Prospectus.  An application for Options will only be accepted by completing the relevant section of the 
Entitlement and  Acceptance Form and/or by making payment as described in Sections 7.5 and 7.6 of 
this Prospectus.
This  Prospectus  is  a  transaction  specific  prospectus  for  an  offer  of  continuously  quoted  securities  (as 
defined  in  the  Corporations  Act)  and  has  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  section  713  of  the 
Corporations  Act.    It  does  not  contain  the  same  level  of  disclosure  as  an  initial  public  offering 
prospectus.    In  preparing  this  Prospectus  regard  has  been  had  to  the  fact  that  the  Company  is  a 
disclosing entity for the purposes of the Corporations Act and  that certain matters may reasonably be 
expected to be known to investors and professional advisers whom potential investors may consult.
The  distribution  of  this  Prospectus  in  jurisdictions  outside  of  Australia  may  be  restricted  by  law  and 
persons who come into possession of this Prospectus should seek advice and observe such restrictions. 
Any failure to comply with such restrictions may constitute a violation of applicable securities laws. This 
Prospectus does not constitute an offer or invitation in any jurisdiction where, or to any person to whom, 
it would not be lawful to make such an offer or invitation.
Neither this document nor the Options the subject of the Offer have been, nor will be, registered under 
the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended  or under the securities legislation  of any state of 
the  Unites  States  of  America,  or  any  applicable  securities  laws  of  a  country  of  jurisdiction  outside  of 
Australia.  Accordingly,  subject  to  certain  exceptions,  the  Options  the  subject  of  the  Offer  may  not, 
directly or indirectly, be offered or sold within a country or jurisdiction outside of Australia or to or for the 
account  or  benefit  of  any  national  resident  or  citizen  of,  or  any  person  located  in  a  country  or 
jurisdiction outside of Australia.
Forward-looking statements
This  Prospectus  contains  forward-looking  statements  which  are  identified  by  words  such  as  ‘may’, 
‘could’, ‘believes’, ‘estimates’, ‘targets’, ‘expects’, or ‘intends’ and such other similar words that involve 
risks and uncertainties.
These statements are based on an assessment of present economic and operating conditions, and on 
a number of assumptions regarding future events and actions that, as at the date of this Prospectus, are 
expected to take place.
Such  forward-looking  statements  are  not  guarantees  of  future  performance  and  involve  known  and 
unknown risks,  uncertainties,  assumptions  and  other important  factors,  many  of  which  are  beyond  the 
control of the Company and the Directors.
The Company cannot and does not give any assurance that the results, performance or achievements 
expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in this Prospectus will actually occur 
and investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
4
The Company has no intention to update or revise forward-looking statements, or to publish prospective 
financial  information  in  the  future,  regardless  of  whether  new  information,  future  events  or  any  other 
factors affect the information contained in this Prospectus, except where required by law.
These forward-looking statements are subject to various risk factors that could cause our actual results to 
differ materially from the results expressed or anticipated in these statements. These risk factors are set 
out in Section 10 of this Prospectus.
Key definitions
Throughout  this  Prospectus,  for  ease  of  reading,  various  words  and  phrases  have  been  defined  rather 
than  used  in  full  on  each  occasion.  Please  refer  to  Section  13  of  this  Prospectus  for  a  list  of  defined 
terms.
Risk factors
Potential investors should be aware that subscribing for  Options in the Company involves a number of 
risks.  The key risk factors of which investors should be aware are set out in  Section 10 of this Prospectus.  
These  risks  together  with  other  general  risks  applicable  to  all  investments  in  listed  securities  not 
specifically referred to, may affect the value of the Options in the future.  Accordingly, an investment in 
the  Company  should  be  considered  highly  speculative.    Investors  should  consider  consulting  their 
professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for Options pursuant to this Prospectus.
5
4.
INVESTMENT OVERVIEW
Investment Overview
This section provides a summary of information that is key to a decision to invest in Shares 
and Options. This is a summary only.  Potential investors should read this entire Prospectus 
carefully.
If you are unclear in relation to any aspect of the Offer, or if you are uncertain whether 
Options  and,  on  exercise  of  the  Options,  Shares  are  a  suitable  investment  for  you,  you 
should consult your financial or other professional adviser.
Question
Response
What 
is  being 
offered  and  at 
what price?
The  Company 
to  Eligible 
Shareholders  by  a  pro-rata  non-renounceable 
entitlement issue.
is  offering  Options
Under the Offer, Eligible Shareholders may subscribe 
for  1  Option  for  every  2  Shares  held  on  the  Record 
Date,  at  a  price  of  $0.001  per  Option,  with  each 
Option  having  an  exercise  price  of  $0.06  and 
expiring at 5:00pm on 15 March 2018.
find
Where  to 
more 
information
Section 7.1
How  many  new 
securities  will  be 
issued?
The maximum number of Options that will be issued 
under  the  Offer  (if  the  Offer  is  fully  subscribed)  is 
approximately 187,791,935 Options.
Sections 
and 7.12
7.1
The  Company  will  apply  to  the  ASX  for  Official 
Quotation  of  the  Options  offered  pursuant  to  this 
Prospectus.    If  ASX  does  not  admit  the  Options  to 
Official  Quotation  before  the  expiration  of  3  months 
after  the  date  of  issue  of  this  Prospectus,  or  such 
period  as  varied  by  the  ASIC,  the  Company  will  not 
allot  or  issue  any  Options  and  will  repay  all  moneys 
received  in  connection  with  Applications  for  the 
Options  within 
the 
Corporations Act, without interest.
time  prescribed  under
the
If the Offer is fully subscribed, the Company will raise 
approximately $187,792 through the issue of Options 
(before expenses of the Offer).
Sections 
and 8.1
7.1
The  purpose  of  the  Offer  is  to  pay  the  expenses  of 
the Offer and to provide the Company with a small 
amount  of  additional  working  capital.    Any  funds 
from  the  issue  of  Shares  on  exercise  of  the  Options 
will  be  applied  to  paying  down  debt,  exploration 
and development, including in connection with the 
K2  deposit  and  the Trident  deposit  which  form  part 
of the Plutonic Dome Project, and the remainder to 
general working capital and corporate overheads.
Section  8  provides  further  details  on  funds  raised
is
What 
the 
amount  that  will 
be  raised  under 
the  Offer  and 
what 
the 
purpose  of  the 
Offer?
is
6
Question
Response
find
Where  to 
more 
information
under the Offer will be applied.
Who is eligible to 
participate 
in 
the Offer?
The Offer  is made to  Eligible Shareholders only.    An 
Eligible  Shareholder 
is  a  Shareholder  with  a 
registered address in Australia on the Record Date.
Section 7.1
If  you  are  not  an  Eligible  Shareholder,  you  are  not 
able to participate in the Offer.
the 
for
What  are 
alternatives 
Eligible 
Shareholders?
The Offer is non-renounceable so you cannot trade 
your  Entitlements.    As  an  Eligible  Shareholder,  you 
may:
Sections 
7.4, 
7.5, 7.6 and 7.7
 

take up all of your Entitlements; 
take up part of your Entitlements, and allow the 
balance of your Entitlements to lapse; or
  allow all of your Entitlements to lapse.
If  you  take  up  your  full  entitlement,  you  will  not  be 
able to apply for additional Options.
Can  I  trade  my 
Entitlement?
No.  The Offer is non-renounceable.  Accordingly, a 
Shareholder  may  not  sell  or  transfer  all  or  part  of 
their Entitlement.
Section 7.7
the  Offer
Is 
underwritten?
KS Capital Pty Limited is the Underwriter to the Offer.
Sections 
and 11.4
7.8
The  Underwriter  is  not  a  related  party  of  the 
Company  and  has  no  current  relevant  interest  in 
Shares.
The  Underwriter  must  apply  for  the  Shortfall  in 
accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  Underwriting 
Agreement.  The  Underwriter  has  entered 
into 
commitments  with  sub-underwriters  to  subscribe  for 
all  or  part  of  the  Shortfall.  The  sub-underwriters 
include  Directors  and  major  Shareholders  of  the 
Company.  It is unlikely that any sub-underwriter will, 
by  its  sub-underwriting,  increase  its  relevant  interest 
in  Shares  to  20%  or  more.  The  details  of  the  sub-
underwriters are set out in Section 7.8.
It  is  proposed  that  the  allotment  of  the  Shortfall 
under 
the 
allotment of Securities under this Offer will occur on 
the same day.
the  Underwriting  Agreement  and
How  will  Shortfall 
be allocated?
Any remaining Shortfall will revert to the Underwriter 
pursuant  to  the  Underwriting  Agreement.    Pursuant 
to  the  sub-underwriting  arrangements,  the  majority 
of  the  Shortfall  will  be  taken  up  by  the  sub-
underwriters.
Sections 
and 11.4
7.8
7
Question
Response
find
Where  to 
more 
information
Company 
update
In  addition  to  its  announcements  on  the  ASX,  the 
Company  wishes  to  update  shareholders  on  the 
following:
Sections 
and 11.4
11.3
  Debt facilities update
On  12 April 2016,  the  Company  announced  that  it 
completed  discussions  with  certain  directors  and  a 
number  of  major  shareholders  who  agreed  to 
commit  $4.5 million  towards  a  total  debt  facility  of 
$6 million  to  assist  in  the  mining  of  the  Plutonic 
Dome Project.  As at the date of this Prospectus, the 
Company  has  received  approximately  $3.3 million 
of  the  approximately  $4.5 million  agreed  to  be 
committed  by  Directors  and  major  shareholders, 
and  $200,000  from  $1.5 million  to  be  sought  from 
third parties.
The material terms of these loan arrangements and 
details  of  the  funds  received  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus are set out in Section 11.3(a).
  Plutonic Dome acquisition update
As  announced  on  25 August 2016,  the  Company 
has now completed its acquisition of Dampier Gold 
Limited’s interest in Dampier (Plutonic) Pty Limited.
  Review  of  tenements  at  the  Plutonic  Dome
Project
The Company presently intends to review its current 
tenements  in  respect  of  the Plutonic  Dome  Project 
in order to determine the most appropriate way to 
deal with the vast number of tenements acquired.
  Early  stage  discussions  in  respect  of  the  farm-in
and development of the Plutonic Dome Project
in  connection  with  potential
The Company is in early stage discussions with third 
parties 
farm-in 
arrangements  and  the  potential  development  of 
the  K2  deposit  forming  part  of  the  Plutonic  Dome 
Project.    There  is  no  guarantee  that  any  of  those 
discussions  will  result  in  binding  agreements  being 
entered into.
Further  details  of  the Company  update  are  set  out 
in  Section  11.3.    In  addition,  the  Company  has 
entered  into  an  underwriting  agreement  with  the 
Underwriter.  The material terms of which are set out 
in  Section 11.4. 
should 
consider  Sections  11.3  and  11.4  prior  to  deciding
Eligible  Shareholders
8
Question
Response
whether to participate in the Offer.
the 
of
What  are 
key 
risks 
further 
investment in the 
Company?
Potential investors should be aware that subscribing 
for  Options  in  the  Company  involves  a  number  of 
risks. Some of the more significant risks which affect 
an  investment  in  the  Company  are  summarised 
below.  Please  refer  to  Section  10  for  further  details 
of  both  the  risks  set  out  below  and  a  number  of 
other  risks  that  are  relevant  to  a  decision  to  apply 
for Options.
  Going concern/solvency
find
Where  to 
more 
information
Section 10
The ability  of  the Company  to  continue as a going 
concern  is  dependent  upon  the  Company  being 
able  to  raise  additional  funds  (beyond  this  raising) 
as  required  to  fund  debt  repayments,  ongoing 
exploration  commitments  and  for  working  capital. 
The  Company, 
resource 
companies,  currently  relies  on  capital  markets  and 
shareholder  and  third  party  loans  for  access  to 
capital  and  its  ability  to  raise  capital  is  influenced 
by the gold and other commodity market generally 
and  other  economic  factors  including  the  cost  of 
production.
like  many
junior
If  the  Company
No  assurances  can  be  made  that  appropriate 
capital  or  funding,  if  and  when  needed,  will  be 
available  on  terms  favourable  to  the  Company  or 
at  all. 
is  unable  to  obtain 
additional financing as needed, it may be required 
to  reduce,  delay  or  suspend  its  operations  or  the 
Company  could  face  solvency  issues.  This  could 
have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the  Company’s 
activities and potentially its solvency.
Further,  the  significant  majority  of  the  net  funds 
anticipated to be under this Offer are in connection 
with  the  exercise  price of  the Options if  the holders 
of the Options choose to exercise them.  There is no 
guarantee that the price of the Shares will rise to or 
maintain a price that will exceed the exercise price 
of the Options or, if it does, that any Options will be 
exercised.    Accordingly,  there is no  guarantee  that 
the exercise price of the Options will be received by 
the Company.
If  approximately  4.5%  of  the  Options  are  not 
exercised  by  the  end  of  2016,  and  the  Company’s 
discussions  with 
in 
Sections 11.3(a) and 11.3(d) do not result in binding 
commitments  to  advance  sufficient  funds,  the 
Company will need to have found other sources of
third  parties  as
set  out
9
Question
Response
find
Where  to 
more 
information
capital  to  fund  its  anticipated  exploration  and 
development  activities  and  to  meet  its  interest 
repayment  obligations  in  respect  of  debt;  it  is 
anticipated  that  any  such  capital  would  take  the 
form  of  additional  support  from  shareholders,  likely 
to  be  in  the  nature  of  additional  debt  or  through 
further debt or equity raisings. Should the Company 
be  unable  to  raise  capital  as  and  when  required, 
there  is  a  material  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the 
Company  will  be  able  to  continue  as  a  going 
concern.
Any additional equity financing (including under this 
Offer) may:
(i)  be  dilutive  to  Shareholders  (see  further  Section
7.10);
(ii)  be undertaken at lower prices than the current
market price; or
(iii)  involve  restrictive  covenants  which  limit  the
Company’s operations and business strategy.
Any additional debt funding is likely to be on terms 
at 
in 
Section 11.3(a).
least  as  onerous  as
set  out
those
As  set  out  in  Section 11.3(a),  the  Company  has 
received  part  of  the  funds  in  connection  with  the 
debt  facilities  announced  in  April.    There  is  no 
guarantee if and when the remaining funds will be 
received  by  the  Company.    In  respect  of  certain 
funds  already  received,  while  the  Company  has 
agreed initial terms, the Company is in the process 
of  negotiating  and  executing 
loan 
  These 
agreements  with  the  relevant 
lenders  may 
terms  which  may  be 
substantially  different  to  those  anticipated  by  the 
Company  as  set  out  in  Section 11.3(a),  or  may  not 
proceed with their remaining commitments.
insist  on
lenders.
full
form
There is no guarantee that any discussions with third 
parties to advance funds to the Company will result 
in binding commitments being entered into.
  Potential  for  dilution  if  Shareholders  do  not
participate in the Offer
Upon  implementation  of  the  Offer,  assuming  all 
the  number  of 
Entitlements  are  accepted 
outstanding  options  will 
from  250,000 
currently  on  issue  to  188,041,935  and  this  has  the
increase
10
Question
Response
find
Where  to 
more 
information
potential to increase the number of Shares on issue 
from  375,583,869  to  563,625,804.    This  means  that 
each  Option  exercised  will 
lower 
represent  a 
proportion of the ownership of the Company.
  Quotation risk
If  an  insufficient  number  of  Eligible  Shareholders 
take up their Entitlements under this Offer, there is a 
risk that the Offer will not be  able to satisfy the ASX 
conditions 
spread.  
Consequently, there is a risk that the Options will not 
be quoted.
to  quotation
relating
to
  Underwriting risk
subject
The  Company  has  entered  into  the  Underwriting 
Agreement, 
terms  and 
conditions.   If  certain  conditions are not  satisfied  or 
certain  events  occur, 
the  underwriter  may 
terminate the Underwriting Agreement.
to  certain
  Gold,  bauxite  and  other  commodity  price
volatility
The  prices  of  gold,  bauxite  and  other  commodities 
inherently  fluctuate  and  are  affected  by  numerous 
factors beyond the control of the Company.
  Mining industry risk
Mining exploration and production is inherently risky 
and  speculative  in  nature,  and  may  be  hampered 
by  circumstances  beyond  the  control  of  the 
Company.    There  is  no  guarantee  that  additional 
gold  or  bauxite  deposits  will  be  discovered  in  the 
locations being explored by the Company.
  Reliance on key personnel
Currently, the Company has personnel who are key 
to  its  business.  There can  be  no  assurance  that  the 
Company will be able to attract or retain sufficiently 
qualified personnel on a timely basis.
  Counterparty  risk  –  joint  venture  counterparties
and contractors
There  is  a  risk  of  financial  failure,  insolvency  and/or 
default 
contractual 
counterparties, including:
the  Company’s
by
1.
lenders  and 
commitments to lend;
those  who
have  made
11
Question
Response
find
Where  to 
more 
information
2.  participants  in  any  joint  venture  to  which  the
Company is or may become a party; and
3.  the contractors and other service providers used
by the Company in its activities.
In  the  event  that  any  of  the  Company’s  joint 
venture  counterparties,  or  other  contractual 
counterparties, become insolvent, it may be difficult 
for  the  Company  to  enforce  its  rights  under  the 
relevant joint venture agreement and/or associated 
agreements. Further, if any of agents or contractors 
of  the  Company  default  or  become  insolvent,  this 
may adversely affect the ability of the Company to 
perform its obligations under contracts.
  Country risk
The  Company  operates 
in  countries  outside 
Australia  and  there  are  risks  that  changes  in  the 
legal  business  environment  in  those  places  such  as 
currency  controls,  price  controls, 
regulatory 
changes  and  political  changes  may  adversely 
affect the value of the Company’s assets.
  Competition
Competition  from  Australian  and  international  gold 
and  bauxite  producers,  developers  and  explorers 
may  affect  the  potential  future  cash  flow  and 
earnings  which  the  Company  may  realise  from  its 
operations.
  General
These risks,  together with other risks  both specific to 
the Company and other general risks applicable to 
all  investments  in  listed  securities  not  specifically 
referred  to,  may  affect  the  value  of  the  Options, 
and  any  Shares  acquired  on  exercise  of  the 
Options, in the future. Accordingly, an investment in 
the  Company  should  be  considered  speculative.  
Investors 
their 
professional  advisers  before  deciding  whether  to 
apply for Options pursuant to this Prospectus.
consulting
should
consider
is
What 
the 
effect on control 
of 
the 
Company?
The  effect  on  the  control  of  the  Company  will 
depend  on  the  take-up  of  Entitlements  by  Eligible 
Shareholders  and  whether  the  Options  are  in  fact 
exercised.
Section 7.9
The  Underwriter  does  not  currently  have  a  relevant
12
Question
Response
find
Where  to 
more 
information
interest  in  the  Company  and  does  not  currently 
hold  any  options  or  convertible  notes 
in  the 
Company.  If none of the Eligible Shareholders take 
up  their  Entitlement  and  the  Underwriter  subscribes 
for  the  Shortfall  and  exercises  all  of  the  Options 
issued  pursuant  to  this  Offer    but  no  other  options 
are  exercised, 
the 
Underwriter  will  be  33.3%.  However,  the Underwriter 
has 
sub-underwriting 
arrangements with  the Directors and management 
of  the  Company  and  certain  of  the  Company’s 
largest Shareholders in relation to  any Shortfall.  It is 
not  envisaged  that  any  sub-underwriter  will,  by  its 
sub-underwriting,  increase  its  relevant  interest  in 
Shares to 20% or more.
interest  of
entered
the
relevant
into
various
By  reason  of  the  above,  the  Offer  will  not  result  in 
any party gaining control of the Company.
The  potential  for  Options  forming  part  of  the 
Shortfall to be exercised following their issue and the 
impact  this  may  have  on  control  of  the  Company 
has also been considered further in Section 7.9.
13
5.
BRIEF INSTRUCTIONS FOR ELIGIBLE SHAREHOLDERS
The number of Options to which you are entitled is shown in the Entitlement and 
Acceptance Form.  You may participate in the Offer as follows: 
If you wish to accept your Entitlement in 
full: 
  pay  the  amount  indicated  on  your 
Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  via 
BPAY®  using  the  BPAY®  code  and 
personalised  Customer 
Reference 
Number  (CRN)  indicated  so  that  the 
funds  are 
received  before  5.00pm 
(AEST) on the Closing Date; or
reference 
that 
the
If you only wish to accept part of your 
Entitlement: 
  pay a lesser amount than indicated on 
your Entitlement and Acceptance Form 
via  BPAY®  using  the  BPAY®  code  and 
number 
personalised 
indicated 
funds  are 
received  before  5.00pm  (AEST)  on  the 
Closing Date; or 
fill in the number of Options you wish to 
accept  in  the  space  provided  on  the 
Entitlement and Acceptance Form and 
attach your cheque for the appropriate 
application  monies 
(at  $0.001  per 
Option).
  complete
so
the
Entitlement
and 
Acceptance  Form,  filling  in  the  details 
in the spaces provided and attach your 
cheque  for  the  amount  indicated  on 
your  Entitlement  and  Acceptance 
Form.

Please refer to Section 7.4(a) of this 
Prospectus for further details on applying 
for Options. 
No ability to apply for additional Options 
Eligible Shareholders who have subscribed 
for their Entitlement in full may not apply for 
Options in addition to their Entitlement.
Please refer to Section 7.4(b) of this 
Prospectus for further details on applying 
for Options. 
If you do not wish to accept all or part of 
your Entitlement, you are not obliged to do 
anything. If Eligible Shareholders do not 
take up their entitlement, their existing 
interest in the Company may be diluted on 
the exercise of the Options acquired under 
this Offer. Please refer to Section 7.10 of this 
Prospectus.
14
6.
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
Dear Shareholder 
 
The Board is pleased to offer Shareholders the opportunity to participate in a 1-for-2 non-
renounceable entitlement issue of new Options.  The primary purpose of the Offer is not 
to  raise  significant  funds  for  the  Company  but  to  provide  Eligible  Shareholders  with  the 
opportunity  to  further  invest  in  the  future  development  of  the  Company  by  acquiring 
Options at a minimal price. 
 
All  shareholders  registered  at  5:00  pm  AEST  on  9 September  2016  will  be  entitled  to 
participate in  a non-renounceable  issue  of  Options on  the basis of 1  Option for every  2 
Shares held. 
 
The Closing Date for acceptances is 5:00 pm AEST on 30 September 2016. 
 
The  Directors  intend  to  take  up  their  individual  entitlement  to  Options  in  full,  and 
recommend that Shareholders join us.  
 
This  Prospectus  includes  details  of  the  Offer,  together  with  an  overview  of  the  key  risks 
associated  with  investing  in  the  Company.    I  urge  you  to  read  this  Prospectus  carefully 
and  seek  professional  advice  to  determine  whether  this  investment  is  appropriate  for 
you.  In  particular  Shareholders  should  consider  the  going  concern/solvency  risk 
contained at Section 10.2(a) and should be aware of the fact that if approximately 4.5% 
of the Options are not exercised by the end of 2016, and the Company’s discussions with 
third  parties  as  set  out  in  Sections 11.3(a)  and  11.3(d)  do  not  result  in  binding 
commitments to advance sufficient funds,  the Company will need to have found other 
sources of capital to fund its anticipated exploration and development activities and to 
meet its interest repayment obligations in respect of debt; it is anticipated that any such 
capital  would  take  the  form  of  additional  support  from  shareholders,  likely  to  be  in  the 
nature of additional debt or through further debt or equity raisings. Should the Company 
be  unable  to  raise  capital  as  and  when  required,  there  is  a  material  uncertainty  as  to 
whether the Company will be able to continue as a going concern. 
 
The Board  takes  this  opportunity  to  thank all  Shareholders for  their  continued  support  of 
the Company. 
 
Yours faithfully
Bruce McInnes 
Executive Chairman
15
7.
DETAILS OF THE OFFER
7.1
The Offer
The  Offer  is  being  made  as  a  non-renounceable  entitlement  issue  of  one  (1) 
Option  for  every  two  (2)  Shares  held  by  Shareholders  registered  at  the  Record 
Date at an issue price of $0.001 per Option, with Option each having an exercise 
price  of  $0.06  and  expiring  on  15 March 2018.    Fractional  entitlements  will  be 
rounded up to the nearest whole number.
Based on the capital structure of the Company as at the date of this Prospectus, 
a maximum of approximately 187,791,935 Options will be issued pursuant to this 
Offer to raise up to $187,792.
As at the date of this Prospectus the Company has 115,000 Convertible Notes on 
issue which may be converted at $0.02 per share into Shares (5,750,000 Shares) 
prior  to  the  Record  Date  in  order  to  participate  in  the  Offer.  In  addition  the 
Company has 250,000 options on issue all of which may be exercised prior to the 
Record  Date  in  order  to  participate  in  the  Offer.    Please  refer  to  Section  8.3  of 
this  Prospectus  for  information  on  the  exercise  price  and  expiry  date  of  the 
options on issue.
All of  the  Options  offered  under  this Prospectus  will  be issued on  the  terms and 
conditions  set  out  in  Section  9.1  of  this  Prospectus.    The  Company  will  apply  to 
the ASX for Official Quotation of the Options issued pursuant to this Prospectus.  If 
ASX does not admit the Options to Official Quotation before the expiration of 3 
months after the date of issue of this Prospectus, or such period as varied by the 
ASIC, the Company will not allot or issue any Options and will repay all moneys 
received  in  connection  with  Applications  for  the  Options  within  the  time 
prescribed under the Corporations Act, without interest.
All of the Shares issued upon the future exercise of the Options offered under this 
Prospectus  will  rank  equally  with  the  Shares  on  issue  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus.  Please refer to Section 9.2 for further information regarding the rights 
and liabilities attaching to the Shares.
The  purpose  of  the  Offer  and  the  proposed  use  of  funds  are  set  out  in 
Section 8.1.
7.2
Minimum subscription
There is no minimum subscription.
7.3
Opening and Closing Dates
The  Offer  will  open  for  receipt  of  acceptances  on  13 September   2016  and  will 
close at 5.00pm AEST on 30 September 2016, or such later date as the Directors, 
in their absolute discretion and subject to compliance with the ASX Listing Rules, 
may  determine  and  provided  that  the  Company  gives  ASX  notice  of  the 
change at least 3 Business Days prior to the Closing Date.
7.4
Acceptance
Your  acceptance  of  the  Offer  must  be  made  on  the  Entitlement  and 
Acceptance Form accompanying this Prospectus.
You may participate in the Offer as follows:
16
(a)
if you wish to accept your full Entitlement:
(i)
(ii)
complete the Entitlement and Acceptance Form; and
attach your cheque, drawn on an Australian bank or bank draft 
or arrange BPAY®, for the amount indicated on the Entitlement 
and Acceptance Form; or
(b)
if you only wish to accept part of your Entitlement:
(i)
(ii)
fill  in  the  number  of  Options  you  wish  to  accept  in  the  space 
provided on the Entitlement and Acceptance Form; and
attach your cheque, drawn on an Australian bank or bank draft 
or  arrange  BPAY®,  for  the  appropriate  application  monies  (at 
$0.001 per Option); or
(c)
if you do not wish to accept all or part of your Entitlement, you are not 
obliged to do anything.
Eligible  Shareholders  who  take  their  full  entitlement  will  not  be  entitled  to 
subscribe for additional Options.
7.5
Payment by cheque/bank draft
All cheques must be drawn on an Australian bank or bank draft made payable 
in Australian currency to “Vango Mining Ltd” and crossed “Not Negotiable”.
Your completed Entitlement and Acceptance Form and cheque must reach the 
Company’s  share  registry  at  the  address  set  out  in  the  Corporate  Directory  no 
later than 5:00pm AEST on the Closing Date.
7.6
Payment by BPAY®
For  payment  by  BPAY®,  please  follow  the  instructions  on  the  Entitlement  and 
Acceptance  Form.  You  can  only  make  a  payment  via  BPAY®  if  you  are  the 
holder of an account with an Australian financial institution that supports BPAY® 
transactions. Please note that should you choose to pay by BPAY®:
(a)
(b)
you  do  not  need  to  submit  the  Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  but 
are  taken  to  have  made  the  declarations  on  that  Entitlement  and 
Acceptance Form; and
if  you  do  not  pay  for  your  Entitlement  in  full,  you  are  deemed  to  have 
taken  up  your  Entitlement  in  respect  of  such  whole  number  of  Options 
which is covered in full by your application monies.
It  is  your  responsibility  to  ensure  that  your  BPAY®  payment  is  received  by  the 
share registry by no later than 5:00pm (EST) on the Closing Date. You should be 
aware  that  your  financial  institution  may  implement  earlier  cut-off  times  with 
regards  to  electronic  payment  and  you  should  therefore  take  this  into 
consideration when making payment. You may also have your own limit on the 
amount  that  can  be  paid  via  BPAY®.  It  is  your  responsibility  to  check  that  the 
amount you wish to pay via BPAY® does not exceed your limit. Any application 
monies  received for  more  than  your  final  allocation  of  Options  (only  where  the 
amount  is  $1.00  or  greater)  will  be  refunded.  No  interest  will  be  paid  on  any 
application monies received or refunded.
17
If you have multiple holdings you will have multiple BPAY® Customer Reference 
Numbers (CRNs).  To ensure you receive your Options in respect of that holding, 
you must use the specific biller code and the customer reference number shown 
on  each  personalised  Application  Form  when  paying  for  any  Options  that  you 
wish to apply for in respect of that holding.
Please note that if you inadvertently use the same Customer Reference Number 
for more than one of your applications, you will be deemed to have applied for 
the  entitlement  to  which  that  Customer  Reference  Number  applies  and  any 
excess amount will not be deemed to be an application for additional Options, 
and will be refunded.
7.7
No trading of entitlements
The  Offer  is  non-renounceable.    Accordingly,  a  Shareholder  may  not  sell  or 
transfer all or part of their Entitlement.
7.8
Underwriting
The Offer of up to $187,792 is fully underwritten by K S Capital Pty Limited 
(Underwriter). Refer to Section 11.4 for the material terms of the Underwriting 
Agreement with the Underwriter.  
 
The Directors of the Company and certain of the Company’s shareholders (or 
persons or entities associated with those Directors and shareholders) have 
agreed to sub-underwrite an aggregate of approximately $160,000.  The 
commitments of the sub-underwriters are as follows:
Name of sub-underwriter
Sub-underwriting 
commitment (% of
Shortfall)
Maximum number of
Options to be
acquired under sub-
underwriting
Zhenzhu Zhang
Bruce McInnes*
Shengqiang (Sean) Zhou
Ruogu Ma
Malcolm Smith
Christopher Kuznetsoff
Martine Beaumont
Total
17.43%
10.01%
5.33%
21.43%
17.44%
11.54%
2.02%
85.20%
32,725,000
18,800,000
10,000,000
40,250,000
32,750,000
21,675,000
3,800,000
160,000,000
*  Bruce  McInnes  is  anticipated  to  sub-underwrite  in  his  own  capacity  in  respect  of  approximately 
8.35 million Options and is anticipated to act as agent or bare trustee in respect of the remaining 
approximately 10.45 million Options for other sub-underwriters; none of whom are Directors, related 
parties or substantial Shareholders. 
 
The  Underwriter  may  appoint  additional  sub-underwriters  to  sub-underwrite  the 
Offer.  The Underwriter  is  responsible for  paying all fees and  commissions due to 
sub-underwriters  and  brokers  appointed  by  the  Underwriter  in  respect  of  the 
underwriting of the Offer.
7.9
Effect on control of the Company
If all Eligible Shareholders take up their Entitlements, the Offer is not expected to 
have a material effect on the control of the Company.
18
If  some  Eligible  Shareholders  do  not  take  up  or  are  not  issued  their  full 
Entitlements  under  the  Offer,  then  their  percentage  shareholding  (and 
consequently  voting rights)  in  the Company  will  be diluted  by  Shares  issued  on 
exercise of the Options.
As the Company is a listed company, any potential acquisition of Shares on the 
exercise  of  the  Options  will  be  subject  to  the  prohibitions  in  section  606  of  the 
Corporations Act.  Section 606 of the Corporations Act prevents the acquisition 
of  a  relevant  interest  in  voting  shares  in  a  company  if  the  transaction  would 
cause a person’s voting power in the company to increase:
(a)
from 20%, or below 20%, to more than 20%; or
(b)
from a starting point that is above 20% and below 90%.
Exceptions  to  this  provision  are  set  out  in  section  611  of  the  Corporations  Act, 
which  allows  such  transactions  (including  in  connection  with  the  exercise  of 
Options) to occur if, among other things, Shareholder approval is obtained, the 
affected  person  acquires  a  3%  relevant  interest  in  a  6  month  period  (the  so 
called ‘3% creep in 6 months’) or in the case of a rights issue if certain conditions 
are met (which conditions are not satisfied under this Offer).
The Underwriter is not presently a Shareholder of the Company and the extent to 
which  Shares  are  issued  upon  the  future  exercise  of  the  Options  acquired 
pursuant  to  the  underwriting will  increase  the  Underwriters’  voting power  in  the 
Company.    The  Underwriter  is  not  a  related  party  of  the  Company  for  the 
purpose of the Corporations Act.  The Underwriter’s present relevant interest and 
changes under several scenarios are set out in the table below and are based 
on the assumption that all Options issued pursuant to the Offer are exercised into 
Shares.
Event
Date of Prospectus
Completion of Entitlement Issue




Fully subscribed
75% subscribed
50% subscribed
0% subscribed
Shares held by
Voting power of
Underwriter
Underwriter
Nil
Nil
46,947,984*
93,895,968*
187,791,935*
0.00%
0.00%
8.33%
16.66%
33.33%
* Shares that will be held by the Underwriter assuming exercise of the Options acquired as Shortfall 
under the Offer and assuming all Shareholders exercise the Options they acquire under the Offer.  
 
The number of Shares held by the Underwriter and its voting power in the table 
above  show  the  potential  effect  of  the  underwriting  of  the  Offer  and  assumes  
all Options acquired by the Underwriter are converted into Shares.  However, it is 
unlikely  that  no  Shareholders  will  take  up  entitlements  under  the  Offer.    The 
underwriting  obligation  and  therefore  voting  power  of  the  Underwriter  will 
reduce  by  a  corresponding  amount  for  the  amount  of  entitlements  under  the 
Offer taken up by Eligible Shareholders, as shown in the table above.
In  addition,  it  is  noted  that  the  Underwriter  has  entered  into  various  sub-
underwriting  arrangements  with  other  parties  in  relation  to  subscribing  for  any 
Shortfall as described in Section 7.8.
19
The present relevant interest of the sub-underwriting parties comprising Directors 
and shareholders of the Company (other than Martine Beaumont) and changes 
to  their  relevant  interest  under  several  scenarios  are  set  out  in  the  table  below 
and  are based  on  the assumption  that  all  Options  issued  pursuant  to  the  Offer 
are exercised into Shares:
Shares and voting power held by relevant sub-underwriter
Event
Zhenzhu
Zhang
Bruce
McInnes
Shengqiang 
(Sean) Zhou
Ruogu Ma
Malcolm
Smith
Christopher 
Kuznetsoff
48,478,106 
Shares
12,350,918 
Shares
14,749,000 
Shares
59,653,100 
Shares
48,543,553 
Shares
32,104,303 
Shares
12.91% 
votes
3.29% 
votes
of
3.93% 
votes
of
15.88% 
votes
of
of
12.92% 
votes
8.55% 
votes
of
of
72,717,159 
Shares
18,526,377 
Shares
22,123,500 
Shares
89,479,650 
Shares
72,815,330 
Shares
48,156,455 
Shares
12.91% 
votes
of
3.29% 
votes
of
3.93% 
votes
of
15.88% 
votes
of
12.92% 
votes
of
8.55% 
votes
of
74,838,643 
Shares
21,682,511 
Shares
22,779,874 
Shares
92,085,509 
Shares
74,934,883 
Shares
13.28% 
votes
of
3.85% 
votes
of
4.04% 
votes
of
16.35% 
votes
of
13.30% 
votes
of
49,562, 
Shares
8.80% 
votes
165
of
76,960,127 
Shares
24,838,644 
Shares
23,436,248 
Shares
94,691,368  
Shares
77,054,436 
Shares
50,967,875 
Shares
13.66% 
votes
of
4.41% 
votes
of
4.16% 
votes
of
16.81% 
votes
of
13.68% 
votes
of
9.05% 
votes
of
81,203,095 
Shares
31,150,911 
Shares
24,748,997 
Shares
99,903,086 
Shares
81,293,542 
Shares
53,779,295 
Shares
14.41% 
votes
of
5.53% 
votes
of
4.39% 
votes
of
17.73% 
votes
of
14.43% 
votes
of
9.55% 
votes
of
Date 
Prospectus
of
Completion  of 
Entitlement 
Issue
  Fully
subscribed 
all 
by 
Shareholders 
including  the 
sub-
underwriters*
  75%
subscribed 
by 
all 
Shareholders 
including  the 
sub-
underwriters*
  50%
subscribed 
all 
by 
Shareholders 
including  the 
sub-
underwriters*
  0%
subscribed 
by 
all 
Shareholders 
including  the 
sub-
underwriters*
*  Shares  and  voting  power  that  will  be  held  by  the  relevant  sub-underwriter  assuming  exercise  of 
the Options acquired as Shortfall and assuming all Shareholders exercise the Options they acquire 
under the Offer.  Assumes all sub-underwriters are Eligible Shareholders.  Sub-underwriters may hold 
Options (and any Shares on exercise of those Options) through persons or entities associated with 
the relevant sub-underwriter.
In  addition  to  the  Directors  and  large  shareholders  of  the  Company  set  out  in 
the  table  above,  the  Underwriter  has  also  entered  into  a  sub-underwriting 
agreement  with  Martine  Beaumont  as  set  out  in  Section 7.8.  As  Martine 
Beaumont’s  voting  power  in  the  Company  is  less  than  5  per  cent,  potential 
changes to her relevant interest have not been included in the table above.
As  mentioned  above  in  this  Section 7.9,  section  606  of  the  Corporations  Act 
prevents a sub-underwriter from exercising their Options in circumstances where 
that exercise would result in the sub-underwriter increasing their relevant interest 
from  20%,  or  below  20%,  to  more  than  20%,  unless  the  relevant  sub-underwriter
20
complies with one of the exceptions in Section 611 of the Corporations Act, such 
as, for example, obtaining Shareholder approval for that increase.
The  Company  does  not  expect  these  underwriting  and  sub-underwriting 
arrangements to have any material effect on the control of the Company.
7.10
Dilutionary effect
Shareholders  should  note  that  if  they  do  not  participate  in  the  Offer,  their 
holdings,  upon  the  future  exercise  of  the  Options,  are  likely  to  be  diluted  by 
approximately 33.33% (as compared to their holdings and number of Shares on 
issue as at the date of the Prospectus). Examples of how the dilution may impact 
Shareholders, assuming the exercise of the Options, is set out in the table below:
Holder
Holding as at 
Record date
% at
Record
Date
Entitlements
under the
Offer
Holdings if 
Offer not 
taken Up
% post Offer
Shareholder 1
10,000,000
2.67%
5,000,000
10,000,000
Shareholder 2
5,000,000
1.33%
2,500,000
5,000,000
Shareholder 3
2,000,000
0.53%
1,000,000
2,000,000
Shareholder 4
1,000,000
0.27%
500,000
1,000,000
Shareholder 5
250,000
0.07%
125,000
250,000
1.79%
0.89%
0.35%
0.18%
0.04%
Notes:
1.
The dilutionary effect shown in the table is the maximum percentage on  the assumption 
that those Entitlements not accepted are placed under the Underwriting.  In the event all 
Entitlements  are  not  accepted  and  some  or  all  of  the  resulting  Shortfall  was  not 
subsequently  placed,  the  dilution  effect  for  each  Shareholder  not  accepting  their 
Entitlement would be a lesser percentage.
2.
This  table  assumes  no  existing  options  or  convertible  notes  are  exercised  and  converted 
into Shares by both the Record Date and the date of allotment under this Offer.
7.11
Shortfall
If you do not wish to take up any part of your Entitlement, you are not required 
to  take  any  action.  That  part  of  your  Entitlement  not  taken  up  will  form  part  of 
the  Shortfall  and  will  revert  to  the  Underwriter  and  be  treated  in  accordance 
with  the  Underwriting  Agreement  (Shortfall  Offer).    It  is  proposed  that  the 
allotment  of  the  Shortfall  under  the  Underwriting  Agreement  and  the  allotment 
of Securities under this Offer will occur on the same day. 
 
The Shortfall  Offer  is a  separate offer made pursuant  to  this Prospectus and will 
remain open for up to three months following the Closing Date.  The issue price 
for each Option to be issued under the Shortfall Offer  shall be $0.001 being the 
price at which Options have been offered under the Offer. 
 
The  Underwriter  reserves  the  right  to  place  the  Shortfall  at  their  absolute 
discretion  in  accordance  with  Underwriting  Agreement.    Accordingly,  do  not 
apply for Shortfall unless instructed to do so by the Underwriter. 
 
ASX listing
Application  for  Official  Quotation  of  the  Options  offered  pursuant  to  this 
Prospectus  will  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  timetable  set  out  at  the 
commencement  of  this  Prospectus.   If  ASX  does  not  grant  Official Quotation  of
7.12
21
the Options offered pursuant to this Prospectus before the expiration of 3 months 
after the date of issue of the Prospectus, (or such period as varied by the ASIC), 
the Company will not issue any Options and will repay all application monies for 
the  Options  within  the  time  prescribed  under  the  Corporations  Act,  without 
interest.
The fact that ASX may grant Official Quotation to the Options is not to be taken 
in  any  way  as  an  indication  of  the  merits  of  the  Company  or  the  Options  now 
offered for subscription.
7.13
Issue of Options
Options  issued  pursuant  to  the  Offer  will  be  issued  in  accordance with  the  ASX 
Listing Rules and timetable set out at the commencement of this Prospectus.
Pending  the  issue  of  the  Options  or  payment  of  refunds  pursuant  to  this 
Prospectus,  all  application  monies  will  be  held  by  the  Company  in  trust  for  the 
Applicants  in  a  separate  bank  account  as  required  by  the  Corporations  Act.  
The Company, however, will be entitled to retain all interest that accrues on the 
bank account and each Applicant waives the right to claim interest.
Holding  statements  for  Options  issued  under  the  Offer  will  be  mailed  in 
accordance  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  and  timetable  set  out  at  the 
commencement of this Prospectus as soon as practicable after their issue.
7.14
Overseas shareholders
This  Offer  does  not,  and  is  not  intended  to,  constitute  an  offer  in  any  place  or 
jurisdiction in which,  or  to  any  person  to whom,  it  would  not  be lawful  to make 
such an offer or to issue this Prospectus.
It  is  not  practicable  for  the  Company  to  comply  with  the  securities  laws  of 
overseas jurisdictions having regard to the number of overseas Shareholders, the 
number and value of Options these Shareholders would be offered and the cost 
of  complying  with 
jurisdiction.  
Accordingly,  the  Offer  is  not  being  extended  and  Options  will  not  be  issued  to 
Shareholders with a registered address which is outside Australia.
requirements
regulatory
in  each
relevant
Shareholders  resident  in  Australia  holding  Shares  on  behalf  of  persons  who  are 
resident  overseas  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  taking  up  an  Entitlement 
under the Offer does not breach regulations in the relevant overseas jurisdiction. 
Return of a duly completed Entitlement and Acceptance Form will be taken by 
the Company  to  constitute a  representation  that  there has been  no breach of 
those regulations.
This Prospectus may not be distributed in the United States.
7.15
Market Prices of Options on ASX
The Company does not currently have any listed Options on issue.
The Company is a disclosing entity for the purposes of the Corporations Act and 
its  quoted  securities,  including  its  Shares,  are  enhanced  disclosure  securities 
quoted on the ASX.
The highest,  lowest  and  last  market  sale  prices  of  the  Shares  on  ASX  during  the 
three  months  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  lodgement  of  this  Prospectus 
with the ASIC and the most recent respective dates of those sales were:
22
Highest
Lowest
Last
7.16
Taxation implications
$0.055
$0.036
$0.049
6 July 2016
22 August 2016
2 September 2016
Shareholders  should  obtain  independent  advice  on  the  taxation  implications 
arising out of their participation in the Offer.
7.17
Enquiries
Any  questions  concerning  the  Offer  should  be  directed  to  Mark  Camilleri, 
Company Secretary, on +61 407 666 937.
23
8.
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER
8.1
Purpose of the Offer and use of funds
The  purpose  of  the  Offer  is  to  raise  up  to  $187,792  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the 
Offer  and  any  excess  funds  arising  from  the  Offer  will  be  applied  to  general 
working  capital  and  corporate  overheads.    Any  funds  raised  from  the  issue  of 
Shares on exercise of the Options will be applied as follows:
(a)
(b)
from  each  dollar  raised,  75  per  cent  will  be  applied  to  paying  down 
debt up to $4.5 million.  Section  11.3(a) sets out the material terms of this 
debt;
from each dollar raised, 20 per cent until the debt has been repaid, and 
thereafter 95 per cent, will be applied to development and exploration, 
including of  the  K2  deposit  and  the  Trident  deposit  forming  part  of  the 
Plutonic Dome Project;  and
(c)
from  each  dollar  raised,  the  remaining  5  per  cent  will  be  applied    to 
general working capital and corporate overheads.
Refer  to  Section  11.10  of  this  Prospectus  for  further  details  relating  to  the 
estimated expenses of the Offer.
The above is a statement of current intentions as of the date of this  Prospectus.  
As  with  any  budget,  intervening  events  (including  techncial  success  or  failure) 
and  new  circumstances  have  the  potential  to  affect  the  manner  in  which  the 
funds are ultimately applied.  The Board reserves the right to alter the way funds 
are applied on this basis.
Any additional funds raised from the participation of Eligible Shareholders in the 
Offer  following  the  exercise  of  their  options  prior  to  the  Record  Date  will  be 
applied to the Company’s general working capital and administration expenses.
8.2
Condensed Balance Sheet
The  unaudited  condensed  balance  sheet  as  at  31  December  2015  and  the 
unaudited pro-forma balance sheet as at 31 December 2015 shown below have 
been prepared on the basis of the accounting policies normally adopted by the 
Company and reflect the changes to its financial position.
The  pro-forma  condensed  balance  sheet  has  been  prepared  to  provide 
investors with information on  the assets and liabilities of  the Company  and  pro-
forma assets and liabilities of the Company as noted below.  The historical and 
pro-forma financial information is presented in an abbreviated form, insofar as it 
does  not  include  all  of  the  disclosures  required  by  Australian  Accounting 
Standards applicable to annual financial statements.
The  pro-forma  unaudited  condensed  balance  sheet  as  at  31 December 2015 
has been adjusted for the following transactions or events:
(a)
the  Offer  of  187,791,935  Options  pursuant  to  this  Prospectus  to  raise  up 
to $187,792; and
(b)
the estimated expenses of the Offer of approximately $80,000.
24
As  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  Options  will  be  exercised  and  the  exercise 
price received by the Company, the pro-forma unaudited condensed balance 
sheet does not include the exercise price for the Options.
ASSETS 
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents1 
Trade and other receivables 
Other 
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets 
Investment accounted for using the equity method 
Exploration evaluation expenditure 
Total Non-Current Assets 
 
Total Assets
LIABILITIES 
Current Liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Borrowings 
Employee benefits 
Total Current Liabilities
Total Liabilities
Net Assets
EQUITY 
Issued capital1 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
Total Equity
Unaudited 
31 Dec 15
Unaudited 
Pro-forma
31 Dec 15
$
$
239,191 
99,591 
116,499 
455,281
3,144,166 
4,978,145 
8,122,311 
 
8,577,592
898,300 
174,534 
65,059 
1,137,893
1,137,893
7,439,699
47,014,061 
14,067,324 
(53,641,686) 
7,439,699
346,983 
99,591 
116,499 
563,073 
 
 
3,144,166 
4,978,145 
8,122,311 
 
8,685,384 
 
 
 
898,300 
174,534 
65,059 
1,137,893 
 
1,137,893 
 
7,547,491 
 
 
47,014,061 
14,175,116 
(53,641,686) 
7,547,491
1.
The pro-forma transaction results in an increase in cash ($187,792, less costs $80,000) and a 
corresponding increase in the option reserve of $107,792
Notes to pro-forma condensed balance sheet
The pro-forma balance sheet:
(a)
(b)
(c)
includes  gross  proceeds  raised  pursuant  to  the  Offer  (less  estimated 
Offer costs);
assumes that no existing options are exercised prior to the Record Date 
for this Offer;  and
not
take
into  account  any
does 
transactions  between 
31 December 2015  and  the  date  of  this  Prospectus.    This  pro-forma 
condensed  balance  sheet  only  reflects  the  transactions  the  subject  of 
this Prospectus.
Material  balance  changes  and  transactions  for  the  period  since  the  review 
date, 31 December 2015 include:
25
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
as  announced  on  14  January 2016,  the  part  placement  of  shortfall 
shares from its non-renounceable pro-rata entitlement issue pursuant to 
an  Offer  Memorandum  dated  18 September 2015,  which  part 
placement of shortfall shares raised $750,600;
as  announced  on  12 April 2016,  the  Company  completed  discussions 
with  Directors  and  a  number  of  major  shareholders  who  agreed  to 
commit  $4.5 million  towards  a  debt  facility  of  $6 million  to  assist  the 
funding of mining the Plutonic Dome Project and the  upfront portion of 
the  purchase price  ($2.2 million)  for  the remaining equity  of  Dampier  in 
the  Plutonic  Dome  Project.    The  remaining  $1.5 million  was  anticipated 
to  be  placed  with  third  parties  as  and  when  required.    Please  refer  to 
Section 11.3  which  sets  out  the  funds  received  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus and certain material terms of those debt facilities;
as  announced  through  the  issue  of  an  Appendix  3B  on  6 July 2016,  the 
Company issued 2,299,550 Shares at an issue price of $0.02 per Share on 
the conversion of certain convertible notes;  and
as  announced  on  25 August 2016,  the  Company  acquired  from 
Dampier  its  interest  in  DPPL,  the  holder  of  the  Plutonic  Dome  project.  
Consideration for the acquisition was an upfront payment of $2.2 million 
with up to an additional $4 million payable as contingent consideration, 
subject  to  aggregate  production  levels.    In  addition,  Dampier  will  be 
paid a royalty capped at $2 million.  The closing of this transaction was 
further to announcements made on 19 January 2016 and 12 May 2016.
8.3
Effect of the Offer
The  effect  of  the  Offer  on  the  capital  structure  of  the  Company,  assuming  all 
Entitlements  are  accepted  and  no  Convertible  Notes  are  converted  and  no 
Options are exercised prior to the Record Date, is set out below.
Shares
Shares currently on issue
Shares offered pursuant to the Offer
Number
375,583,869
Nil
Total Shares on issue after completion of the Offer
375,583,869
Options
Options currently on issue - exercisable at $0.26 on or before
7 March 2017
New Options offered pursuant to the Offer
Total Options on issue after completion of the Offer
Convertible Notes
Number
250,000
187,791,935
188,041,935
Number
26
Convertible Notes currently on issue
Convertible Notes offered pursuant to the Offer
115,000
Nil
Total Convertible Notes on issue after completion of the Offer
115,000
The  capital  structure  on  a  fully  diluted  basis  as  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus 
would  be  381,583,869  Shares  and  on  completion  of  the  Offer  (assuming  all 
Entitlements  are  accepted  and  no  options  are  exercised,  and  no  convertible 
notes  are  converted,  prior  to  the  Record  Date)  would  be  569,375,804  Shares, 
assuming all Options are exercised.
No Shares  or options  on  issue  are subject  to  escrow  restrictions,  either voluntary 
or ASX imposed.
The principal effects of the Offer on cash reserves will be as follows:
(a)
(b)
assuming all  Options offered  under  the  Prospectus are issued,  the cash 
reserves of the Company will increase by $107,792 (after deducting the 
estimated  expenses  of  the  Offer)  immediately  after  completion  of  the 
Offer; and
assuming  all  Options  offered  under  the  Prospectus  are  exercised,  the 
cash reserves of the Company will increase by a further $11,267,516.10.  
There  is  no  guarantee  that  the  Options  will  be  exercised  and  the 
exercise price received by the Company.
8.4
Details of substantial shareholders
Based on the publically available information and the Company’s share register 
prior  to  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  those  persons  which  (together  with  their 
associates) have a relevant interest in 5% or more of the Shares on issue are set 
out below:
Shareholder
Ruogu Ma
Malcolm John Smith
Zhenzhu Zhang
Christopher Kuznetsoff
Shares
59,653,100
48,543,553
48,478,106
32,104,303
%
15.88%
12.92%
12.91%
8.55%
The Offer will have no effect on the quantity of Shares held by these substantial 
Shareholders as only Options are being issued.  The impact of the Offer, and the 
underwriting arrangements, on control of the Company is set out in Section 7.9.  
Many  of  the  substantial  Shareholders  will  also  be  sub-underwriters  to  the  Offer.  
Their  various  sub-underwriting  commitments  are  described  in  Section 7.8  and 
the  impact  of  the  sub-underwriting  commitments  on  the  control  of  the 
Company is set out in Section 7.9.
27
9.
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SECURITIES
9.1
Options
(a)
Exercise Price
The exercise price of each Option is $0.06 (Exercise Price)
(b)
Entitlement
Each  Option  entitles  the  holder  to  subscribe  (in  cash)  for  one  Share  in 
the capital of the Company.
(c)
Option Period
The  Options  expire  at  5:00pm  AEST  on  15 March 2018  (Expiry  Date).  
Subject to paragraph 9.1(h), Options may be exercised at any time prior 
to the Expiry Date and Options not so exercised will automatically lapse 
on the Expiry Date.
(d)
Ranking of Share Allotted on Exercise of Option
Each Share allotted as a result of the exercise of any Option will, subject 
to the Constitution of the Company,  rank in all respects pari passu with 
the existing Shares in the capital of the Company on issue at the date of 
issue.
(e)
Quotation
The Company will apply for Official Quotation of the Options.
(f)
Voting
A  registered  owner  of  an  Option  (Option  Holder)  will  not  be  entitled  to 
attend or vote at any meeting of the members of the Company unless 
they  are,  in  addition  to  being  an  Option  Holder,  a  member  of  the 
Company.
(g)
Transfer of an Option
Options are transferrable at any time prior to the Expiry Date. This right is 
subject  to  any  restrictions  on  the  transfer  of  Options  that  may  be 
imposed  by  the  ASX  in  circumstances  where  the  Company  is  listed  on 
the ASX.
(h)
Exercise Date
A Notice of Exercise is only effective on and from the later of the date of 
receipt of the Notice of Exercise and the date of receipt of the payment 
of  the  Exercise  Price  for  each  Option  being  exercised  in  cleared  funds 
(Exercise Date).
(i)
Method of Exercise of an Option
(i)
The Company will provide to each Option Holder a notice that 
is  to  be  completed  when  exercising  the  Options  (Notice  of 
Exercise).  Options  may  be  exercised  by  the  Option  Holder  by 
completing the Notice of Exercise and forwarding the same to
28
the Company’s share registry  to be received prior to the Expiry 
Date.  The  Notice of  Exercise  must  state  the  number  of  Options 
exercised and the consequent number of Shares to be allotted; 
which number of Options must be:
(A)
(B)
a  multiple  of  5,000  if  only  part  of  the  Option  Holder’s 
total Options are exercised;  or
the  total  of  all  Options  held  by  that  Option  Holder, 
including  if  the  total  number  of  Options  held  by  an 
Option  Holder  is  less  than  5,000  or  a  number  which  is 
not a multiple of 5,000.
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
The Notice of Exercise forwarded by an Option Holder must be 
accompanied 
accordance  with 
paragraph 9.1(h) for the relevant number of Options exercised.
payment
by
in
Subject to paragraph 9.1(i)(i) above, the exercise of less than all 
of an Option Holder’s Options will not prevent the Option Holder 
from  exercising  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  balance  of  the 
Option  Holder’s  entitlement  under 
the  Option  Holder’s 
remaining Options.
Within  14  business  days  from  the  date  the  Option  Holder 
properly  exercises  Options  held  by  the  Option  Holder,  the 
Company shall issue and allot to the Option Holder that number 
of Shares so subscribed for by the Option Holder.
If  the  Company  is  listed  on  the  ASX,  the  Company  will  within 
three  (3) business days from the date of issue and allotment of 
Shares pursuant to the exercise of an Option,  apply to the ASX 
for, and use its best endeavours to obtain, Official Quotation of 
all  such  Shares,  in  accordance  with  the  Corporations  Act  and 
the ASX Listing Rules.
The  Company  will  generally  comply  with  the  requirements  of 
the ASX Listing Rules in relation to the timetables imposed when 
quoted  Options  are  due  to  expire.  Where  there 
is  any 
inconsistency between the timetables outlined herein regarding 
the expiry of the Options and the timetable outlined in the ASX 
Listing Rules, the timetable outlined in the ASX Listing Rules shall 
apply.
(j)
Reconstruction
reconstruction  or
the  event  of  a
In 
(including 
consolidation,  sub-division,  reduction  or  return)  of  the  issued  capital  of 
the  Company,  all  rights  of  the  Option  Holder  will  be  changed  to  the 
extent  necessary  to  comply  with  the  Corporations  Act  and  ASX  Listing 
Rules applying to the reconstruction or reorganisation of capital, at the 
time of the reconstruction or reorganisation.
reorganisation
(k)
Participation in New Share Issues
There  are no  participation  rights  or  entitlements  inherent  in  the  Options 
to  participate  in  any  new  issues  of  capital  which  may  be  made  or 
offered  by  the  Company  to  its  shareholders  from  time  to  time  prior  to
29
the Expiry Date unless and until the Options are exercised. The Company 
will ensure that prior to the Expiry Date, the record date for the purposes 
of determining entitlements to any new such issue, will be at least five (5) 
business days after such new issues are announced (or such other date 
if  required  under  the  ASX  Listing  Rules)  in  order  to  afford  the  Option 
Holder  an  opportunity  to  exercise  the  Options  held  by  the  Option 
Holder.
(l)
No Change of Options’ Exercise Price or Number of Underlying Options
There  are  no  rights  to  change  the  Exercise  Price  or  the  number  of 
underlying Shares if there is a bonus issue to the holders of Shares. If the 
Company makes a pro rata issue of securities (except a bonus issue) to 
the holders of ordinary shares (other than an issue in lieu or in satisfaction 
of  dividends  or  by  way  of  dividend  investment)  the  Exercise  Price  shall 
be reduced according to the formula specified in the ASX Listing Rules.
9.2
Shares
The following is a summary of the more significant rights and liabilities attaching 
to Shares being the underlying securities of the Options to be issued pursuant to 
this  Prospectus.    This  summary  is  not  exhaustive  and  does  not  constitute  a 
definitive statement of the rights and liabilities of Shareholders.  To obtain such a 
statement, persons should seek independent legal advice.
Full  details  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to  Shares  are  set  out  in  the 
Constitution,  a  copy  of  which  is  available  for  inspection  at  the  Company’s 
registered office during normal business hours.
9.2.1  General meetings
Shareholders are entitled to be present in person, or by proxy, attorney 
or  representative  to  attend  and  vote  at  general  meetings  of  the 
Company.
Shareholders may requisition meetings in accordance with section 249D 
of the Corporations Act and the Constitution of the Company.
9.2.2
Voting rights
Subject  to  any  rights  or  restrictions  for  the  time  being  attached  to  any 
class or classes of shares, at general meetings of Shareholders or classes 
of Shareholders:
(a)
(b)
(c)
each  Shareholder  entitled  to  vote  may  vote  in  person  or  by 
proxy, attorney or representative;
on a show of hands, every person present who is a Shareholder 
or a proxy, attorney or representative of a Shareholder has one 
vote; and
on a poll, every person present who is a Shareholder or a proxy, 
attorney  or  representative  of  a  Shareholder  shall,  in  respect  of 
each  fully  paid  Share  held  by  him,  or  in  respect  of  which  he  is 
appointed  a  proxy,  attorney  or  representative,  have  one  vote 
for each Share held.
30
9.2.3
Dividend rights
Subject  to  the  Corporation  Act,  the  ASX  Listing  Rules,  the  rights  of  any 
preference  Shareholders  or  the  holders  of  any  Shares  with  special 
dividend arrangements,  the Directors may  from  time to  time declare a 
dividend to be paid to the Shareholders entitled to the dividend which 
shall  be  payable  on  all  Shares  according  to  the  proportion  that  the 
amount  paid  (not  credited)  is  of  the  total  amounts  paid  and  payable 
(excluding amounts credited) in respect of such Shares.
No dividend shall carry  interest as against the Company.  The Directors 
may set aside out of the profits of the Company any amounts that they 
may  determine  as  reserves,  to  be  applied  at  the  discretion  of  the 
Directors, for any purpose for which the profits of the Company may be 
properly applied.
Subject to the ASX Listing Rules and the Corporations Act, the Company 
may,  by  resolution of  the Directors,  implement  a  dividend  reinvestment 
plan  on  such  terms  and  conditions  as  are  referred  to  in  the  resolution 
and  which  plan  provides  for  any  dividend  which  the  Directors  may 
declare  from  time  to  time  and  payable  on  Shares  which  are 
participating Shares in the dividend reinvestment plan, less any amount 
which the Company shall either pursuant to the Constitution or any law 
be  entitled  or  obliged  to  retain,  be  applied  by  the  Company  to  the 
payment of the subscription price of Shares.
9.2.4  Winding-up
If the Company is wound up, the liquidator may, with the authority of a 
special  resolution,  divide  among  the  Shareholders  in  kind  the  whole  or 
any part of the property of the Company, and may for that purpose set 
such value as he considers fair upon any property to be so divided, and 
may  determine  how  the  division  is  to  be  carried  out  as  between  the 
Shareholders or different classes of Shareholders.
The  liquidator  may,  with  the  authority  of  a  special  resolution,  vest  the 
whole  or  any  part  of  any  such  property  in  trustees  upon  such  trusts  for 
the benefit of the contributories as the liquidator thinks fit, but so that no 
Shareholder  is  compelled  to  accept  any  shares  or  other  securities  in 
respect of which there is any liability.
9.2.5
Shareholder liability
As the Shares issued pursuant to the exercise of the Options will be fully 
paid  shares,  they  will  not  be  subject  to  any  calls  for  money  by  the 
Directors and will therefore not become liable for forfeiture.
9.2.6
Transfer of shares
Generally, Shares are freely transferable, subject to formal requirements.  
The Directors may refuse to register any transfer of Shares (other than an 
ASX settlement transfer) where the ASX Listing Rules permit or require the 
Company to do so.
9.2.7
Future increase in capital
Without prejudice to any special right previously conferred on the holder 
of  an  existing  Share  or  class  of  Shares,  unissued  Shares  are  under  the
31
control  of  the  Directors  of  the Company.    Subject  to  the  restrictions  on 
the  issue  or  grant  of  Securities  contained  in  the  ASX  Listing  Rules,  the 
Constitution and the Corporations Act, the Directors may issue Shares at 
the  issue  price  that  the  Directors  determine  and  with  such  rights  or 
restrictions as the Directors  shall, in their absolute discretion, determine.
9.2.8
Variation of rights
If at any time the share capital is divided into different classes of shares, 
the rights attached to any class (unless otherwise provided by the terms 
of  issue  of  the  Shares  of  that  class),  whether  or  not  the  Company  is 
being  wound  up,  may  be  varied  with  the  consent  in  writing  of  the 
holders  of  three  quarters  of  the  issued  shares  of  that  class,  or  if 
authorised by a special resolution passed at a separate meeting of the 
holders of the shares of that class.
9.2.9
Alteration of constitution
In accordance with the Corporations Act, the Constitution can only be 
amended  by  a  special  resolution  passed  by  at  least  three  quarters  of 
Shareholders present and voting at the general meeting.  In addition, at 
least  28 days  written  notice  specifying  the  intention  to  propose  the 
resolution as a special resolution must be given.
32
10.
RISK FACTORS
10.1
Introduction
The Options offered under this Prospectus are considered highly speculative.  An 
investment in the Company is not risk free and the Directors strongly recommend 
potential  investors  to  consider  the  risk  factors  described  below,  together  with 
information  contained  elsewhere  in  this  Prospectus  and  to  consult  their 
professional  advisers  before  deciding  whether  to  apply  for  Options  pursuant  to 
this Prospectus.
There  are  specific  risks  which  relate  directly  to  the  Company’s  business.    In 
addition,  there  are  other  general  risks,  many  of  which  are  largely  beyond  the 
control of the Company and the Directors.  The risks identified in this  section, or 
other risk factors, may have a material impact on the financial performance of 
the Company and the market price of the Shares and Options.
The following is not intended to be an exhaustive list of the risk factors to which 
the Company is exposed.
10.2
Company specific
(a)
Going Concern/solvency
The  ability  of  the  Company  to  continue  as  a  going  concern  is 
dependent  upon  the  Company  being  able  to  raise  additional  funds 
(beyond  this  raising)  as  required  to  fund  debt  repayments,  ongoing 
exploration  commitments  or  potential  production  and  for  working 
capital.  The  Company,  like  many  junior  resource  companies,  currently 
relies  on  capital  markets  and  shareholder  and  third  party  loans  for 
access to capital and its ability to raise capital is influenced by the gold, 
bauxite  and  other  commodity  market  generally  and  other  economic 
factors including the cost of production.
No assurances can be made that appropriate capital or funding, if and 
when needed, will be available on terms favourable to the Company or 
at  all.    If  the  Company  is  unable  to  obtain  additional  financing  as 
needed,  it may  be required  to  reduce,  delay  or  suspend its operations 
or the Company could face solvency issues. This could have a material 
adverse effect on the Company’s activities and potentially its solvency.
Further, the significant majority of the net funds anticipated to be raised 
under this Offer are in connection with the exercise price of the Options 
if  the  holders  of  the  Options  choose  to  exercise  them.    There  is  no 
guarantee  that  the  price  of  the  Shares  will  rise  to  or  maintain  a  price 
that will exceed the exercise price of the Options or, if it does, that any 
Options will  be  exercised.    Accordingly,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the 
exercise price of the Options will be received by the Company.
If  approximately  4.5%  of  the  Options  are  not  exercised  by  the  end  of 
2016,  and  the  Company’s  discussions  with  third  parties  as  set  out  in 
Section 11.3(a)  and  11.3(d)  do  not  result  in  binding  commitments  to 
advance  sufficient  funds,  the  Company  will  need  to  have  found  other 
sources of capital to fund its anticipated exploration and development 
activities  and  to  meet  its  interest  repayment  obligations  in  respect  of 
debt;  it  is  anticipated  that  any  such  capital  would  take  the  form  of 
additional  support  from  shareholders,  likely  to  be  in  the  nature  of
33
additional  debt  or  through  further  debt  or  equity  raisings.  Should  the 
Company  be  unable  to  raise  capital  as  and  when  required,  there  is  a 
material  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  Company  will  be  able  to 
continue as a going concern.
Any additional equity financing (including under this Offer) may:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
be dilutive to Shareholders (see further Section 7.10);
be undertaken at lower prices than the current market price; or
involve 
operations and business strategy.
restrictive  covenants  which
limit
the  Company’s
Any  additional  debt  funding is likely  to  be on terms at least  as onerous 
as those set out in Section 11.3(a).
As  set  out  in  Section 11.3(a),  the  Company  has  received  part  of  the 
funds in connection with the debt facilities announced in April.  There is 
no guarantee if and when the remaining funds will be received by the 
Company.    In  respect  of  certain  funds  already  received,  while  the 
Company  has  agreed  initial  terms,  the  Company  is  in  the  process  of 
negotiating and  executing full form loan agreements with the relevant 
lenders.    These  lenders  may  insist  on  terms  which  may  be  substantially 
different  to  those  anticipated  by  the  Company  as  set  out 
in 
Section 11.3(a), or may not proceed with their remaining commitments.
There is no guarantee that any discussions with third parties to advance 
funds to the Company will result in binding commitments being entered 
into.
(b)
Potential for dilution
Upon  implementation  of  the  Offer,  assuming  all  Entitlements  are 
accepted the number of outstanding options will increase from 250,000 
currently  on  issue  to  188,041,935  and  this  has  the  potential  to  increase 
the  number  of  shares  on  issue  from  375,583,869  to  563,625,804.    This 
means  that  each  Option  exercised  will  represent  a  lower  proportion  of 
the ownership of the Company.
Exercise of the outstanding options and the Options under this Offer will 
dilute current shareholdings in the Company.  However, it is not possible 
to predict how many Options may be exercised and at that time what 
the value of  the Company  or  a  Share will  be and  the  Directors  do  not 
make any representation as to such matters.
The  last  trading  price  of  Shares  on  ASX  prior  to  this  Prospectus  being 
lodged  is not  a  reliable  indicator as to  the potential  trading price after 
implementation of the Offer.
(c)
Quotation risk
insufficient  number  of  Eligible  Shareholders  take  up  their 
If  an 
Entitlements  under  this  Offer,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  Offer  will  not  be 
satisfy 
spread.  
Consequently, there is a risk that the Options will not  be quoted.  If ASX 
does  not  admit  the  Options  to  Official  Quotation  before  the  expiration 
of 3 months after the date of issue of this Prospectus, or such period as
the  ASX  conditions
to  quotation
relating
to
34
varied by the ASIC, the Company will not allot or issue any Options and 
will  repay  all  moneys  received  in  connection  with  Applications  for  the 
Options within the time prescribed under the Corporations Act, without 
interest.
(d)
Underwriting risk
The Company has entered into the Underwriting Agreement, subject to 
certain  terms  and  conditions.    If  certain  conditions  are  not  satisfied  or 
certain  events  occur,  the  Underwriter  may  terminate  the  Underwriting 
Agreement.
If  the  Underwriting  Agreement  is  terminated  and  the  Offer  does  not 
proceed  or  the  Offer  does  not  raise  the  funds  (including  through  the 
exercise of the Options) required by the Company, the Company could 
need  to  find  alternative  financing  to  meeting  its  funding  requirements.  
There is no guarantee that alternative funding could be sourced, either 
at all or on satisfactory terms and conditions.
(e)
Gold, bauxite and other commodity price volatility
The  prices  of  gold,  bauxite  and  other  commodities  inherently  fluctuate 
and  are  affected  by  numerous  factors  beyond  the  control  of  the 
Company.  These  factors  include  world  and  regional  demand  for  and 
supply of the commodity, forward selling and other hedging activities by 
producers,  the  level  of  production  costs  in  major  gold  producing  or 
bauxite  producing  regions,  gold  reserve  movements  at  central  banks 
and speculative trading. Moreover, commodity prices are also affected 
by  macroeconomic  factors  such  as  expectations  regarding  inflation, 
interest rates and global and regional economic activity.
It  is  not  useful  to  predict  or  quantify  the  effect  of  these  factors, 
individually  or  in  aggregate,  on  the  gold  price  or  the  bauxite  price  as 
the  occurrence  of  those  factors,  and  the  level  of  impact  that  those 
factors are likely to have, are beyond the control of the Company.
However,  a  sustained  drop  in  the market  price  of  gold  or  bauxite  may 
adversely  affect  the  financial  performance  and  position  of  the 
Company as:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
it  may  become  less  profitable  for  the  Company  to  pursue  its 
gold exploration operations;
less  funds  will  be  available  to  conduct  exploration  and 
development activities;
the  Company’s  tenement  interests  may  need  to  be  written 
down  due  to  the  determination  that  future  cash  flows  do  not 
recover the carrying value; and
in  the  event  that  the  Company  successfully  completes  the 
exploration  stage  of  its  projects,  it  may  not  be  economically 
feasible for the Company to commence mining and processing 
activities.
(f)
Mining industry risks
35
Mineral  exploration  and  mining  may  be  hampered  by  circumstances 
beyond  the  control  of  the  Company,  and  are  speculative  operations 
which by their nature are subject to a number of inherent risks, including 
the following:
(i)
Exploration risks
Currently,  other  than  in  connection  with  the  K2  deposit  forming part  of 
the  Plutonic  Dome  Project,  the  Company’s  main  activity 
in 
exploration. The success of the Company in this activity depends on the 
delineation of economically minable reserves and resources, access to 
required development capital, movement in the price of commodities, 
securing  and  maintaining  title  to  the  Company’s  existing  exploration 
and  proposed  mining  tenements  and  obtaining  all  consents  and 
approvals necessary for the conduct of its exploration activities.
is
Exploration on the Company’s existing exploration and proposed mining 
tenements may be unsuccessful, and therefore may result in a reduction 
of  the value of  those  tenements,  diminution in  the cash  reserves of  the 
Company and possible relinquishment of tenements.
There is no guarantee that the Company will discover additional gold or 
bauxite  deposits  at  the  locations  explored  by  the  Company  or  that 
those deposits will be in commercially viable or be economically viable.
(ii)
Production risks
There are inherent risks and uncertainties associated with developing a 
mine from the exploration stage through to production, including those 
which  arise  out  of  dealings  with  counterparties  (including  joint  venture 
partners, mineral processors and financiers) and Government Agencies, 
and  those  which  are  beyond  the  control  of  the  mine  developer, 
including adverse weather conditions and interruptions in supply chains 
or  transport  routes.  During  the  development  period  the  anticipated 
economic  feasibility  of  the  mine  may  deteriorate  owing  to  cyclical  or 
sustained changes in, amongst other things, commodity prices, funding 
costs or cost inflation associated with capital expenditure. Although it is 
the  Company’s  plan  to  concentrate  on  projects  with  the  potential  for 
near  term  production,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  any  project  will 
achieve  production  within 
time  periods 
contemplated  by  the Company,  in  a  faster  time period  than  alternate 
projects available to the Company, or at all.
time  period  or
the
(iii)
Resource estimates
Resource  estimates  are  expressions  of  judgment  based  on  knowledge, 
experience and industry practice.
There  are  risks  associated  with  such  estimates.  Resource  estimates  are 
necessarily  imprecise  and  depend  to  some  extent  on  interpretations, 
which  may  ultimately  prove  to  be  inaccurate  and  require  adjustment. 
Downward  adjustments  to  resource  estimates  could  adversely  impact 
the  Company’s  future  plans  and  ultimately  its  financial  performance 
and value.
36
The  Company  confirms  that  resource  estimates,  where  made  by  the 
Company, were appropriate when made, but may change significantly 
when new information becomes available.
(iv)
Regulatory and co-operation requirement
It  may  not  always  be  possible  for  the  Company  to  exploit  successful 
discoveries (including the K2 deposit forming part of the Plutonic Dome 
Project)  which  may  be  made  in  areas  in  which  the  Company  has  an 
interest.  Such  exploitation  would  involve  obtaining  the  necessary 
licences  or  clearances  from  relevant  authorities  that  may  require 
conditions  to  be  satisfied  and/or  the  exercise  of  discretions  by  such 
authorities.  It  may  or  may  not  be  possible  for  such  conditions  to  be 
satisfied.  Further,  the  decision  to  proceed  to  further  exploitation  may 
require participation of other companies whose interests and objectives 
may not be the same as the Company’s.
The  inability  of  the  Company  to  obtain  the  necessary  regulatory  and 
third  party  consents  and  cooperation 
the 
Company’s  activities may  impede or  frustrate  the Company’s  efforts in 
advancing  those  activities.  This  in  turn  may  adversely  impact  the 
Company’s  business  plans  and  in  turn  its  financial  performance  and 
value.
in  connection  with
As noted in Section 11.3(e), while the Company considers that it has all 
required  permits  for  its  current  activities,  the  Company  has  requested 
that the status of its permits are confirmed by the Department of Mining 
and  Petroleum.    If  any  issues  are  discovered  in  connection  with  the 
Company’s  permits,  this  could  result  in  additional  expense  or  time  to 
rectify.
(v)
Native title and title risks
The effect of the native title laws that presently apply in Australia is that 
exploration  and  mining 
tenement  applications  and  project 
developments may be affected by native title claims or procedures. This 
may preclude or delay granting of permits to explore or mine on some 
tenements.  The  presence  of  Aboriginal  sacred  sites  on  tenements  held 
by  the  Company  may  limit  or  preclude  exploration  or  mining  activity 
within  the  sphere  of  influence  of  those  sites  and  delays  and  expenses 
may be incurred in obtaining clearances.
The  funds  raised  under  the  Offer  will  assist  the  Company  to  keep  its 
tenement interests in good standing in the short-to-medium term.
Land access has been negotiated with land owners on a number of the 
project  areas  in  Australia.  In  respect  of  the  Plutonic  Dome  Project,  it  is 
contemplated  that  access  will  be  provided  under  a  number  of 
agreements with third parties. Access to other project areas will have to 
be  negotiated  with  other  land  owners  and/or  government  authorities. 
Interests in tenements in Australia and Laos are governed by legislation 
in  their  respective  jurisdictions  and  are  evidenced  by  the  granting  of 
licences or leases. Each licence or lease is for a specific term and carries 
with  it  reporting  commitments,  as  well  as  other  conditions  requiring 
compliance,  eg  environmental  obligations  and  minimum  expenditure 
requirements.  Consequently,  the  Company  could  lose  title  to  or  its 
interest  in  tenements  if  licence  conditions  are  not  met  or  if  insufficient
37
funds are  available  to  meet  expenditure  commitments or  alternatively, 
be subject to fines imposed by the relevant authority.
(g)
Key personnel
Recruiting  and  retaining  qualified  personnel  are  important  to  the 
Company’s  success.    The  number  of  persons  skilled  in  the  exploration 
and  development  of  mining  properties  is  limited  and  competition  for 
such persons is strong.
Currently, the Company has personnel who are key to its business. There 
can be no assurance that the Company will be able to attract or retain 
sufficiently  qualified  personnel  on  a  timely  basis.  The  inability  to  do  so 
could have  a  significant  adverse  impact  on  the financial  performance 
of  the  Company  and  its  ability  to  implement  its  business  plans  and 
capitalise on both its existing and potential investment opportunities.
(h)
Risk in connection with DPPL
As  announced  on  25  August  2016,  the  Company  has  now  completed 
the  acquisition  of  DPPL.    The  transaction  was  effected  through  a  share 
sale.    As  with  all  transactions  of  this  type,  all  rights,  obligations  and 
liabilities  of  the  acquired  company  will  remain  with  that  company.  
Although DPPL may have obligations, commitments or liabilities of which 
the  Company  may  be  unaware  (including  obligations  which  might  be 
material),  the  Company  has  obtained  from  Dampier  a  number  of 
warranties  including  that  DPPL  owns  the  relevant  tenements  free  from 
any  encumbrances  not  disclosed  to  the  Company  and  that  at 
completion DPPL has no current assets, no receivables and no liabilities 
(including  contingent  liabilities)  other  than  those  relating  to  the  terms 
and  conditions  attaching  to  the  tenements.    There  may  be  royalties 
associated with these tenements.
(i)
Counterparty risk – joint venture counterparties and contractors
There  is  a  risk  of  financial  failure,  insolvency  and/or  default  by  the 
Company’s contractual counterparties, including:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
lenders and those who have made commitments to lend;
participants  in  any  joint  venture  to  which  the  Company  is  or 
may become a party; and
the  contractors  and  other  service  providers  used  by  the 
Company in its activities.
The  Company  has  no  reason  to  believe  that  any  of  its  joint  venture 
counterparties, contractors or service providers may default under their 
respective agreements with the Company or become insolvent.
However,  in  the  event  that  any  of  the  Company’s  joint  venture 
counterparties, or other contractual counterparties, become insolvent, it 
may be difficult for the Company to enforce its rights under the relevant 
joint  venture  agreement  and/or  associated  agreements.  Further,  if  any 
of agents or contractors of  the Company default or become insolvent, 
this  may  adversely  affect  the  ability  of  the  Company  to  perform  its 
obligations  under  contracts.  Such  circumstances  may  negatively
38
impact  the  value  of  the  Company’s  assets  and  the  ongoing  financial 
performance of the Company.
If  any  of  the  Company’s  contractual  counterparties  default  in  the 
performance  of  their  obligations,  it  may  be  necessary  to  approach 
courts in Laos or Australia to seek enforcement or some other remedy, if 
no  alternative  settlement  can  be  reached.    Legal  action  can  be 
uncertain and costly.  There is a risk that the Company may not be able 
to  seek  legal  redress  against  a  defaulting  counterparty,  or  that  legal 
remedy will not be granted on satisfactory terms.
(j)
Country risk
The Company operates in countries outside Australia and there are risks 
that changes in the legal business environment in those places such as 
currency  controls,  price  controls,  regulatory  changes  and  political 
changes  may  adversely  affect  the  value  of  the  Company’s  assets.  
Some  of  the  jurisdictions  in  which  the  Company  operates  have  legal 
systems and laws different to Australia that may lead to uncertainty  for 
the  Company  in  enforcing  legal  and  contractual  rights  in  those 
jurisdictions.    If  the  Company  is  unable  to  enforce  its  legal  and 
contractual  rights  this  may  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the 
Company.
The Company has projects located in Laos held through Sino Australian 
Resources (Laos) Co., Ltd (SARCO). There can be no assurance that the 
systems  of  government  and  the  political  systems  in  overseas  countries 
will  remain  stable  nor  any  assurance  that  government  regulations 
relating to foreign investment, repatriation of foreign currency,  taxation 
and  the  mining  industry  in  these  countries  will  not  be  amended  or 
replaced  in  the  future  to  the  detriment  of  the  Company’s  business 
and/or projects.
The  Company  is  unaware  of  any  such  proposals  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus.  However,  changes  in  foreign  government  policies  that 
restrict  or  prohibit  the  repatriation  of  funds  or  the  conduct  of  projects 
held  by  the  Company  in  the  relevant  jurisdictions could  limit  the  ability 
of  the  Company  to  redeploy  capital  invested  in  those  jurisdictions  into 
more  profitable  investments  in  other  jurisdictions  and  the  Company’s 
ability to dispose of its interest in those projects (e.g. the SARCO Project). 
This  has  the  potential  to  adversely  affect  the  Company’s  business 
strategy and its ongoing financial performance.
(k)
Environmental risks
The operations and activities of the Company in Australia are subject to 
State  and  Federal  laws  and  regulations  concerning  the  environment. 
The  Company  also  has  operations  and  activities  in  Laos  which  are 
subject  to  Laos  environmental  laws  and  regulations.  Non-compliance 
with  these  laws  and  regulations  could  result  in  pecuniary  penalties, 
criminal sanctions as well as ‘cease work’ orders.
The  Company  attempts  to  conduct  its  operations  and  activities  to  the 
highest  standard  of  environmental  obligations,  including  compliance 
with  all  environmental  laws.  The  Company  has  ceased  all  field  work  in 
Laos  in  light  of  its  prior  proposals  to  dispose  of  its  interests  in  its  SARCO
39
Project, which proposals the Company is no longer pursuing for the time 
being.
As  with  most  exploration  projects  and  mining  operations, 
the 
Company’s  operations and  activities  are expected  to  have an  impact 
on  the  environment,  particularly  if  advanced  exploration  or  mine 
development proceeds. Presently, the Company’s main activities are in 
exploration, all of which are in their early stages. Therefore, the Directors 
do  not  anticipate  the  Company’s  activities  and  operations  will  cause 
significant environmental damage.
(l)
Competition
For  example,  the
Competition  from  Australian  and 
international  gold  and  bauxite 
producers,  developers  and  explorers  may  affect  the  potential  future 
cash  flow  and  earnings  which  the  Company  may  realise  from  its 
operations. 
introduction  of  new  mining  and 
processing  facilities  and  any  increase  in  competition  and  supply  in  the 
global  gold  and  bauxite  markets  could  lower  the  price  of  these 
commodities.    The  Company  may  also  encounter  competition  from 
other  mining  and  exploration  companies  for  the  acquisition  of  new 
projects or to secure services in connection with mining projects.
(m)
Insurance coverage risk
Exploration  and  development  operations  on  mineral  properties  involve 
numerous  risks,  including  unexpected  or  unusual  geological  operating 
conditions,  rock  bursts,  cave-ins,  ground  or  slope  failures,  fires,  floods, 
earthquakes and other environmental occurrences, political and social 
instability  that  could  result  in  damage  to  or  destruction  of  mineral 
properties or producing facilities, personal injury or death, environmental 
damage,  delays  in  mining  caused  by  industrial  accidents  or  labour 
disputes,  changes  in  regulatory  environment,  monetary  losses  and 
possible legal liability.
It is not always possible to obtain insurance against all such risks and the 
Company  may  decide  not  to  insure  against  certain  risks  because  of 
high premiums or other reasons.  Moreover, insurance against risks such 
as  environmental  pollution  or  other  hazards  as  a  result  of  exploration 
and development is not generally available to the Company or to other 
companies  in  the  industry  on  acceptable  terms.    Should  such  liabilities 
arise, they could reduce or eliminate any further profitability and result in 
increasing  costs  and  a  decline  in  the  value  of  the  securities  of  the 
Company.
(n)
Records
The  Company’s  historical  record-keeping  has  been  poor,  although 
current management is making an effort to address this.  This may have 
compliance and business organisational consequences.
10.3
General investment risks
The following risks have been identified as being general investments risks and 
therefore these risks apply to an investment in the Company:
(a)
Securities Investment risk
40
Applicants  should  be  aware  that  there  are  risks  associated  with  any 
securities  investment.  Securities  listed  on  the  stock  market,  and  in 
particular  securities  of  mining  and  exploration  companies  have 
experienced  extreme  price  and  volume  fluctuations  that  have  often 
been unrelated to the operating performances of such companies.
These  factors  may  materially  and  adversely  affect  the  market  price  of 
the  securities  regardless  of  the  Company’s  performance.  General 
factors  that  may  impact  the  market  price  of  Shares  include  economic 
conditions  in  both  Australia  and  internationally,  investor  sentiment  and 
local  and  international  share  market  conditions,  changes  in  interest 
rates  and  the  rate  of  inflation,  variations  in  commodity  process,  the 
global  security  situation  and  the  possibility  of  terrorist  disturbances, 
changes to government regulation, policy or legislation, changes which 
may  occur  to  the  taxation  of  companies  as  a  result  of  changes  in 
Australian and foreign taxation laws, changes to the system of dividend 
imputation in Australia, and changes in exchange rates.
There is no guarantee as to the profitability, dividends, return on capital 
or  the  price  at  which  securities  in  the  Company  may  trade  on  the 
market.
(b)
Liquidity risk
There  can  be  no  assurance  that  there  will  be  an  active  market  for 
Options and any Shares acquired on exercise of the Options or that the 
price of Options and Shares will increase.
There may be relatively few buyers or sellers of Option or Shares on ASX 
at any given time. This may affect the volatility of the market price of the 
Options and the Shares. It may also affect the prevailing market price at 
which  securityholders in  the Company  are able to  sell  their  securities in 
the  Company.  This  may  result 
in  the  Company’s  securityholders 
receiving  a  market  price  for  their  Options  and  any  Shares  acquired  on 
exercise of the Options that is less or more than the price paid.
(c)
Economic Risks
General economic conditions, movements in interest and inflation rates 
and  currency  exchange  rates  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the 
Company’s exploration, development and production activities, as well 
as on its ability to fund those activities and to receive future dividends.
Further, share market conditions may affect the value of the Company’s 
quoted securities regardless of the Company’s operating performance. 
Share market conditions are affected by many factors such as:
(i)
(ii)
general economic outlook;
interest rates and inflation rates;
(iii)
currency fluctuations;
(iv)
changes in investor sentiment toward particular market sectors;
(v)
the demand for, and supply of, capital; and
(vi)
terrorism or other hostilities.
41
(d)
Unforeseen expenses
The  Company  may  be  subject  to  significant  unforeseen  expenses  or 
actions.
This may include unplanned operating expenses, future legal actions or 
expenses  in  relation  to  future  unforeseen  events.    The  Directors  expect 
that  the  Company  will  have  adequate  working  capital  to  carry  out  its 
stated objectives however there is the risk that additional funds may be 
required to fund the Company’s future objectives.
(e)
Litigation risk
The  Company  is  subject  to  litigation  risks.  All  industries,  including  the 
minerals  exploration  industry,  are  subject  to  legal  claims,  with  and 
without  merit.    Defence  and  settlement  costs  of  legal  claims  can  be 
substantial, even with respect to claims that have no merit.
Due to the inherent uncertainty of the litigation process, the resolution of 
any  particular  legal  proceeding  to  which  the  Company  is  or  may 
become  subject  could  have  a  material  effect  on  its  financial  position, 
results of operations or the Company’s activities.
(f)
Joint venture parties, contractors and agents
The Directors are unable to predict the risk of:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
financial  failure  or  default  by  a  participant  in  any  joint  venture 
to which the Company is or may become a party;
insolvency or other managerial failure by any of the contractors 
used by the Company in any of its activities; or
insolvency  or  other  managerial  failure  by  any  of  the  other 
service providers used by the Company for any activities.
42
11.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
11.1
Litigation
As  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  the  Company  is  not  involved  in  any  legal 
proceedings and the Directors are not aware of any legal proceedings pending 
or threatened against the Company.
11.2
Continuous disclosure obligations
The  Company  is  a  “disclosing  entity”  (as  defined  in  section  111AC  of  the 
Corporations  Act)  for  the purposes  of  section  713  of  the Corporations  Act  and, 
as  such,  is  subject  to  regular  reporting  and  disclosure  obligations.    Specifically, 
like all listed companies, the Company is required to continuously disclose to the 
market any information it has which a reasonable person would expect to have 
a  material  effect  on  the  price  or  the  value  of  the  Company’s  securities.    The 
Company  has  issued  this  Prospectus  in  accordance  with  section  713  of  the 
Corporations  Act  applicable  to  offers  of  securities,  or  options  to  acquire 
securities,  which  are  quoted  enhanced  disclosure  (ED)  securities  and  the 
securities are in a class of securities that were quoted ED securities at all times in 
the 12 months before the issue of this Prospectus.
This  Prospectus  is  a  “transaction  specific  prospectus”.    In  general  terms  a 
“transaction  specific  prospectus”  is  only  required  to  contain  information  in 
relation  to  the  effect  of  the  issue  of  securities  on  a  company  and  the  rights 
attaching  to  the securities.   It is not  necessary  to include  general  information  in 
relation  to  all  of  the  assets  and  liabilities,  financial  position,  profits  and  losses  or 
prospects of the issuing company.
This Prospectus is intended to be read in conjunction with the publicly available 
information in relation to the Company which has been notified to ASX and does 
not include all of the information that would be included in a prospectus for an 
initial public offering of securities in an entity that is not already listed on a stock 
exchange.    Investors  should  therefore  have  regard  to  the  other  publicly 
available  information  in  relation  to  the  Company  before  making  a  decision 
whether or not to invest.
Having  taken  such  precautions  and  having  made  such  enquires  as  are 
reasonable,  the  Company  believes  that  it  has  complied  with  the  general  and 
specific  requirements  of  ASX  as  applicable  from  time  to  time  throughout  the  3 
months before the issue of this Prospectus which required the Company to notify 
ASX  of  information  about  specified  events  or  matters  as  they  arise  for  the 
purpose  of  ASX  making  that  information  available  to  the  stock  market 
conducted by ASX.
Information  that  is  already  in  the  public  domain  has  not  been  reported  in  this 
Prospectus  other  than  that  which  is  considered  necessary  to  make  this 
Prospectus complete.
The Company, as a disclosing entity under the Corporations Act states that:
(a)
it is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations;
(b)
copies of documents lodged with the ASIC in relation to the Company 
(not  being  documents 
in  section  1274(2)(a)  of  the 
Corporations Act) may be obtained from, or inspected at, the offices of 
the ASIC; and
referred  to
43
(c)
it  will  provide  a  copy  of  each  of  the  following  documents,  free  of 
charge,  to  any  person  on  request  between  the  date  of  issue  of  this 
Prospectus and the Closing Date:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the  annual  financial  report  most  recently  lodged  by  the 
Company with the ASIC;
any half-year financial report lodged by the Company with the 
ASIC after the lodgement of the annual financial report referred 
to  in  (i)  and  before  the  lodgement  of  this  Prospectus  with  the 
ASIC; and
any continuous disclosure documents given by the Company to 
ASX  in  accordance  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  as  referred  to  in 
section  674(1)  of  the  Corporations  Act  after  the  lodgement  of 
the  annual  financial  report  referred  to  in  (i)  and  before  the 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC.
Copies of  all  documents lodged with  the ASIC  in  relation  to  the  Company  can 
be  inspected  at  the  registered  office  of  the  Company  during  normal  office 
hours.
Details  of  documents  lodged  by  the  Company  with  ASX  since  the  date  of 
lodgement  of  the  Company’s  latest  annual  financial  report  and  before  the 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC are set out in the table below.
Date
29/08/2016
26/08/2016
26/08/2016
26/08/2016
26/08/2016
26/08/2016
25/08/2016
24/08/2016
27/07/2016
27/07/2016
06/07/2016
12/05/2016
12/05/2016
28/04/2016
28/04/2016
12/04/2016
15/03/2016
09/03/2016
29/01/2016
Description of Announcement
Appendix 3B
Letter to Convertible Note Holders
Letter to Option Holders
Non-Renounceable Entitlement Offer of Options
Change in Substantial Holding
Change of Director's Interest Notice
100% Ownership Plutonic Dome Now Complete
Trading Halt
Quarterly Activities Report
Quarterly Cashflow Report
Appendix 3B
DAU: Sale of Plutonic Dome Gold Project
Completed Agreement of Sale – Plutonic Dome
Quarterly Activities Report
Quarterly Cashflow Report Appendix 5B
Debt Raising Facility Announcement
Half Year Accounts
SARCO Project Update
Quarterly Activities Report
44
Date
29/01/2016
19/01/2016
19/01/2016
14/01/2016
14/01/2016
07/12/2015
20/11/2015
30/10/2015
30/10/2015
30/10/2015
20/10/2015
16/10/2015
16/10/2015
16/10/2015
14/10/2015
30/09/2015
Description of Announcement
Quarterly Cashflow Report
100% Purchase of Plutonic Dome Gold Project
DAU: Sale of Plutonic Dome Gold Project
Appendix 3B
Placement of Rights Issue Shortfall
Company Secretary Appointment/Resignation
Results of Annual General Meeting
Market Update Plutonic Dome Joint Venture
Quarterly Cashflow Report
Quarterly Activities Report
Notice of Annual General Meeting/Proxy Form
Change of Director’s Interest Notice (x3)
Appendix 3B
Completion of Rights Issue
Rights Issue Closure and Notice of Shortfall
Appendix 4G
ASX  maintains  files  containing  publicly  available  information  for  all  listed 
companies.    The  Company’s  file  is  available  for  inspection  at  ASX  in  Sydney 
during normal office hours.
The  announcements  are  also  available  through  the  Company’s  website 
www.vangomining.com.
11.3
Company update
In  addition  to  its  announcements  on  the  ASX,  the  Company  wishes  to  update 
shareholders on the following:
(a)
Debt facilities update
On  12 April 2016,  the  Company  announced  that  it  completed  discussions  with 
certain  directors  and  a  number  of  major  shareholders  who  agreed  to  commit 
approximately $4.5 million towards a total debt facility of $6 million to assist in the 
mining of  the Plutonic Dome Project  and  that  the remaining $1.5 million of  that 
debt  facility  would  be  placed  with  third  parties.    As  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus, the Company has received:
(i)
(ii)
approximately  $3.3 million  of  the  approximately  $4.5 million 
agreed  to  be  committed  by  Directors  and  major  shareholders; 
and
approximately  $200,000  of  the  approximately  $1.5 million  to  be 
placed with third parties.
45
Shareholder loans
The  Company  and  the  following  Shareholders  (or  their  associates)  agreed  to 
advance  the  following  amounts  via  letter  agreements  dated  on  or  about 
31 March 2016,  each  of  which  was  executed  with  a  view  to  entering  into  full 
form loan agreements:
Shareholder/associate
Amount committed
Approximate 
amount 
received  as  at  the  date 
of this Prospectus
Ruoguo  Ma,  and  Brook 
& Valley Pty Limited
Gifted 
International Limited
Force
$2,000,000
$700,000
$2,000,000
$2,000,000
Kristofer Sales
$200,000
Christopher Kuznetsoff
$350,000
Michelle Le Pavoux
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$100,000
Total
$4,650,000
$3,300,000
The  terms  of  the  letter  agreements  provided  that  the  loans  would  be  on  the 
following terms:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the debt is for a maximum term of 24 months with the Company 
having the ability to repay all or part of the debt after 6 months;
the  interest  rate  is  25  per  cent  payable  six  monthly  in  arears; 
and
security will only be provided over certain tenements if required 
and  only  on  the  condition  that  the  lender  acknowledges  that 
Shareholder  approval  must  first  be  obtained  by  the  Company 
calling an Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders.  As at 
the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  no  lender  has  required  that  any 
such approval be sought for security to be granted in its favour.
As at the date of this Prospectus, the Company has entered into a full form loan 
agreement  dated  30 May 2016  with  Gifted  Force  International  Limited,  a 
company  incorporated  in  the  British  Virgin  Islands  and  which,  as  it  is  owned  by 
her  husband,  is  related  to  Zhenzhu  (Carol)  Zhang,  a  director  and  major 
shareholder  of  the  Company.    Set  out  below  are  the  key  terms  of  that  loan 
agreement:
(i)
the loan is for an amount of $2 million which is fully drawn down 
and  is  repayable  on  26 May 2018.    Earlier  repayment  may  be 
required in an event of default or if the lender requires payment 
to  be  accelerated  following  a  review  of  the  Company’s 
financial  circumstances.    The  Company  may  choose  to  repay 
the principal sum or the amount unpaid at any time;
46
(ii)
(iii)
the  interest  rate  is  25  per  cent  per  annum,  which  interest  is 
calculated  on  bi-annual  rests  and  payable 6  months  in  arrears 
commencing on  26  May  2016.    Interest  may  be  capitalised  by 
the lender as it deems appropriate;
technically  under  the  loan  agreement,  the  Company  charges 
certain  property  and  tenements  forming  part  of  the  Plutonic 
Dome Project as security for the loan and, on demand from the 
lender  will  procure  the  execution  in  favour  of  the  lender  of 
certain collateral securities.  The lender acknowledges that the 
security  will  not  be  held  on  a  sole  or  exclusive  basis.    As  the 
granting  of  such  security  would  require  Shareholder  approval, 
the  understanding  between  the  parties  is  that  security  will  be 
granted  in  favour  of  the  lender  on  demand,  but  subject  to 
Shareholder  approval.    As  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  the 
lender  has  not  required  that  any  such  approval  be  sought  for 
security to be granted in its favour.
It  is  anticipated  that  the  full  form  loan  agreements  to  be  entered  into  with  the 
other  relevant  Shareholders  (or  their  associates)  will  be  on  substantially  similar 
terms  to  those  agreed  with  Gifted  Force  International  Limited.    However,  in  the 
case of the funds advanced by Brook & Valley Pty Limited, it is anticipated that 
the loan will be repayable during or about August or September 2018.
Third party loans
In  connection  with  the  remaining  approximately  $1.5 million  of  the  debt  facility 
announced  on  12 April 2016  which  is  being  sought  from  third  parties,  the 
Company  has  received  approximately  $200,000  from  AGH  Demolition  & 
Asbestos  Removal  Pty  Limited  on  substantially  similar  terms  as  the  letter 
agreement  described  above  (except  that  the  letter  agreement  with  AGH 
Demolition & Asbestos Removal Pty Limited is silent as to security), with a view to 
entering  into  full  form  agreement  on  terms  substantially  similar  to  the  full  form 
loan  agreement  entered  into  with  Gifted  Force  International  Limited.    In 
addition,  the  Company  is  in  early  stage  discussions  with  other  third  parties  in 
respect  of  the  remaining  $1.3 million.    There  is  no  guarantee  that  any  of  those 
discussions will result in binding agreements being entered into.
(b)
Plutonic Dome acquisition update
As  announced  on  25 August 2016,  the  Company  has  now  completed  its 
acquisition of Dampier Gold Limited’s interest in Dampier (Plutonic) Pty Limited.
The  move  by  the  Company  to  effect  100%  ownership  of  the  Plutonic  Dome 
Project tenements was announced on 19 January 2016.  At the time a Heads of 
Agreement had been entered into in relation to the acquisition by the Company 
of  Dampier’s  interest  in  DPPL,    DPPL  held  legal  title  to  and  a  40%  beneficial 
interest  in  the  tenements.    Although  further  discussions  between  Dampier  and 
the  Company  led  to  the  consideration  of  a  varied  transaction  structure 
(proceeding by way of tenement sale rather than the acquisition of DPPL shares) 
the  key  commercial  terms  (including  price)  did  not  change.    Ultimately,  the 
transaction proceeded on the share sale basis originally contemplated in the 19 
January  2016  announcement  by  the  Company  and  at  the  price  referred  to  in 
that announcement.
47
(c)
Review of tenements at the Plutonic Dome Project
The Company presently intends to review its current tenements in respect of the 
Plutonic Dome Project in order to determine the best way to deal with the vast 
number of tenements acquired through DPPL.
(d)
Early stage discussions in respect of the farm-in and development of the 
Plutonic Dome Project
The  Company  is  in  early  stage  discussions  with  third  parties  in  connection  with 
potential  farm-in  arrangements  and  the  potential  development  of  the  K2 
deposit  forming  part  of  the  Plutonic  Dome  Project.    As  at  the  date  of  this 
prospectus, neither party has passed due diligence.  There is no guarantee that 
any of those discussions will result in binding agreements being entered into.
(e)
Permitting of mining development and exploration activities
While  the  Company  considers  that  it  has  all  required  permits  for  its  current 
activities,  the  Company  has  requested  that  the  Department  of  Mining  and 
Petroleum confirm the status of the Company’s permits.
11.4
Summary of Underwriting Agreement
Pursuant to an agreement between K S Capital Pty Limited (Underwriter) and the 
Company  (Underwriting  Agreement),  the  Underwriter  has  agreed  to  fully 
underwrite the Offer of up to 187,791,935 Options (Underwritten Options).
Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, the Company has agreed to:
(a)
(b)
pay  the  Underwriter  an  underwriting  fee  of  $11,268  (being  6%  of  the 
amount raised under the Offer); and
reimburse  the  Underwriter  for  all  reasonable  expenses  incidental  to  the 
offer.
The  obligation  of  the  Underwriter  to  underwrite  the  Offer  is  subject  to  certain 
events of termination.  The Underwriter may terminate, without cost or liability, its 
obligations under the Underwriting Agreement if:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Misleading  statement  in  the  Prospectus:    from  or  after  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus a material statement in the Prospectus is found to be untrue, 
misleading  or  deceptive  or  it  is  found  that  the  Prospectus  contains  a 
material omission;
ASIC stop order, hearing or investigation:  ASIC issues a stop order under 
section 739(1) or (3) of the Corporations Act, gives notice of intention to 
hold a hearing in relation to the Prospectus pursuant to section 739(2) of 
the  Corporations  Act,  applies  for  an  order  under  Part 9.5  of  the 
Corporations  Act 
in  relation  to  the  Prospectus  or  the  Offer  or 
commences  any  investigation,  examination  or  hearing  or  gathers 
information  under  Part 3  of  the  ASIC  Act  in  connection  with  the 
Prospectus or the Offer;
Notices  concerning  the  Prospectus:    any  person  (provided  that  if  that 
person is the Underwriter, the Underwriter must act in good faith) gives a 
notice  under  section  730  or  section  733(3)  of  the  Corporations  Act  or 
withdraws  a  consent  previously  given  under  section  720  of  the 
Corporations Act, in relation to the Prospectus;
48
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
Lodgement  of  supplementary  Prospectus: 
  a  supplementary  or 
replacement  Prospectus  is  lodged  under  the  Corporations  Act  without 
the  prior  written  approval  of  the  Underwriter  (which  approval  may  not 
be unreasonably withheld);
Changes in prospects of the Company:  any adverse change occurs in 
the  condition,  financial  position  or  prospects  of  the  Company  or  a 
related body corporate that is, in the Underwriter’s reasonable opinion, 
material;
Breach  of  constitution:    the  Company  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries  (if  any) 
breaches its Constitution;
Breach  of  material  contract:    any  person  breaches  any  material 
contract;
Termination  of  material  contracts:    a  Material  Contract  is  terminated 
(whether  by  breach  or  otherwise),  rescinded,  altered  or  amended, 
without  the  prior  consent  of  the  Underwriter,  or  any  such  contract  is 
found to be void, voidable or unenforceable;
Breach  of  law  or  regulation:    the  Company  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries  or 
any  Officer  of  the  Company  or  a  subsidiary  contravenes  any  provision 
of the Corporations Act,  the  ASX Listing Rules or any other legislation of 
the  Commonwealth  of  Australia  or  any  State  or  Territory  of  Australia 
which  would,  in  the  Underwriter’s  reasonable  opinion,  materially  and 
adversely affect the Company or the Offer;
Prescribed  Occurrence:    a  Prescribed  Occurrence  (as  defined  in 
section 652C(1)  or  (2)  of  the  Corporations  Act  but  substituting  the 
Company for “target”) occurs in relation to the Company or any of the 
Company’s subsidiaries;
Insolvency:  an insolvency event occurs or, in the reasonable opinion of 
the Underwriter, is likely to occur;
Breach  of  agreement:    the  Company  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries  is  in 
breach  of  any  provision  of  the  Underwriting  Agreement  that,  in  the 
Underwriter’s reasonable opinion, is material.
Breach  of  warranty:    any  warranty  given  by  the  Company  under  the 
Underwriting  Agreement 
in  the 
Underwriter’s reasonable opinion, would materially and adversely affect 
the Company or the Offer or has ceased to be true;
in  any  respect  that,
is  not  true
Conviction  of  Officers:    any  Officer  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its 
subsidiaries  is  charged  with  or  convicted  of  any  criminal  offence 
involving fraudulent or dishonest conduct;
Unapproved alteration of capital:  the Company alters, or announces an 
intention  to  alter,  its capital  structure or  its constitution without  the prior 
consent  of  the  Underwriter  (such  consent  not  to  be  unreasonably 
withheld);
Unapproved  encumbrances:  the  Company  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries 
gives security in favour of any person who is not a security holder at the 
date of the Underwriting Agreement;
49
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
(w)
(x)
(y)
(z)
information  given
in  the  Underwriter’s
False  or  misleading 
  any  
information  that, 
reasonable  opinion,  would 
materially and adversely affect the Company or the Offer, was supplied 
at  any  time  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Company  to  the  Underwriter  in 
respect  of  any  aspect  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries  or  the 
Offer is or becomes misleading or deceptive;
to
the  Underwriter:
Quotation  on  ASX:    3  months  or  such  other  period  agreed  by  the 
Underwriter elapses after the date of issue of the Prospectus without ASX 
granting quotation of the Options on the securities market operated by 
ASX;
Grant by ASX:  any grant by ASX referred to in (r) is withdrawn or is made 
subject  to  any  conditions  other  than  the  standard  conditions  that  may 
be imposed by ASX on its permission for the quotation of the Options;
Statements  issued  in  breach  of  agreement:    during  the  term  of  the 
Underwriting  Agreement  the  Company  or  its  officers  breach  certain 
undertakings  made  by  the  Company  in  connection  with  certain 
statements relating to the Company and the Offer;
Withdrawal of Prospectus:  the Company withdraws the Prospectus;
Significant Change to Management or Board:  either or both of Mr Bruce 
McInnes  or  Mr  Shengqiang  (Sean)  Zhou  cease  to  be  Directors  of  the 
Company without the approval of the Underwriter (which approval may 
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed);
Judgement:  a judgement in an amount exceeding $250,000 is obtained 
against  the Company  or  any  subsidiary  and  is not  set  aside  or  satisfied 
within 5 Business Days;
Requirement  to  repay  Application  Money:    any  circumstance  arises 
after the Prospectus is lodged a consequence of which is either that the 
Company  is  required  to  repay  the  money  received  from  Applicants  or 
to  offer  Applicants  an  opportunity  to  withdraw  their  Applications  and 
receive a refund of their application money;
Movement in the All Ordinaries Index:  the All Ordinaries Index of ASX is 
at  any  time  on  any  3 consecutive  business  days  prior  to  settlement  of 
the  Options  90%  or  less  of  the  level  that  Index  attained  at  the  close  of 
trading on the business day before the date of signing the Underwriting 
Agreement;  or
Movement in the ASX Small Ords Index:  the ASX Small Ords Index is at 
any  time on  any  3  consecutive  business days prior  to  settlement  of  the 
Options  90%  or  less  of  the  level  that  Index  attained  at  the  close  of 
trading on the business day before the date of signing the Underwriting 
Agreement.
The  Underwriting  Agreement  contains  a  number  of  conditions  that  must  be 
satisfied  by  the Company  before the Underwriter’s obligation  to  underwrite the 
Offer commences that  are considered standard for an agreement of this type.  
If any of these conditions are not satisfied by the relevant date the Underwriter 
will be entitled to terminate the Underwriting Agreement.
50
The  Underwriting  Agreement  also  contains  a  number  of 
indemnities, 
representations  and  warranties  from  the  Company  to  the  Underwriter  that  are 
considered standard for an agreement of this type.
Sub-underwriting arrangements
As noted in Section 7.8 above, the Underwriter has entered into sub-underwriting 
arrangements with various parties.
Sub-underwriting  commission  is  payable  by  the  Underwriter  out  of  the  fees  it 
receives from the Company under the Underwriting Agreement.
11.5
Corporate Governance
The  Company  has  adopted  comprehensive 
systems  of  control  and 
accountability as the basis for the administration of corporate governance.  The 
Board  of  Directors  is  committed  to  administering  the  policies  and  procedures 
with  openness  and  integrity,  pursuing  the  true  spirit  of  corporate  governance 
commensurate with the Company's needs.
To the extent that they are applicable to the Company, the Board has adopted 
the ASX Corporate Governance Council's Corporate Governance Principles and 
Recommendations where the Board has considered the recommendation to be 
an  appropriate  benchmark  for  its  corporate  governance  practices.    Where, 
after  due  consideration,  the  Company’s  corporate  governance  practices 
depart  from  a  recommendation,  the  Board  has  disclosed  the  reasons  for  the 
departure in its Corporate Governance Statement for the financial year ended 
30 June 2015.    This  can  be  found  in  the  Company’s  Annual  Report  for  the 
financial year ended 30 June 2015.
11.6
Agreements with Directors and related parties
The Company’s policy in respect of related party arrangements is:
(a)
(b)
a Director with a material personal interest in a matter is required to give 
notice to the other Directors before such a matter is considered by the 
Board;  and
for the Board to consider such a matter, the Director who has a material 
personal  interest  may  not  be  present  while  the  matter  is  being 
considered at the meeting and may not vote on the matter.
Shareholder loans
As  noted  in  Section 11.3(a),  an  entity  related  to  Zhenzhu  (Carol)  Zhang  has 
advanced  a  loan  in  an  amount  of  approximately  $2 million  to  the  Company.  
The Directors consider that loan to be on arms-length terms on the basis that it is 
on substantially similar terms as have been agreed or anticipated to be agreed 
with other Shareholders who have advanced or agreed to advance loans to the 
Company as part of the debt facility announced in April 2016.
Bruce  McInnes  and  Sean  Zhou,  or  persons  or  entities  related  to  them,  do  not 
intend to advance loans to the Company.
Sub-underwriting
As noted  in  Sections  7.8  and  11.4  above,  the  Underwriter  has entered  into  sub-
underwriting arrangements with various parties, including members of the board
51
of directors of the Company.  Set out in the table below are the sub-underwriting 
commitments of each of the Directors and the potential number of Options (and 
therefore  shares)  they  may  acquire  if  the  full  sub-underwriting  commitment  is 
called on:
Director
Committed sub-
underwriting amount ($)
Potential number of 
Options /Shares on
exercise
Bruce McInnes
Shengqiang (Sean) Zhou
Zhenzhu (Carol) Zhang
11.7
Interests of Directors
$18,800
$10,000
$32,725
18,800,000
10,000,000
32,725,000
Other than as set out in this Prospectus, no  Director or proposed Director  holds, 
or  has  held  within  the 2  years  preceding  lodgement  of  this  Prospectus  with  the 
ASIC, any interest in:
(a)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
(b)
any property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in 
connection with:
(i)
(ii)
its formation or promotion; or
the Offer; or
(c)
the Offer,
and  no  amounts  have  been  paid  or  agreed  to  be  paid  and  no  benefits  have 
been given or agreed to be given to a Director or proposed Director:
(a)
as an inducement to become, or to qualify as, a Director; or
(b)
for services provided in connection with:
(i)
(ii)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
the Offer.
Security holdings
The relevant interest of each of the Directors in the securities of the Company as 
at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  together  with  their  respective  Entitlement,  is  set 
out in the table below.
Director
Shares
Options
Convertible
Entitlement
$
Bruce McInnes
12,350,918
Nil
14,749,000
125,000
Notes
Nil
Nil
6,175,459
$6,176
7,374,500
$7,375
Shengqiang 
(Sean) Zhou
Zhenzhu 
Zhang
48,478,106
Nil
Nil
24,239,053
$24,239
52
The  Board  recommends  all  Shareholders  take  up  their  Entitlement  and  advises 
that all Directors intend to take up their respective Entitlements.
Remuneration
The remuneration of an executive Director is decided by the Board, without the 
affected  executive  Director  participating  in  that  decision-making  process.    The 
total  maximum  remuneration  of  non-executive  Directors  will  be  not  more  than 
the aggregate fixed sum determined by the Company in a general meeting in 
accordance  with  the  Constitution,  the  Corporations  Act  and  the  ASX  Listing 
Rules,  as  applicable. 
  The  determination  of  non-executive  Directors’ 
remuneration within that maximum will be made by the Board having regard to 
the  inputs  and  value  to  the  Company  of  the  respective  contributions  by  each 
non-executive Director.  The current amount has been set at an amount not to 
exceed $250,000 per annum.
A  Director  may  be  paid  fees  or  other  amounts  (i.e.  non-cash  performance 
incentives  such  as  Options,  subject  to  any  necessary  Shareholder  approval)  as 
the  other  Directors  determine  where  a  Director  performs  special  duties  or 
otherwise  performs  services  outside  the  scope  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  a 
Director.  In addition, Directors are also entitled to be paid reasonable travelling 
and other expenses incurred by them respectively in or about the performance 
of their duties as Directors.
The following table shows the total (and proposed) annual remuneration paid to 
both executive and non-executive directors.
Director
Financial
year ended
30 June 2014*
Financial year 
ended 30 June 
2015*
Proposed 
financial year 
ending 30 June 
2016
Bruce McInnes
$188,324.00
$216,429.00
Shengqiang (Sean) 
Zhou
Not applicable
$84,839.00
Zhenzhu Zhang
Not applicable  Not applicable
$0
$0
$0
*
including  share  based  payments  under  the  Vango  Share  Plan  as 
disclosed in the Company’s 2014 and 2015 annual reports.
11.8
Interests of experts and advisers
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus, no:
(a)
person  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  performing  a  function  in  a 
professional,  advisory  or  other  capacity 
in  connection  with  the 
preparation or distribution of this Prospectus;
(b)
promoter of the Company; or
(c)
underwriter (but not a sub-underwriter) to the issue or a financial services 
licensee  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  a  financial  services  licensee 
involved in the issue,
holds, or has held within the 2 years preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with 
the ASIC, any interest in:
53
(d)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
(e)
any property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in 
connection with:
(i)
(ii)
its formation or promotion; or
the Offer; or
(f)
the Offer,
and no amounts of any kind (whether in cash, Shares, options or otherwise) have 
been paid or agreed to be paid and no benefits have been given or agreed to 
be given to any of these persons for services provided in connection with:
(g)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
(h)
the Offer.
KS  Capital  Pty  Limited  is  the  Underwriter  to  the  Offer  and  will  be  paid  an 
underwriting  fee  of  $11,268  in  respect  of  this  Offer.    Refer  to  Section  11.4  for 
further details of the Underwriting Agreement.  During the 24 months preceding 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC, K S Capital Pty Limited has not been 
paid fees by the Company.
Gilbert  +  Tobin  has  acted  as  the  solicitors  to  the  Company  in  relation  to  the 
Offer.  The Company estimates it will pay Gilbert + Tobin $30,000 (excluding GST 
and  disbursements)  for  these  services.    During  the  24 months  preceding 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC, Gilbert + Tobin has been paid, or has 
billed,  fees  totalling  $126,180  (excluding  GST  and  disbursements)  for  legal 
services provided to the Company.
11.9
Consents
Each of the parties referred to in this Section 11.9:
(a)
has not authorised or caused the issue of this Prospectus;
(b)
(c)
does not make, or purport to make, any statement in this Prospectus  or 
on  which  a  statement  made  in  the  Prospectus  is  based  other  than  as 
specified in this Section; and
to  the  maximum  extent  permitted  by  law,  expressly  disclaim  and  take 
no responsibility for any part of this Prospectus other than a reference to 
its name and a statement included in this Prospectus with the consent of 
that party as specified in this Section.
Each  of  the  following  has  consented  to  being  named  in  the  Prospectus  in  the 
capacity  as  noted  below  and  have  not  withdrawn  such  consent  prior  to  the 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC:
(a)
K S Capital Pty Limited as Underwriter to the Offer; and
(b)
Gilbert + Tobin as solicitors to the Company in relation to the Offer.
There may be a number of persons referred to elsewhere in this Prospectus who 
are not experts and who have not made statements included in this Prospectus 
nor  are  there  any  statements  made  in  this  Prospectus  on  the  basis  of  any
54
statements  made  by  those  persons.    These  persons  did  not  consent  to  being 
named  in  the  Prospectus  and  did  not  authorise  or  cause  the  issue  of  the 
Prospectus.
11.10
Expenses of the offer
In  the  event  that  all Entitlements are accepted,  the total expenses of the Offer 
are  estimated  to  be  approximately  $80,000  (excluding  GST)  and  are  expected 
to be applied towards the items set out in the table below:
Item
Underwriter fees
ASIC fees
ASX fees
Other  expenses,  including  legal  fees,  share 
registry costs, and printing and distribution.
Total
11.11
Electronic prospectus
$
11,268
2,350
20,720
45,662
80,000
If you have received this Prospectus as an electronic Prospectus, please ensure 
that you have received the entire Prospectus accompanied by the Application 
Forms.  If you have not, please phone the Company on +61 2 9251 6012 and the 
Company will send you, for free, either a hard copy or a further electronic copy 
of  the  Prospectus,  or  both.    Alternatively,  you  may  obtain  a  copy  of  this 
Prospectus from the Company’s website at www.vangomining.com.
The  Company  reserves  the  right  not  to  accept  an  Application  Form  from  a 
person if it has reason to believe that when that person was given access to the 
electronic  Application  Form,  it  was  not  provided  together  with  the  electronic 
Prospectus and any  relevant  supplementary  or  replacement  prospectus or  any 
of those documents were incomplete or altered.
11.12  Clearing House Electronic Sub-Register System (CHESS) and Issuer Sponsorship
The  Company  will  not  be  issuing  option  certificates.    The  Company  is  a 
participant in CHESS, for those investors who have, or wish to have, a sponsoring 
stockbroker.    Investors  who  do  not  wish  to  participate  through  CHESS  will  be 
issuer  sponsored  by  the  Company.    Because  the  sub-registers  are  electronic, 
ownership  of  securities  can  be  transferred  without  having  to  rely  upon  paper 
documentation.
Electronic  registers  mean  that  the  Company  will  not  be  issuing  certificates  to 
investors.  Instead, investors will be provided with a statement (similar to a bank 
account statement) that sets out the number of Options allotted to them under 
this  Prospectus.    The  notice  will  also  advise  holders  of  their  Holder  Identification 
Number or Security Holder Reference Number and explain, for future reference, 
the sale and purchase procedures under CHESS and issuer sponsorship.
Further  monthly  statements  will  be  provided  to  holders  if  there  have  been  any 
changes in their security holding in the Company during the preceding month.
55
11.13
Financial forecasts
The Directors have considered the matters set out in ASIC Regulatory Guide 170 
and believe that they do not have a reasonable basis to forecast future earnings 
on  the  basis  that  the  operations  of  the  Company  are  inherently  uncertain.  
Accordingly, any forecast or projection information would contain such a broad 
range of potential outcomes and possibilities that it is not possible to prepare a 
reliable best estimate forecast or projection.
11.14
Privacy Act
If  you  complete  an  application  for  Options,  you  will  be  providing  personal 
information to the Company (directly or by the Company’s share registry).  The 
Company collects, holds and will use that information to assess your application, 
service  your  needs  as  a  holder  of  equity  securities  in  the  Company,  facilitate 
distribution payments and corporate communications to you as a securityholder 
and  carry  out  administration.    By  submitting  an  Entitlement  and  Acceptance 
Form,  each  Applicant  agrees  that  the  Company  may  use  and  disclose  the 
information  for  the  purposes  set  out  in  this  Section 11.14  and  the  privacy 
disclosure statement in the Entitlement and Acceptance Form.
The  information  may  also  be  used  from  time  to  time  and  disclosed  to  persons 
inspecting  the  register,  bidders  for  your  securities  in  the  context  of  takeovers, 
regulatory  bodies,  including the Australian  Taxation  Office,  authorised  securities 
brokers, print service providers, mail houses and the Company’s share registry.
You  can  access,  correct  and  update  the  personal  information  that  we  hold 
about you.  Please contact the Company or its share registry if you wish to do so 
at  the  relevant  contact  numbers  set  out  in  this  Prospectus.    A  fee  may  be 
charged for access.
Collection,  maintenance  and  disclosure  of  certain  personal  information  is 
governed by legislation including the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (as amended), the 
Corporations Act and certain rules such as the ASX Settlement Operating Rules.  
You  should  note  that  if  you  do  not  provide  the  information  required  on  the 
application  for  Options,  the  Company  may  not  be  able  to  accept  or  process 
your application.
56
12.
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION
This Prospectus is issued by the Company and its issue has been authorised by a 
resolution of the Directors.
In  accordance  with  section  720  of  the  Corporations  Act,  each  Director  has 
consented to the lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC.
Mr Bruce McInnes 
Executive Chairman 
For and on behalf of 
VANGO MINING LIMITED
57
13.
GLOSSARY
$ means the lawful currency of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Applicant means a Shareholder who applies for Options pursuant to the Offer or 
a  Shareholder  or  other  party  who  applies  for  Shortfall  pursuant  to  the  Shortfall 
Offer.
Application  Form  means  an  Entitlement  and  Acceptance  Form  or  Shortfall 
Application Form as the context requires.
ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
ASIC Act means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 
(Cth).
ASX means ASX Limited (ACN 008 624 691) or the financial market operated by it 
as the context requires.
ASX Listing Rules means the listing rules of the ASX.
ASX  Settlement  Operating  Rules  means  the  settlement  rules  of  the  securities 
clearing house which operates CHESS.
Board means the board of Directors unless the context indicates otherwise.
Business Day means Monday to Friday inclusive, except New Year’s Day, Good 
Friday,  Easter  Monday,  Christmas Day,  Boxing Day  and  any  other  day  that  ASX 
declares is not a business day.
Closing  Date  means  the  applicable  date  specified  in  the  timetable  set  out  at 
the commencement of this Prospectus (unless extended).
Company means Vango Mining Limited (ACN 108 737 711).
Constitution  means  the  constitution  of  the  Company  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Dampier means Dampier Gold Limited (ACN 141 703 399).
Directors means the directors of the Company as at the date of this Prospectus.
DPPL means Dampier (Plutonic) Pty Limited (ACN 131 670 963).
Eligible Shareholder means a Shareholder with a Registered Address in Australia 
on the Record Date.
Entitlement means the entitlement of a Shareholder who is eligible to participate 
in the Offer.
Entitlement and Acceptance Form means the entitlement and acceptance form 
either attached to or accompanying this Prospectus.
EST means Eastern Standard Time as observed in Sydney, New South Wales.
58
Offer  means  the  non-renounceable  entitlement  issue  the  subject  of  this 
Prospectus.
Official Quotation means official quotation on ASX.
Option means an option to acquire a Share.
Option Holder means a holder of an Option.
Plutonic Dome Project means the Plutonic Dome Gold Project located in central 
Western Australia.
Prospectus means this prospectus.
Record  Date  means  the  date  specified  in  the  timetable  set  out  at  the 
commencement of this Prospectus.
SARCO  Project  means  the  SARCO  Bauxite  Project  located  in  southern  Laos, 
which  is  undertaken  pursuant  to  a  joint  venture  arrangement  between  the 
Company  and  China  Nonferrous  Metal  Industry’s  Foreign  Engineering  and 
Construction Co. Limited.
Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
Shareholder means a holder of a Share.
Shortfall means the Options not applied for under the Offer (if any).
Underwriter means K S Capital Pty Limited (ACN 124 761 557) AFSL No. 316880.
59