
ASX APPENDIX 4E and
ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited 
ABN 42 000 837 472
Suite 801, Level 8 
14 Martin Place 
Sydney NSW 2000
Phone:    +61 2 8256 4800 
Facsimile:  +61 2 8256 4810 
Email: 
info@kingsgate.com.au 
Website:  www.kingsgate.com.au
CORPORATE INFORMATION
Directors 
Ross Smyth-Kirk  Chairman 
Peter Alexander  Non-Executive Director 
Peter McAleer    Non-Executive Director 
Sharon Skeggs    Non-Executive Director 
  Non-Executive Director 
Peter Warren 
 
Company Secretary 
Ross Coyle 
 
Chief Executive Officer 
Greg Foulis 
 
Stock Exchange Listing 
Kingsgate  Consolidated  Limited  is  a  Company 
limited  by  shares, 
listed  on  the  Australian 
Securities  Exchange  (ASX)  under  the  code  KCN. 
The  Company’s  shares  also  trade  in  the  United 
States  of  America  over-the-counter  (OTC)  as  an 
American  Depository  Receipt  (ADR)  under  the 
code OTC: KSKGY.  
 
Registered  Office  and  Principal  Business 
Address 
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited 
Suite 801, Level 8 
14 Martin Place 
Sydney NSW 2000 
Australia 
Phone: 
+61 2 8256 4800 
Facsimile:  +61 2 8256 4810 
Email:  
info@kingsgate.com.au 
Website:   www.kingsgate.com.au 
 
Bangkok Office 
Akara Resources Public Company Limited 
19th Floor, Sathorn Thani Building 2 
No. 92/54-55 North Sathorn Road 
Kwaeng Silom, Khet Bangrak 
Bangkok 10500 
Thailand 
Phone: 
+66 2 233 9469 
Facsimile:  +66 2 236 5512
+56 2 2231 7565
Chatree Mine Office 
Akara Resources Public Company Limited 
No. 99 Moo 9, Tambon Khao Chet Luk 
Amphur Thap Khlo 
Phichit 66230 
Thailand 
Phone: 
+66 56 614 500 
Facsimile:  +66 56 614 190 
 
Chile Office 
Laguna Resources Chile Ltda 
San Pio x 2460 oficina 1202 
Providencia, Santiago 
Chile 
Phone:  
 
Share Registry 
Link Market Services Limited 
Level 12, 680 George Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
Australia 
Postal Address 
Locked Bag A14, Sydney South NSW 1235 
Australia 
Phone: 
+61 1300 554 474 
Facsimile:  +61 2 9287 0303 
Email:  
Website:   www.linkmarketservices.com.au 
 
ADR Depository (American Depository Receipts) 
The Bank of New York Mellon 
ADR Division 
101 Barclay Street, 22nd Floor 
New York NY 10286 
USA 
Phone: 
 
Auditor 
PricewaterhouseCoopers 
Darling Park Tower 2 – 201 Sussex Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
Australia 
Phone: 
+61 2 8266 0000 
Facsimile:  +61 2 8266 9999
registrars@linkmarketservices.com.au
+1 212 815 2293
Contents
ASX Appendix 4E – Results for Announcement to the Market
Directors’ Report
Auditor’s Independence Declaration
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Directors’ Declaration
Independent Auditor’s Report
1
3
30
32
33
34
35
36
91
92
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited (ASX Code: KCN)
ASX APPENDIX 4E - RESULTS FOR ANNOUNCEMENT TO THE MARKET
For the year ended 30 June 2016
2016 
$’000
10.5% 
 
33.3% 
 
19.1%
97.1%
174,412 
 
78,916 
 
253,328
Revenue decreased    
 
Revenue decreased    
 
Revenue decreased
Revenue from ordinary activities 
 
Revenue from discontinued operation 
 
Revenue from ordinary activities and 
discontinued operation 
 
Loss from ordinary activities after tax 
attributable to members 
 
Net loss for the period attributable to 
members 
 
Discontinued Operations 
On 30 October 2015, Kingsgate announced the sale of 100% of the Challenger Gold Mine (“CGO”) and certain 
exploration licenses for a cash consideration of $1 million and a royalty of $25 per ounce on gold production from 
the Challenger South South West Zone after production of 30,000 ounces. The transaction was completed on 15 
March 2016.
Loss increased
(264,182)
(229,451)
Loss increased
55.4%
2015 
$’000
194,808 
 
118,354 
 
313,162
(134,006)
(147,643)
On 25 February 2016, Kingsgate announced a Share Purchase Agreement was entered into to sell an 85% interest 
in the Bowdens Silver Project (“Bowdens”) for a cash consideration of $20 million to Silver Investment Holdings 
Australia Limited (“SIHA”). This arrangement was subsequently varied with SIHA agreeing to purchase 100% of the 
project for a total consideration of $25 million. On 29 June 2016, the Company completed the sale of the project.  
At that date, $5 million of the consideration was outstanding and is due to be paid by 30 September 2016.  If this 
is not paid by the due date the Company will retain 15% of the project under an unincorporated Joint Venture.
In respect of the above:
•  Revenue from discontinued operation relates to CGO; 
•  Revenue  from  ordinary  activities  and  the  loss  from  ordinary  activities  after  tax  attributable  to  members
excludes the performance of CGO and Bowdens for the year; and
•  Net loss for the period attributable to members includes the results of all Group operations, including CGO 
and  Bowdens.  (CGO  and  Bowdens  are  defined  as  discontinued  operations.  Refer  Note  34  of  the  financial 
statements for details).
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 1
Dividends 
 
No interim dividend was paid in relation to the year ended 30 June 2016. 
 
No final dividend will be paid in relation to the year ended 30 June 2016. 
 
 
Net Tangible Assets 
 
 
 
Net tangible asset backing per ordinary share: $ per share
Review of Results 
Refer to Review of Operations and Results included in the Directors’ Report. 
 
Audit Report 
The Financial Statements and Remuneration Report have been subject to audit.
2016 
0.34
2015 
1.37
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 2
DIRECTORS’ REPORT 
Your Directors’ present their report on the Group consisting of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited and the entities it 
controlled at the end of, or during the year ended 30 June 2016. 
 
DIRECTORS 
The following persons were directors of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited during the whole of the financial year and 
up to the date of this report.  
 
•  Ross Smyth-Kirk  Chairman 
•  Peter Alexander  Non-Executive Director 
•  Peter McAleer *  Non-Executive Director 
•  Sharon Skeggs    Non-Executive Director 
•  Peter Warren    Non-Executive Director 
* granted leave of absence from February 2016 due to ill health
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES 
The principal activities of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited are mining and mineral exploration in Australia, South 
East Asia and South America. 
 
DIVIDENDS 
•  No final dividend was declared for the year ended 30 June 2015 (30 June 2014: nil). 
•  No interim dividend was declared for the year ended 30 June 2016 (30 June 2015: nil).
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS AND RESULTS 
Operational performance 
Kingsgate is a gold and silver mining, development and exploration company based in Sydney, Australia. Kingsgate 
owns and operates the Chatree Gold Mine in Thailand. In addition, the Company has an advanced development 
project; the Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project, in the highly prospective Maricunga Gold/Silver Belt in Chile. 
Group gold production for the year was 146,502 ounces with Chatree contributing 97,510 ounces and Challenger 
48,992 ounces. 
Kingsgate suffered a major setback during the year when the Thai Government announced on 10 May 2016, that 
the Chatree Gold Mine must cease operations by 31 December 2016. In effect, the Thai Government’s actions or 
lack of action over the past 12 months, and their inability to articulate a valid reason for the decision has now 
irrevocably  damaged  Kingsgate  and  its  Thai  subsidiary  Akara  Resources  Public  Company  Limited’s  (“Akara”), 
business and reputations. 
Since  the  initial  closure  announcement  in  May,  the  Thai  Government  has  also  rescinded  the  original  Cabinet 
resolution to close the mine and via a new Cabinet resolution empowered the Thai Industry Minister and other 
key government officials to oversee the closure of the mine by the end of the year. 
The Thai Government has expressed that the closure is in no way a reflection of the way the mine is operated 
which  validates  Kingsgate’s  view  that  the  mine  is  and  always  has  been  a  socially  responsible,  internationally 
accredited mining operation employing modern techniques. Chatree continues to comply with stringent health 
and environmental laws, and is one of the most heavily regulated mining operations in the world. 
A great deal of uncertainty still remains in how Akara might continue to operate the mine until the end of the 
year, as the Thai Department of Primary Industries and Mines has issued various instructions in the wake of the 
10 May decision only to revoke some less than a month later. 
The Thai Industry Minister Atchaka Sibunruang, on 18 August 2016, once again told the media that governmental 
committees set up in October 2015 to investigate alleged health and environmental issues around the mine have 
found  that  there  have  been  no  problems  caused  by  the  mine.  However,  the  Committee  will  not  conclude  its 
findings until the end of the year.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 3
The Industry Ministry went on to say that the Cabinet’s 10 May 2016 resolution to shut down Akara was cancelled 
because the resolution did not comply with Thai law, and was further explained by saying the 10 May resolution 
could put the Cabinet at risk of legal action by Akara as cancelling a concession that has already been approved 
and still remains valid does in fact break the law.  
Akara has however, in light of this ongoing uncertainty, implemented a revised mine plan up until 31 December 
2016 that is expected to generate sufficient cash flow to cover all of Akara’s liabilities and obligations. 
While  Kingsgate  is  extremely  disappointed  with  the  situation  it  now  finds  itself  in,  the  Company  continues  to 
vigorously  pursue  a  range  of  potential  remedies  for  the  situation,  which  include  both  legal  and  diplomatic 
options.  
Both the Kingsgate Board and Management are seeking compensation on behalf of shareholders for the material 
impact  of  the  Thai  Government’s  decision,  and  as  noted  previously,  it  is  appropriate  that  Kingsgate’s  shares 
remain voluntarily suspended while these options are being pursued.  
Kingsgate also appreciates that while the voluntary suspension may be frustrating for some shareholders, it is 
necessary to protect against volatility created by this uncertainty.  
In  other  Thai  specific  matters,  Kingsgate  also  sought  clarification  from  the  Thai  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission (“SEC”), with respect to the SEC’s announcement on 2 October 2015, in relation to the status of the 
Initial Public Offering (“IPO”) of Akara. The SEC suggested that they had rejected the IPO application. As far as 
Kingsgate was aware, the IPO application was still under consideration by the SEC. The Board of Kingsgate was in 
any event, as a result of market conditions at the time, considering making an application to the SEC for deferral 
of the IPO. Akara submitted an application to the SEC to defer the IPO in October 2015. 
Given  the  events  of  10  May  2016,  and  the  Thai  Government’s  decision  to  close  the  Chatree  Gold  Mine 
prematurely, there will be no further consideration given to the IPO. 
The National Anti-Corruption Commission (“NACC”) of Thailand contacted Akara Resources in November 2015 to 
inquire  into  facts  and  gather  evidence  in  respect  of  allegations  made  against  a  number  of  parties,  including 
Kingsgate and Akara Resources.  
Kingsgate and Akara Resources are unaware of the details of the allegations, nor are they aware of any matters 
that  would  justify  such  an  inquiry.  Kingsgate  has  not  been  formally  contacted  to  date.  The  NACC  Committee 
established to oversee the matter has been reconstituted and a new Chairperson has been appointed, but there 
has been no further activity to date. 
Kingsgate’s other operating asset, the Challenger Gold Mine, made a solid contribution to group production for 
the year before its sale to WPG/Diversified Minerals Pty Ltd in March 2016.  
Challenger contributed 48,992 ounces at a total cash cost of US$763 per ounce, with underground mining ceasing 
in December 2015, and the remaining ore being sourced from the SEZ open pit.  
Kingsgate’s after tax loss of $229.5 million for the year is primarily due to a non-cash impairment charge of $227.6 
million against the carrying value of the Chatree Gold Mine.  
As at 30 June 2016, the Group’s current liabilities exceeded its current assets by $36,855,000.  This was largely a 
result of the reclassification of the external borrowings of Akara as current liabilities due to the Thai government’s 
decision that the Chatree Gold Mine must cease operation by 31 December 2016.  As a result of this matter the 
independent  auditor’s  report  refers  to  a  material  uncertainty  regarding  continuation  of  the  Group  as  a  going 
concern.    A  plan  has  been  implemented  to  enable  the  Group  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  For  further 
information refer to the going concern disclosure in Note 1 of the financial statements together with the auditor’s 
report. 
Chatree 
Notwithstanding the current situation in Thailand with the Chatree Gold Mine, it remained Kingsgate’s primary 
production asset for the year, producing 97,510 ounces of gold and 675,579 ounces of silver. The process plant 
treated 5.5 million tonnes at a head grade of 0.70 grams per tonne gold with a recovery of 79.8%.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 4
The main operational and processing issues over the course of the year at Chatree resulted from a combination of   
harder than scheduled ore from the stockpiles, and extended periods of reduced truck and excavator availability.  
Total cash costs for the year were US$895 per ounce (US$797 per ounce exclusive of Thai royalties). The average 
royalty paid to the Thai Government was US$98 per ounce of gold. Total production costs after depreciation and 
amortisation were US$1,225 per ounce of gold produced. 
At  year  end,  6.74  million  tonnes  of  ore  was  stockpiled  with  an  average  contained  gold  grade  of  0.44g/t 
representing 95,340 ounces of gold. 
Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project 
Kingsgate’s focus remained firmly on the development of the impressive Nueva Esperanza Project throughout the 
year, which has the potential to provide Kingsgate with a solid platform for growth in Chile and other strategic 
areas of South America. 
The  Optimisation  Study  blending  historical elements  of  the  project  was  completed  to  a  Pre-Feasibility  level  in 
conjunction with Ausenco during the year and released in April 2016.  The Pre-Feasibility Study has confirmed: 
•  First 5 years production average of 135 Koz/pa at US$ 633/oz cash costs (AuEq601); 
•
Initial 11.6 year life; supported by an Ore Reserve of 1.1 million ounces AuEq60, at a grade of 2.0 grams per 
tonne AuEq60 of oxidised mineralisation contained in three open pits; and 
Life of mine cash costs of US$706/oz and All-in-costs US$913/oz (AuEq60).
• 
Notably, the Pre-Feasibility Study was published using gold and silver prices lower than the current spot price, and 
the project continues to generate industry and market interest. 
There  was  also  a  strong  emphasis  on  developing  a  systematic  regional  approach  to  exploration  at  Nueva 
Esperanza during the year, with the aim of building detailed layers of geological information to generate new drill 
targets.  
To that end, a regional drilling program to ascertain basement geochemistry was completed in March 2016, which 
saw  a  total  of  3,332  metres  drilled  across  485  holes  that  generated  527  samples.  Further  RC  drilling  was 
undertaken in May, and US$3 million has been committed to further drilling of target areas commencing in the 
Chilean spring field season. 
Notes:  
1 Gold Equivalent: AuEq (g/t) = Au (g/t) + Ag (g/t) ÷ 60.  Calculated from long term historical prices of US$1,200/oz for gold and US$19.00 for silver and 
combined life of mine average metallurgical recoveries of 80% Au and 84% Ag estimated from test work by  Kingsgate.  It  is Kingsgate’s opinion  that  all 
elements included in the metal equivalents calculation have a reasonable potential to be recovered and sold.  Although gold is not the dominant metal, gold 
equivalent values are reported to allow comparison with Kingsgate’s other projects.  Nueva Esperanza silver equivalent: AgEq (g/t) = Ag (g/t) + Au (g/t) x 60.  
Challenger 
On  30  October  2015,  Kingsgate  announced  an  Option  Agreement  was  reached  with  a  50/50  Joint  Venture 
between Diversified Minerals Pty Ltd and WPG Resources Limited (“Purchasers”), whereby the Purchasers would 
acquire 100% of the Challenger Gold Mine and certain exploration licences for a consideration of $1 million and a 
$25 per ounce revenue royalty on future production in excess of 30,000 ounces from the Challenger SSW Zone. 
The Option Agreement was exercised on 11 December 2015. A Share Purchase Agreement was executed on 19 
February 2016, and the sale was completed on 15 March 2016. 
Bowdens Silver Project 
On 25 February 2016, Kingsgate announced a Share Purchase Agreement was entered into to sell an 85% interest 
in  the  Bowdens  Silver  Project  for  a  cash  consideration  of  $20  million  to  Silver  Investment  Holdings  Australia 
Limited (“SIHA”). This arrangement was subsequently varied with SIHA agreeing to purchase 100% of the project 
for a total consideration of $25 million. On 29 June 2016, the Company completed the sale of the project.  At that 
date $5 million of the consideration was outstanding and is due to be paid by 30 September. If this is not paid by 
the due date the Company will retain 15% of the project and revert to an unincorporated Joint Venture.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 5
FINANCIAL RESULTS 
 
 
Net (loss)/profit after tax ($’000) 
EBITDA ($’000) 
Dividends paid (Cash & DRP) ($’000) 
Share price 30 June ($) 
Basic (loss) earnings per share (Cents) 
Diluted (loss) earnings per share (Cents) 
*Shares have been suspended since 13 May 2016. 
 
EBITDA before significant items 
The pre-tax loss for the Group before significant items was $18.4 million down from a profit of $1.2 million in the 
previous year.  
EBITDA before significant items was $39.9 million (2015: $69.5 million). 
Significant items are detailed below.
2012 
(327,067)  75,006 
 96,424   166,732  
22,739 
22,026 
4.85 
1.27 
52.5 
(215.0) 
(215.0) 
52.5
2016 
(229,451) 
39,864 
- 
*0.41 
(102.6) 
(102.6)
2015 
(147,643) 
 69,458  
- 
0.70 
(66.0) 
(66.0)
2013
2014 
(97,613) 
 64,207  
- 
0.86 
(56.7) 
(56.7)
2015 
$’000 
(147,643) 
651 
(146,992) 
 
 
115,650 
- 
22,643 
9,888 
1,189 
 
14,319 
53,950 
69,458
2016 
$’000 
(229,451) 
40 
(229,411) 
 
 
227,564 
(411) 
(16,645) 
461 
(18,442) 
 
12,129 
46,177 
39,864
Loss after income tax 
Income tax expense 
Loss before income tax 
 
Significant items  
Impairment of Chatree Gold Mine 
Impairment reversal of Challenger Gold Mine 
Impairment (reversal)/impairment of Bowdens Silver Project 
Impairment of capitalised exploration 
Loss/profit before tax and significant items 
 
Net finance costs 
Depreciation and amortisation 
EBITDA before significant items 
 
EBITDA before significant items is a financial measure which is not prescribed by International Financial Reporting 
Standards (“IFRS”) and represents the profit under IFRS adjusted for specific significant items. The table above 
summarises key items between statutory loss after tax and EBITDA before significant items. The EBITDA before 
significant  items  has  not been  subject  to  any  specific  auditor  review  procedures  by  our  auditor  but  has  been 
extracted from the accompanying audited financial statements. 
Revenue 
Total sales revenue for the Group was $253.3 million for the year, down from $313.2 million in the previous year. 
Gold revenue decreased by 19% to $238.9 million and silver revenue decreased by 14% to $14.5 million. 
The decrease in gold and silver revenue reflects mining fleet availability issues, delayed access to higher grade ore 
and lower gold and silver prices. 
The average US dollar gold price received was US$1,135 per ounce (2015: US$1,208 per ounce).  The average 
silver price received was US$15 per ounce (2015: US$17 per ounce). 
Costs 
The overall decrease in cost of sales to $242.2 million (including royalties, depreciation and amortisation) reflects 
decreased  mining  production  from  the  Chatree  Mine,  due  primarily  to  mining  fleet  availability  issues,  and 
decreased depreciation due to lower gold production.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 6
2016
2015
US$/oz 
833 
690 
1,059
US$/oz 
851 
895 
763
Movement 
in unit cost  
US$/oz 
18 
205 
(296)
Total cash costs per ounce 
 
Group 
Chatree 
Challenger 
Depreciation and amortisation 
The decrease in depreciation and amortisation to $46.2 million is mainly a result of lower production at Chatree 
and the impact of the 2015 asset impairment against the project which resulted in a reduction in the carrying 
value of depreciable assets. 
Cash flow 
Net  operating  cash  inflow  was  $46.5  million  (2015:  $76.6  million).  The  decrease  of  $30.1  million  reflects  a 
decrease in gold and silver sales offset by a decrease in mining costs and lower interest payments, due to the 
reduction in borrowings over the year. Net investing cash outflow was $17.1 million (2015: $40.3 million), down 
$23.2  million,  representing  continued  project  feasibility  exploration  work  at  the  Nueva  Esperanza  Gold/Silver 
Project and completion of Tailings Storage Facility #2 – Stage 5 at Chatree offset by proceeds of $20 million from 
the sale of the Bowdens Silver Project. Net cash outflow from financing activities was $48.6 million (2015: $37.7 
million), including repayment of $47.5 million of the multi-currency loan facility and revolving credit facility. 
 
MATERIAL BUSINESS RISKS  
The  Group  uses  a  range  of  assumptions  and  forecasts  in  determining  estimates  of  production  and  financial 
performance.  There  is  uncertainty  associated  with  these  assumptions  that  could  result  in  actual  performance 
differing from expected outcomes. 
The material business risks that may have an impact on the operating and financial prospects of the Group are: 
Revenue 
Revenue, and hence operating margins, are exposed to fluctuations in the gold price and to a degree in the silver 
price  including  foreign  currency  rate  movement  affecting  US  dollar  denominated  metal  prices.  Management 
continually monitors operating margins and responds to changes to commodity prices as necessary to address 
this risk, including reviewing mine plans and entering into forward gold sale contracts. 
Changes  in  the  gold  and  silver  price  also  impact  assessments  of  the  feasibility  of  exploration  and the Group’s 
development project, Nueva Esperanza. 
Mineral resources and ore reserves 
Ore reserves and mineral resources are estimates. These estimates are substantially based on interpretations of 
geological  data  obtained  from  drill  holes  and  other  sampling  techniques.  Actual  mineralisation  or  geological 
conditions may be different from those predicted and as a consequence there is a risk that any part, or all of the 
mineral resources, will not be converted into reserves. 
Market price fluctuations of gold and silver as well as increased production and capital costs, may render ore 
reserves unprofitable to develop at a particular site for periods of time. 
Replacement of depleted reserves 
The Group aims to continually replace reserves depleted by production to maintain production levels over the 
long  term.  Reserves  can  be  replaced  by  expanding  known  ore  bodies,  locating  new  deposits  or  making 
acquisitions. 
As a result, there is a risk that depletion of reserves will not be offset by discoveries or acquisitions. The mineral 
base may decline if reserves are mined without adequate replacement and, as a consequence, the Group may not 
be able to sustain production beyond the current mine lives based on current production rates.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 7
Mining risks and insurance risks 
The  mining  industry  is  subject  to  significant  risks  and  hazards,  including  environmental  hazards,  industrial 
accidents,  unusual  or  unexpected  geological  conditions,  unavailability  of  materials  and  unplanned  equipment 
failures.  These  risks  and  hazards  could  result  in  significant  costs  or  delays  that  could  have  a material  adverse 
impact on the Group’s financial performance and position. 
The  Group  maintains  insurance  to  cover  some  of  these  risks  and  hazards  at  levels  that  are  believed  to  be 
appropriate for the circumstances surrounding each identified risk. However, there remains the possibility that 
the level of insurance may not provide sufficient coverage for losses related to specific loss events. 
Reliance on contractors 
Some aspects of Kingsgate’s production, development and exploration activities are conducted by contractors. As 
a  result,  the  Group’s  business,  operating  and  financial  performance  and  results  are  impacted  upon  by  the 
availability and performance of contractors and the associated risks. 
Production and cost estimates 
The Group prepares estimates of future production, cash costs and capital costs of production for each operation, 
though there is a risk that such estimates will not be achieved. Failure to achieve production or cost estimates 
could have an adverse impact of future cash flows, profitability, results of operations and financial position. 
Refinancing risk 
In addition to cash flows from operating activities, Kingsgate has debt facilities in place with external financiers.  
Although the Group currently generates sufficient funds to service its debt requirements, no assurance can be 
given that Kingsgate will be able to meet its financial covenants when required or be able to refinance the debt 
prior to its expiry on acceptable terms to the Company.  If Kingsgate is unable to meet its financial covenants 
when required or refinance its external debt on acceptable terms to the Company, its financial condition and 
ability to continue operating may be adversely affected. 
Maintaining title 
The  Group’s  production,  development  and  exploration  activities  are  subject  to  obtaining  and  maintaining  the 
necessary  titles,  authorisations,  permits  and  licences,  and  associated  land  access  arrangements  with  the  local 
community,  which  authorise  those  activities  under  the  relevant  law  (“Authorisations”).  There  can  be  no 
guarantee that the Group will be able to successfully obtain and maintain relevant Authorisations to support its 
activities, or that renewal of existing Authorisations will be granted in a timely manner or on terms acceptable to 
the Group. 
Authorisations  held  by  or  granted  to  the  Group  may  also  be  subject  to  challenge  by  third  parties  which,  if 
successful, could impact on Kingsgate’s exploration, development and/or mining activities. 
Political, economic, social and security risks 
Kingsgate’s production, development and exploration activities are subject to the political, economic, social and 
other  risks  and  uncertainties  in  the  jurisdictions  in  which  those  activities  are  undertaken.  Such  risks  are 
unpredictable and have become more prevalent in recent years. In particular, in recent years there has been an 
increasing social and political focus on: 
• 
•
the revenue derived by governments and other stakeholders from mining activities; and 
resource nationalism, greater limits on foreign ownership of mining or exploration interests and/or forced 
divestiture  (with  or  without  adequate  compensation),  and  broad  reform  agenda  in  relation  to  mining 
legislation, environmental stewardship and local business opportunities and employment.
As evidenced by the decision by the Thai Government that the Chatree Gold Mine must cease operation by 31 
December  2016  there  can  be  no  certainty  as  to  what  changes,  if  any,  will  be  made  to  relevant  laws  in  the 
jurisdictions  where  the  Company  has  current  interests,  or  other  jurisdictions  where  the  Company  may  have 
interest in the future, or the impact that relevant changes may have on Kingsgate’s ability to own and operate its 
mining and related interests and to otherwise conduct its business in those jurisdictions.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 8
Environmental, health and safety regulations 
The  Group’s  mining  and  processing  operations  and  exploration  activities  are  subject  to  extensive  laws  and 
regulations.  Delays  in  obtaining,  or  failure  to  obtain  government  permits  and  approvals  may  adversely  affect 
operations, including the ability to continue operations. 
Community relations 
The  Group  has  established  community  relations  functions  that  have  developed  a  community  engagement 
framework, including a set of principles, policies and procedures designed to provide a structured and consistent 
approach to community activities. 
A  failure  to  appropriately  manage  local  community  stakeholder  expectations  may  lead  to  disruptions  in 
production and exploration activities. 
Risk management 
The  Group  manage  the  risks  listed  above,  and  other  day-to-day  risks  through  an  established  management 
framework. The Group has policies in place to manage risk in the areas of health and safety, environment and 
equal employment opportunity.  
Management  and  the  Board  regularly  review  the  risk  portfolio  of  the  business  and  the  effectiveness  of  the 
Group’s management of those risks.
FINANCE 
At the end of the year Kingsgate’s drawn debt facilities consisted of: 
Revolving Credit Facility 
Kingsgate has a Revolving Credit Facility (“RCF”) with $10 million drawn against this facility at 30 June 2016. A 
debt repayment of $5 million was paid at the end of July 2016. The balance of the RCF of $5 million is due for 
repayment at the end of January 2017. 
Kingsgate,  in  addition,  has  available  over  the  tenure  of  the  RCF  an  Equity-linked  Loan  Facility  (“ELF”)  of  $15 
million. The ELF is currently undrawn.   
Multi-currency loan facility 
Kingsgate’s  Thai  operating  subsidiary,  Akara  Resources  PCL  (“Akara”),  has  an  amortising  multi-currency  loan 
facility which under the loan facility agreement has less than three years remaining following the commencement 
of quarterly repayments in November 2013. Subsequent to the Thai Government decision on 10 May 2016 that 
the Chatree Gold Mine would only be able to continue to operate until 31 December 2016, a revised mine plan 
was implemented which from the planned production profile indicates the potential to generate sufficient cash 
flow  to  repay  this  debt  in  full  by  31  December  2016.  The  outstanding  debt  balance  is  classified  as  a  current 
liability at year end as it is expected to be repaid by 31 December 2016, and covenants under the loan agreement 
were  not  met.  No  default  notice  has  been  received  from  the  financiers.  At  year  end  the  equivalent  of  $75.3 
million was owed against this facility and a further equivalent $7.3 million has been repaid since year end.  As 
security  against  the  facility  the  lender  has  a  fixed  and  floating  charge  over  the  land,  buildings,  plant  and 
equipment in Thailand owned by Akara and its material subsidiaries. In addition, Akara is required to maintain a 
debt service reserve account of US$5 million. 
Significant change in the state of affairs 
There were no significant changes in the state of affairs of the Group that occurred during the financial year not 
otherwise disclosed in this report or the consolidated financial statements.
MATTERS SUBSEQUENT TO THE END OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 
No other matter or circumstance has arisen since 30 June 2016 that has significantly affected, or may significantly 
affect: 
•  the Group’s operations in future financial years; 
•  the results of those operations in future financial years; or 
•  the Group’s state of affairs in future financial years.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 9
LIKELY DEVELOPMENTS AND EXPECTED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
If the Thai Government’s decision to close the Chatree Gold Mine is enforced, the fiscal year 2017 will see operations 
cease  on  31  December  2016  with  the  plant  then  placed  on  care  and  maintenance.  Gold  production  up  until  31 
December 2016 is expected to cover all remaining liabilities and obligations that sit against the Chatree Gold Mine.  
Work will continue on the Nueva Esperanza Development Project in Chile, with further targeted exploration drilling 
undertaken in conjunction with advancement of feasibility works. 
Kingsgate remains focused on ongoing cost saving initiatives. Further cost reductions will be implemented in FY17.
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION 
The Group is subject to environmental regulations in respect to its gold mining operations and exploration activities 
in  Australia,  Thailand,  Chile  and  Lao  PDR.  For  the  year  ended  30  June  2016,  the  Group  has  operated  within  all 
environmental laws.
DIRECTORS’ MEETINGS 
The number of meetings of the Company’s Board of Directors and of each Board Committee held during the year 
ended 30 June 2016, and the number of meetings attended by each Director were:
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Peter Alexander 
Peter McAleer * 
Sharon Skeggs  
Peter Warren
Meetings of Committees
Board
Audit
A 
12 
11 
5 
12 
12
B 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12
A 
3 
- 
1 
3 
3
B 
3 
- 
3 
3 
3
Nomination 
A 
B 
1 
1 
- 
- 
1 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1
Remuneration
A 
1 
1 
- 
1 
1
B 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1
A   Number of meetings attended 
B   Number of meetings held during the time the Director held office or was a member of the committee during 
the year. 
* granted leave of absence from February 2016 due to ill health
INFORMATION ON DIRECTORS/COMPANY SECRETARY 
Ross Smyth-Kirk, B Com, CPA, F Fin, Chairman 
Ross Smyth-Kirk was a founding Director of the former leading investment management company, Clayton Robard 
Management Limited and has had extensive experience over a number of years in investment management including 
a close involvement with the minerals and mining sectors. He has been a Director of a number of companies over the 
past 36 years in Australia and the United Kingdom.  Mr Smyth-Kirk was previously Chairman of the Australian Jockey 
Club  Limited  and  retired  in  May  2013  as  a  Director  of  Argent  Minerals  Limited.    Mr  Smyth-Kirk  is  Chairman  of 
Kingsgate’s wholly owned subsidiary, Akara Resources Public Company Limited. 
Responsibilities  
Chairman  of  the  Board,  member  of  the  Audit  Committee,  Chairman  of  the  Nomination  and  Remuneration 
Committees.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 10
Peter Alexander, Ass. Appl. Geol, Non-Executive Director 
Peter Alexander has had 43 years’ experience in the Australian and offshore mining and exploration industry. He 
was  Managing  Director  of  Dominion  Mining  Limited  for  10  years  prior  to  his  retirement  in  January  2008.  Mr 
Alexander was appointed a Non-Executive Director of Dominion Mining Limited in February 2008 and resigned on 
21 February 2011. Mr Alexander is a Non-Executive Director of the ASX listed companies Doray Minerals Limited 
and Caravel Minerals Limited. He was previously Chairman of Doray Minerals Limited and a Director of Fortunis 
Resources Limited. 
Responsibilities 
Member of the Remuneration Committee. 
 
Peter McAleer, B Com (Hons), Barrister-at-Law (Kings Inns – Dublin Ireland), Non-Executive Director 
Peter  McAleer  was  until  the  end  of  May  2013,  the  Senior  Independent  Director  and  Chairman  of  the  Audit 
Committee of Kenmare Resources PLC (Ireland). Previously, he was Chairman of Latin Gold Limited, Director and 
Chief Executive Officer of Equatorial Mining Limited and was a Director of Minera El Tesoro (Chile). 
Responsibilities 
Member of the Audit, Remuneration and Nomination Committees. 
 
Sharon Skeggs,  Non-Executive Director 
Sharon Skeggs has had a distinguished career in business management, in London and Australia, for over 36 years. 
She is an expert in business strategy and communications. She is currently a Director of ANZ Stadiums and was 
previously a Director of Saatchi & Saatchi (Australia) for 15 years and the Australian Jockey Club. 
For the past six years Ms Skeggs has consulted to a number of major companies including Telstra, Westpac, News 
Limited,  Visa  (Australia  &  Asia)  and  Woolworths  on  a  variety  of  corporate  matters  including  business  and 
marketing strategies, change management, communication programs and cost reduction initiatives. 
Responsibilities 
Member of the Audit, Remuneration and Nomination Committees. 
 
Peter Warren, B Com, CPA, Non-Executive Director 
Peter Warren was Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited for six years 
up  until  his  retirement  in  2011.  He  is  a  CPA  of  over  40  years  standing,  with  an  extensive  involvement  in  the 
resources industry. He was Company Secretary and Chief Financial Officer for Equatorial Mining Limited and of 
the  Australian  subsidiaries  of  the  Swiss  based  Alusuisse  Group  and  has  held  various  financial  and  accounting 
positions  for  Peabody  Resources  and  Hamersley  Iron.  Mr  Warren  is  a  Director  of  Kingsgate’s  wholly  owned 
subsidiary, Akara Resources Public Company Limited. 
Responsibilities 
Chairman of the Audit Committee and member of the Nomination and Remuneration Committees. 
 
Ross Coyle, BA, FCPA, FGIA, Company Secretary 
Ross Coyle was reappointed Company Secretary on 7 December 2015, having previously served in this office from 
September 2011 to November 2014. He is Kingsgate’s Chief Financial Officer and was previously General Manager 
Finance and Administration.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 11
Remuneration Report
Dear Shareholder 
 
 
I am pleased to present our Remuneration Report for 2016. 
 
During the 2016 financial year, the Company’s remuneration practices have reflected the market conditions in 
which we operate.   
 
We  are  confident  our  remuneration  practices  are  sound,  market  competitive  and  demonstrate  a  clear  link 
between  executive’s  performance  and  shareholder  returns.  Benchmarking  of  salaries  for  all  roles  is  routinely 
undertaken  to  ensure  that  we  remain  a  competitive  employer  in  the  market  while  continuing  to  meet  all 
legislative and regulatory requirements.  
 
Our discipline in this area has been combined with significant change to management initiatives to ensure that 
cost reductions within our business have been in line with market conditions. As a result certain senior executives 
have taken a 10% reduction in remuneration effective from 1 October 2015. 
 
The Group’s framework for awarding long term incentives (“LTI”) was subject to a comprehensive review by the 
Board  during  the  2016  financial  year  with  the  decision  made  to  reintroduce  the  previously  implemented 
Employee Share Option Plan (“ESOP”).  Other than the issue of options to the new General Manager of Corporate 
Development who was appointed in April 2016 no other LTI awards were granted during the year. In addition no 
Short Term Incentives were awarded during the year. 
 
 
We will continue to consider your feedback as shareholders and review our remuneration and incentive policies 
and framework to meet future market changes. 
 
Thank you for your interest in this report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Chairman 
Remuneration Committee
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 12
INTRODUCTION 
This Remuneration Report forms part of the Directors’ Report. It outlines the Remuneration Policy and framework 
applied by the Company as well as details of the remuneration paid to Key Management Personnel (“KMP”).  KMP 
are defined as those persons having the authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling the 
activities of the Company, directly or indirectly, including Directors and members of Executive Management. 
 
The information provided in this report has been prepared in accordance with s300A and audited as required by 
section 308 (3c) of the Corporations Act 2001. 
 
The  objective  of  the  Company’s  remuneration  philosophy  is  to  ensure  that  Directors  and  Executives  are 
remunerated fairly and responsibly at a level that is competitive, reasonable and appropriate, in order to attract 
and retain suitably skilled and experienced people. 
 
REMUNERATION POLICY 
The Remuneration Policy other than the termination of the Executive Rights Plan and the reintroduction of the   
Kingsgate Employee Share Option Plan remains unchanged from last financial year. The Remuneration Policy has 
been  designed  to  align  the  interests  of  shareholders,  Directors,  and  employees.  This  is  achieved  by  setting  a 
framework to: 
•  help  ensure  an  applicable  balance  of  fixed  and  at-risk  remuneration,  with  the  at-risk  component  linking
incentive and performance measures to both Group and individual performance;
•  provide an appropriate reward for Directors and Executive Management to manage and lead the business 
successfully  and  to  drive  strong,  long-term  growth  in  line  with  the  Company’s  strategy  and  business 
objectives;
facilitate transparency and fairness in executive remuneration policy and practices;
contribute to appropriate attraction and retention strategies for Directors and executives.
•  encourage executives to strive for superior performance; 
• 
•  be competitive and cost effective in the current employment market; and 
• 
 
In  consultation  with  external  remuneration  consultants,  the  Group  has  structured  an  executive  remuneration 
framework that is market competitive and aligned with to the business strategy of the organisation. 
 
The framework is intended to provide a mix of fixed and variable remuneration, with a blend of short and long-
term incentives as appropriate. As executives gain seniority within the Group, the balance of this mix shifts to a 
higher proportion of “at risk” rewards (refer to chart – Reward Mix on page 14). 
 
REMUNERATION GOVERNANCE 
Role of the Remuneration Committee 
The  Remuneration  Committee  is  a  committee  of  the  Board  and  has  responsibility  for  setting  policy  for 
determining the nature and amount of emoluments of Board members and Executives.  The Committee makes 
recommendations to the Board concerning: 
•  Non-Executive Director fees; 
•  remuneration level of Executive Directors and other KMP; 
•  the executive remuneration framework and operation of the incentive plan; 
•  key performance indicators and performance hurdles for the executive team; and 
•  the engagement of specialist external consultants to design or validate methodology used by the Company
to remunerate Directors and employees.
In  forming  its  recommendations  the  Committee  takes  into  consideration  the  Group’s  stage  of  development, 
remuneration  in  the  industry  and  performance.  The  Corporate  Governance  Statement  provides  further 
information on the role of this committee.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 13
Remuneration consultants 
The Group engages the services of independent and specialist remuneration consultants from time to time. Under 
the  Corporations  Act  2001,  remuneration  consultants  must  be  engaged  by  the  Non-Executive  Directors  and 
reporting of any remuneration recommendations must be made directly to the Remuneration Committee. 
 
The Remuneration Committee engaged the services of Godfrey Remuneration Group Pty Ltd in the 2013/2014 
financial year to review its remuneration practice revisions and to provide further validation in respect of both the 
executive short-term and long-term incentive plan design methodology and standards. These recommendations 
covered the remuneration of the Group’s Non-Executive Directors and KMP. 
 
The Godfrey Remuneration Group Pty Ltd confirmed that the recommendations from that review were made free 
from undue influence by members of the Group’s KMP. 
 
The  following  arrangements  were 
remuneration recommendations were free from undue influence: 
 
•
the Godfrey Remuneration Pty Ltd was engaged by, and reported directly to, the Chair of the Remuneration 
Committee. The agreement for the provision of remuneration consulting services was executed by the Chair 
of the Remuneration Committee under delegated authority on behalf of the Board; and
implemented  by  the  Remuneration  Committee  to  ensure  that  the
As a consequence, the Board is satisfied that the recommendations contained in the report were made free from 
undue influence from any members of the Group’s KMP. 
 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL REMUNERATION 
The executive pay and reward framework is comprised of three components: 
• 
• 
• 
 
Reward mix  
The following chart represents the remuneration reward mix for the various KMP based on achievement of all 
stretch targets.
fixed remuneration including superannuation; 
short-term performance incentives; and 
long-term incentives through participation in the Executive Rights Plan and Options.
•  any remuneration recommendations by the Godfrey Remuneration Group Pty Ltd were made directly to the
Chair of the Remuneration Committee.
*The above reward mix remains unchanged from financial year 2013/2014 and LTI relate to deferred and performance rights.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 14
Fixed remuneration 
Total  fixed  remuneration  (“TFR”)  is  structured  as  a  total  employment  cost  package,  including  base  pay  and 
superannuation. Base pay may be delivered as a mix of cash, statutory and salary sacrificed superannuation, and 
prescribed non-financial benefits at the Executive’s discretion. 
 
Executives are offered a competitive base pay. Base pay for executives is reviewed annually to ensure their pay is 
competitive with the market. An executive’s pay is also reviewed on promotion. 
 
The Board annually reviews and determines the fixed remuneration for the CEO. The CEO does the same for his 
direct reports. The Executive Management group reviews and recommends fixed remuneration for other senior 
management, for the CEO’s approval. There are no guaranteed increases to fixed remuneration incorporated into 
any senior executives’ agreements. The base pay of a number of Executives was reduced by 10%, effective from 
October, 2015. 
 
The following summarises the performance of the Group over the last five years
Revenue (‘000s) 
Net profit/(loss) after income tax (‘000s) 
EBITDA (‘000s) 
Share price at year end ($/share) 
Dividends paid (cent/share) 
KMP short term employee benefits (‘000s)
2016 
253,328 
(229,451) 
39,864 
0.41 
Nil 
*2,358
2015 
313,162 
(147,643) 
 69,458  
0.70 
Nil 
3,425
2014 
328,326 
(97,613) 
64,207 
0.86 
Nil 
4,471
2013 
329,282 
(327,067) 
96,424 
1.27 
5.0 
4,671
2012 
357,372 
75,006 
166,732 
4.85 
20.0 
4,456
* see page 22 for table outlining the short term employee benefits. 
 
Short-Term Incentives 
Linking current financial year earnings of executives to their performance and the performance of the Group is 
the key objective of our Short-Term Incentive (“STI”) Plan. The Remuneration Committee set key performance 
measures and indicators for the individual executives on an annual basis that reinforce the Group’s business plan 
and targets for the year. No short-term incentives were awarded during the financial year. 
 
The Board has discretion to issue cash bonuses to employees for individual performance outside the STI Plan. 
 
The structure of the STI Plan remains unchanged from financial year 2014/2015 and its key features are outlined 
in the table below:
What is the STI Plan 
and who 
participates? 
How much can the 
executives earn 
under the STI Plan?
Is there Board 
discretion in the
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
The  STI  Plan  is  a  potential  annual  reward  for  eligible  Executive  Key  Management  Personnel  for 
achievement  of  predetermined  individual  Key  Performance  Indicators  (“KPIs”)  aligned  to  the 
achievement of business objectives for the assessment period (financial year commencing 1 July). 
Threshold – represents the minimum acceptable level of performance that needs to be achieved 
before any Individual Award would be payable in relation to that Performance Measure. 
Managing Director/CEO – up to 15% of TFR. COO & CFO – up to 12.5% of TFR. Other KMP – up to 
10% of TFR. 
Target  –  represents  a  challenging  but  achievable  level  of  performance  relative  to  past  and 
otherwise  expected  achievements.  It  will  normally  be  the  budget  level  for  financial  and  other 
quantitative performance objectives. 
Managing Director/CEO – up to 30% of TFR. COO & CFO – up to 25% of TFR. Other KMP – up to 
20% of TFR. 
Stretch (Maximum) – represents a clearly outstanding level of performance which is evident to all 
as a very high level of achievement. 
Managing Director/CEO – up to 60% of TFR. COO & CFO – up to 50% of TFR. Other KMP – up to 
40% of TFR. 
(TFR – Total Fixed Remuneration) 
Yes, the plan provides for Board discretion in the approval of STI outcomes.
Page | 15
payment of an STI 
benefit? 
What are the 
performance 
conditions? 
How are 
performance targets 
set and assessed?
How is the STI 
delivered?
What happens in the 
event  of  cessation  if 
employment?
For KMP between 70% - 80% of potential STI weighting (dependent upon role) is assessed against 
specific  predetermined  KPIs  by  role  with  20%  -  30%  being  based  on  company  performance 
indicators. 
Individual performance targets are set by the identification of key achievements required by role 
in order to meet business objectives determined for the upcoming assessment period in advance. 
The  criteria  for  KMP  are  recommended  by  the  Managing  Director/CEO  for  sign  off  by  the 
Remuneration Committee and in the case of the Managing Director/CEO, are recommended by 
the Chairman by sign off by the Remuneration Committee. 
The relative achievement at the end of the financial period is determined by the above authorities 
with  final  sign  off  by  the  Remuneration  Committee  after  confirmation  of  financial  results  and 
individual/company performance against established criteria. 
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for assessing whether the KPIs are met. To assist in 
this  assessment,  the  Committee  receives  detailed  reports  on  performance  from  management 
which are verified by independent remuneration consultants if required. The Committee has the 
discretion to adjust STIs in lights of unexpected or unintended circumstances. 
STIs are paid in cash after the conclusion of the assessment period and confirmation of financial 
results/individual  performance  and  subject  to  tax  in  accordance  with  prevailing  Australian 
taxation laws. The STIs are then in effect paid and expensed in the financial year subsequent to 
the measurement year. 
Executives are required to be employed for the full 12 months of the assessment period before 
they are eligible to be considered to receive benefits from the STI Plan.
Long-Term Incentives 
The objectives of the LTI Plan are to retain key executives and to align an at-risk component of certain executives’ 
remuneration with shareholder returns. The previously operating Kingsgate Long-Term Incentive (“LTI”) plan, also 
referred to  as  the  Executive  Rights  Plan,  has  been  terminated  and  replaced  by  the Kingsgate Employee  Share 
Option Plan (“ESOP”). The rules and terms and conditions of the ESOP have been independently reviewed.
Under the terms of the ESOP long-term incentives can be provided to certain employees through the issue of 
options  to  acquire  Kingsgate  shares.  Options  are  issued  to  employees  to  provide  incentives  for  employees  to 
deliver long-term shareholder returns.
At the date of this report other than 1,500,000 options granted to Alistair Waddell General Manager of Corporate  
Development no other executive was the recipient of options during the year. 
 
Key features of the ESOP LTI Plan are outlined in the following table:
What is the LTI Plan 
and who 
participates?
What are the 
performance and 
vesting conditions? 
Is there a cost to 
participate?
What happens in the 
event of bonus 
shares, rights issues 
or other capital 
reconstructions?
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Kingsgate executives and other eligible employees  can be granted options to acquire  Kingsgate 
Consolidated Limited fully paid shares. In granting the options the Board takes into account such 
matters as the position of the eligible person, the role they play in the Company, their current 
level  of  fixed  remuneration,  the  nature  of  the  terms  of  employment  and  the  contribution  they 
make to the Group. 
The period over which the options vest is at the discretion of the Board though in general it is 1-3 
years.  The  executive  and  eligible  employee  must  still  be  employed  by  the  Company  at  vesting 
date.  
The options may at the discretion of the Board be issued for nil consideration and are granted in 
accordance  with  performance  guidelines  established  by  the  Remuneration  Committee  and 
approved by the Board. 
If  between  the  grant  date  and  the  date  of  conversion  of  options  into  shares  there  are  bonus 
shares,  rights  issues  or  other  capital  reconstructions  that  affect  the  value  of  Kingsgate 
Consolidated  shares,  the  Board  may,  subject  to  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  make  adjustments  to  the 
number  of  rights  and/or  the  vesting  entitlements  to  ensure  that  holders  of  rights  are  neither 
advantaged or disadvantaged by those changes.
Page | 16
Key features of the previous Executive Rights Plan are outlined in the following table: 
All  outstanding  Performance  Rights  and  Deferred  Rights  vested  on  1  July  2016  with  the  Performance  Rights 
subsequently lapsed.
What is the LTI Plan 
and who 
participates?
What is awarded 
under the LTI Plan? 
How much can the 
executives earn 
under the LTI Plan? 
What are the 
performance and 
vesting conditions? 
Is there a cost to 
participate? 
What are the specific 
performance/vesting 
criteria?
How does the LTI 
vest? 
Is the LTI subject to 
retesting? 
What criteria are 
used for assessment 
and who assesses 
performance?
How is the LTI 
delivered?
What happens in the 
event of bonus 
shares, rights issues 
or other capital 
reconstructions? 
Takeover or Scheme 
of Arrangement? 
What happens in the 
event of cessation of 
employment?
Kingsgate executives can be granted Kingsgate Consolidated Limited rights each year, although an 
award of rights does not confer any entitlement to receive any subsequent awards. In awarding 
rights the Board takes into account such matters as the position of the eligible person, the role 
they play in the Company, their current level of fixed remuneration, the nature of the terms of 
employment  and  the  contribution  they  make  to  the  Group.  Currently  only  members  of  the 
Executive Management group and key site based operational senior management are eligible to 
participate in the LTI Plan. 
Two types of rights are offered under the LTI Plan: Deferred Rights and Performance Rights.
Managing Director/CEO – up to 45% of TFR as Performance Rights only. 
COO/CFO/Executive Management – up to 12.5% of TFR as Deferred Rights and additionally, up to 
12.5% of TFR as Performance Rights. 
Deferred Rights – vesting is time based (three years after the granting of the Deferred Right). 
Performance Rights – refer to Vesting Schedule for Performance Rights later in this report.
The  rights  are  issued  for  nil  consideration  and  are  granted  in  accordance  with  performance 
guidelines established by the Remuneration Committee and approved by the Board. 
Deferred Rights are subject to three year vesting periods. There are no performance conditions 
attached to the Deferred Rights. 
Performance Rights are subject to a three year performance measurement period from 1 July in 
the year when the grant occurs. 
Performance  Rights  vest  subject  to  the  achievement  of  a  hurdle  based  on  total  shareholder 
return. Further information on the vesting scale is below. 
There is no retesting of either the Deferred Rights or Performance Rights.
Performance  is  assessed  against  a  TSR  AlphaTM  measure  for  financial  years  12/13  and  13/14 
executive performance rights. For financial year 14/15 and going forward, performance rights are 
measured  against  the  S&P/ASX  All  Ordinaries  Gold  (AUD)  index  (gold  production  only  and  to 
include dividends paid). The Remuneration Committee signs off performance assessment based 
on  recommendations  by  the  Managing  Director/CEO  with  advice  from  Godfrey  Remuneration 
Group Pty Ltd in terms of relative performance. 
On vesting the first $1,000 value of each of the deferred rights and performance rights awards is 
paid in cash, e.g. if both deferred and received as shares in the Company as per below. 
Number of shares = (number of vested rights x share price on vesting date - $2,000) ÷ share price 
on vesting date. 
If  between  the  grant  date  and  the  date  of  conversion  of  vested  rights  into  cash  and  restricted 
shares there are bonus shares, rights issues or other capital reconstructions that affect the value 
of  Kingsgate  Consolidated  shares,  the  Board  may,  subject  to  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  make 
adjustments  to  the  number  of  rights  and/or  the  vesting  entitlements  to  ensure  that  holders  of 
rights are neither advantaged or disadvantaged by those changes. 
Unvested rights vest in the proportion that the share price has increased since the beginning of 
the vesting period. All vested rights need to be exercised within three months of the takeover. 
Unvested rights are forfeited on dismissal  for cause. In all other termination circumstances any 
unvested rights granted in the year of the cessation of employment are forfeited in the proportion 
that  the  remainder  of  the  year  bears  to  a  full  year.  Unvested  rights  that  are  not  forfeited  are 
retained  by  the  participant  and  are  subsequently  tested  for  vesting  at  the  end  of  the  vesting 
period.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 17
Vesting schedule for performance rights issued after financial year 2013/2014 
Following a review by the Remuneration Committee of recommendations by the Godfrey Remuneration Group in 
financial  year  2013/2014,  the  Board  approved  the  assessment  of  relative  Total  Shareholder  Return  “TSR”  of 
Kingsgate against S&P/ASX All Ordinaries Gold (AUD) index of companies, as represented in Diagram 1. The Board 
chose to replace the TSR Alpha™ measurement with this new measure to: 
•  provide a genuine measure of performance by executives against companies operating in the same market
•
segment; 
retain  the  key  values  of  the  previous  TSR  Alpha™  measure  which  is  to  only  reward  executives  for  over 
performance; 
retain a focus on performance from an investors perspective albeit within a defined market segment; and 
create a simple and easy system to interpret for management and shareholders alike.
• 
• 
These Performance Rights will be subject to a three year vesting period. 
 
Vesting schedule for Performance Rights issued for financial year 2012/2013 and financial year 2013/2014  
These Performance Rights continue to be subject to a hurdle that is derived for the three year vesting period 
using the external performance measuring metric, TSR Alpha™. 
 
Total  Shareholder  Return  measures  the  percentage  return  received  by  a  shareholder  from  investing  in  a 
company’s  shares  over  a period of time.  Broadly,  it  is  share  price  growth  plus  dividends over the  period.  TSR 
Alpha™ takes into account market movement over the vesting period and the additional return (risk premium) 
that shareholders expect from the share market performance over the vesting period. In essence it measures 
whether  shareholders  have  received  a  return  over  the  period  that  is  consistent  with  their  expectations  (TSR 
Alpha™ of zero) or more or less. 
 
Executive Performance Rights Vesting Scale 
The  following  diagram  provides  an  overview  of  the  Performance  Rights  Vesting  Scale  applied  to  performance 
rights issued during financial year 2013/2014.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 18
Grant date
Exercise Period
Exercise 
price ($)
29 Apr 2016 
29 Apr 2016 
29 Apr 2016
1 July 2017 - 30 June 2019 
1 July 2018 - 30 June 2020 
1 July 2019 - 30 June 2021
0.40 
0.50 
0.60
500,000 
500,000 
500,000
0.23 
0.24 
0.22
- 
- 
-
Options 
Options are issued to executive to provide long-term incentives for executives to deliver long-term shareholder 
returns. Details of options issued as remuneration to the Key Management Personnel (Alistair Waddell, General 
Manager Corporate Development) during the year are set out below.
Number of
options granted 
during the year
Value of 
option at
grant date ($)
Number of
options vested 
during the year
Non-Executive Chairman
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director * 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director
Options granted carry no dividend or voting rights. When exercisable, each option is convertible into one ordinary 
share. Further information on the options is set out in Note 24 to the financial statements. 
 
Directors and Key Management Personnel 
Except where noted, the named persons held their current positions for the whole of the year and up to the date 
of this report. 
Chairman 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Non-Executive Directors 
Peter Alexander 
Peter McAleer 
Sharon Skeggs 
Peter Warren 
Senior Executives 
Greg Foulis 
Ross Coyle 
Tim Benfield 
Alistair Waddell 
Ron James 
Paul Mason 
Joel Forwood 
 
* granted leave of absence from February 2016 due to ill health  
Changes since the end of the reporting period 
Except where noted, there have been no changes to Directors and Key Management Personnel since the end of 
the reporting period.
Chief Executive Officer 
Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary – appointed Company Secretary 7 December 2015 
Chief Operating Officer – ceased employment 9 August 2016 
General Manager Corporate Development – commenced 1 April 2016 
General Manager Exploration – ceased employment 31 May 2016 
Company Secretary – resigned Company Secretary 7 December 2015 
General Manager Corporate and Markets – ceased employment 30 September 2015
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 19
Contract terms of the Executive Directors and Key Management Personnel 
Remuneration and other key terms of employment for the Senior Executives are summarised in the following 
table.
Name
Term of 
agreement
Fixed annual remuneration including
Notice period by
superannuation
Executive
Financial year
Financial year
Notice period by 
the Company9
20161
-
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Greg Foulis 
Ross Coyle 
Tim Benfield 
Alistair Waddell 
Ron James 
Paul Mason 
Joel Forwood 
 
1  Amount shown are annual salaries as at year end or date ceased employment with the Group. 
2  Amount  shown  includes  a  voluntary  10%  reduction  in  fixed  remuneration  from  1  October  2013.  Role  reverted  to  Non-Executive
$600,000 
4$405,000 
3$450,504 
10C$370,000 
5$400,000 
7$210,000 
 6$330,504
12 months 
6 months 
6 months 
6 months 
6 months 
1 month 
6 months
3 months 
3 months 
3 months 
3 months 
3 months 
1 month 
3 months
Open 
Open 
Open 
Open 
Open 
Open 
Open 
Open
$400,000 
$210,000 
 $330,504
N/A
8N/A
20151
2$157,680 
$600,000 
$450,000 
$500,504
n/a
Chairman effective 1 July 2015.
Ceased employment 31 May 2016. A voluntary 10% reduction in fixed remuneration effective from 1 October 2015 to 30 April 2016. 
Ceased employment 30 September 2015.
3  A voluntary 10% reduction in fixed remuneration effective from 1 October 2015. 
4  A voluntary 10% reduction in fixed remuneration effective from 1 October 2015.  
5 
6 
7  Resigned as Company Secretary 7 December 2015.   
8 
Temporary role as Executive Chairman. Role reverted to Non-Executive Chairman effective 1 July 2015. 
9  Notice Period by the Company in respect of benefits payable in the event of an early termination only. 
10     Canadian dollars. Commenced 1 April 2016. 
 
Fixed annual remuneration, inclusive of the required superannuation contribution amount is reviewed annually 
by the Board following the end of the financial year. 
In the event of the completion of a takeover (relevant interest exceeds 50%) certain executives will receive a lump 
sum gross payment equal to between six to 12 months of the Total Remuneration Package. If within six months 
after  the  completion  of  the  takeover  the executive  elects to  terminate  his  employment  or  his  employment  is 
terminated by the Company the executive will not be entitled to any notice of termination or payment in lieu of 
notice.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 20
NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS FEES 
Non-Executive  Directors  are  paid  fixed  fees  for  their  services  to  the  Company  plus  statutory  superannuation 
contributions the Company is required by law to make on their behalf.  Those fees are inclusive of any salary-
sacrificed contribution to superannuation that a Non-Executive Director wishes to make. 
The  level  of  Non-Executive  Directors  fees  is  set  so  as  to  attract  the  best  candidates  for  the  Board  while 
maintaining a level commensurate with boards of similar size and type. The Board may also seek the advice of 
independent  remuneration  consultants,  including  survey  data,  to  ensure  Non-Executive  Directors’  fees  and 
payments are consistent with the current market.  
including  statutory 
Non-Executive  Directors’  base  fees 
superannuation are outlined as follows. Note that from the period 1 October 2013, all Non-Executive Directors 
fees were voluntarily reduced by 10% and this reduction is still in place as at the date of this report.
inclusive  of  committee  membership  but  not
Financial year 
ended 
30 June 20161 
$ 
144,0003 
360,000 
504,000
Financial year 
ended  
30 June 20151 
$ 
41,8192 
360,000 
401,819
Chairman 
Directors 
 
1 On an annualised basis for all Directors and excludes Director fees paid by subsidiary. 
2 Amount shown is for the period up to 16 October 2014, being the date the Chairman’s role changed from Non-Executive to 
Executive.  
3 Role reverted to Non-Executive Chairman effective 1 July 2015. 
 
The aggregate remuneration of Non-Executive Directors is set by shareholders in general meeting in accordance 
with the Constitution of the Company, with individual Non-Executive Directors remuneration determined by the 
Board  within  the  aggregate  total.  The  aggregate  amount  of  Non-Executive  Directors’  fees  approved  by 
shareholders on 13 November 2008 is $1,000,000. 
Non-Executive Directors do not receive any additional fees for serving on committees of the Company. Where 
applicable Non-Executive Directors may receive director fees if served as directors in operating subsidiaries (see 
page 22 for details). 
There are no retirement allowances for Non-Executive Directors. 
 
 
ADDITIONAL STATUTORY DISCLOSURES  
 
Details of remuneration  
Details of the nature and amount of each major element of the remuneration of the Directors and the Group Key 
Management Personnel are set out in the following tables:
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 21
Post-employment benefits
Share-based payment
Amortised value
of rights4
(accounting expense)
$
Options
$
Year ended 30 June 2016
Name
Non-Executive Chairman 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Paid by Company 
Paid by subsidiary5 
Non-Executive Directors 
Peter Alexander 
Peter McAleer6 
Sharon Skeggs 
Peter Warren 
Paid by Company 
Paid by subsidiary5 
Sub-total Non-Executive Directors 
Compensation 
 
Other KMPs 
Greg Foulis 
Ross Coyle7 
Paid by Company 
Paid by subsidiary5 
Tim Benfield8 
Alistair Waddell 
Ron James9  
Joel Forwood10   
Paul Mason11 
Sub-total other KMP 
Compensation 
 
TOTAL
Short-term benefits
Cash salary 
and fees
$
Cash 
bonus
$
Other 
benefits2
$
Non-
monetary 
benefits1
$
144,000 
25,414 
 
90,000 
90,000 
90,000 
 
90,000 
18,125 
547,539
565,000 
 
381,250 
3,940 
443,696 
95,950 
317,083 
53,877 
35,000 
1,895,796 
 
 
2,443,335
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
-
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
26,792 
- 
(24,906) 
- 
(15,173) 
9,219 
(86,782) 
3,959 
(1,003) 
(87,894)
(87,894)
2,617 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
2,617
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
2,617
Long-term 
benefits 
Other 
benefits2
$
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
1,499 
- 
6,940 
- 
5,967 
137 
87,169 
(10,324) 
(3,675) 
87,713 
 
 
87,713
Super-
annuation
$
13,680 
- 
 
8,550 
- 
8,550 
 
8,550 
- 
39,330
35,000 
 
35,000 
- 
19,308 
- 
35,000 
28,750 
35,000 
188,058 
 
 
227,388
Termination 
benefits3
$
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
- 
254,102 
- 
- 
216,099 
- 
470,201 
 
 
470,201
Total
$
160,297 
25,414 
 
98,550 
90,000 
98,550 
 
62,640 
18,125 
553,576
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
31,636 
- 
- 
- 
31,636
628,291 
 
456,823 
3,940 
782,949 
136,942 
298,788 
246,024 
65,322 
2,619,079
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
(35,910) 12 
- 
(35,910)
- 
 
58,539 
- 
75,049 
- 
(53,682) 12 
(46,337) 12 
- 
33,569
(2,341)
31,636
3,172,655
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 22
1  
2
3 
4
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12
Non-monetary benefits relate primarily to car parking.  
Represents annual leave (short term) and long service leave (long term) entitlements, measured on an accrual basis, and reflects the 
movement in the entitlements over the 12 month period. 
Benefits paid were in accordance with employment contract. 
Amortised value of rights comprises the fair value of performance and deferred rights expensed during the year.  This is an accounting 
expense and does not reflect the value to the executive of rights that vested in the financial year. Refer to the table on page 27 for the 
value of rights that have vested.  
Fees paid by subsidiary relate to director fees paid by Akara Resources PCL. The payment of these fees ceased in November 2015. 
Consulting Fees of $90,000 were paid or payable to Norwest Mining Consultants Ltd, of which Peter McAleer is an officer and director. 
Appointed Company Secretary 7 December 2015. 
Ceased employment 9 August 2016. 
Ceased employment 31 May 2016. 
Ceased employment 30 September 2015.  
Resigned Company Secretary 7 December 2015.   
Amortised value is net of write-back of expense incurred in prior periods relating to unvested rights that were forfeited during the 
year.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 23
Year ended 30 June 2015 
 
 
Name
Non-Executive Directors 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Paid by Company5 
Paid by subsidiary5,6 
Peter Alexander 
Craig Carracher 
Paid by Company 
Paid by subsidiary6 
Peter McAleer7 
Sharon Skeggs8 
Peter Warren9 
Paid by Company 
Paid by subsidiary6 
Sub-total Non-Executive 
Directors Compensation 
 
Executive Chairman 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Paid by Company5 
Other KMPs 
Greg Foulis10 
Tim Benfield11 
Ross Coyle12 
Paid by Company 
Paid by subsidiary6 
Ron James 
Joel Forwood 
Paul Mason13 
Duane Woodbury 
Michael Monaghan 
Geoff Day 
Austen Perrin 
Brett Dunstone 
Sub-total Executive Chairman 
and other KMP Compensation 
 
TOTAL
Short-term benefits
Cash salary and
fees 
$
Cash 
bonus 
$
Other 
benefits2
$
41,819 
70,945 
90,000 
 
36,775 
14,666 
90,000 
45,000 
 
90,000 
51,696 
530,901
102,181 
 
15,000 
506,460 
 
395,168 
51,696 
400,000 
295,504 
115,858 
3,513 
417,757 
68,305 
28,715 
96,285 
2,496,442
3,027,343
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
75,00014 
 
58,50014 
- 
80,00014 
44,75014 
15,00014 
- 
59,147 
- 
- 
50,550 
382,947
382,947
- 
 
3,804 
4,057 
 
(1,398) 
- 
(16,730) 
3,947 
5,061 
(3,635) 
(7,561) 
5,278 
2,236 
4,268 
(673)
(673)
Non-monetary
benefits1
$
917 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
917
2,242 
 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,325 
10,588 
- 
- 
- 
14,155
15,072
Long-term 
benefits 
Other 
benefits2
$
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
55 
4,282 
 
6,336 
- 
4,743 
4,060 
1,247 
(5,567) 
- 
- 
- 
(1,144) 
14,012
14,012
Post-employment benefits
Share-based payment
Super-
annuation
$
3,973 
- 
8,550 
 
12,500 
- 
- 
4,275 
 
8,550 
- 
37,848
9,707 
 
35,000 
18,792 
 
35,000 
- 
- 
35,000 
20,215 
334 
- 
4,759 
3,132 
6,264 
168,203
206,051
Termination 
benefits3
$
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
434,903 
25,962 
17,692 
194,714 
673,271
673,271
Amortised value of rights4
(accounting expense)
$
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
147,937 
 
109,107 
- 
110,534 
92,321 
- 
- 
(33,035)15 
- 
- 
(17,094)15 
409,770
Total
$
46,709 
70,945 
98,550 
 
49,275 
14,666 
90,000 
49,275 
 
98,550 
51,696 
569,666
114,130 
 
53,859 
756,528 
 
602,713 
51,696 
578,547 
475,582 
157,381 
(4,030) 
881,799 
104,304 
51,775 
333,843 
4,158,127
409,770
4,727,793
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 24
1  
2
3 
4
5
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12
13 
14
15
Non-monetary benefits relate primarily to car parking.  
Represents annual leave (short term) and long service leave (long term) entitlements, measured on an accrual basis, and reflects the 
movement in the entitlements over the 12 month period. 
Benefits paid were in accordance with employment contract. 
Amortised value of rights comprises the fair value of performance and deferred rights expensed during the year.  This is an accounting 
expense and does not reflect the value to the executive of rights that vested in the financial year. Refer to the table on page 27 for the 
value of rights that have vested.  
Total remuneration for the year for Ross Smyth-Kirk for Non-Executive and Executive roles was $231,784, including cash salary and 
fees of $214,945, non-monetary benefits of $3,159 and superannuation of $13,680. 
Fees paid by subsidiary relate to director fees paid by Akara Resources PCL. 
Consulting Fees of $90,000 were paid or payable to Norwest Mining Consultants Ltd, of which Peter McAleer is an officer and director.
Appointed Non-Executive Director 1 January 2015. 
     Received consulting fees of $90,000 which are not included in the remuneration table. 
     Appointed Chief Executive Officer 1 June 2015. 
     Acting Chief Executive Officer from 16 October 2014 to 30 April 2015.
Appointed  Chief  Financial  Officer  from  6  November  2014,  previously  General  Manager  Finance  &  Administration  and  Company 
Secretary. Resigned as Company Secretary 6 November 2014. 
Appointed Company Secretary 6 November 2014.   
Cash bonuses paid to these executives by the Board during the 2014/2015 financial year include a discretionary component relating to 
individual performance in the first half of the 2014/2015 financial year as well as an STI component relating to performance in the 
2013/2014 financial year.   
Amortised value is net of write-back of expense incurred in prior periods relating to unvested rights that were forfeited during the 
year.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 25
The relative proportions of remuneration that are linked to performance and those that are fixed are as follows:
Name
Fixed remuneration
STI/cash bonus
2016
At risk – LTI
2016
Non-Executive Director 
Peter Warren 
Other Key Management Personnel 
Greg Foulis 
Ross Coyle 
Tim Benfield 
Alistair Waddell 
Ron James 
Joel Forwood 
Paul Mason 
 
1
2016
100%
100% 
87% 
86%2 
77% 
100% 
100%2 
100%
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
-1
-
13%1 
14%1,2 
23%3 
-1 
-1,2 
-
The percentages disclosed reflect the value consisting of deferred rights and performance rights, based on the value of deferred rights 
and performance rights expensed during the year. Where applicable, the expenses exclude negative amounts for expenses reversed 
during the year due to cessation of employment.  
Termination benefits are excluded in determining the relative proportion of remuneration. 
The percentages disclosed reflect the value of options expensed during the year.
2 
3 
 
Share rights held by Key Management Personnel 
Details of each grant of share rights included in the Key Management Personnel remuneration tables are noted in 
the following tables. Note that no deferred or performance rights were granted in the 2015/2016 financial year. 
The percentage of rights granted to Key Management Personnel on issue that have vested and the percentage 
that was forfeited because the person did not meet the service criteria is set out below: 
Forfeited 
Name
Forfeited 
Number
Number 
granted
Lapsed 
Number
Vested 
number
Financial
Lapsed
Vested
year
%
%
%
granted
2014
2013 
2014 
2013 
2014
2013 
2014 
2013 
2014
2013 
2014 
2013 
2014
2013 
2014 
2013 
2014
P Warren
Performance
T Benfield 
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
R James
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
R Coyle
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
J Forwood 
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
95,000
14,205 
49,407 
28,409 
98,814
11,364 
39,526 
22,727 
79,051
11,080 
38,538 
22,159 
77,075
9,375 
32,609 
18,750 
65,217
-
100 
- 
- 
-
100 
- 
- 
-
100 
- 
- 
-
100 
- 
- 
-
14,205
11,364
11,080
9,375
-
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
- 
100 
- 
 
- 
- 
100 
- 
 
- 
- 
100 
- 
 
- 
- 
100 
-
(28,409)
- 
 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
-
- 
 
- 
-
-
(22,727)
(22,159)
(18,750)
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
100 
- 
100
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
100 
- 
100
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
-
(39,526)
(79,051)
(32,609)
(65,217)
Financial 
year that 
rights may
vest
2017
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 26
Value of share rights 
Name
Financial year 
that rights 
may vest
P Warren
Performance
T Benfield 
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
R James
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
R Coyle
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
J Forwood 
Deferred 
Deferred 
Performance 
Performance
2017 
 
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017 
 
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017 
 
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017 
 
2016 
2017 
2016 
2017
Number 
granted
95,000 
 
14,205 
49,407 
28,409 
98,814 
 
11,364 
39,526 
22,728 
79,051 
 
11,080 
38,538 
22,159 
77,075 
 
9,375 
32,609 
18,750 
65,217
Fair value 
per right 
at grant 
date2 
$ 
 
1.26 
 
5.17 
1.47 
3.21 
0.74 
 
5.17 
1.34 
3.21 
0.74 
 
5.17 
1.47 
3.21 
0.74 
 
5.17 
1.47 
3.21 
0.74
Total fair 
value at 
grant 
date2 
$ 
 
119,700 
 
73,438 
72,628 
91,193 
72,628 
 
58,750 
52,965 
72,955 
58,102 
 
57,281 
56,651 
71,131 
56,650 
 
48,469 
47,935 
60,188 
47,934
Maximum 
value yet 
to vest3 
 
$ 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
-
Value at 
vesting 
date4 
 
$ 
 
- 
 
10,228 
- 
- 
- 
 
8,182 
- 
- 
- 
 
7,978 
- 
- 
- 
 
6,750 
- 
- 
-
Value at 
lapse 
date5 
 
$ 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
20,739 
- 
 
- 
16,206 
16,591 
32,411 
 
- 
- 
16,176 
- 
 
- 
23,478 
13,688 
46,956
1 
 
2
3 
 
4
5
The minimum value of the rights yet to vest is nil, as the rights will be forfeited if the Key Management Personnel fails to meet a vesting 
condition.  
The fair value of the performance rights was estimated using Monte Carlo simulation; taking into account the terms and conditions 
upon which the awards were granted. 
The maximum value of the share rights yet to vest has been determined as the fair value of the rights at the grant date that is yet to be 
expensed. 
The value at vesting date (1 July 2015) is the number of rights vesting multiplied by the Company’s share price on the vesting date.  As 
rights  convert  to  ordinary  shares  on  the  vesting date,  this  date is  also  the  exercise  date.   No  payment  by  the  holder  of  the right  is 
required on vesting of the right. 
The value at lapse date is the number of rights lapsing multiplied by the Company’s share price at the close of business on that day.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 27
Movement in LTI Rights for the year ended 30 June 2016
Performance rights 
The number of performance rights held during the financial year by each Director of Kingsgate and each of the 
specified executives of the Group, including their personally-related entities, are set out as follows:
2016
Balance at 
start of year
Granted during 
the year
Converted 
during the year
Lapsed/ 
forfeited  
during the year
Balance at 
year end
Vested and 
exercisable  
at year end
-
-
-
95,000
-
95,000
Non-Executive Director 
Peter Warren 
Other Key Management Personnel 
Ross Coyle 
Tim Benfield 
Ron James 
Joel Forwood
99,234 
127,223 
101,778 
83,967
- 
- 
- 
-
(22,159) 
(28,409) 
(101,778) 
(83,967)
77,075 
98,814 
- 
-
Deferred rights 
The  number  of  deferred  rights  held  during  the  financial  year  by  each  Director  of  Kingsgate  and  each  of  the 
specified executives of the Group, including their personally-related entities, are set out as follows: 
Balance at 
2016 
year end
Forfeited during 
the year
Converted 
during the year
Granted during 
the year
Balance at 
start of year
Vested and 
exercisable  
at year end
Other Key Management Personnel 
Ross Coyle 
Tim Benfield 
Ron James 
Joel Forwood
49,618 
63,612 
50,890 
41,984
(11,080) 
(14,205) 
(11,364) 
(9,375)
- 
- 
(39,526) 
(32,609)
38,538 
49,407 
- 
-
Options 
The number of options held during the financial year by each Director of Kingsgate and each of the specified 
executives of the Group, including their personally-related entities, are set out as follows: 
2016
Balance at 
start of year
Granted during 
the year
Converted 
during the year
Forfeited during 
the year
Balance at 
year end
-
1,500,000
-
-
1,500,000
-
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
-
Vested and 
exercisable  
at year end
Balance at 
year end1
5,076,725
46,487 
100,000 
19,347 
145,000
100,000 
46,415 
12,816 
- 
- 
-
Other Key Management Personnel 
Alistair Waddell
Share holdings 
2016
Non-Executive Chairman 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Non-Executive Directors 
Peter Alexander 
Peter McAleer 
Sharon Skeggs 
Peter Warren 
Other Key Management Personnel 
Greg Foulis 
Ross Coyle 
Tim Benfield 
Ron James 
Paul Mason 
Joel Forwood
Balance at 
start of year
Received during year on 
conversion of deferred rights
Other changes 
during the year
5,076,725
46,487 
100,000 
19,347 
145,000
-
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
36,724 
- 
19,691 
15,000 
7,930
- 
9,691 
12,816 
9,975 
- 
7,986
-
- 
- 
- 
-
100,000 
- 
- 
(29,666) 
(15,000) 
(15,916)
1 The closing balance represents the balance at year end or at the date of departure from the Group.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 28
Loan to Director 
There were no loans made to Directors or other Key Management Personnel at any time during the year. 
 
Insurance of officers 
During the financial year, the Group paid premiums to insure Directors and Officers of the Group. The contracts 
include a prohibition on disclosure pf the premium paid and nature of the liabilities covered under the policy. 
 
Directors’ interest in contracts 
No material contracts involving Directors’ interests were entered into since the end of the previous financial year 
or existed at the end of the financial year other than the transactions detailed in the note to the accounts.  
 
Non-audit services 
Details of amounts paid or payable to the auditor for non-audit services provided during the year are detailed in 
Note 30: Auditors Remuneration. The Directors are satisfied that the provision of non-audit services during the 
period  by  the  auditor  is  compatible  with  the  general  standard  of  independence  for  auditors  imposed  by  the 
Corporations Act 2001. 
 
The Directors are of the opinion that the services disclosed in Note 30: Auditors Remuneration to the financial 
statements do not compromise the external auditor’s independence, based on the Auditor’ representations and 
advice received from the Audit Committee, for the following reasons: 
 
•  all non-audit services have been reviewed to ensure they do not impact the integrity and objectivity of the
auditor; and
•  none of the services undermine the general principles relating to auditor independence as set out in Code of 
Conduct  APES  110  Code  of  Ethics  for  Professional  Accountants  issued  by  the  Accounting  Professional  and 
Ethical Standards Board, including reviewing or auditing the auditor’s own work, acting in a management or 
decision-making capacity for the Company, acting as advocate for the Company or jointly sharing economic 
risks and rewards.
A copy of the Auditor’s Independence Declaration as required under section 307c of the Corporations Act 2001 is 
set out on page 30. 
 
Rounding of amounts 
The Company is of a kind referred to in ASIC Corporations (Rounding in Financial/Directors’ Reports) Instrument 
2016/91  and  in  accordance  with  that  instrument,  amounts  in  the  Directors’  Report  and  Financial  Report  are 
rounded to the nearest thousand dollars except where otherwise indicated. 
 
Auditors 
PricewaterhouseCoopers continues in office in accordance with section 327 of the Corporations Act 2001. 
 
This report is made in accordance with a resolution of Directors. 
 
 
 
 
 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Director 
Sydney 
31 August 2016
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Directors’ Report
Page | 29
Auditor’s Independence Declaration
As lead auditor for the audit of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited for the year ended 30 June 2016, I
declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief, there have been:
1.
2.
no contraventions of the auditor independence requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 in
relation to the audit; and
no contraventions of any applicable code of professional conduct in relation to the audit.
This declaration is in respect of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited and the entities it controlled during
the period.
Brett Entwistle
Partner
PricewaterhouseCoopers
Sydney
31 August 2016
Page | 30
PricewaterhouseCoopers, ABN 52 780 433 757
Darling Park Tower 2, 201 Sussex Street, GPO BOX 2650, SYDNEY NSW 1171
T: +61 2 8266 0000, F: +61 2 8266 9999, www.pwc.com.au
Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation.
Financial Statements
For the year ended 30 June 2016
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Financial Statements
Page | 31
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 
For the year ended 30 June 2016
Note
2016 
 
$’000 
 
174,412 
(184,867) 
(10,455) 
 
(552) 
(17,449) 
(2,612) 
3,655 
- 
(227,564) 
(461) 
(255,438) 
 
406 
(12,359) 
(11,953) 
 
(267,391) 
3,209 
(264,182) 
 
 
34,731 
(229,451) 
 
 
 
201 
 
(3,000) 
(2,799) 
(232,250)
(264,182) 
34,731
2015 
*Restated 
$’000 
 
194,808 
(173,203) 
21,605 
 
(1,138) 
(17,580) 
755 
2,699 
(112) 
(115,650) 
(9,888) 
(119,309) 
 
777 
(14,823) 
(14,046) 
 
(133,355) 
(651) 
(134,006) 
 
 
(13,637) 
(147,643) 
 
 
 
838 
 
60,764 
61,602 
(86,041)
(134,006) 
(13,637)
5a 
5b 
 
 
 
5c 
5d 
 
 
5i 
5i 
 
 
 
5e 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
34
19a
19a
Continuing operations 
Sales revenue 
Costs of sales 
Gross (loss)/profit 
 
Exploration expenses  
Corporate and administration expenses 
Other income and expenses 
Foreign exchange gain 
Share of loss in associate 
Impairment losses –  Chatree Gold Mine 
Impairment losses  –  exploration assets 
Loss before finance costs and income tax 
 
Finance income 
Finance costs 
Net finance costs 
 
Loss before income tax 
Income tax benefit/(expense) 
Loss from continuing operations after income tax 
 
Discontinued operations 
Profit/(loss) from discontinued operations after income tax 
Loss for the year 
 
Other comprehensive income 
Items that will never be reclassified to profit and loss 
Change in fair value of employee provisions (net of tax) 
Items that may be reclassified to profit and loss 
Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations (net of tax) 
Total other comprehensive (loss)/income for the year 
Total comprehensive loss for the year 
 
Profit/(loss) attributable to: 
Owners of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Continuing operations
- 
-  Discontinued operations
Total comprehensive loss attributable to: 
Owners of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Continuing operations
- 
-  Discontinued operations
Earnings per share 
Basic and diluted loss per share from continuing operations 
Basic and diluted loss per share from discontinued operations 
Basic and diluted loss per share from continuing operations and discontinued operations
(72,404) 
(13,637) 
 
Cents 
(59.9) 
(6.1) 
(66.0) 
The above consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income should be read in conjunction with the accompanying 
notes. 
* Comparative information has been restated as a result of the classification of Challenger Mine and Bowdens Silver Project as discontinued 
operations (refer to Note 34 for details) and the correction of error (refer to Note 35 for details).
(266,981) 
34,731 
 
Cents 
(118.1) 
15.5 
(102.6)
31 
31
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Financial Statements
Page | 32
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
As at 30 June 2016
Note
ASSETS 
Current assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted cash 
Receivables 
Inventories 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Other assets 
Total current assets 
 
Non-current assets 
Restricted cash 
Receivables 
Inventories 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration, evaluation and development 
Other assets 
Total non-current assets 
TOTAL ASSETS 
 
LIABILITIES 
Current liabilities 
Payables  
Borrowings 
Provisions 
Total current liabilities 
 
Non-current liabilities 
Payables 
Borrowings 
Deferred tax liabilities 
Provisions 
Total non-current liabilities 
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
NET ASSETS 
 
EQUITY 
Contributed equity 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
TOTAL EQUITY 
The above consolidated statement of financial position should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes. 
* Comparative information has been restated as a result of the correction of error (refer to Note 35 for details).
7 
7 
8 
9 
11 
10 
 
 
 
7 
8 
9 
11 
12 
13 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
16 
17 
 
 
 
15 
16 
6 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
19a 
19b
2016 
 
$’000
36,314 
7,004 
12,273 
26,060 
540 
10,919 
93,110 
 
 
- 
4,015 
- 
- 
44,278 
96,972 
14,130 
159,395 
252,505 
 
 
 
21,313 
98,097 
10,555 
129,965 
 
 
4,074 
- 
119 
25,983 
30,176 
160,141 
92,364 
 
 
677,042 
50,949 
(635,627) 
92,364
2015 
*Restated 
$’000 
 
 
55,472 
- 
19,139 
47,147 
- 
9,619 
131,377 
 
 
6,601 
- 
55,711 
1,350 
188,494 
143,035 
18,442 
413,633 
545,010 
 
 
 
27,344 
67,552 
3,625 
98,521 
 
 
7,171 
75,071 
388 
39,226 
121,856 
220,377 
324,633 
 
 
677,109 
53,700 
(406,176) 
324,633
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Financial Statements
Page | 33
Contributed 
equity 
$’000 
677,109 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
 
677,109
Contributed 
equity 
$’000 
677,109 
- 
- 
-
Total equity 
 
$’000 
410,264 
(147,643) 
61,602 
(86,041)
410 
410 
 
324,633
Total equity 
 
$’000 
324,633 
(229,451) 
(2,799) 
(232,250)
(67) 
48 
(19) 
 
92,364
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY  
For the year ended 30 June 2016
Note
Balance at 1 July 2014 (*Restated) 
Loss after income tax 
Total other comprehensive loss for the year 
Total comprehensive loss for the year 
 
Transaction with owners in their capacity as 
owners: 
Movement in share-based payment reserve 
Total transaction with owners 
 
Balance at 30 June 2015 (*Restated)
19b
19a
Note
Reserves 
 
$’000 
(8,312) 
- 
61,602 
61,602
410 
410 
 
53,700
Accumulated 
losses  
$’000 
(258,533) 
(147,643) 
- 
(147,643)
- 
- 
 
(406,176)
Reserves 
 
$’000 
53,700 
- 
(2,799) 
(2,799)
Accumulated 
losses  
$’000 
(406,176) 
(229,451) 
- 
(229,451)
Balance at 1 July 2015  
Loss after income tax 
Total other comprehensive loss for the year 
Total comprehensive loss for the year 
 
Transaction with owners in their capacity as 
owners: 
Movement in contributed equity 
Movement in share-based payment reserve 
Total transaction with owners 
 
Balance at 30 June 2016 
The above consolidated statement of changes in equity should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes. 
* Comparative information has been restated as a result of the correction of error (refer to Note 35 for details).
(67) 
- 
(67) 
 
677,042
- 
48 
48 
 
50,949
18
- 
- 
- 
 
(635,627)
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Financial Statements
Page | 34
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
For the year ended 30 June 2016
Cash flows from operating activities 
Receipts from customers  
Payments to suppliers and employees  
Interest received 
Finance costs paid 
Income tax paid 
Net cash inflow from operating activities 
 
Cash flows from investing activities 
Payments for property, plant and equipment 
Payments for exploration, evaluation and development 
 Increase in deposits  
Proceeds from sale of Bowdens 
Proceeds from sale of Challenger 
Net cash outflow from investing activities 
 
Cash flows from financing activities 
Proceeds from corporate borrowings, net of transaction costs 
Repayment of corporate borrowings 
Repayment of subsidiary (Akara Resources PCL) borrowings 
Share acquisition for the settlement of vested deferred 
Net cash outflow from financing activities 
 
Net decrease in cash held 
Cash at the beginning of the year 
Effects of exchange rate on cash and cash equivalents 
Cash at the end of the year
Note
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
2016 
$’000
255,082 
(203,241) 
427 
(5,775) 
- 
46,493 
 
 
(275) 
(35,898) 
(1,139) 
20,000 
250 
(17,062) 
 
 
3,051 
(19,043) 
(32,528) 
(67) 
(48,587) 
 
(19,156) 
55,472 
(2) 
36,314
2015 
$’000 
 
313,918 
(226,980) 
859 
(9,480) 
(1,671) 
76,646 
 
 
(1,828) 
(38,048) 
(455) 
- 
- 
(40,331) 
 
 
2,443 
(11,379) 
(28,741) 
- 
(37,677) 
 
(1,362) 
53,632 
3,202 
55,472
The above consolidated statement of cash flows should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Financial Statements
Page | 35
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The Financial Report of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited (Kingsgate or the “Company”) for the year ended 30 June 
2016 was authorised for issue in accordance with a resolution of Directors on 30 August 2016. 
Kingsgate  is  a  Company  limited  by  shares  incorporated  in  Australia  whose  shares  are  publicly  traded  on  the 
Australian Securities Exchange using the ASX code KCN. The consolidated financial statements of the Company as 
at and for the year ended 30 June 2016 comprise the Company and its subsidiaries (together referred to as the 
“Group”  and  individually  as  “group  entities”).  A  description  of  the  nature  of  the  Group’s  operations  and  its 
principal activities is included in the Directors’ Report. 
 
1.  BASIS OF PREPARATION 
Going Concern 
The consolidated financial statements of the Group have been prepared on a going concern basis, which indicates 
continuity of business activities and the realisation of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of 
business. 
As previously advised, on 10 May 2016 the Thai Government announced that the Chatree Gold Mine operated by 
Kingsgate’s  subsidiary  Akara  Resources  Public  Company  Limited  (“Akara”)  would  only  be  able  to  continue  to 
operate until 31 December 2016.  Although uncertainty remains regarding the manner and the legal process that 
the Thai Government will use to implement this decision, the Group is currently of the view that there is a clear 
intention from the Thai Government to shut down the Chatree Gold Mine on 31 December 2016. The Chatree 
Gold  Mine  in  its  capacity as  Kingsgate’s  primary  production  asset  is the main cash  contributor  for  the  Group. 
Based on current resources within designed pits and the potential resource and exploration upside that exists the 
life of the Chatree Gold Mine can be extended well beyond the tenure of the current mining licences. 
As at 30 June 2016, the Group’s current liabilities exceeded its current assets by $36,855,000.  This was largely a 
result of the reclassification of the external borrowing of Akara as current liabilities as this debt is expected to be 
repaid by 31 December 2016 and covenants under the loan agreement were not met due to the events described 
above.  No  default  notice  has  been  received  from  the  financiers.  The  total  borrowings  classified  as  current 
liabilities amounts to $98,097,000 and the Group currently does not have sufficient cash available to fully repay 
these amounts. 
As  a  result  of  these  matters,  there  is  a  material  uncertainty  related  to  events  or  conditions  that  may  cast 
significant doubt on whether the Group will continue as a going concern and, therefore, whether it will realise its 
assets and settle its liabilities and commitments in the normal course of the business and at the amounts stated in 
the financial report.  
Over the next financial period, the continuing viability of the Group and its ability to continue as a going concern 
and to meet its commitments as and when they fall due is dependent upon the Group being able to continue to 
operate the Chatree Gold Mine successfully until 31 December 2016 and generating sufficient cash flows from the 
revised mine plan the Group has implemented to enable the repayment of creditors, employee liabilities and all 
external debt by 30 June 2017.  The continuing operations of the Chatree Gold Mine also require the ongoing 
support of the external lenders of the Group until the external debt is fully repaid. 
The Group has successfully operated the Chatree Gold Mine in the past and the current performance up to the 
date of this report supports the cash flow projections from the revised mine plan.   
 The external lenders of the Group have been advised of the revised mine plan that has been implemented to 
maximise cash flow from the operation up until 31 December 2016 and they have indicated at this time that they 
will support the adoption of the revised mine plan. 
In the longer term, additional funds will be required for the Group to continue to develop the Nueva Esperanza 
Gold/Silver  Project  and  to  fund  the  net  rehabilitation  obligations  of  the  Chatree  Gold  Mine  after  taking  into 
account the already established cash backed rehabilitation fund. The ability of the Group to continue as a going 
concern, in addition to the short terms matters described above, is dependent upon the Group being successful in 
one or more the following: 
•
realising the value of assets including reviewing the possibility of the sale of Chatree Gold Mine infrastructure 
assets which include plant and equipment and non-strategic land and property;
Notes to the Financial Statements
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Page | 36
•  potentially extending the term of the metallurgical licence to enable the processing of other economic ore
material beyond 31 December 2016;
•  obtaining approval and implementing a rehabilitation plan for the Chatree Gold Mine that is commercially 
viable and more cost effective for the Group and which takes into account the significantly shorter life of 
mine that has been imposed on the Group;
•  pursuing available legal and other avenues for compensation including action for damages against the Thai
Government; 
reducing, if necessary, the Group’s currently planned ongoing expenditure;  
reviewing the potential for and timing of an equity raising; and/or 
considering  options  that  might  include  the  sale  of  assets,  or  entering  into  farm-in  agreements  with  other 
parties.
• 
• 
•
The Group has started a process to identify surplus assets that can be sold, including land and property assets at 
the  Chatree  Gold Mine. Management  has  prepared  a  responsible  and  cost effective  rehabilitation  plan  that  it 
believes will meet its obligations in the context of the early mine closure. The Group in conjunction with its legal 
advisors is working methodically through various potential remedies to compensate for the material economic 
impact of the Thai Government’s actions. 
The Directors believe that the Group will be successful in managing the above matters and accordingly, they have 
prepared the financial report on a going concern basis. At this time the Directors are of the opinion that no asset 
is likely to be realised for an amount less than the amount at which it is recorded in the consolidated financial 
statements at 30 June 2016. 
Accordingly  no  adjustments  have  been  made  to  the  financial  report  relating  to  the  recoverability  and 
classification of the asset carrying amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary 
should the Group not continue as a going concern. 
The  general  purpose  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  the  Australian  Accounting 
Standards,  other  authoritative  pronouncements  of  the  Australian  Accounting  Standards  Board  and  the 
Corporations Act 2001. The Company is a for-profit entity for the purpose of preparing the financial statements. 
Compliance with IFRS 
The  financial  statements  comply  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  adopted  by  the 
International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”). 
Historical cost convention 
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention, as modified by the revaluation 
of  available-for-sale  financial  assets  and  financial  instruments  (including  derivative  instruments)  at  fair  value 
through profit or loss. 
Functional and presentation currency 
The  financial  statements  of  the  Group  entities  are  measured  using  the  currency  of  the  primary  economic 
environment in which the entity operates (“the functional currency”). The consolidated statements are presented 
in Australian dollars, which is the Company’s functional currency and presentation currency. 
Rounding of amounts 
The Company is of a kind referred to in ASIC Corporations (Rounding in Financial/Directors’ Reports) Instrument 
2016/91  and  in  accordance  with  that  instrument,  amounts  in  the  Directors’  Report  and  Financial  Report  are 
rounded to the nearest thousand dollars except where otherwise indicated.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 37
Critical accounting estimates 
The preparation of financial statements requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates. It also requires 
management  to  exercise  its  judgement  in  the  process  of  applying  the  Group’s  accounting  policies.  The  areas 
involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity, or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant 
to the financial statements are disclosed in Note 3. 
 
2.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the financial statements are set out below. These 
policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented. 
 
a.  Principles of consolidation 
(i)  Business combinations 
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method as at the acquisition date, which is the 
date on which control is transferred to the Group. Control is the power to govern the financial and operating 
policies  of  an  entity  so  as  to  obtain  benefits  from  its  activities.  In  assessing  control,  the  Group  takes  into 
consideration potential voting rights that currently are exercisable. 
 
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary comprises the fair value of the assets transferred, 
the  liabilities  incurred  and  the  equity  interests  issued  by  the  Group.  The  consideration  transferred  does  not 
include amounts related to the settlement of a pre-existing relationship. Such amounts are generally recognised 
in profit or loss. 
 
Costs related to the acquisition other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity securities, that the 
Group incurs in connection with a business combination are expensed as incurred. Any contingent consideration 
payable is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date. 
 
Acquisitions of non-controlling interests are accounted for as transactions with owners in their capacity as owners 
and  therefore  no  goodwill  is  recognised  as  a  result  of  such  transactions.  The  non-controlling  interest  in  the 
acquiree is based on the fair value of the acquiree’s net identifiable assets. The adjustments to non-controlling 
interests are based on the proportionate amount of the net assets of the subsidiary. The acquisition of an asset or 
group  of  assets  that  is  not  a  business  is  accounted  for  by  allocating  the  cost  of  the  transaction  to  the  net 
identifiable assets and liabilities acquired based on their fair values. 
 
(ii)  Subsidiaries 
Subsidiaries  are  entities  controlled  by  the  Group.  The  financial  statements  of  subsidiaries  are  included  in  the 
consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases. 
 
The  accounting  policies  of  subsidiaries  have  been  changed  when  necessary  to  align  them  with  the  policies 
adopted by the Group. Losses applicable to the non-controlling interests in a subsidiary are allocated to the non-
controlling interests even if doing so causes the non-controlling interests to have a deficit balance. 
 
Intra-group  balances  and  transactions,  and  any  unrealised  gains  arising  from  intra-group  transactions  are 
eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements. Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the 
transaction provides evidence of the impairment of the asset transferred.  
 
b.  Foreign currency translation 
(i)  Transactions and balances 
Foreign  currency transactions  are  translated  into  the  respective  functional  currencies  of the  Group  entities  at 
exchange rates on the dates of the transactions. Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement 
of  such  transactions  and  from  the  translation  at  year-end  exchange  rates  of  monetary  assets  and  liabilities 
denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the profit or loss; except when they are deferred in equity as 
qualifying  cash  flow  hedges  and  qualifying  net  investment  hedges  or,  are  attributable  to  part  of  the  net 
investment in a foreign operation.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 38
Translation differences on assets and liabilities carried at fair value are reported as part of the fair value gain or 
loss.  Translation  differences  on  non-monetary  assets  and  liabilities  such  as  equities  held  at  fair  value  through 
profit or loss are recognised in profit or loss as part of the fair value gain or loss. Translation differences on non-
monetary assets are included in the fair value reserve in equity. 
 
Exchange  gains  and  losses  which  arise  on  balances  between  Group  entities  are  taken  to  the  foreign  currency 
translation reserve where the intra-group balances are in substance part of the Group’s net investment. Where as 
a result of a change in circumstances, a previously designated intra-group balance is intended to be settled in the 
foreseeable  future,  the  intra-group  balance  is  no  longer  regarded  as  part  of  net  investment.  The  exchange 
differences for such balance previously taken directly to the foreign currency translation reserves are recognised 
in the profit or loss.  
 
(iii)  Foreign operations 
The results and financial position of all the Group entities (none of which has the currency of a hyperinflationary 
economy)  that  have  a  functional  currency  different  from  the  presentation  currency  are  translated  into  the 
presentation currency as follows: 
 
•  the assets and liabilities of the foreign operations, including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on
acquisition, are translated at the year-end exchange rate;
•  the income and expenses of foreign operations are translated at average exchange rates (unless this is not a 
reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rate prevailing on the transaction dates, in which 
case income and expenses are translated at the dates of the transactions); and
•  foreign  currency  differences  are  recognised  in  other  comprehensive  income,  and  presented  in  the  foreign
currency translation reserve.
Income tax
c.  Revenue 
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable. Sales revenue represents the 
net proceeds receivable from the buyer. 
 
Gold and silver sales 
Gold  and  silver  revenue  is  recognised  when  the  refinery  process  has  been  finalised  at  which  point  the  sale 
transaction to a third party is also completed. Transportation and refinery costs are expensed when incurred. 
 
d. 
Income tax expense comprises current and deferred tax. Current tax and deferred tax is recognised in profit or 
loss except to the extent that it relates to a business combination, or items recognised directly in equity or in 
other comprehensive income. 
 
Current  tax  is  expected  tax  payable  or  receivable  on  the  taxable  income  or  loss  for  the  year  using  tax  rates 
enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date, and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous 
years.  Deferred  tax  is  provided  using  the  liability  method,  providing  for  temporary  differences  between  the 
carrying  amounts  of  assets  and  liabilities  for  financial;  reporting  purposes  and  the  amounts  used  for  taxation 
purposes. The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of 
the carrying amount of assets and liabilities, using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting 
date. 
 
A deferred tax asset is recognised for unused tax losses, tax credits and deductible temporary differences, to the 
extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which they can be utilised. Deferred 
tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the 
related tax benefit will be realised. 
 
Deferred tax is not recognised for: 
 
•
temporary differences on the initial recognition of assets or liabilities in a transaction that is not a business 
combination and that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss;
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 39
•
•
temporary differences related to investments in subsidiaries where the Company is able to control the timing 
of the reversal of the temporary differences and it is probable that they will not reverse in the foreseeable 
future; and 
taxable temporary differences arising on the initial recognition of goodwill.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax liabilities and 
assets and, they relate to income taxes levied by the same tax authority on the same taxable entity. 
 
Additional income tax expenses that arise from the distribution of cash dividends are recognised at the same time 
that the liability to pay the related dividend is recognised. 
 
Tax consolidation 
The Company and its wholly owned Australian resident entities formed a tax-consolidation group with effect from 
1 July 2003 and are therefore taxed as a single entity from that date. The head entity within the tax-consolidation 
group is Kingsgate Consolidated Limited. 
 
Current tax expense or benefit, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities arising from temporary differences 
of  the  members  of  the  tax-consolidation  group  are  recognised  in  the  separate  financial  statements  of  the 
members of the tax-consolidation group using the “stand alone taxpayer” approach by reference to the carrying 
amounts in the separate financial statements of each entity and the tax values applying under tax consolidation. 
 
Current tax assets or liabilities and deferred tax assets arising from unused tax losses assumed by the head entity 
from the subsidiaries in the tax-consolidation group, are recognised as amounts receivable or payable to other 
entities in the tax-consolidation group in conjunction with any tax funding agreement amounts. 
 
The Company recognises deferred tax assets arising from unused tax losses of the tax-consolidation group to the 
extent that it is probable that future taxable profits of the tax-consolidation group will be available against which 
the asset can be utilised. 
 
Tax funding and sharing agreements 
The members of the tax-consolidation group have entered into a funding agreement that sets out the funding 
obligations of members of the tax-consolidation group in respect of tax amounts. The tax funding arrangements 
require payments; to or from, the head entity and any deferred tax asset assumed by the head entity, resulting in 
the  head  entity  recognising  an  intra-group  receivable  or  payable  in  the  separate  financial  statements  of  the 
members of the tax-consolidation group equal in amount to the tax liability or asset assumed. The intra-group 
receivables or payables are at call. 
 
The head entity recognises the assumed current tax amounts as current tax liabilities or assets adding to its own 
current tax amounts, since they are also due to or from the same taxation authority. The current tax liabilities or 
assets are equivalent to the tax balances generated by external transactions entered into by the tax-consolidated 
group. 
 
The amounts receivable or payable under the tax funding agreement are due upon receipt of the funding advice 
from the head entity, which is issued as soon as practicable after the end of each financial year. The head entity 
may also require payment of interim funding amounts to assist with its obligations to pay tax instalments. 
 
The members of  the  tax-consolidation  group  have also entered  into  a  tax  sharing  agreement.  The  tax  sharing 
agreement provides for the determination of the allocation of income tax liabilities between the entities should 
the head entity default on its tax payment obligations. No amounts have been recognised in the consolidated 
financial statements in respect of this agreement as payment of any amounts under the tax sharing agreement is 
considered remote. 
 
e. 
Leases of property, plant and equipment where the Group as lessee has substantially all the risks and rewards of 
ownership are classified as finance leases. Finance leases are capitalised at the lease’s inception at the fair value 
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Leases
Page | 40
of the leased property or, if lower, the present value of the minimum lease payments. The corresponding rental 
obligations, net of finance charges, are included in other short-term and long-term payables. Each lease payment 
is allocated between the liability and finance cost. The finance cost is charged to the profit or loss over the lease 
period so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability for each 
period. 
 
The property, plant and equipment acquired under finance leases is depreciated over the asset’s useful life or 
over the shorter of the asset’s useful life and the lease term if there is no reasonable certainty that the Group will 
obtain ownership at the end of the lease term. 
 
Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are not transferred to the Group as 
lessee are classified as operating leases. Payments made under operating leases (net of any incentives received 
from the lessor) are charged to the profit or loss on a straight-line basis over the period of the lease.
Impairment of assets
Trade and other receivables
f.  Divestment transaction costs 
Transaction costs directly relating to the partial divestment of an interest in a subsidiary are expensed as incurred 
in the year prior to the disposal where control is retained. 
 
g. 
Assets  other  than  goodwill  and  indefinite  life  intangible  assets  are tested  for  impairment whenever events  or 
changes  in  circumstances  indicate  that  the  carrying  amount  may  not  be  recoverable.  An  impairment  loss  is 
recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds it recoverable amount. The recoverable 
amount is the higher of an asset’s fair value in use. For the purposes of assessing impairment, assets are grouped 
at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash inflows which are largely independent of the 
cash  inflows  from  other  assets  or  groups  of  assets  (cash-generating  units).  Non-financial  assets  other  than 
goodwill that suffered impairment are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each reporting date. 
 
h.  Cash and cash equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents includes cash on hand, deposits held  at call with financial institutions, other short-
term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less that are readily convertible to 
known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value, and bank overdrafts. 
Bank overdrafts are shown within borrowings in current liabilities in the statement of financial position. 
 
i. 
Trade and other receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost 
using the effective interest method, less provision for impairment. Receivables are due for settlement no more 
than 90 days from the date of recognition.  
 
Collectability  of  trade  and  other  receivables  is  reviewed  on  an  ongoing  basis.  Debts  which  are  known  to  be 
uncollectible are written off by reducing the carrying amount directly. An allowance account is used when there is 
objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of 
the receivables. Significant financial difficulties of the debtor, probability that the debtor will enter bankruptcy or 
financial  reorganisation,  and  default  or  delinquency  in  payments  more  than  60  days  overdue  are  considered 
indicators  that  the  trade  and  other  receivable  is  impaired.  The  amount  of  the  impairment  allowance  is  the 
difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted 
at the original effective interest rate. Cash flows relating to short-term receivables are not discounted if the effect 
of discounting is immaterial. 
 
The amount of the impairment loss is recognised in the income statement within other expenses. When a trade 
and  other  receivable  for  which  an  impairment  allowance  had  been  recognised  becomes  uncollectible  in  a 
subsequent period, it is written off against the allowance account.  
 
Subsequent  recoveries  of  amounts  previously  written  off  are  credited  against  other  expenses  in  the  income 
statement.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 41
Inventories
j. 
Raw materials and stores, work in progress and finished goods (including gold bullion), are stated at the lower of 
cost  and  net  realisable  value.  Cost comprises  direct materials,  direct  labour  and  an  appropriate  proportion  of 
variable and fixed overhead expenditure, the latter being allocated on the basis of normal operating capacity. 
Costs are assigned to individual items of inventory on the basis of weighted average costs. Costs of purchased 
inventory are determined after deducting rebates and discounts. Net realisable value is the estimated selling price 
in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary to 
make the sale. 
 
Stockpiles  represent  ore  that  has  been  extracted  and  is  available  for  further  processing.  If  there  is  significant 
uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  stockpiled  ore  will  be  processed  it  is  expensed  as  incurred.  Where  the  future 
processing of this ore can be predicted with confidence, e.g. because it exceeds the mine’s cut-off grade, it is 
valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value. If the ore will not be processed within the 12 months after 
the reporting date, it is included within non-current assets. Work in progress inventory includes ore stockpiles and 
other partly processed material. Quantities are assessed primarily through surveys and assays, and truck counts. 
 
k.  Non-derivative financial assets 
Classification and recognition 
The Group classifies its investments and other financial assets in the following categories: financial assets at fair 
value through profit or loss, loans and receivables and available-for-sale financial assets.  
 
The classification depends on the purpose for which the investments were acquired. The Group determines the 
classification of its investments at initial recognition and, in the case of assets classified as held-to-maturity, re-
evaluates this designation at each reporting date. 
 
The Group initially recognises loans and receivables and deposits on the date that they are originated. All other 
financial assets (including assets designated at fair value through profit or loss) are recognised initially on the 
trade date at which the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument. 
 
The Group derecognises a financial asset when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the asset expire, or it 
transfers  the  rights  to  receive  the  contractual  cash  flows  on  the  financial  asset  in  a  transaction  in  which 
substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the financial assets are transferred. 
 
Financial  assets  and  liabilities  are  offset  and  the  net  amount  presented  in  the  statement  of  financial  position 
when, and only when, the Group has a legal right to offset the amounts and intends either to settle on a net basis 
or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously. 
 
(i)  Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are financial assets held for trading if acquired principally for 
the  purpose  of  selling  in  the  short-  term.  Derivatives  are  also  categorised  as  held  for  trading  unless  they  are 
designated as hedges.  
 
Attributable  transaction  costs  are  recognised  in  the  profit  or  loss  when  incurred.  Assets  in  this  category  are 
classified as current assets if they are expected to be settled within 12 months, otherwise they are classified as 
non-current. 
 
(ii)  Loans and receivables 
Loans  and  receivables  are  non-derivative  financial  assets  with  fixed  or  determinable  payments  that  are  not 
quoted in an active market. They are included in current assets, except for those with maturities greater than 12 
months after the reporting date which are classified as non-current assets. 
 
Loans and receivables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method, less any impairment 
losses.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 42
(iii)  Available-for-sale financial assets 
Available-for-sale financial assets, comprising principally marketable equity securities, are non-derivative financial 
assets that are either designated in this category or not classified in any of the other categories. They are included 
in non-current assets unless management intends to dispose of the investment within 12 months of the reporting 
date.  Investments  are  designated  as  available-for-sale  if  they  do  not  have  fixed  maturities  and  fixed  or 
determinable payments and management intends to hold them for the medium to long term. 
 
Subsequent  to  initial  recognition,  available-for-sale  financial  assets  are  measured  at  fair  value  and  changes 
therein, other than impairment losses, are recognised as a separate component of equity net of attributable tax. 
When an asset is derecognised the cumulative gain or loss in equity is transferred to the income statement. 
 
Impairment 
The Group assesses at each reporting date whether there is objective evidence that a financial asset or group of 
financial  assets  is  impaired.  In  the  case  of  equity  securities  classified  as  available-for-sale,  a  significant  or 
prolonged decline in the fair value of a security below its cost is considered as an indicator that the securities are 
impaired. If any such evidence exists for available-for-sale financial assets, the cumulative loss measured as the 
difference between the acquisition cost and the current fair value, less any impairment loss on that financial asset 
previously  recognised  in  profit  or  loss,  is  removed  from  equity  and  recognised  in  the  income  statement. 
Impairment losses recognised in the profit or loss on equity instruments classified as available-for-sale are not 
reversed through the income statement. 
 
If there is evidence of impairment for any of the Group’s financial assets carried at amortised cost, the loss is 
measured as the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash 
flows, excluding future credit losses that have not been incurred. The cash flows are discounted at the financial 
asset’s original effective interest rate. The loss is recognised in the income statement. 
 
l.  Derivative financial instruments 
Derivative financial instruments are used by the Group to protect against the Group’s Australian dollar gold price 
risk  exposures.  The  Group  does  not  apply  hedge  accounting  and  accordingly  all  fair  value  movements  on 
derivative financial instruments are recognised in the profit or loss. 
 
Derivative financial instruments are stated at fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are 
subsequently remeasured to their fair value at each reporting date. The resulting gain or loss is recognised in the 
income statement immediately. 
 
m.  Property, plant and equipment 
Property, plant and equipment are stated at historical cost less depreciation. Historical cost includes expenditure 
that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items. 
 
Subsequent costs are included in the asset’s carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset, as appropriate, 
only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Group and the 
cost of the item can be measured reliably. The carrying amount of any component accounted for as a separate 
asset is derecognised when replaced. All other repairs and maintenance are charged to the income statement 
during the reporting period in which they are incurred. 
 
Depreciation 
Depreciation and amortisation of mine buildings, plant, machinery and equipment is provided over the assessed 
life of the relevant mine or asset, whichever is the shorter. 
 
Depreciation  and  amortisation  is  determined  on  a  units-of-production  basis  over  the  estimated  recoverable 
reserves from the related area. In some circumstances, where conversion of resources into reserves is expected, 
some elements of resources may be included. For mine plant, machinery and equipment, which have an expected 
economic life shorter than the life of the mine, a straight line basis is adopted.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 43
The expected useful lives are as follows: 
•  mine buildings – the shorter of applicable mine life and 25 years; 
•  plant, machinery and equipment – the shorter of applicable mine life and 3 - 15 years depending on the nature
of the asset.
The estimated recoverable reserves and life of each mine and the remaining useful life of each class of asset are 
reassessed  at  least  annually.  Where  there  is  a  change  in  the  reserves  during  the  period,  depreciation  and 
amortisation rates are adjusted prospectively from the beginning of the reporting period. 
 
Major spares purchased specifically for a particular plant are capitalised and depreciated on the same basis as the 
plant to which they relate.  
 
Impairment 
An asset’s carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the asset’s carrying amount 
is greater than its estimated recoverable amount (Note 2g). 
 
Derecognition 
An item of property, plant and equipment is derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are 
expected to arise from the continued use of the asset. 
 
Any  gain  or  loss  arising  on  derecognition  of  the  asset  (calculated  as  the  difference  between  the  net  disposal 
proceeds  and  the  carrying  amount  of  the  item)  is  included  in  the  profit  or  loss  in  the  period  the  item  is 
derecognised.  
 
n.  Deferred stripping costs 
As part of its mining operations, the Group incurs stripping (waste removal) costs both during the development 
phase and production phase of its operations. 
 
Stripping costs incurred during the production phase are generally considered to create two benefits, being either 
the production of inventory in the period or improved access to the ore to be mined in the future. Where the 
benefits  are  realised  in  the  form  of  inventory  produced  in  the  period,  the  production  stripping  costs  are 
accounted for as part of the cost of producing those inventories. Where production stripping costs are incurred 
and the benefit is improved access to the ore to be mined in the future, the costs are recognised as a non-current 
asset, referred to as a “production stripping asset”, if the following criteria are all met: 
 
•  future economic benefits (being improved access to the ore body) associated with the stripping activity are
probable;
measured.
•  the component of the ore body for which access has been improved can be accurately identified; and 
•  the    costs    associated    with    the    stripping    activity    associated    with    that    component  can  be    reliably
The amount of stripping costs deferred is based on the ratio obtained by dividing the volume of waste mined by 
the volume of ore mined for each component of the mine. Stripping costs incurred in the period are deferred to 
the extent that the actual current period waste to ore ratio exceeds the life of component expected waste to ore 
(“life of component”) ratio.   
 
A  component  is  defined  as  a  specific  volume  of  the  ore  body  that  is  made  more  accessible  by  the  stripping 
activity. An identified component of the ore body is typically a subset of the total ore body of the mine. It is 
considered that each mine may have several components, which are identified based on the mine plan. The mine 
plans and therefore the identification of specific components will vary between mines as a result of both the 
geological characteristics and location of the ore body. The financial considerations of the mining operations may 
also impact the identification and designation of a component. 
 
The identification of components is necessary for both the measurement of costs at the initial recognition of the 
production stripping asset, and the subsequent depreciation of the production stripping asset. 
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 44
The life of component ratio is a function of an individual mine’s design and therefore changes to that design will 
generally result in changes to the ratio. Changes in other technical or economic parameters that impact reserves 
will also have an impact on the life of component ratio even if they do not affect the mine’s design. Changes to 
the life of component ratio are accounted for prospectively from the date of change. 
 
The production stripping asset is initially measured at cost, which is the accumulation of costs directly incurred to 
perform the stripping activity that improves access to the identified component of ore. If incidental operations 
are  occurring  at  the  same  time  as  the  production  stripping  activity,  but  are  not  necessary  for  the  production 
stripping activity to continue as planned, these costs are not included in the cost of the stripping activity asset. 
 
The production stripping asset is amortised over the expected useful life of the identified component of the ore 
body  that  is  made  more  accessible  by  the  activity,  on  a  units  of  production  basis.  Economically  recoverable 
reserves  are  used  to  determine  the  expected  useful  life  of  the  identified  component  of  the  ore  body.  The 
production stripping asset is then carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and any impairment losses. 
 
The production stripping asset is included in “Exploration, Evaluation and Development”.  These costs form part 
of  the  total  investment  in  the  relevant  cash  generating  unit  to  which  they  relate,  which  is  reviewed  for 
impairment in accordance with the Group’s impairment accounting policy (Note 2g). 
 
o.  Deferred mining services costs 
Provisions to the group of mining services by its contractor do not systematically align with the billing made by 
the contractor employed for these services.  When there is a material difference between the provisions of the 
mining services and the amount paid for these services, a portion of the billing is deferred on the statement of 
financial  position.    These  amounts  are  subsequently  recognised  in  the  profit  or  loss.    Mining  services  are 
recognised in the profit or loss on a systematic basis based on bank cubic metres mined by the contractor. 
 
p.  Exploration, evaluation and feasibility expenditure 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure incurred by, or on behalf of the Group is accumulated separately for each 
area  of  interest.  Such  expenditure  comprises  direct  costs  and  depreciation  and  does  not  include  general 
overheads or administrative expenditure not having a specific nexus with a particular area of interest. 
 
Exploration expenditure for each area of interest is carried forward as an asset provided the rights to tenure of 
the area of interest are current and one of the following conditions is met: 
 
•  the exploration and evaluation expenditures are expected to be recouped through successful development
and exploitation of the area of interest, or alternatively by its sale, or;
•  exploration and evaluation activities in the area of interest have not at the reporting date reached a stage 
which permits a reasonable assessment of the existence or otherwise of economically recoverable reserves, 
and active and significant operations in, or in relation to, the area of interest are continuing.
Exploration expenditure is written off when it fails to meet at least one of the conditions outlined above or an 
area of interest is abandoned. The carrying value of exploration and evaluation assets is assessed in accordance 
with AASB 6 Exploration for and Evaluation of Mineral Resources and the Group’s impairment policy (Note 2g).   
 
Feasibility expenditure 
Feasibility expenditure represents costs related to the preparation and completion of a feasibility study to enable 
a development decision to be made in relation to an area of interest and capitalised as incurred. 
 
At the commencement of production; all past exploration, evaluation and feasibility expenditure in respect of an 
area of interest that has been capitalised is transferred to mine properties where it is amortised over the life of 
the area of interest to which it relates on a unit-of-production basis.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 45
Investment in associates
q.  Mine properties 
Mine properties represents the accumulated exploration, evaluation, land and development expenditure incurred 
by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Group  in  relation  to  areas  of  interest  in  which  mining  of  a  mineral  resource  has 
commenced. 
 
When  further  development  expenditure  is  incurred  in  respect  of  a  mine  property  after  commencement  of 
production,  such  expenditure  is  carried  forward  as  part  of  the  mine  property  only  when  substantial  future 
economic  benefits  are  thereby  established.  Otherwise,  such  expenditure  is  classified  as  part  of  the  cost  of 
production. 
 
Amortisation of costs is provided on the units-of-production method with separate calculations being made for 
each component. The units-of-production basis results in an amortisation charge proportional to the depletion of 
the  estimated  recoverable  reserves.  In  some  circumstances,  where  conversion  of  resources  into  reserves  is 
expected, some elements of resources may be included. Development and land expenditure still to be incurred in 
relation to the current recoverable reserves are included in the amortisation calculation. Where the life of the 
assets is shorter than the mine life, their costs are amortised based on the useful life of the assets. 
 
The estimated recoverable reserves and life of each mine and the remaining useful life of each class of asset are 
reassessed at least annually. Where there is a change in the reserves during a six month period, depreciation and 
amortisation rates are adjusted prospectively from the beginning of that reporting period. 
 
r. 
Investments in associates are accounted for using the equity method. An associate is an entity in which the Group 
has significant influence. 
 
Under the equity method, the investment in the associate is carried on the statement of financial position at cost 
plus post-acquisition changes in the Group’s share of net assets of the associate. 
 
The  income  statement  reflects  the  Group’s  share  of  the  results  of  operations  of  the  associate.  The  Group 
recognises its share of any changes and discloses this when applicable, in the statement of changes of equity. 
Unrealised gains and losses resulting from transactions between the Group and the associate are eliminated to 
the extent of the interest in the associate. 
 
The Group’s share of profit of an associate is included in the income statement. This is the profit attributable to 
equity holders of the associate and therefore, is profit after tax and non-controlling interests in the subsidiaries of 
the associate. After application of the equity method, the Group determines whether it is necessary to recognise 
an additional impairment loss on its investment in its associate. The Group determines at each reporting date 
whether there is any objective evidence that the investment in the associate is impaired. If this is the case, the 
Group  calculates  the  amount  of  the  impairment  as  the  difference  between  the  recoverable  amount  of  the 
associate and its carrying value and recognises the amount in the income statement. 
 
Upon  loss  of  significant  influence  over  the  associate,  the  Group  measures  and  recognises  any  remaining 
investment at its fair value. Any difference between the carrying amount of the associate upon loss of significant 
influence and the fair value of the retained investment and proceeds from disposal is recognised in profit or loss. 
 
s.  Trade and other payables 
Trade and other payables represent liabilities for goods and services provided to the Group prior to the end of the 
financial year which are unpaid. The amounts are unsecured and are usually paid within 30 days of recognition. 
 
t.  Borrowings 
Borrowings are initially recognised at fair value, net of transaction costs incurred. Borrowings are subsequently 
measured at amortised cost. Any difference between the proceeds (net of transaction costs) and the redemption 
amount is recognised in the profit or loss over the period of the borrowings using the effective interest method. 
Fees  paid  on  the  establishment  of  loan  facilities  are  recognised  as  transaction  costs  to  the  extent  that  it  is 
probable that some or all of the facility will be drawn down. In this case, the fee is deferred until the drawdown
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 46
occurs. To the extent there is no evidence that it is probable that some or all of the facility will be drawn down, 
the fee is capitalised and amortised over the period of the facility to which it relates.  
 
Preference shares which are mandatorily redeemable on a specific date are classified as liabilities. The dividends 
on these preference shares are recognised in the profit or loss as finance costs. 
 
Borrowings are removed from the statement of financial position when the obligation specified in the contract is 
discharged, cancelled or expired. The difference between the carrying amount of a financial liability that has been 
extinguished  or  transferred  to  another  party  and  the  consideration  paid,  including  any  non-cash  assets 
transferred or liabilities assumed, is recognised in other income or finance costs.  
 
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of 
the liability for at least 12 months after the reporting date.  
 
u.  Borrowing costs 
Borrowing costs directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of qualifying assets are added 
to the cost of those assets, until such time as the assets are substantially ready for their intended use.  
 
Where the funds used to finance a qualifying asset form part of general borrowings, the amount capitalised is 
calculated  using  a  weighted  average  of  rates  applicable  to  the  relevant  borrowings  during  the  period.  Where 
funds borrowed are directly attributable to a qualifying asset, the amount capitalised represents the borrowing 
costs specific to those borrowings.  
 
All other borrowing costs are recognised as expenses in the period in which they are incurred. 
 
v.  Provisions 
Provisions for legal claims are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result 
of past events, it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount 
has been reliably estimated. Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses. 
 
Where there are a number of similar obligations, the likelihood that an outflow will be required in settlement is 
determined by considering the class of obligations as a whole. A provision is recognised even if the likelihood of 
an outflow with respect to any one item included in the same class of obligations may be small. 
  
Provisions  are  measured  at  the  present  value  of  management’s  best  estimate  of  the  expenditure  required  to 
settle the present obligation at the reporting date. The discount rate used to determine the present value reflects 
current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability. The increase in the 
provision due to the passage of time is recognised as finance costs. 
 
w.  Restoration and rehabilitation provision 
The estimated costs of decommissioning and removing an asset and restoring the site are included in the cost of 
the asset at the date the obligation first arises and to the extent that it is first recognised as a provision. This 
restoration asset is subsequently amortised on a units-of-production basis. 
 
The corresponding provision of an amount equivalent to the restoration asset created is reviewed at the end of 
each reporting period. The provision is measured at the best estimate of present obligation at  the end of the 
reporting period based on current legal and other requirements and technology, discounted where material using 
national  government  bond  rates  at  the  reporting  date  with  terms  to  maturity  and  currencies  that  match,  as 
closely as possible, the estimated future cash outflows. 
 
Where there is a change in the expected restoration, rehabilitation or decommissioning costs, an adjustment is 
recoded  against  the  carrying  value  of  the  provision  and  any  related  restoration  asset,  and  the  effects  are 
recognised in the income statement on a prospective basis over the remaining life of the operation.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 47
The unwinding of the effect of discounting on the rehabilitation provision is included within finance costs in the 
income statement. 
 
Costs incurred that relate to an existing condition caused by past operations, but do not have a future economic 
benefit are expensed as incurred. 
 
x.  Employee benefits 
(i)  Wages and salaries, annual leave and sick leave 
Liabilities for wages and salaries (including non-monetary benefits and annual leave) expected to be settled within 
12 months of  the  reporting  date  are  recognised  in  provisions  for  employee  benefits  in  respect  of  employees’ 
services up to the reporting date and are measured at the amounts expected to be paid when the liabilities are 
settled. Liabilities for sick leave are recognised when the leave is taken and are measured at the rates paid or 
payable. 
 
(ii)  Long service leave and severance pay  
The liability for long service leave and severance pay is recognised in the provision for employee benefits and 
measured  as  the  present  value  of  expected  future  payments  to  be  made  in  respect  of  services  provided  by 
employees  up  to  the  reporting  date.  Consideration  is  given  to  the  expected  future  wage  and  salary  levels, 
experience  of  employee  departures  and  periods  of  service.  Expected  future  payments  are  discounted  using 
market  yields  at  the  reporting  date  on  national  government  bonds  with  terms  to  maturity  and  currency  that 
match, as closely as possible, the estimated future cash outflows. 
 
(iii)  Cash bonuses 
Cash bonuses are expensed in the income statement at reporting date. 
 
A  liability  is  recognised  for  the  amount  expected  to  be  paid  if  the  Group  has  a  present  legal  or  constructive 
obligation  to  pay  this  amount  as  a  result  of  past  service  provided  by  the  Directors  or  employees  and  the 
obligation can be estimated reliably. 
 
(iv)  Retirement benefit obligations 
Defined Contribution plan 
Contributions  to  defined  contribution  superannuation  plans  are  recognised  as  an  expense  in  the  income 
statement as they become payable. 
 
Defined benefit plan 
The Company’s Thai subsidiary, Akara Resources Public Company Limited, have a defined benefit plan which is the 
amount  of  pension  benefit  that  an  employee  will  receive  on  retirement,  usually  dependent  on  one  or  more 
factors such as age, years of service and compensation.  
 
Retirement benefit 
Under Labour laws applicable in Thailand, employees completing 120 days of service are entitled to severance pay 
on termination or retrenchment without cause or upon retirement age of 60. The severance pay will be at the 
rate according to number of years of service as stipulated in the Labor Law which is currently at a maximum rate 
of 300 days of final salary.
The liability recognised in the statement of financial position in respect of defined benefit pension plans is the 
present value of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the reporting period, together with adjustments for 
unrecognised past-service costs. The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries 
using  the  projected  unit  credit  method.  The  present  value  of  the  defined  benefit  obligation  is  determined  by 
discounting the estimated future cash outflows using market yield of government bonds that are denominated in 
the currency in which the benefits will be paid, and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the 
related pension liability. 
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged 
or credited to equity in other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise. 
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 48
Past-service  costs  are  recognised  immediately  in  profit  or  loss,  unless  the  changes  to  the  pension  plan  are 
conditional on the employees remaining in service for a specified period of time (the vesting period). In this case, 
the past-service costs are amortised on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. 
Other long-term benefits - Gold 
The Company’s Thai subsidiary, Akara Resources Public Company Limited,  has a policy to give gold to employees 
who have worked for the Company for 10 years, 15 years and 20 years, in the amounts of Baht 0.5, Baht 1 and 
Baht 1.5 respectively. 
The liability recognised in the statement of financial position in  respect of other long-term benefit plan is the 
present  value  of  the  other  long-term  benefit  obligation  at  the  end  of  the  reporting  period,  together  with 
adjustments for unrecognised past-service costs. The other long-term benefit obligation is calculated annually by 
independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method. The present value of the other long-term benefit 
obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using market yield of government 
bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid, and that have terms to maturity 
approximating to the terms of the related pension liability. 
 
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged 
or credited to the statement of comprehensive income in the period in which they arise. 
 
Past-service costs are recognised immediately in profit or loss. 
 
(v)  Share-based payment transactions 
The Group provides benefits to employees (including Directors) in the form of share-based payments, whereby 
employees render services in exchange for shares or rights over shares (“equity settled transactions”). 
 
The  fair  value  of  these  equity  settled  transactions  is  recognised  as  an  employee  benefit  expense  with  a 
corresponding increase in equity. The fair value is measured at grant date and recognised over the period during 
which the employees become unconditionally entitled. 
 
The fair value at grant date is determined using a pricing model that takes into account the exercise price, the 
term,  the  share  price  at  the  grant  date,  the  expected  price  volatility  of  the  underlying  share,  the  expected 
dividend yield and the risk free interest rate. 
 
Upon  the  exercise  of  the  equity  settled  reward,  the  related  balance  of  the  share-based  payments  reserve  is 
transferred to share capital. 
 
y.  Dividends 
Dividends are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are declared. 
 
z. 
(i)  Basic earnings per share 
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing: 
•  the profit attributable to owners of the Company, excluding any costs of servicing equity other than ordinary
Earnings per share
shares; and
•  by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the financial year, adjusted for bonus
elements in ordinary shares issued during the year and excluding treasury shares.
(ii)  Diluted earnings per share 
Diluted earnings per share adjust the figures used in the determination of basic earnings per share to take into 
account: 
•  the after income tax effect of interest and other financing costs associated with dilutive potential ordinary
•  the weighted average number of additional ordinary shares that would have been outstanding assuming the
conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
shares; and
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 49
aa.  Contributed equity 
Issued ordinary share capital is classified as equity and is recognised at the fair value of the consideration received 
by the Group. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of shares and share options are recognised as a 
deduction, net of tax from the proceeds. 
 
bb.  Goods and services tax (GST) 
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of associated GST, unless the GST incurred is 
not recoverable from the taxation authority. In this case it is recognised as part of the cost of acquisition of the 
asset or as part of the expense. 
 
Receivables and payables are stated inclusive of the amount of GST receivable or payable. The net amount of GST 
recoverable  from  or  payable  to,  the  taxation  authority  is  included  with  other  receivables  or  payables  in  the 
statement of financial position. 
 
Cash  flows  are  presented  on  a  gross  basis.  The  GST  components  of  the  cash  flows  arising  from  investing  or 
financing activities which are recoverable from, or payable to the taxation authority, are presented as operating 
cash flows. 
 
Commitments and contingencies are disclosed net of the amount of GST recoverable from, or payable to, the 
taxation authority. 
 
cc.  Operating and segment reporting 
Operating  segments  are  reported  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  internal  reporting  provided  to  the  chief 
operating decision maker.  The chief operating decision maker, who is responsible for allocating resources and 
assessing performance of the operating segments, has been identified as the Board of Directors. 
 
Segment results that are reported to the Board of Directors include items directly attributable to a segment as 
well as those that can be allocated on a reasonable basis. The operating segments are disclosed in Note 4. 
 
dd.  New accounting standards and interpretations 
(i)  New and amended standards adopted by the Group 
The Group has adopted the following new and revised accounting standards, amendments and interpretations as 
of 1 July 2015: 
•  AASB  2013-9:  Amendments  to  Australian  Accounting  Standards  –  Conceptual  Framework,  Materiality  and
Financial Instruments
•  AASB  2015-3:  Amendments  to  Australian  Accounting  Standards  arising  from  the  Withdrawal  of  AASB  1031:
Materiality
The  adoption  of  these  new  and  revised  standards  did  not  have  a  material  impact  on  the  Group’s  financial 
statements. 
 
(ii)  New accounting standards and interpretations not yet adopted  
The Group has not elected to early adopt any new standards, amendments or interpretations that are issued but 
are not yet effective. Certain new accounting standards and interpretations have been published that are not 
mandatory for 30 June 2016 reporting periods and have not yet been applied in the financial statements. The 
Group’s assessment of the impact of these new standards and interpretations is set out below:
AASB 9 Financial Instruments and AASB 2010-7 and AASB 2012-6 Amendments to AAS’s arising from AASB 9  
AASB 9 includes requirements for the classification and measurement of financial assets. It was further amended 
by AASB 2010-7 to reflect amendments to the accounting treatment of financial liabilities.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 50
The  revised  IFRS  9  will  eventually  replace  AASB  139  and  all  previous  versions  of  IFRS  9.  The  revised  standard 
includes changes to the: 
•  classification and measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities; 
•  expected credit loss impairment model; and 
•  hedge accounting. 
Financial  assets  are  measured  at  amortised  cost,  fair  value  through  profit  or  loss,  or  fair  value  through  other 
comprehensive  income,  based  on  both  the  entity’s  business  model  for  managing  the  financial  assets  and  the 
financial asset’s contractual cash flow characteristics. 
Apart from the ‘own credit risk’ requirements, classification and measurement of financial liabilities is unchanged 
from existing requirements. 
When  adopted,  the  standard  will  affect  in  particular  the  Group’s  accounting  for  its  available-for-sale  financial 
assets, since AASB 9 only permits the recognition of fair value gains and losses in other comprehensive income if 
they relate to equity investments that are not held for trading. 
There will be no impact on the Group’s accounting for financial liabilities, as the new requirements only affect the 
accounting for financial liabilities that are designated at fair value through profit or loss and the Group does not 
have any such liabilities. 
The application date for the Group is 1 July 2018. 
AASB 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 
IFRS 15 establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the nature, 
amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from an entity’s contracts with customers. 
IFRS 15 supersedes: 
(a) IAS 11 Construction Contracts; and 
(b) IAS 18 Revenue. 
The core principle of IFRS 15 is that an entity recognises revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or 
services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in 
exchange  for  those  goods  or  services.  An  entity  recognises  revenue  in  accordance  with  that  core  principle  by 
applying the following steps: 
Step 1: 
Step 2: 
Step 3:  Determine the transaction price. 
Step 4:  Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract. 
Step 5:  Recognise revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. 
The Group does not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact as gold and silver sales are 
only made with reputable institutions using a market price and on relatively short trading terms. 
The application date for the Group is 1 July 2018.
Identify the contract(s) with a customer. 
Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
AASB 16: Leases 
This Standard sets out the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of leases. The 
objective is to ensure that lessees and lessors provide relevant information in a manner that faithfully represents 
those transactions. This information gives a basis for users of financial statements to assess the effect that leases 
have on the financial position, financial performance and cash flows of an entity. 
The  Group  does  not expect  the  adoption of this  standard  to  have  a  significant  impact  as  the  Group  does  not 
expect to have any material lease contracts in place on the application date of this Standard. 
The application date for the Group is 1 July 2019.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 51
AASB 2: Clarifications of classification and measurement of share based payment transactions 
This Standard amends IFRS 2: Share-based Payment to clarify how to account for certain types of share based 
payment transactions. 
The Group does not expect the adoption of this Standard to have a significant impact as the use of share-based 
payments by the Group in recent years had been minimal and any impact of a change in accounting for them 
would immaterial. 
The application date for the Group is 1 July 2018. 
 
ee.  Parent entity financial information 
The  financial  information for  the  parent  entity Kingsgate  Consolidated Limited,  disclosed  in  Note  32  has  been 
prepared on the same basis as the consolidated financial statements except as set out below: 
 
Investments in subsidiaries 
Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for at cost in the financial statements of Kingsgate. 
 
Share-based payments 
The issue by the Company of equity instruments to extinguish liabilities of a subsidiary undertaking in the Group is 
treated as a capital contribution to that subsidiary undertaking.
3.  CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES ASSUMPTIONS AND JUDGEMENTS
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors, 
including expectation of future events that may have a financial impact on the Group and that are believed to be 
reasonable under the circumstances. The Group makes estimates and assumptions concerning the future. Actual 
results  may  differ  from  these  estimates  under  different  assumptions  and  conditions.  The  estimates  and 
assumptions that could materially affect the financial position and results are discussed below: 
 
(i)  Mineral resources and ore reserves estimates 
The Group estimates its ore reserves and mineral resources annually at 30 June each year, and reports in the 
following October, based on information compiled by Competent Persons as defined and in accordance with the 
Australasian code for reporting Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Resources (JORC code 2012). The 
estimated quantities of economically recoverable reserves are based upon interpretations of geological models 
and require assumptions to be made regarding factors such as estimates of short and long-term exchange rates, 
estimates  of  short  and  long-term  commodity  prices,  future  capital  requirements  and  future  operating 
performance.  Changes  in  reported  reserves  estimates  can  impact  the  carrying  value  of  property,  plant  and 
equipment  (including  exploration  and  evaluation  assets),  the  provision  for  rehabilitation  obligations,  the 
recognition of deferred tax assets, as well as the amount of depreciation charged to the Income Statement. 
 
(ii)  Exploration and evaluation assets 
Judgement is required to determine whether future economic benefits are likely, from either exploitation or sale, 
or whether activities have not reached a stage that permits a reasonable assessment of the existence of reserves. 
In addition to these judgements, the Group has to make certain estimates and assumptions. The determination of 
a JORC resource is itself an estimation process that involves varying degrees of uncertainty depending on how the 
resources  are  classified  (i.e.  measured,  indicated  or  inferred).  The  estimates  directly  impact  when  the  Group 
capitalises  exploration  and  evaluation  expenditure.  The  capitalisation  policy  requires  management  to  make 
certain  estimates  and  assumptions  as  to  future  events  and  circumstances,  in  particular,  the  assessment  of 
whether economic quantities of reserves will be found. Any such estimates and assumptions may change as new 
information becomes available.  
 
The recoverable amount of capitalised expenditure relating to undeveloped mining projects (projects for which 
the decision to mine has not yet been approved at the required authorisation level within the Group) can be 
particularly  sensitive  to  variations  in  key  estimates  and  assumptions.  If  a  variation  in  key  estimates  or 
assumptions has a negative impact on recoverable amount it could result in a requirement for impairment. 
 
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 52
(iii)  Production stripping assets 
The life of component ratio is a function of the mine design and therefore changes to that design will generally 
result in changes to the ratio. Changes in other technical or economic parameters that impact reserves will also 
have an impact on the life of component ratio even if they do not affect the mine design. Changes to production 
stripping assets resulting from a change in life of component ratios are accounted for prospectively.
(iv)  Impairment of non-current assets, determination of recoverable amounts 
Significant  judgements  and  assumptions are required  in  making  estimates  of  the  recoverable  amounts. This  is 
particularly so in the assessment of long life assets. It should be noted that the CGU recoverable amounts are 
subject to variability in key assumptions including, but not limited to, gold and silver prices, currency exchange 
rates,  discount  rates,  production  profiles  and  operating  and  capital  costs.  A  change  in  one  or  more  of  the 
assumptions  used  to  estimate  the  recoverable  amounts  would  result  in  a  change  in  the  CGU’s  recoverable 
amounts. For further details regarding the impairment testing refer to note 14.
(v)  Net realisable value 
The  computation  of  net  realisable  value  for  ore  stockpiles  involves  significant  judgements  and  estimates  in 
relation to timing and cost of processing, commodity prices, foreign exchange rates, recoveries and the timing of 
sale of the bullion produced. A change in any of these assumptions will alter the estimated net realisable value 
and may therefore impact the carrying value of ore stockpiles. 
 
(vi)  Restoration and rehabilitation provision 
Significant estimates and assumptions are required in determining the provision for mine rehabilitation as there 
are  many  transactions  and  other  factors  that will  affect  the  ultimate  liability payable  to  rehabilitate  the  mine 
sites. Factors that will affect this liability include changes in technology, changes in regulations, price increases, 
changes in timing of cash flows which are based on life of mine plans and changes in discount rates. When these 
factors change or become known in the future, such differences will impact the mine rehabilitation provision in 
the period in which they change or become known. The rehabilitation provision relating to the Chatree Gold Mine 
takes into account the premature shut-down of the mine. 
 
(vii)  Units-of-production method of depreciation 
The  Group  uses  the  units  of  production  basis  when  depreciating/amortising  specific  assets  which  results  in  a 
depreciation/amortisation  charge  proportional  to  the  depletion  of  the  anticipated  remaining  life  of  mine 
production.  Each  item’s  economic  life,  which  is  assessed  annually,  has  due  regard  to  both  its  physical  life 
limitations and to present assessments of economically recoverable reserves of the mine property at which it is 
located. These calculations require the use of estimates and assumptions. 
 
(viii) Share-based payments 
The Group measures share-based payments at fair value at the grant date.  The fair value is determined by an 
external  valuer  using  a  Monte  Carlo  simulation  model  or  other  valuation  technique  appropriate  for  the 
instrument being valued. 
 
(ix)  Deferred tax balances 
Deferred tax assets in respect of tax losses for the Kingsgate tax-consolidation group (Note 6) are only recognised 
to the extent of deferred tax liabilities, the balance of tax losses are not recognised in the financial statements as 
management considers that it is currently not probable that future taxable profits will be available to utilise those 
tax losses.  Management reviews on a regular basis the future profitability of the entities included in the tax-
consolidation group to consider if tax losses should be recognised and to ensure that any tax losses recognised 
will be utilised. 
Deferred tax balances for temporary differences in respect of Akara Resources PCL are measured based on their 
expected rate of reversal which is different for the two Royal Thai Board of Investment (“BOI”) activities (Note 6). 
The period in which the temporary differences will reverse also take into account the impact of the shutdown of 
the Chatree Gold Mine as discussed in Note 1, basis of preparation going concern. Deferred tax assets in respect 
of  deductible  temporary  differences  are  only  recognised  as  deferred  tax  assets  to  the  extent  of  deferred  tax 
liabilities as management considers not probable that future taxable profits of the entity in the context of the 
shut-down of the mine will be available to utilise them. 
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 53
4.  SEGMENT INFORMATION 
The Group’s operating segments are based on the internal management reports that are reviewed and used by 
the Board of Directors (chief operating decision maker). The operating segments represent the Group’s operating 
mines and projects and include the following: 
 
•  Chatree Mine, Thailand; 
•  Challenger Mine, South Australia, Australia (discontinued during the year ended 30 June 2016); 
•  Bowdens Silver Project, New South Wales, Australia (discontinued during the year ended 30 June 2016); 
•  Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project, Chile; and 
•  Exploration, South East Asia. 
 
Information regarding the results of each reportable segment is included as follows:
2016
Operation 
 
Chatree 
$’000
Development 
Nueva 
Esperanza 
$’000
Exploration 
 
 
$’000
Corporate 
 
 
$’000
Continuing 
operations 
 
$’000
Discontinued 
operations 
 
$’000
Total 
 
 
$’000
External sales revenue 
Other income 
Total segment 
revenue 
 
Segment EBITDA 
Impairment 
/impairment reversal* 
Depreciation and 
amortisation 
Segment result 
(Operating EBIT) 
 
Finance income 
Finance costs 
Net finance costs 
Loss before tax 
 
Other segment information 
Segment assets 
Segment liabilities
174,412 
521 
174,933
29,830 
 (227,564)
(44,370)
(242,104)
- 
- 
- 
 (242,104)
106,562 
(141,354)
- 
- 
-
(3) 
-
-
(3)
- 
- 
-
- 
2 
2
174,412 
523 
174,935
(561) 
 (461)
(12,226)1 
  -
17,040 
 (228,025)
78,916 
467 
79,383
253,328 
990 
254,318
22,824  
17,056
39,864 
 (210,969)
-
(83)
(44,453)
(1,724)
(46,177)
(1,022)
(12,309)
(255,438)
38,156
(217,282)
- 
- 
- 
(3) 
 
 
106,125 
(6,038)
- 
- 
- 
 (1,022) 
 
 
1,137 
 (53)
- 
- 
- 
 (12,309) 
 
 
38,681 
 (12,696)
406 
(12,359) 
(11,953) 
(267,391) 
 
 
 252,505  
 (160,141)
33 
(209) 
(176) 
37,980 
 
 
- 
-
439 
(12,568) 
(12,129) 
(229,411) 
 
 
252,505  
(160,141)
*Related to the sale of Challenger Gold Mine (see Note 34). 
1 includes foreign exchange gain of $3,655,000 for the Group.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 54
4.  SEGMENT INFORMATION (Continued)
2015  
*Restated
Operation 
 
Chatree 
$’000
Development 
Nueva 
Esperanza 
$’000
Exploration 
 
 
$’000
Corporate 
 
 
$’000
Continuing 
operations 
 
$’000
Discontinued 
operations 
 
$’000
Total 
 
 
$’000
-    
  -    
  -
(1,138) 
 (9,888) 
  -
-    
  -    
  -
-    
  -    
  -
-
118,354  
 9  
 118,363  
 
 13,779  
 (22,643) 
 (4,500)
313,162  
 814  
 313,976  
 
 69,458  
 (148,181) 
 (53,950)
194,808  
 805  
 195,613  
 
 55,679  
 (125,538) 
 (49,450)
194,808  
 648  
 195,456  
 
 70,031  
 (115,650) 
 (49,354)
-    
 157  
 157  
 
 (13,214)1 
  -    
 (96)
External sales revenue 
Other income 
Total segment revenue 
 
Segment EBITDA 
Impairment 
Depreciation and 
amortisation 
Segment result 
(Operating EBIT) 
 
 
 859  
Finance income 
 (15,178) 
Finance costs 
(14,319) 
Net finance costs 
(146,992) 
Loss before tax 
 
 
 
Other segment information 
545,010 
Segment assets 
Segment liabilities 
(220,377) 
* Comparative information has been restated as a result of the classification of Challenger Mine and Bowdens Silver Project as discontinued 
operations (refer to Note 34 for details) and the correction of error (refer to Note 35 for details).  
1 includes foreign exchange gain of $2,699,000 for the Group.
777  
 (14,823) 
 (14,046) 
(133,355) 
 
 
 515,589  
 (200,687)
82  
 (355) 
 (273) 
(13,637) 
 
 
 29,421  
 (19,690)
-    
  -    
  -    
 (11,026) 
 
 
2,956 
 (770)
-    
  -    
  -    
 (13,310) 
 
 
30,156 
 (28,769)
-    
  -    
  -    
- 
 
 
96,234 
 (6,419)
(94,973)
-    
  -    
  -    
(94,973)
(11,026)
(13,310)
(119,309)
(13,364)
(132,673)
386,243 
 (164,729)
Customer A 
Customer B 
** Revenue from continuing operations and discontinued operations (refer to Note 34 for details).
Revenue**
% of External Revenue
2016 
$’000 
174,412 
78,916
2015 
$’000 
194,808 
118,354
2016 
% 
69 
31
2015 
% 
62 
38
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 55
5.     REVENUE AND EXPENSES
Cost of sales
Sales revenue
Other income and expenses
Corporate and administration expenses
a. 
Gold sales 
Silver sales 
Sales revenue from continuing operations 
Sales revenue from discontinued operations (Note 34) 
 
b. 
Direct costs of mining and processing 
Royalties 
Inventory movements 
Depreciation (operations) 
Cost of sales from continuing operations 
Cost of sales from discontinued operations (Note 34) 
 
c. 
Administration 
Divestment transaction costs 
Technical support and business development 
Statutory and professional fees 
Depreciation 
Corporate and administration expenses from continuing operations 
Corporate and administration expenses from discontinued operations (Note 34) 
 
d. 
Net gain on sale of fixed assets 
Realised loss on delivery against hedge contracts 
Change in fair value of available-for-sale assets 
Other revenue 
Other income and expenses from continuing operations 
Other income and expenses from discontinued operations (Note 34) 
 
e. 
Interest and finance charges 
Foreign exchange loss on loans 
Unwinding of discount 
Amortisation of deferred borrowing costs 
Finance costs from continuing operations 
Finance costs from discontinued operations (Note 34) 
 
f. 
Property, plant and equipment 
Mine properties 
Less: depreciation capitalised 
Depreciation and amortisation expenses 
Included in: 
Costs of sales depreciation 
Corporate depreciation 
 
g. 
Included in: 
Costs of sales 
Corporate and administration expenses 
Total employee benefits expenses
Depreciation and amortisation
Employee benefits expenses
Finance costs
2016 
$’000 
 
159,972 
14,440 
174,412 
78,916 
 
 
112,854 
14,693 
12,950 
44,370 
184,867 
57,331 
 
 
13,860 
- 
1,016 
2,490 
83 
17,449 
903 
 
 
18 
(2,325) 
(810) 
505 
(2,612) 
467 
 
 
6,795 
3,257 
748 
1,559 
12,359 
209 
 
 
15,801 
 30,467  
 (91) 
 46,177  
 
 45,954  
 223
18,024 
7,178 
25,202
2015 
$’000
177,983 
16,825 
194,808 
118,354 
 
 
 98,478  
 16,019  
 9,352  
49,354 
173,203 
105,704 
 
 
13,434 
191 
1,210 
2,649 
 96  
 17,580  
564 
 
 
11 
- 
120 
624 
755 
(2,632) 
 
 
9,823 
2,419 
756 
1,825 
14,823 
355 
 
 
 15,652  
 38,878  
 (580) 
 53,950  
 
 53,732  
 218
20,386 
8,503 
28,889
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 56
5.  REVENUE AND EXPENSES (Continued)
Other items
Significant items
h. 
Operating lease rentals 
Total other items 
 
i. 
Impairment of Chatree Gold Mine 
Impairment of capitalised exploration 
Total significant items (pre-tax) from continuing operations 
Total significant items (pre-tax) from discontinued operations (Note 34) 
 
 
6.
INCOME TAX
Income tax expense
a. 
Current tax 
Deferred tax 
Income tax expense 
 
Deferred tax expense/(benefit) included in tax expense comprises: 
Increase in deferred tax assets 
Increase in deferred tax liabilities 
Deferred tax
2016 
$’000 
 
457 
457 
 
 
227,564 
461 
228,025 
(17,056)
2016 
$’000 
 
309 
(269) 
40 
 
 
14,465 
(14,734) 
(269)
2015 
$’000 
 
583 
583 
 
 
115,650 
9,888 
125,538 
22,643
2015 
$’000 
 
(704) 
1,355 
651 
 
 
(11,196) 
12,551 
1,355
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 57
6.
INCOME TAX (Continued)
Numerical reconciliation of income tax expense to prima facie tax payable
b. 
Loss from continuing operations before income tax 
Profit/(loss) from discontinued operations before income tax 
Total loss before income tax 
Tax at Australian rate of 30% 
Tax effect of amounts not deductible/assessable in calculating taxable income 
Non-deductible expenses 
Non-deductible amortisation 
Non-deductible interest expense to preference shareholders 
Share-based payment remuneration 
Share of loss of associate 
Difference in Thailand tax rates 
Non-temporary differences affecting the tax expense 
Tax benefit of tax losses not brought to account in the prior year recognised this year 
Tax benefit of tax losses not brought to account 
Temporary difference adjustment (Thailand) 
Other temporary difference adjustment 
• 
impairment of Chatree Gold Mine 
• 
impairment reversal of Bowdens Silver Project 
• 
impairment of exploration 
Income tax expense
Kingsgate’s Thai controlled entity Akara Resources Public Company Limited (“Akara”) received on 18 June 2010 
approval from The Royal Thai Board of Investment (“BOI”) for promotion of the Chatree North gold processing 
plant. Based on annual production limit from the new processing plant of 185,200 ounces of gold and 1,080,400 
ounces of silver, Akara is entitled to: 
a.  an eight year tax holiday on income derived from the new processing plant with tax savings limited to the
capital cost of the new treatment plant;
b.  25% investment allowance on the capital cost of certain assets of the new processing plant; and 
c.  other benefits. 
The start of the promotion period was 1 November 2012. 
 
c.
Tax recognised in other comprehensive income
Foreign exchange losses recognised directly in foreign currency translation reserves 
Total tax recognised in other comprehensive income 
 
d. 
Deferred tax liabilities amounting to $$11,007,000 (2015:$28,795,000) have been offset against deferred tax assets.
Deferred tax liabilities offset
2016 
$’000 
 
(267,431) 
37,980 
(229,411) 
(68,823) 
 
468 
129 
364 
100 
- 
- 
- 
(3,620) 
6,719 
1,046 
271 
68,269 
(4,994) 
111 
40
2015 
$’000 
 
(134,006) 
(13,637) 
(147,643) 
(44,293) 
 
1,037 
1,762 
361 
123 
34 
(1,968) 
417 
- 
- 
- 
- 
33,419 
6,793 
2,966 
651
2016 
$’000 
 
- 
-
2015 
$’000 
 
- 
-
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 58
INCOME TAX (Continued) 
Unrecognised deferred tax assets and tax liabilities
6. 
e.
2016 
$’000 
 
301,841 
502 
1,278 
303,621 
90,7031
2015 
$’000 
 
277,098 
1,443 
38,293 
316,834 
95,050
Tax losses – Australian entities 
Tax losses – other entities 
Temporary difference 
Subtotal 
Unrecognised deferred tax assets 
 
1  Amount  excludes  potential  deductible  temporary  differences  in  respect  of  Akara  for  $45,350,000  arising  from  an  impairment  charge 
recognised during the year. It is not probable that there will be sufficient future assessable income available against which this deferred tax 
asset could be utilised 
As at 30 June 2016 Akara has undistributed earnings of $20,604,000 which, if paid out as dividends, and if not 
paid out from one of the BOI activity, would be subject to withholding tax in the hands of its Australian parent 
entity.
Tax consolidation group
f. 
 
Kingsgate  Consolidated  Limited  and  its  wholly  owned  Australian  subsidiary  have  implemented  the  tax 
consolidation legislation as of 1 July 2003. The accounting policy in relation to this legislation is set out in Note 2d. 
On adoption of the tax consolidation legislation, the entities in the tax-consolidation group entered into a tax 
sharing  agreement  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Directors,  limits  the  joint  and  several  liabilities  of  the  wholly 
owned entities in the case of default by the head entity, Kingsgate Consolidated Limited. 
The  entities  have  also  entered  into  a  tax  funding  agreement  under  which  the  wholly  owned  entities  fully 
compensate Kingsgate for any current tax payable assumed and are compensated for any current tax receivable 
and deferred assets relating to the unused tax losses or unused tax credits that are transferred to Kingsgate under 
the tax legislation. The funding amounts are determined by reference to the amounts recognised in the wholly 
owned entities’ financial statements. 
The amount receivable/payable under the tax funding agreement are due upon receipt of the funding advice from 
the head entity, which is issued as soon as practicable after the end of each financial year. The head entity may 
also require payment of interim funding amounts to assist with its obligations to pay tax instalments.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 59
Assets
2016 
$’000
158 
- 
5,722 
631 
660 
- 
3,836 
11,007 
(11,007) 
- 
208 
10,799 
11,007
2015 
$’000
1,009 
2,368 
5,198 
472 
417 
19,331 
- 
28,795 
(28,795) 
- 
131 
28,664 
28,795
6.
INCOME TAX (Continued) 
g.  Recognised deferred tax assets and liabilities
Deferred tax assets/(liabilities) 
Employee benefits 
Provision for restoration and rehabilitation 
Unrealised exchange (gains)/losses 
Other items 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Mine properties and exploration 
Tax losses 
Total deferred tax assets/(liabilities) 
Set off tax 
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) 
Deferred tax assets/(liabilities) expected to be recovered within 12 months 
Deferred tax assets/(liabilities) expected to be recovered after more than 12 months 
Total deferred tax assets/(liabilities)
Liabilities 
2016 
$’000
2015 
$’000
- 
- 
(10,824) 
(302) 
- 
- 
- 
(11,126) 
11,007 
(119) 
- 
(11,126) 
(11,126)
Net
2016 
$’000
158 
- 
(5,102) 
329 
660 
- 
3,836 
(119) 
- 
(119) 
208 
(327) 
(119)
2015 
$’000
1,009 
2,368 
(4,479) 
308 
417 
(11) 
- 
(388) 
- 
(388) 
108 
(496) 
(388)
- 
- 
(9,677) 
(164) 
- 
(19,342) 
- 
(29,183) 
28,795 
(388) 
(23) 
(29,160) 
(29,183)
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 60
6.
INCOME TAX (Continued) 
Movement in deferred tax balances
2016 
Deferred tax assets/(liabilities): 
Employee benefits 
Provision for restoration and rehabilitation 
Unrealised exchange losses 
Other items 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Mine properties and exploration 
Tax losses 
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) 
 
2015 
Deferred tax assets/(liabilities): 
Derivatives 
Employee benefits 
Provision for restoration and rehabilitation 
Provision for obsolescence 
Unrealised exchange losses 
Other items 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Mine properties and exploration 
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities)
Balance at  
1 July
Recognised in 
profit or loss
1,009 
2,368 
(4,479) 
308 
417 
(11) 
- 
(388) 
 
 
 
189 
1,814 
4,774 
348 
21 
521 
419 
(7,509) 
577
(851) 
(2,368) 
(623) 
21 
243 
(12) 
3,836 
246 
 
 
 
(189) 
(909) 
(2,724) 
(390) 
(4,500) 
(263) 
(2) 
7,622 
(1,355)
Recognised in 
other 
comprehensive 
income 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
Foreign 
exchange
Balance at  
30 June
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
23 
- 
23 
 
 
 
- 
104 
318 
42 
- 
50 
- 
(124) 
390
158 
- 
(5,102) 
329 
660 
- 
3,836 
(119) 
 
 
 
- 
1,009 
2,368 
- 
(4,479) 
308 
417 
(11) 
(388)
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 61
2016 
$’000 
 
13 
36,301 
7,004 
43,318 
 
 
- 
-
2015 
$’000 
 
21 
55,451 
- 
55,472 
 
 
6,601 
6,601
Cash on hand 
These are petty cash balances held by subsidiaries. 
Deposits at call 
These deposits are at call, interest bearing and may be accessed daily. 
Restricted cash 
Under the terms of the loan facilities (see Note 16), the Group is required to maintain a minimum cash balance of 
US$5,000,000 in respect of Akara. 
Risk exposure 
The Group’s exposure to interest rate risk and a sensitivity analysis for financial assets and liabilities are disclosed 
in Note 28.
Current 
Cash on hand 
Deposits at call 
Restricted cash 
Total current 
 
Non-current 
Restricted cash 
Total non-current
8.  RECEIVABLES
7.  CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS AND RESTRICTED CASH
2016 
$’000 
 
- 
7,273 
5,000 
12,273 
 
 
4,015 
4,015
2015 
$’000 
 
1,448 
17,691 
- 
19,139 
 
 
- 
-
Current 
Trade receivables 
Other debtors 
Financial assets measured at fair value through profit or loss (Bowdens receivable) 
Total receivables  – current 
 
Non-current 
Other debtors 
Total receivables  – non-current 
Trade receivables 
Trade receivables represent gold sales at the end of the financial year, where payment was yet to be received. 
Other debtors 
Other  debtors  mainly  relate  to  GST/VAT  receivables  and  receivables  on  sale  of  Challenger  Gold  Mine  and 
Bowdens Silver Project (see Note 34). 
Risk exposure 
The Group’s exposure to credit and currency risks are disclosed in Note 28.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 62
2016 
$’000 
 
 12,664  
  -    
 69,812  
 6,525  
 (4,763) 
(58,178) 
 26,060  
 
 
- 
-
2015 
$’000 
 
15,261 
82 
28,341 
6,080 
(2,617) 
- 
47,147 
 
 
55,711 
55,711
2016 
$’000 
 
- 
2,365 
8,554 
10,919 
 
 
14,060 
70 
14,130
2015 
$’000 
 
1,060 
4,982 
3,577 
9,619 
 
 
11,345 
7,097 
18,442
INVENTORIES
9.
Current 
Raw materials and stores 
Livestock 
Stockpiles and work in progress 
Gold bullion  
Provision for obsolescence 
Impairment * 
Total inventories – current 
 
Non-current 
Stockpiles 
Total inventories – non-current 
*Impairment relates to ore stockpiles and work in progress at Chatree Gold Mine (see Note 14).
10.  OTHER ASSETS
Current 
Prepaid mining services 
Prepayments 
Other deposits 
Total other assets – current 
 
Non-current 
Prepayments 
Other deposits 
Total other assets – non-current 
Prepayments 
Non-current  prepayments  include  prepaid  royalties  and  water  rights  in  respect  of  the  Nueva  Esperanza 
Gold/Silver Project in Chile. 
Other deposits 
Other  deposits  current  includes  cash  held  on  deposit  with  financial  institutions  that  is  restricted  to  use  on 
community projects in Thailand and $4,118,000 of security deposits.
11.  AVAILABLE-FOR-SALE FINANCIAL ASSETS
Equity securities – current 
At the beginning of the financial year 
Revaluation 
At the end of the financial year 
 
Equity securities – non-current 
At the beginning of the financial year 
Reclassification from investment in associate 
Revaluation 
At the end of the financial year
2016 
$’000 
 
1,350 
(810) 
540 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
-
2015 
$’000 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
270 
960 
120 
1,350
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 63
12.  PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Opening balance 
Cost 
Accumulated depreciation and amortisation 
Accumulated impairment 
Net book amount 
 
Year ended 30 June  
Opening net book amount 
Additions 
Reclassified 
Disposals 
Disposal group * 
Impairment 
Depreciation and amortisation expense 
Foreign currency differences 
Closing net book amount 
 
Cost 
Accumulated depreciation and amortisation 
Accumulated impairment 
Net book amount
*Related to the sales of Challenger Gold Mine and Bowdens Silver Project (see Note 34).
2016 
$’000 
 
365,349 
(111,958) 
(64,897) 
188,494 
 
 
188,494 
619 
(7,491) 
(77) 
(834) 
(119,363) 
(15,710) 
(1,360) 
44,278 
 
263,453 
(34,915) 
(184,260) 
44,278
2015 
$’000 
 
320,915 
(85,360) 
(64,897) 
170,658 
 
 
170,658 
5,315 
(1,214) 
(36) 
- 
- 
(15,652) 
29,423 
188,494 
 
365,349 
(111,958) 
(64,897) 
188,494
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 64
13.  EXPLORATION, EVALUATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Exploration & 
evaluation 
$’000
Feasibility 
expenditure 
$’000
At 30 June 2014 
Cost 
Accumulated depreciation and amortisation 
Accumulated impairment 
Net book amount 
 
Year ended 30 June 2015 
Opening net book amount 
Additions 
Reclassified 
Disposals 
Impairment 
Depreciation and amortisation expense 
Foreign currency exchange differences 
Closing net book amount 
 
At 30 June 2015 
Cost 
Accumulated depreciation and amortisation 
Accumulated impairment 
Net book amount 
 
Year ended 30 June 2016 
Opening net book amount 
Additions 
Reclassified 
Disposal groups * 
Impairment 
Depreciation and amortisation expense 
Foreign currency exchange differences 
Closing net book amount 
 
At 30 June 2016 
Cost 
Accumulated depreciation and amortisation 
Accumulated impairment 
Net book amount
*Related to the sales of Challenger Gold Mine and Bowdens Silver Project (see Note 34).
48,024 
- 
(39,530) 
8,494 
 
 
8,494 
1,283 
- 
- 
(9,888) 
- 
991 
880 
 
 
50,298 
- 
(49,418) 
880 
 
 
880 
 91  
 (510) 
- 
 (461) 
- 
  -    
  -
39,991
- 
(39,991) 
  -
Mine 
properties 
$’000
649,556 
(240,112) 
(239,848) 
169,596 
 
 
169,596 
25,032 
(316) 
(326) 
(115,650) 
(38,878) 
24,595 
64,053 
 
 
720,474 
(300,923) 
(355,498) 
64,053 
 
 
64,053 
 29,710  
7,400 
 (8,599) 
 (50,023) 
 (30,467) 
 (1,057) 
 11,017
327,638  
 (26,750) 
(289,871) 
 11,017
Total 
$’000
849,441 
(240,112) 
(354,072) 
255,257 
 
 
255,257 
39,488 
1,214 
(326) 
(148,181) 
(38,878) 
34,461 
143,035 
 
 
946,211 
(300,923) 
(502,253) 
143,035 
 
 
143,035 
 35,617  
7,491    
 (8,599) 
 (50,484) 
 (30,467) 
 379 
 96,972
528,278  
 (26,750) 
(404,556) 
 96,972
151,861 
- 
(74,694) 
77,167 
 
 
77,167 
13,173 
1,530 
- 
(22,643) 
- 
8,875 
78,102 
 
 
175,439 
- 
(97,337) 
78,102 
 
 
78,102 
 5,816  
601 
- 
- 
- 
 1,436  
 85,955
160,649  
- 
(74,694) 
 85,955
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 65
14.  IMPAIRMENT ASSESSMENT 
For the purposes of assessing impairment, assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately 
identifiable cash inflows which are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets 
(cash generating units “CGUs”).
Methodology 
An impairment is recognised when the carrying amount exceeds the recoverable amount. 
The  recoverable  amount  of  the  Chatree  Gold  Mine  has  been  determined  using  a  value  in  use  model  and  the 
Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project has been estimated using a fair value less costs of disposal basis. The costs of 
disposal have been estimated by management based on prevailing market conditions. 
The recoverable amounts of these CGUs has been estimated based on discounted cash flows using market based 
commodity price and exchange rate assumptions, estimated quantities of recoverable minerals, production levels, 
operating costs and capital requirements, based on latest life of mine plans. 
The recoverable amount estimate for Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project is considered to be level 3 fair value 
measurement (as defined by accounting standards) as it is derived from valuation techniques that include inputs 
that are not based on observable market data. The Group considers the inputs and the valuation approach to be 
consistent with the approach taken by market participants. 
Significant  judgements  and  assumptions are required  in  making  estimates  of  the  recoverable  amounts. This  is 
particularly so in the assessment of long life assets. It should be noted that the CGU recoverable amounts are 
subject to variability in key assumptions including, but not limited to, gold and silver prices, currency exchange 
rates,  discount  rates,  production  profiles  and  operating  and  capital  costs.  A  change  in  one  or  more  of  the 
assumptions  used  to  estimate  the  recoverable  amounts  would  result  in  a  change  in  the  CGU’s  recoverable 
amounts.
Key assumptions 
In determining each key assumption, management has used external sources of information and utilised experts 
within the Group to validate entity specific assumptions such as reserves and resources. For both Chatree and 
Nueva  Esperanza,  production  and  capital  costs  are  based  on  the  Group’s  estimate  of  forecast  geological 
conditions, capacity of existing plant and equipment and future production levels. This information is obtained 
from  external  experts  where  applicable,  internally  maintained  budgets,  mine  models  and  project  evaluations 
performed by the Group in its ordinary course of business. 
The table below summarises the key assumptions used in the carrying value assessments.
FY 2016 
     & 
FY 2017 
US$1,300 
US$19 
35
+FY 2018 
long term 
average 
US$1,300 
US$20 
35
Gold (US$ per ounce) 
Silver (US$ per ounce) 
US$: THB exchange rate 
 
The Group receives long term forecast price data from multiple externally verifiable sources when determining its 
pricing forecasts.  For the Nueva Esperanza project, gold and silver prices forecast that result in the recoverable 
amount exceeding the book value are generally achieved when the high end of the range is adopted.  
The foreign exchange rates used in the models are AUD/USD of 0.75 and USD/THB of 35.0 based on exchange 
rates current at period end.
Chatree Gold Mine 
Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project
Discount rate (%) 
9.3% 
8.5%
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 66
14. IMPAIRMENT ASSESSMENT (Continued) 
The  Group  has  applied  post-tax  real  discount  rates  to  discount  the  forecast  future  attributable  post-tax  cash 
flows. The equivalent pre-tax nominal discount rates applied to Chatree Gold Mine is 39% (the pattern of the tax 
payments included in the impairment model lead to a higher pre-tax rate) and to the Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver 
Project is 11.1%. The post-tax discount rate applied to the future cash flow forecasts represent an estimate of the 
rate the market would apply having regard to the time value of money and the risks specified to the asset for 
which the future cash flow estimate have not been adjusted. 
Chatree Gold Mine 
In  accordance  with  AASB  136  –  Impairment  of  Assets  an  impairment  charge  of  $227,564,000  has  been  made 
against the carrying value of the Chatree Gold Mine (“Chatree”).  This reduction in carrying value reflects the 
shortened  Chatree  mine  life  arising  from  the  implementation  during  2016  of  a  policy  resolution  by  the  Thai 
Government requiring all gold mining activity in Thailand to cease by 31 December 2016. 
The recoverable amount of Chatree at 30 June 2016 was determined based on a value in use model. Based on the 
assumptions noted above, the recoverable amount of Chatree as at 30 June 2016 is assessed as being equal to its 
carrying amount of $35,080,000 after impairment. 
The key assumptions to which the models is most sensitive includes: 
•  gold and silver prices; 
• 
•  production costs.
foreign exchange rates; and
Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project 
The recoverable amount of Nueva Esperanza at 30 June 2016 was determined based on a fair value less costs of 
disposal model. Based on the assumption noted above, the fair value of Nueva Esperanza as at 30 June 2016 is 
assessed as being approximately equal to its carrying value of $98,878,000 resulting in no impairment. 
The key assumptions to which the model is most sensitive includes: 
•  gold and silver prices; 
•  production an capital costs; 
•  discount rate; and 
•
reserves and resources.
Sensitivity analysis 
After  effecting  the  impairment  for  the  Chatree  Gold  Mine  CGU,  the  recoverable  amount  of  these  assets  is 
assessed as being equal to their carrying amount as at 30 June 2016. 
Any variation in the key assumptions used to determine the recoverable amount would result in a change of the 
estimated  the  recoverable  amount.  If  the  variation  in  assumption  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  recoverable 
amount it could indicate a requirement for additional impairment of non-current assets.     
It is estimated that the following reasonably possible changes in the key assumptions would have the following 
approximate pre-tax impact on the recoverable amount of each CGU as at 30 June 2016:
Chatree Gold Mine
US$100/oz increase/decrease in gold price 
US$1 increase/decrease in silver price 
THB1.5 increase in US$: THB exchange rate 
THB1.5 decrease in US$: THB exchange rate 
5% increase/decrease in operating costs 
5% increase/decrease in capital expenditure
$’000 
 6,011  
 515  
              2,680 
   (2,449) 
 2,689  
                    -
Nueva Esperanza 
Gold/Silver Project
$’000 
 15,676  
 25,889  
n/a 
n/a 
 19,248  
10,797
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 67
14. IMPAIRMENT ASSESSMENT (Continued) 
In respect of Nueva Esperanza, as the recoverable amount only marginally exceeds the carrying amount, applying 
any negative sensitivity to the cash flow forecasts would result in an impairment charge at 30 June 2016. 
It must be noted that each of the sensitivities above assumes that the specific assumption moves in isolation, 
whilst all other assumptions are held constant. In reality, a change in one of the aforementioned assumptions 
may  accompany  a  change  in  another  assumption  which  may  have  an  offsetting  impact.  Action  is  also  usually 
taken to respond to adverse changes in economic assumptions that may mitigate the impact of any such change.
The Group’s exposure to currency and liquidity risk related to trade and other payables is disclosed in Note 28.
16.  BORROWINGS 
This note provides information about the contractual terms of the Group’s interest-bearing loans and borrowings. 
For more information about the Group’s exposure to interest rate and liquidity risk, see Note 28.
15.  PAYABLES
Current 
Trade payables 
Other payables and accruals 
Total payables – current 
 
Non-current 
Other payables  
Total payables – non-current
Current 
Secured bank loans 
Preference shares in controlled entity 
Finance lease liabilities 
Other loan 
Total borrowings – current 
 
Non-current  
Secured bank loans 
Preference shares in controlled entity 
Finance lease liabilities 
Total borrowings – non-current 
 
Borrowings 
Secured bank loans 
Preference shares in controlled entity 
Finance lease liabilities 
Other loan 
Total borrowings
2016 
 
$’000 
 
 12,342  
 8,971  
 21,313  
 
 
 4,074  
 4,074
2015 
Restated 
$’000 
 
 18,095  
 9,249  
 27,344  
 
 
7,171 
7,171
2016 
$’000 
 
85,240 
10,171 
1,549 
1,137 
98,097 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
85,240 
10,171 
1,549 
1,137 
98,097
2015 
$’000 
 
54,971 
10,870 
398 
1,313 
67,552 
 
 
73,427 
82 
1,562 
75,071 
 
 
128,398 
10,952 
1,960 
1,313 
142,623
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 68
16. BORROWINGS (Continued) 
Secured bank loans 
Terms and debt repayment schedule 
Terms and conditions of outstanding loans were as follows:
Currency
Nominal interest
Revolving Credit Facility 
Multi-currency loan facilities 
 
Less capitalised borrowing costs 
Total
THAI BAHT
AUD
USD
BBSY1 + margin 
THBFIX2+ margin 
LIBOR3 + margin
Financial 
year of 
maturity
2017 
*2019 
*2019
Face 
value 
$’000 
10,000 
30,585 
44,723
Carrying 
amount 
$’000 
10,000 
30,585 
44,723 
(68) 
85,240
1BBSY means bank bill swap bid rate 
2THBFIX means Thai Baht interest rate fixing 
3LIBOR means London interbank offered rate 
*classified as current liabilities at year end. 
 
Revolving Credit Facility 
Kingsgate has a Revolving Credit Facility (“RCF”) with $10 million drawn against this facility at 30 June 2016. A 
debt repayment of $5 million was paid at the end of July 2016. The balance of the RCF of $5 million is due for 
repayment at the end of January 2017. As security the lender has a fixed and floating charge over Kingsgate assets 
including shares in its material subsidiaries. 
Kingsgate,  in  addition,  has  available  over  the  tenure  of  the  RCF  an  Equity-linked  Loan  Facility  (“ELF”)  of  $15 
million. The ELF is currently undrawn.
Multi-currency loan facility 
Kingsgate’s  Thai  operating  subsidiary,  Akara  Resources  PCL  (“Akara”),  has  an  amortising  multi-currency  loan 
facility which under the loan facility agreement has less than three years remaining following the commencement 
of quarterly repayments in November 2013. Subsequent to the Thai Government decision on 10 May 2016 that 
the Chatree Gold Mine would only be able to continue to operate until 31 December 2016, a revised mine plan 
was implemented which from the planned production profile indicates the potential to generate sufficient cash 
flow  to  repay  this  debt  in  full  by  31  December  2016.  The  outstanding  debt  balance  is  classified  as  a  current 
liability at year end as it is expected to be repaid by 31 December 2016, and covenants under the loan agreement 
were  not  met.  No  default  notice  has  been  received  from  the  financiers.  At  year  end  the  equivalent  of  $75.3 
million was owed against this facility and a further equivalent $7.3 million has been repaid since year end.  As 
security  against  the  facility  the  lender  has  a  fixed  and  floating  charge  over  the  land,  buildings,  plant  and 
equipment in Thailand owned by Akara and its material subsidiaries. 
Restricted funds 
Under  the  terms  of  the  loan  facilities,  Akara  is  required  to  maintain  a  debt  service  reserve  account  of 
US$5,000,000 ($7,004,000).
Preference shares in controlled entity 
Terms and repayment schedule 
Terms and conditions of outstanding preference shares in controlled entity were as follows: 
Face value
Interest rate
Currency
Preference shares in controlled 
entity
Thai Baht
12%
n/a
Financial year 
of maturity
$’000 
10,238
Carrying 
amount  
$’000 
11,394
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 69
Within 1 year 
Later than 1 year but not later than 5 years 
Total
17.  PROVISIONS
Current 
Employee benefits 
Restoration and rehabilitation 
Total provisions – current 
 
Non-current 
Restoration and rehabilitation 
Employee benefits 
Total provisions – non-current 
 
Movements in the restoration and rehabilitation provision: 
Restoration and rehabilitation 
At the beginning of the financial year 
Revision of rehabilitation provision 
Unwind of discount rate for provision 
Disposal on sale of Challenger Gold Mine (see Note 34) 
Foreign currency exchange differences 
At the end of the financial year
18.  CONTRIBUTED EQUITY
$’000 
151 
 - 
151
$’000 
1,549 
    -
1,549
Note
2x,24
2w 
2x,24
2016 
$’000 
 
 6,280  
 4,275  
 10,555  
 
 
 25,917  
 66  
 25,983  
 
 
 
34,641 
2,691 
952 
(7,851) 
(241) 
30,192
2015 
$’000 
 
3,625 
- 
3,625 
 
 
34,641 
4,585 
39,226 
 
 
 
27,731 
2,215 
981 
- 
3,714 
34,641
16. BORROWINGS (Continued) 
Finance lease liabilities 
The Group has various items of plant and equipment with a carrying amount of $1,700,000 under finance leases. 
Finance lease liabilities are payable as follows:
Future minimum 
lease payments
Interest
Present value of minimum
lease payments
$’000 
1,700 
    - 
1,700
2016 
Shares 
223,584,937 
-
2015 
Shares 
223,584,937 
-
2016 
$’000 
677,109 
(67)
2015 
$’000 
677,109 
-
223,584,937
223,584,937
Opening balance 
Share  acquisition  for  the  settlement  of  vested  deferred 
rights 
Closing balance 
During  the  year,  the  Company  acquired  98,000  shares  in  Kingsgate  Consolidated  Limited  on  market  for 
consideration of $67,000. These shares were distributed to rights holders as settlement of vested deferred rights. 
Capital risk management 
The  Group’s  objectives  when  managing  capital  are  to  safeguard  the  Group’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going 
concern, so as to maintain a strong capital base sufficient to maintain future exploration and development of its 
projects. In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Group may return capital to shareholders, issue 
new  shares  or  sell  assets.  The  Group’s  focus  over  the  financial  year  has  been  to  utilise  surplus  cash  from 
operations and asset sale to fund capital investment at Chatree, working capital and exploration and evaluation 
activities, for the Nueva Esperanza Project in Chile and to repay borrowings.
677,042
677,109
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 70
19.  RESERVES AND ACCUMULATED LOSSES
2015 
Restated 
$’000
2016 
 
$’000 
 
45,234 
 9,056  
 (3,341) 
 50,949  
 
 
 
 48,234  
 (3,000) 
 45,234  
 
 
9,008 
48 
9,056 
 
 
(3,542) 
201  
 (3,341)
Reserves
48,234 
9,008 
(3,542) 
53,700 
 
 
 
(12,530) 
60,764 
48,234
a. 
Foreign currency translation reserve 
Share-based payment reserve 
General reserve 
Total reserves 
 
Movements 
Foreign currency translation reserve 
At the beginning of the financial year 
Exchange differences on translation of foreign controlled entities (net of tax) 
At the end of the financial year 
 
Share-based payment reserve 
At the beginning of the financial year 
Share-based payment expense 
At the end of the financial year 
 
General reserve 
At the beginning of the financial year 
Net change 
At the end of the financial year 
Foreign currency translation reserve 
Exchange differences arising on translation of the foreign controlled entities are taken to the foreign currency 
translation reserve, as described in Note 2b. 
Share-based payment reserve 
The share-based payment reserve is used to recognise the fair value of deferred rights, performance rights and 
options issued but not exercised. 
General reserve 
The  general  reserve  represents  changes  in  equity  as  a  result  of  changes  in  non-controlling  interests  in  prior 
periods and revaluation of employee benefit obligations in current year.
8,598 
410 
9,008 
 
 
(4,380) 
838 
(3,542)
Accumulated losses
b. 
Accumulated losses at the beginning of the year 
Net loss attributable to members of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited 
Accumulated losses
2016 
$’000 
 
(406,176) 
(229,451) 
(635,627)
2015 
$’000 
 
 (258,533) 
 (147,643) 
(406,176)
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 71
20. COMMITMENTS FOR EXPENDITURE
Operating leases 
Within one year 
Later than one year but not later than five years 
Total operating leases 
 
Exploration commitments 
Within one year 
Total exploration commitments
21.  CONTROLLED ENTITIES 
 
Entity 
Parent Entity 
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited 
Subsidiaries 
Dominion Mining Ltd 
Gawler Gold Mining Pty Ltd 
Dominion Metals Proprietary Ltd 
Kingsgate Treasury Pty Ltd 
Kingsgate Capital Pty Ltd 
Kingsgate Chile NL1 
Laguna Exploration Pty Ltd 
Akara Resources Public Company Limited 
Issara Mining Limited 
Suan Sak Patana Ltd 
Phar Mai Exploration Ltd 
Richaphum Mining Ltd 
Phar Lap Ltd 
Phar Rong Ltd 
Asia Gold Ltd 
Dominion (Lao) Co., Ltd 
Laguna Chile Ltda
Country of 
incorporation
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Thailand 
Thailand 
Thailand 
Thailand 
Thailand 
Thailand 
Thailand 
Mauritius
Laos 
Chile
2016 
$’000 
 
343 
373 
716 
 
 
- 
-
2015 
$’000 
 
465 
706 
1,171 
 
 
1,400 
1,400
Equity holding
2016 
%
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100
2015 
%
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100
Class of 
shares
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary
1 Laguna Resources NL changed its name to Kingsgate Chile NL on 12 August 2015.
22.  DIVIDENDS 
No final dividend was declared for the year ended 30 June 2015 (30 June 2014: nil). 
No interim dividend was declared for the year ended 30 June 2016 (30 June 2015: nil).
23.  RELATED PARTIES 
Transaction with related parties 
Information  on  remuneration  of  Directors  and  Key  Management  Personnel  is  disclosed  in  Note  29  and  the 
Remuneration Report. 
Controlling entity 
The ultimate parent entity of the Group is Kingsgate Consolidated Limited.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 72
24.  EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS
Employee benefits and related on-costs liabilities 
Provision for employment benefits – current 
Provision for employee benefits  – non-current 
Total employee provisions
Superannuation 
The  Group  makes  contributions  on  behalf  of  employees  to  externally  managed  defined  contribution 
superannuation funds. Contributions are based on percentages of employee wages and salaries and include any 
salary-sacrifice  amounts.  Contributions  to  defined  contribution  plans  for  2016  were  $1,423,000  (2015: 
$1,869,000).
2016 
$’000 
 
6,280 
66 
6,346
2015 
$’000 
 
3,625 
4,585 
8,210
2016 
$’000 
 
4,091 
1,637 
145 
- 
(405) 
(51) 
5,417 
 
 
4.1% 
3%
2015 
$’000 
 
4,190 
293 
111 
(993) 
(221) 
711 
4,091 
 
 
4.1% 
3%
Retirement benefit and other long-term benefits (Akara Resources PCL) 
Opening balance 
Service costs 
Interest 
Actuarial gain 
Benefits paid 
Foreign currency exchange differences 
Closing balance 
 
The principal actuarial assumptions used were as follows: 
Discount rate 
Inflation rate
Executive Rights Plan 
On 1 July 2012, the Company introduced an Executive Rights Plan which involves the grant of two types of rights 
being performance rights and deferred rights. Subject to the satisfaction of the performance condition at the end 
of a three year measurement period in respect of performance rights and the service condition at the end of the 
three year vesting period in respect of deferred rights, the rights will vest. The first $1,000 of value per individual 
award is settled by cash with the balance settled by shares.  
 
Performance rights 
Kingsgate issued the following performance rights during financial year 2013/2014:
Vesting date 
1 July 2016 
1 July 2016
Grant date 
7/13 November 2013 
26 November 2013
Performance rights 
Performance rights 
The  Executives  Rights  Plan  entitles  participants  to  receive  rights  to  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  in  the  Company 
(Performance  Rights).  The  performance  measures  for  the  Performance  Rights  issued  in  the  2013  and  2014 
financial  years  is  subject  to  a  hurdle  derived  from a  three  year vesting  period  using  the  internal  performance 
measuring metric, TSR Alpha™. This measure is based on total shareholder return over that vesting period. 
The fair value of the performance rights was estimated using Monte Carlo simulations, taking into account the 
terms and conditions upon which the awards were granted.
Number 
479,643 
768,380
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 73
24. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (Continued) 
The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the performance rights granted for the year:
Number of rights issued 
Grant date 
Spot price ($) 
Risk-free rate (%) 
Term (years) 
Volatility (%) 
Exercise price 
Fair value ($)
479,643 
7/13 November 2013 
1.24 
2.9 
2.6 
60 – 65 
- 
0.72 – 0.75
768,380 
26 November 2013 
1.24 
2.9 
2.6 
60 – 65 
- 
0.72 – 0.75
The volatility above was determined with reference to the historical volatility of the Company’s share price from 
June 2008 to November 2013.  
The outstanding balance of the performance rights is summarised in the table below: 
2016 
Number 
507,202 
- 
- 
(92,045) 
(144,268) 
270,889
Outstanding balance at the beginning of the year 
Performance rights granted during the year 
Vested during the year 
Lapsed during the year 
Forfeited during the year 
Outstanding balance at the end of the year
2015 
Number 
695,097 
- 
- 
- 
(187,895) 
507,202
Grant date
7 November 2013 
13 November 2013 
4 November 2013
Deferred rights 
Kingsgate issued the following deferred rights during financial year 2013/2014: 
 
Deferred rights 
Deferred rights 
Deferred rights 
Total 
The fair value of the deferred rights was estimated based on the share price less the present value of projected 
dividends over the expected term of each deferred right using Monte Carlo simulations model. 
The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the deferred rights granted for the year: 
Number of rights issued 
Grant date 
Spot price ($) 
Term (years) 
Dividends ($)
63,241 
13 November 2013 
$1.34 
2.6 
-
215,874 
7 November 2013 
$1.47 
2.6 
-
49,407 
4 November 2013 
$1.39 
2.6 
-
Vesting date 
1 July 2016 
1 July 2016 
1 July 2016
Number 
215,874 
63,241 
49,407 
328,522
Fair value
$1.47 
$1.34 
$1.39
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 74
24. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (Continued) 
The outstanding balance of the deferred rights is summarised in the table below:
Outstanding balance at the beginning of the year 
Deferred rights granted during the year 
Vested during the year 
Lapsed during the year 
Forfeited during the year 
Outstanding balance at the end of the year
2016 
Number 
236,637 
- 
(52,842) 
- 
(72,135) 
111,660
2015 
Number 
560,502 
- 
(99,308) 
- 
(224,557) 
236,637
Employee Share Option Plan 
On 29 April 2016, Kingsgate granted 1,500,000 employee options. The terms of the options issued pursuant to the 
plan are as follows: 
•  Each option will entitle the holder to subscribe for one ordinary share of the Company; 
•  Options are granted under the plan for no consideration; and  
•  Options granted under the plan carry no dividend or voting rights. 
Granted 
during year
Grant date
Expiry date
Exercise 
price
Balance 
start of 
year
Number
- 
- 
-
Number 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000
Expired 
during 
year
Number
- 
- 
-
Balance 
end of 
year
Number 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000
Vested and 
exercisable at 
end of year 
Number
- 
- 
-
29 Apr 2016 
29 Apr 2016 
29 Apr 2016
30 June 2019 
30 June 2020 
30 June 2011
$0.40 
$0.50 
$0.60
Fair value of options granted 
The  fair  value  at  grant  date  of  the  options  is  determined  using  the  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model  which 
incorporates the following inputs:
500,000 
5.17  
0.60
500,000 
4.17  
0.50
500,000 
3.17  
0.40
Number of options issued 
Term (years) 
Exercise price ($) 
Dividend yield ($) 
Spot price ($) 
Volatility (%) 
Risk free rate (%) 
Fair value ($) 
Outstanding balance at the beginning of the year 
Options granted during the year 
Vested during the year 
Lapsed during the year 
Forfeited during the year 
Outstanding balance at the end of the year 
The volatility above was determined with reference to the historical volatility of the Company’s share price from 
April 2013 to April 2016.
0.455 
65-75 
1.86 
0.23
0.455 
65-75 
1.85 
0.24
0.455 
65-75 
1.85 
0.22
500,000
500,000
-
-
- 
- 
-
-
-
- 
- 
-
-
-
- 
- 
-
500,000
500,000
500,000
500,000
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 75
25.  RECONCILIATION OF LOSS AFTER INCOME TAX TO NET CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Loss for the year 
Depreciation and amortisation 
Share-based payments 
Impairment  
Unwind of discount rate for provision 
Amortisation of deferred borrowing costs 
Unrealised losses/(gains) 
Share of associate’s loss 
Net exchange differences 
 
Change in operating assets and liabilities: 
(Increase)/decrease in receivables 
(Increase)/decrease in prepayments 
(Increase)/decrease in inventories 
Increase/(decrease) in current tax liabilities 
Increase/(decrease) in creditors 
Increase/(decrease) in provisions 
Increase/(decrease) in deferred tax liabilities 
Net cash inflow from operating activities
2016 
 
$’000 
(229,451) 
 46,177  
 48  
210,969 
952 
1,559 
810 
- 
123 
 
 
9,039 
3,736 
13,622 
- 
(9,244) 
(1,578) 
(269) 
46,693
2015 
Restated 
$’000 
(147,643) 
53,950 
410 
148,181 
1,104 
1,825 
(743) 
112 
448 
 
 
(3,263) 
14,328 
10,875 
(1,284) 
(2,418) 
(201) 
965 
76,646
26.  EVENTS OCCURRING AFTER REPORTING DATE 
No other matter or circumstance has arisen since 30 June 2016 that has significantly affected, or may significantly 
affect: 
• 
• 
•
the Group’s operations in future financial years; 
the results of those operations in future financial years; or 
the Group’s state of affairs in future financial years.
27.  CONTINGENT LIABILITIES 
The Group had contingent liabilities at 30 June 2016 in respect of guarantees. Bank guarantees have been given 
by Kingsgate’s controlled entities to participating banks in the loan facility and corporate loan facility as described 
in Note 16 as part of the security package. The corporate loan guarantee may give rise to liabilities in the parent 
entity if the controlled entities do not meet their obligations under the terms of the loans subject to guarantees. 
No material losses are anticipated in respect of the above contingent liabilities.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 76
28.  FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSTRUMENTS 
The Group’s activities expose it to a variety of financial risks: market risk (including foreign currency risk, price 
risk, fair value risk and interest rate risk), credit risk and liquidity risk. 
At  this  point,  the  Directors  believe  that  it  is  in  the  interest  of  shareholders  to  expose  the  Group  to  foreign 
currency risk, price risk (except in specific circumstances) and interest rate risk. Therefore, the Group does not 
employ any derivative hedging of foreign currency or interest rate risks. The Group has entered into forward gold 
sale contracts to manage Australian gold price risk in respect of the forecast production from the Challenger Gold 
Mine and US$ gold price risk in respect of the forecast production from Chatree. No forward gold sale contracts 
were in place at year end (refer to “commodity price risk”). The Directors and management monitors these risks, 
in particular market forecasts of future movements in foreign currency and price movements and, if it is to be 
believed  to  be  in  the  best  interests  of  shareholders,  will  implement  risk  management  strategies  to  minimise 
potential adverse effects on the financial performance of the Group. 
Risk management is carried out by the senior executive team. The Board provides written principles for overall 
risk  management,  as  well  as  policies  covering  specific  areas,  such  as  foreign  exchange  risk,  credit  risk,  use  of 
derivative financial instruments and non-derivative financial instruments, and investment of excess liquidity. 
The Group holds the following financial instruments:
2015 
Restated 
$’000
55,472 
19,139 
6,601 
1,350 
10,674 
93,236
(34,515) 
(144,092) 
(178,607)
Financial assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Receivables 
Restricted cash 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Other financial assets 
Total financial assets 
 
Financial liabilities 
Payables 
Borrowing 
Total financial liabilities
2016 
 
$’000 
 
 36,314  
 16,288  
 7,004  
 540  
 8,624  
68,770  
 
 
 (25,387) 
 (98,097) 
(123,484)
Market risk 
Foreign exchange risk 
The  Group  operates  internationally  and  is  exposed  to  foreign  exchange  risk  arising  from  currency  exposures, 
primarily  with  respect  to  the  US  dollar  and  Thai  Baht  and  as  discussed  earlier,  no  financial  instruments  are 
employed to mitigate the exposed risks. This is the Group’s current policy and it is reviewed regularly including 
forecast movements in these currencies by management and the Board. Currently foreign exchange risks arise 
primarily from:  
• 
•  payables denominated in US dollars; and 
• 
The  functional  currency  of  the  Thai  subsidiaries  is  Thai  Baht.  The  Company’s  functional  currency  is  Australian 
dollars.
the sale of gold, which is in US dollars;
cash balances in US dollars.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 77
28. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSTRUMENTS (Continued) 
The Group’s exposure to US dollar foreign currency risk at the reporting date was as follows.
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted cash 
Receivables 
Payables 
Total exposure to foreign currency risk
2016 
$’000 
 1,819     
 7,004     
 59     
 (4,493)    
 4,389
2015 
$’000 
2,074 
6,601 
38 
(3,242) 
5,471
The Group’s sale of gold produced from Chatree Gold Mine and part of the multi-currency loan facilities (see Note 
16) are in US dollars, however the functional currency of the subsidiary company that owns Chatree Gold Mine is 
Thai Baht and therefore, the Group’s profit is sensitive to movement in those currencies. 
The Group’s current exposure to other foreign exchange movements is not material.
Impact on post tax
Impact on other
One cent weakened in Australian dollar against the US dollar 
One cent strengthened in Australian dollar against the US dollar
loss 
2016 
$’000 
1,743 
(1,743)
2015 
$’000 
1,739 
(1,739)
comprehensive income 
2015 
$’000 
- 
-
2016 
$’000 
- 
-
Commodity price risk 
As at 30 June 2016, no forward gold sale contracts were in place at year end. 
Gold for 
 
physical 
delivery 
ounces
As at 30 June 2016 
Within one year 
As at 30 June 2015 
Within one year 
 
The following table displays fluctuations in the fair value of the Group’s gold forward contracts due to movements 
in the spot price of gold with all other variables held constant. The 10% sensitivity is based on reasonable possible 
changes, over a financial year, using the observed range of actual historical prices.
7,693
5,000
1,538
-
-
Value of 
committed
sales 
$’000
Contracted 
sales price
A$/oz
-
2016 
$’000 
 
- 
-
2015 
$’000 
 
(804) 
741
Mark to market movement of the fair value of gold forward contracts 
10% increase in the spot price of gold (2015: 10%) 
10% decrease in the spot price of gold (2015: 10%)
Equity price risk 
The Group is exposed to equity securities price risk, which arises from investments classified on the statement of 
financial position as available-for-sale financial assets. 
A  10% 
increased/(decreased) profit/equity by the amounts shown as follows: 
 
+10%
increase/decrease  of  the  share  price  for  the  equity  securities  at  30  June  2016  would  have
-10%
Profit 
$’000 
54 
135
Equity 
$’000 
- 
-
Profit 
$’000 
(54) 
(135)
Equity 
$’000 
- 
-
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 78
Available-for-sale financial asset - 2016 
Available-for-sale financial asset - 2015
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
2016 
Financial assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Receivables 
Restricted cash 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Other financial assets 
Total financial assets 
 
Financial liabilities 
Payables 
Borrowings 
Total financial liabilities 
 
Net financial liabilities 
 
2015 Restated 
Financial assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Receivables 
Restricted cash 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Other financial assets 
Total financial assets 
 
Financial liabilities 
Payables 
Borrowings 
Total financial liabilities 
 
Net financial liabilities
36,303 
- 
7,004 
- 
 8,316  
 51,623  
 
 
- 
 (87,859) 
 (87,859) 
 
 (36,236) 
 
 
 
55,451 
- 
6,601 
- 
10,268 
72,320 
 
 
- 
(129,866) 
(129,866) 
 
(57,546)
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 (10,171) 
 (10,171) 
 
 (10,171) 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
(12,582) 
(12,582) 
 
(12,582)
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
(472) 
(472) 
 
(472)
Non-
interest 
bearing 
$’000
$’000
11  
 16,288  
- 
 540  
 308  
 17,147  
 
 
 (25,387) 
 (67) 
 (25,454) 
 
 (8,307) 
 
 
 
21 
19,139 
- 
1,350 
406 
20,916 
 
 
(34,515) 
(82) 
(34,597) 
 
(13,681)
36,314  
 16,288  
 7,004  
 540  
 8,624  
 68,770 
 
 
 (25,387) 
 (98,097) 
 (123,484) 
 
(54,714)  
 
 
 
55,472 
19,139 
6,601 
1,350 
10,674 
93,236 
 
 
(34,515) 
(144,092) 
(178,607) 
 
(85,371)
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
(1,090) 
(1,090) 
 
(1,090)
28. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSTRUMENTS (Continued) 
Interest rate risk 
The Group’s exposure to interest rate risk for classes of financial assets and financial liabilities, at 30 June 2016 
and 30 June 2015 are set out as follows:
Fixed interest rate maturing in
Floating 
interest
1 year or
1-2 years
2-5 years
Total
rate 
$’000
less 
$’000
$’000
$’000
The weighted average rate on floating rate borrowings was 4.18% for the year ended 30 June 2016 (2015: 4.67%). 
A change of 100 basic points (“bps”) in interest rate at the reporting date would have increased/decreased profit 
or loss by the amounts shown below. This analysis assumes that all other variables, in particular foreign exchange 
rates remain constant.
Variable rate instrument - 2016 
Variable rate instrument - 2015
Credit risk 
Credit risk arises from cash and cash equivalents, deposits with banks and financial institutions, as well as credit 
exposures to customers including, outstanding receivables and committed transactions.
100 bps increase 
Profit 
$’000 
853 
1,299
100 bps decrease 
Profit 
$’000 
(853) 
(1,299)
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 79
28. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSTRUMENTS (Continued) 
The Group has no significant concentrations of credit risk. The sale of gold and other cash equivalents are limited 
to counterparties with sound credit ratings. 
The maximum exposure to credit risk is represented by the carrying value of the Group’s financial assets in the 
statement of financial position. The maximum exposure to credit risk at reporting date was:
Cash and cash equivalents 
Receivables 
Restricted cash 
Other financial assets 
Total exposure to credit risk at year end
Liquidity risk 
The Group’s liquidity requirements are based upon cash flow forecasts which are based upon forward production, 
operations,  exploration  and  capital  projections.  Liquidity  management,  including  debt/equity  management,  is 
carried out under policies approved by the Board and forecast material liquidity changes are discussed at Board 
meetings.  The  following  table  analyses  the  Company’s  financial  assets  and  liabilities  into  relevant  maturity 
groupings  base  on  the  remaining  period  at  the  reporting  date.  The  amounts  disclosed  are  the  contractual 
undiscounted  cash  flows.  The  borrowings  of  the  Group  are  repayable  on  demand,  however  the  contractual 
amounts for borrowings also include the interests that are expected to be repaid until the repayment of these 
debts based on the cash flow forecast prepared by the Group.
2016 
$’000 
36,314 
16,288 
7,004 
8,624 
68,230
2015 
$’000 
55,472 
19,139 
6,601 
10,674 
91,886
Total
$’000
25,387  
100,610  
125,997 
-
34, 811 
153,270 
188,081
- 
- 
-
774 
- 
774
Carrying 
amount 
$’000
1 year or
1-2 years
2-5 years
More than
less 
$’000
$’000
$’000
5 years 
$’000
25,387  
 98,097  
123,484
34,515 
144,092 
178,607
21,313 
100,610 
121,923
27,344 
73,379 
100,723
- 
- 
-
952 
32,502 
33,454
4,074 
- 
4,074 
-
5,741 
47,389 
53,130
2016 
Payables 
Borrowings 
Total financial liabilities 2016 
 
2015 (Restated) 
Payables 
Borrowings 
Total financial liabilities 2015
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 80
28. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSTRUMENTS (Continued) 
Fair value measurements 
The  carrying  value  of  financial  assets  and  liabilities  of  the  Group  approximate  their  fair  values.  Fair  values  of 
financial assets and liabilities have been determined for measurement and/or disclosure purposes. Refer to Note 
14 for details of impairment of Level 3 assets. 
Fair value hierarchy 
The  Group  classifies  assets  and  liabilities  carried  at  fair  value  using  a  fair  value  hierarchy  that  reflects  the 
significance  of  the  inputs  used  in  determining  that  value.  The  table  following  analyses  financial  instruments 
carried at fair value, by the valuation method. The different levels in the hierarchy have been defined as follows:
Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities; 
Inputs  other than  quoted prices  included  within  level  1 that  are  observable  for  the  asset  or 
liability, either directly (as process) or indirectly (derived from prices); and 
Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data (unobservable 
inputs).
Level 1: 
Level 2:
Level 3:
30 June 2016 
Available-for-sale financial assets 
Receivable 
30 June 2015 
Available-for-sale financial assets
Level 1 
$’000
540 
- 
 
1,350
Level 2 
$’000
- 
- 
 
-
Level 3 
$’000
- 
5,000 
 
-
Total 
$’000
540 
5,000 
 
1,350
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 81
Non-Executive Chairman
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director  
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director
29. KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL DISCLOSURES 
Chairman 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Non-Executive Directors 
Peter Alexander 
Peter McAleer 
Sharon Skeggs 
Peter Warren 
Key Management Personnel 
Greg Foulis 
Ross Coyle 
Tim Benfield 
Alistair Waddell 
Ron James 
Paul Mason 
Joel Forwood
Chief Executive Officer 
Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary – appointed Company Secretary 7 December 2015 
Chief Operating Officer – Ceased employment 09 August 2016 
General Manager Corporate Development – commenced 1 April 2016 
General Manager Exploration –  Ceased employment 31 May 2016 
Company Secretary – Resigned as Company Secretary 7 December 2015 
General Manager Corporate and Markets – Ceased employment 30 September 2015
2016 
$ 
2,358,058 
227,388 
470,201 
29,295 
87,713 
3,172,655
2015 
$ 
3,424,689 
206,051 
673,271 
409,770 
14,012 
4,727,793
2016 
$ 
 
 
592,840 
 
295,782 
888,622 
 
 
 
35,401 
 
- 
 42,205  
77,606 
 
 
 
30,600 
 
47,164 
77,764
2015 
$
563,300 
 
338,176 
901,476
11,325 
 
68,376 
27,075 
106,776
45,575 
 
47,575 
93,150
Key Management Personnel Compensation
Short-term employee benefits 
Post-employment benefits 
Termination benefits 
Share-based payments 
Other long term benefits 
Total Key Management Personnel compensation
30. AUDITORS’ REMUNERATION
Audit and other assurance services 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Australian Firm 
Audit and review of the financial reports 
Related Practices of PricewaterhouseCoopers Australian Firm 
Audit and review of the financial statements 
Total remuneration for audit services 
 
Other Services 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Australian Firm 
Other services 
Related practices of PricewaterhouseCoopers Australian Firm 
Transaction services (IPO) 
Other services 
Total remuneration for non-audit related services 
 
Taxation services 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Australian Firm 
Tax compliance services 
Related practices of PricewaterhouseCoopers Australian Firm 
Tax compliance services 
Total remuneration for tax related services
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 82
31.  LOSS PER SHARE
Basic and diluted loss per share from continuing operations 
Basic and diluted loss per share from discontinued operations 
Basic and diluted loss per share from continuing operations and discontinued operations 
 
 
Net loss used to calculate basic and diluted earnings per share
Continuing operations
- 
-  Discontinued operations
Weighted average number of ordinary shares used as the denominator: basic 
Adjustment for dilutive effect  
Weighted average number of ordinary shares used as the denominator: diluted
2016 
 
Cents 
(118.1) 
15.5 
(102.6) 
 
$’000 
 
(264,182) 
34,731 
 
Number 
223,575,540 
- 
223,575,540
2015 
Restated 
Cents 
(59.9) 
(6.1) 
(66.0) 
 
$’000
(134,006) 
(13,637) 
 
Number 
223,584,937 
- 
223,584,937
Diluted loss per share 
As the Group made a loss for the year, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share as the impact of 
dilution would be to reduce the loss per share.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 83
32. PARENT ENTITY FINANCIAL INFORMATION 
As at, and throughout the financial year ending 30 June 2016, the parent entity of the Group was Kingsgate. 
Summary of financial information
Results of parent entity 
Loss for the year 
Other comprehensive loss 
Total comprehensive loss 
 
Financial position of parent entity at year end 
Current assets 
Total assets 
Current liabilities 
Total liabilities 
 
Total equity of the parent entity comprising: 
Issued capital 
Reserve 
Accumulated losses 
Total equity
2016 
$’000 
 
(18,303) 
- 
(18,303) 
 
 
 107,622  
 136,288  
 74,869 
 74,977 
 
 
 677,042  
 8,377  
 (624,108) 
 61,311
2015 
$’000
(36,777) 
- 
(36,777) 
 
 
125,219 
168,240 
88,565 
88,607 
 
 
677,109 
8,329 
(605,805) 
79,633
Contingent liabilities of the parent entity 
Bank guarantees have been given by Kingsgate’s controlled entities to participating banks in the loan facility as 
described in Note 16 as part of the security package. 
The corporate loan facility guarantee may give rise to liabilities in the parent entity if the controlled entities do 
not meet their obligations under the terms of the loans subject to guarantee. No material losses are anticipated in 
respect of the above contingent liabilities. 
In addition, there are cross guarantees given by Kingsgate, Dominion Mining Limited and Gawler Gold Mining Pty 
Ltd as described in Note 33.  No deficiencies of assets exist in any of these companies.  No liability was recognised 
by the parent entity or the group in relation to this guarantee, as the fair value of the guarantees is immaterial. 
As at 30 June 2016, the parent entity had no contractual commitments for the acquisition of property, plant or 
equipment.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 84
33. DEED OF CROSS GUARANTEE 
Pursuant to ASIC Class Order 98/1418 (as amended) dated 13 August 1998, the wholly owned subsidiaries listed 
below  are  relieved  from  the  Corporations  Act  2001  requirements  for  preparation,  audit  and  lodgement  of 
financial reports, and Directors’ Reports. 
It is a condition of the Class Order that the Company and each of the subsidiaries enter into a Deed of Cross 
Guarantee (“Deed”). The effect of the Deed is that the Company guarantees to each creditor payment in full of 
any debt on the event of the winding up of any of the subsidiaries under certain provisions of the Corporations 
Act 2001. If a winding up occurs under other provisions of the Corporations Act 2001, the Company will only be 
liable in the event that after six months any creditor has not been paid in full. The subsidiaries have also given 
similar guarantees in the event that the Company is wound up.  
The subsidiaries subject to the Deed are: 
•  Dominion Mining Limited; 
•  Challenger Gold Operations Pty Ltd *; and 
•  Gawler Gold Mining Pty Ltd. 
* discontinued operation and exited closed group on 15 March 2016 (see Note 34). 
The above companies represent a ‘closed group’ for the purpose of the Class Order, and as there are no other 
parties to the Deed of Cross Guarantee that are controlled by Kingsgate Consolidated Limited, they also represent 
the ‘extended closed group’. 
A consolidated income statement and other comprehensive income, a summary of movements in consolidated 
accumulated losses, and consolidated statement of financial position, comprising the Company and controlled 
entities which are a party to the Deed, after eliminating all transactions between parties to the Deed of Cross 
Guarantee, is set out as follows:
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 85
33. DEED OF CROSS GUARANTEE (Continued) 
Income statement and other comprehensive income
Sales revenue 
Costs of sales 
Gross profit 
 
Exploration expenses 
Corporate and administration expenses 
Other income and expenses 
Foreign exchange gain/(loss) 
Impairment losses – investment in Chatree Gold Mine 
Impairment losses – investment in Bowdens Silver Project 
Impairment losses – investment in Nueva Esperanza Gold/Silver Project 
Impairment reversal – investment in Challenger Gold Mine 
Writ-off on loan to subsidiaries 
Loss before financial costs and income tax 
 
Finance income 
Finance costs 
Net finance costs 
 
Loss before income tax 
Income tax expense 
Loss after income tax 
 
Total comprehensive loss for the year 
 
Loss attributable to: 
Owners of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited 
 
Total comprehensive loss attributable to: 
Owners of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Summary of movements in consolidated retained earnings 
Accumulated losses 
Accumulated losses at beginning of the financial year 
Loss for the year 
Accumulated losses at end of the financial year
2016 
$’000 
 78,916  
 (57,331) 
 21,585  
 
 (80) 
 (10,196) 
 30,979  
 1,962  
(2,091) 
(9,217) 
(6,750) 
411 
(41,180) 
(14,577) 
 
 271  
 (4,337) 
 (4,066) 
 
(18,643) 
- 
(18,643) 
 
(18,643) 
 
 
(18,643) 
 
 
(18,643)
2015 
$’000 
118,353 
(105,697) 
12,656
(143) 
(9,436) 
(1,293) 
11,924 
- 
(23,921) 
(19,026) 
- 
- 
(29,239) 
 
434 
(4,480) 
(4,046) 
 
(33,285) 
- 
(33,285) 
 
(33,285) 
 
 
(33,285) 
 
 
(33,285)
2016 
$’000 
 
(603,242) 
(18,643) 
(621,885)
2015 
$’000 
 
(569,957) 
(33,285) 
(603,242)
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 86
33.  DEED OF CROSS GUARANTEE (Continued) 
Statement of financial position
ASSETS 
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Receivables 
Inventories 
Other assets 
Total current assets 
 
Non-current assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration, evaluation and development 
Investment in subsidiaries 
Other assets 
Total non-current assets 
 
TOTAL ASSETS 
 
LIABILITIES 
Current liabilities 
Payables 
Borrowings 
Provisions 
Total current liabilities 
 
Non-current liabilities 
Payables 
Provisions 
Total non-current liabilities 
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
 
NET ASSETS 
 
EQUITY 
Contributed equity 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
TOTAL EQUITY
2016 
$’000 
 
 
 30,356  
78,950 
- 
543 
109,849 
 
 
68 
- 
28,528 
70 
28,666 
 
138,515 
 
 
 
 63,452  
 11,069  
352 
74,873 
 
 
 43  
65 
108 
 
74,981 
 
63,534 
 
 
 677,042  
 8,377  
 (621,885) 
 63,534
2015 
$’000 
 
 
37,981 
104,888 
4,541 
725 
148,135 
 
 
562 
906 
39,153 
1,559 
42,180 
 
190,315
71,139 
26,140 
3,100 
100,379 
 
 
 
7,740 
7,740 
 
108,119 
 
82,196 
 
 
677,109 
8,329 
(603,242) 
82,196
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 87
34.  DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS 
a.  Accounting for discontinued operations  
An impairment loss is recognised for any initial or subsequent write-down of the asset (or disposal group) to fair 
value less costs of disposal. A gain is recognised for any subsequent increases in fair value less costs of disposal of 
an asset (or disposal group), but not in excess of any cumulative impairment loss previously recognised. A gain or 
loss not previously recognised by the date of the sale of the non-current asset (or disposal group) is recognised at 
the date of derecognition. 
 
b.  Details of discontinued operations 
Challenger Gold Mine 
On  30  October  2015,  Kingsgate  announced  an  Option  Agreement  was  reached  with  a  50/50  Joint  Venture 
between Diversified Minerals Pty Ltd and WPG Resources Limited (“Purchasers”), whereby the Purchasers would 
acquire 100% of the Challenger Gold Mine and certain exploration licences for consideration of $1,000,000 and a 
$25 per ounce revenue royalty on future production in excess of 30,000 ounces from the Challenger SSW Zone. 
The Option Agreement was exercised on 11 December 2015. A Share Purchase Agreement was executed on 19 
February 2016 and the sale was completed on 15 March 2016. 
 
Bowdens Silver Project 
On 25 February 2016, Kingsgate announced a Share Purchase Agreement was entered into to sell an 85% interest 
in  the  Bowdens  Silver  Project  for  a  cash  consideration  of  $20  million  to  Silver  Investment  Holdings  Australia 
Limited (“SIHA”). This arrangement was subsequently varied with SIHA agreeing to purchase 100% of the project 
for a total consideration of $25 million. On 29 June 2016, the Company completed the sale of the project.  At that 
date $5 million of the consideration was outstanding and is due to be paid by 30 September.  If this is not paid by 
the due date the Company will retain 15% of the project and revert to an unincorporated Joint Venture. 
 
Challenger  Gold  Mine  and  Bowdens  Silver  Project  were  not  previously  classified  as  held-for-sale  or  as  a 
discontinued  operation.  The  comparative  consolidated  statement  of  profit  or  loss  and  other  comprehensive 
income has been restated to show the discontinued operation separately from continuing operations.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 88
34. DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS (Continued) 
c.  Results of the discontinued operations 
The results of the discontinued operations for the year until disposal are presented below: 
 
Sales revenue 
Cost of sales 
Gross profit 
Exploration expenses 
Corporate and administration expenses 
Other income and expenses 
Reversal of impairment/(impairment)  
Profit/(loss) before finance costs and income tax from discontinued operations 
 
Finance income 
Finance cost 
Net finance costs 
 
Profit before income tax 
Income tax expense 
Profit/(loss)  after income tax from discontinued operations 
 
Earnings per share for profit from discontinued operations 
Basic earnings per share (Note 31) 
Diluted earnings per share (Note 31)
d.  Cash flow information of the discontinued operations
The net cash flows of discontinued operations are as follows:
Net cash flows from operating activities 
Net cash flows from investing activities 
Net cash flows for the year
2016 
$’000 
78,916 
(57,331) 
21,585 
(49) 
(903) 
467 
17,056 
38,156 
 
33 
(209) 
(176)
37,980 
(3,249) 
34,731 
 
Cents 
15.5 
15.5
2015 
$’000 
 118,354  
 (105,704) 
 12,650  
 (175) 
 (564) 
 (2,632) 
(22,643) 
(13,364) 
 
82 
(355) 
(273) 
 
(13,637) 
- 
(13,637) 
 
Cents 
(6.1) 
(6.1)
2016 
$’000 
13,610 
(2,742) 
10,868
2015 
$’000 
17,346 
(2,986) 
14,360
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 89
34.  DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS (Continued) 
e.  Details of the sale of the discontinued operations
Consideration  
Carrying amount of net assets sold 
Gain on sale before income tax 
Income tax expense 
Gain on sale after income tax 
 
The carrying amounts of assets and liabilities of the discontinued operations as at the date of the sale were:
Receivables 
Inventories 
Exploration, evaluation and development 
Property, plant and equipment 
Other assets 
Deferred tax asset 
Provisions 
Net assets
35. CORRECTION OF PRIOR YEAR ERROR
2016 
$’000 
26,000 
(26,000) 
- 
- 
-
2016 
$’000 
35 
4,339 
22,331 
873 
3,069 
3,249 
(7,896) 
26,000
The error, which relates to the non-provision by Akara (Kingsgate’s Thai operating subsidiary) of a community 
fund required under the metallurgical license applicable to the operation of the Chatree North processing plant, 
has been adjusted retrospectively by restating the comparative amounts for the prior periods in which the errors 
occurred. As the prior period’s errors on the opening balance sheet at 1 July 2014 are considered immaterial, a 
third balance sheet has not been included in the financial statements. 
 
The impacts of this correction in the prior period are: 
•  Payables at 30 June 2015 has increased from $26,281,000 to $27,344,000 by $1,063,000; 
•  Reserves at 30 June 2015 has decreased from $53,793,000 to $53,700,000 by $93,000; 
•  Accumulated losses at 30 June 2015 has increased from $405,206,000 to $406,176,000 by $970,000; 
•  Cost of sales for the year ended 30 June 2015 has increased by $550,000 from $278,357,000 to $278,907,000;
•  Basic and diluted loss per share for the year ended 30 June 2015 has increased by $0.002 from $0.658 to
and
$0.660.
There is no impact to the statement of cash flows for the year ended 30 June 2015.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 90
DIRECTORS’ DECLARATION 
 
In the Directors’ opinion: 
 
a)  the financial statements and notes that are set out on pages 32 to 90 and the Remuneration Report in the
Directors’ Report, are in accordance with the Corporations Act 2001, including:
b)  there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Company will be able to pay its debts as and when they
become due and payable; and
c)  at the date of this declaration, there are reasonable grounds to believe that the members of the extended 
closed group identified in Note 33 will be able to meet any obligations or liabilities to which they are, or may 
become, subject by virtue of the Deed of Cross Guarantee described in Note 33.
Note 1 confirms that the financial statements also comply with International Financial Reporting Standards as 
issued by the International Accounting Standards Board. 
 
The Directors have been given the declarations required by section 295A of the Corporations Act 2001 from the 
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer for the financial year ended 30 June 2016. 
 
This declaration is made in accordance with a resolution of the Directors. 
 
 
 
 
 
Ross Smyth-Kirk 
Director 
 
 
 
Dated at Sydney on 31 August 2016 
On behalf of the Board
(i)  giving a true and fair view of the Group’s financial position as at 30 June 2016 and of its performance for
(ii)  complying with Australian Accounting Standards, the Corporation Regulations 2001 and other mandatory
the financial year ended on that date; and
professional reporting requirements.
Kingsgate Consolidated Limited
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page | 91
Independent auditor’s report to the members of Kingsgate
Consolidated Limited
Report on the financial report
We have audited the accompanying financial report of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited (the company),
which comprises the consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2016, the consolidated
statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income, consolidated statement of changes in
equity and consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended on that date, a summary of
significant accounting policies, other explanatory notes and the directors’ declaration for Kingsgate
Group (the consolidated entity). The consolidated entity comprises the company and the entities it
controlled at year’s end or from time to time during the financial year.
Directors' responsibility for the financial report
The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation of the financial report that gives a
true and fair view in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Act 2001
and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of the
financial report that is free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. In Note 1, the
directors also state, in accordance with Accounting Standard AASB 101 Presentation of Financial
Statements, that the financial statements comply with International Financial Reporting Standards.
Auditor’s responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial report based on our audit. We conducted
our audit in accordance with Australian Auditing Standards. Those standards require that we comply
with relevant ethical requirements relating to audit engagements and plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance whether the financial report is free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures
in the financial report. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s judgement, including the
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial report, whether due to fraud or error.
In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the consolidated
entity’s preparation and fair presentation of the financial report in order to design audit procedures
that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the entity’s internal control. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of
accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by the directors, as well
as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for
our audit opinion.
Independence
In conducting our audit, we have complied with the independence requirements of the Corporations
Act 2001.
Page | 92
PricewaterhouseCoopers, ABN 52 780 433 757
Darling Park Tower 2, 201 Sussex Street, GPO BOX 2650, SYDNEY NSW 1171
T: 1300 799 615, F: 1300 799 618, www.pwc.com.au
Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation.
Auditor’s opinion
In our opinion:
(a)
the financial report of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited is in accordance with the Corporations
Act 2001, including:
(i)
(ii)
giving a true and fair view of the consolidated entity's financial position as at 30 June
2016 and of its performance for the year ended on that date; and
complying with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Regulations
2001.
(b)
the financial report and notes also comply with International Financial Reporting Standards as
disclosed in Note 1.
Material uncertainty regarding continuation as a going concern
Without qualifying our conclusion, we draw attention to Note 1 in the financial report which indicates
that the consolidated entity’s main cash contributor, the Chatree Gold mine will only operate until 31
December 2016. Related external borrowings have been therefore reclassified to current liabilities
resulting in the consolidated entity having current liabilities exceeding its current assets by
$36,855,000 and having insufficient financial resources to fully fund its ongoing operations.
The continuing viability of the consolidated entity and its ability to continue as a going concern and
meet its debts and commitments as and when they fall due are dependent upon the consolidated entity
being successful in generating sufficient positive cash flows from the Chatree Gold mine until 31
December 2016 and the ongoing support of the external lenders of the Group.
These conditions, along with other matters as set out in Note 1, indicate the existence of a material
uncertainty that may cast significant doubt about the consolidated entity’s ability to continue as a
going concern and, therefore, the consolidated entity may be unable to realise its assets and settle its
liabilities in the normal course of business and at the amounts stated in the financial report.
Report on the Remuneration Report
We have audited the remuneration report included in pages 12 to 28 of the directors’ report for the
year ended 30 June 2016. The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation and
presentation of the remuneration report in accordance with section 300A of the Corporations Act
2001. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the remuneration report, based on our audit
conducted in accordance with Australian Auditing Standards.
Auditor’s opinion
In our opinion, the remuneration report of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited for the year ended 30 June
2016 complies with section 300A of the Corporations Act 2001.
Page | 93
Matters relating to the electronic presentation of the audited financial
report
This auditor's report relates to the financial report and remuneration report of Kingsgate Consolidated
Limited (the company) for the year ended 30 June 2016 included on Kingsgate Consolidated Limited’s
web site. The company’s directors are responsible for the integrity of Kingsgate Consolidated Limited’s
web site. We have not been engaged to report on the integrity of this web site. The auditor’s report
refers only to the financial report and remuneration report named above. It does not provide an
opinion on any other information which may have been hyperlinked to/from the financial report or the
remuneration report. If users of this report are concerned with the inherent risks arising from
electronic data communications they are advised to refer to the hard copy of the audited financial
report and remuneration report to confirm the information included in the audited financial report
and remuneration report presented on this web site.
PricewaterhouseCoopers
Brett Entwistle
Partner
Sydney
31 August 2016
Page | 94