
NT 10-K 1 formnt10k2016.htm FORM NT 10-K STERLING GROUP VENTURES, INC. - Form
NT10-K
SEC FILE NUMBER: 000-51775
CUSIP NUMBER: 85932R104_
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 12b-25
NOTIFICATION OF LATE FILING
(Check One): x Form 10-K ¨ Form 11-K ¨ Form 20-F ¨ Form 10-Q
¨ Form N-SAR ¨ Form N-CSR
For Period Ended: May 31, 2016
¨ Transition Report on Form 10-K 
¨ Transition Report on Form 20-F 
¨ Transition Report on Form 11-K 
¨ Transition Report on Form 10-Q 
¨ Transition Report on Form N-SAR
For the Transition Period Ended:
Read attached instruction sheet before preparing form. Please print or type.
Nothing in this form shall be construed to imply that the Commission has verified any
information contained herein.
If the notification relates to a portion of the filing checked above, identify the item(s) to
which the notification relates:
PART I
REGISTRANT INFORMATION
STERLING GROUP VENTURES, INC.
Full Name of Registrant
______________________________
Former Name if Applicable
Address of Principal Executive Office (Street and Number)
904 - 1455 Howe Street
Vancouver, B.C., Canada, V6Z 1C2
City, State and Zip Code
PART II RULE 12b-25(b) AND (c)
If  the  subject  report  could  not  be  filed  without  unreasonable effort  or  expense  and  the
registrant  seeks  relief  pursuant  to  Rule  12b-25(b), the  following  should  be  completed.
(Check box if appropriate.)
(a)
(c)
(b)
¨
The reason described in reasonable detail in Part III of this form could not be eliminated
without unreasonable effort or expense;
The subject annual report, semi-annual report, transition report on Form 10-K, Form 20-F,
Form 11-K, Form N-SAR or Form N-CSR, or portion thereof, will be filed on or before the
fifteenth calendar day following the prescribed due date; or the subject quarterly report or
transition report on Form 10-Q or subject distribution report on Form 10-D, or portion thereof,
will be filed on or before the fifth calendar day following the prescribed due date; and
The accountant's statement or other exhibit required by Rule 12b-25(c) has been attached if
applicable.
PART III NARRATIVE
State below in reasonable detail why Forms 10-K, 20-F, 11-K, 10-Q, N-SAR, N-CSR, or the
transition  report  portion  thereof,  could  not  be  filed within  the  prescribed  time  period.
(Attach extra sheets if needed.)
We are currently continuing to work with our auditors to finish our audit, but
due to complexities in an Agreement signed on April 11 and an impairment
analysis on our existing mining operation we will not be able to file the form 10-
K within the prescribed period.
PART IV OTHER INFORMATION
(1) Name and telephone number of person to contact in regard to this notification
Christopher J. Tsakok
(Name)
(604) 684-1001
(Area Code) (Telephone Number)
(2)  Have  all  other  periodic  reports  required  under  Section 13  or  15(d)  of  the  Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 or Section 30 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 during the
preceding  12  months  or  for  such  shorter  period that  the  registrant  was  required  to  file
such report(s) been filed? If the answer is no, identify report(s).
x Yes      ¨ No
(3)  Is  it  anticipated  that  any  significant  change  in  results of  operations  from  the
corresponding period for the last fiscal year will be reflected by the earnings statements to
be included in the subject report or portion thereof?
¨ Yes      x No
If so, attach an explanation of the anticipated change, both narratively and quantitatively,
and, if appropriate, state the reasons why a reasonable estimate of the results cannot be
made.
STERLING GROUP VENTURES, INC.
(Name of Registrant as Specified in Charter)
has caused this notification to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly
authorized.
Date: August 26, 2016
By:      /s/ Christopher Tsakok
Christopher Tsakok,
President & CEO
INSTRUCTION: The form may be signed by an executive officer of the registrant or by any
other  duly  authorized  representative.  The  name  and title of the person signing the form
shall be typed or printed beneath the signature. If the statement is signed on behalf of the
registrant  by  an  authorized  representative (other  than  an  executive  officer),  evidence  of
the representative's authority to sign on behalf of the registrant shall be filed with the form.
Intentional misstatements or omissions of fact constitute Federal Criminal Violations (see
18 U.S.C. 1001).
ATTENTION