
6-K 1 d242204d6k.htm FORM 6-K Form 6-K
1934 ACT FILE NO. 001-14714
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
Report of Foreign Private Issuer
Pursuant to Rule 13a-16 or 15d-16
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the month of August 2016
Yanzhou Coal Mining Company Limited
(Translation of Registrant’s name into English)
298 Fushan South Road
Zoucheng, Shandong Province
People’s Republic of China
(Address of principal executive offices)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover of Form
20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F  x            Form 40-F  ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1):  ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7):  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this Form
is also thereby furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes  ¨            No   x
If “Yes” is marked, indicate below the file number assigned to the registrant in connection with
Rule 12g3-2(b): 82-
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURE
Date August 15,
2016
Yanzhou Coal Mining Company Limited
By     /s/ Zhang Baocai
 Name: Zhang Baocai
 Title: Director
Certain statements contained in this announcement may be regarded as forward-looking
statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and as defined in the U.S.
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements involve
inherent risks and uncertainties that may cause the actual performance, financial condition or
results of operations of the Company to be materially different from any future performance,
financial condition or results of operations implied by such forward-looking statements. Further
information regarding these risks and uncertainties is included in the Company’s filings with the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The forward-looking statements included in this
announcement represent the Company’s views as of the date of this announcement. Except as
required by law, the Company undertakes no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-
looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, after the
date on which the statements are made or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
These forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as representing the Company’s
views as of any date subsequent to the date of this announcement.
Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited and The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited
take no responsibility for the contents of this announcement, make no representation as to its
accuracy or completeness and expressly disclaim any liability whatsoever for any loss
howsoever arising from or in reliance upon the whole or any part of the contents of this
announcement.
YANZHOU COAL MINING COMPANY LIMITED
(A joint stock limited company incorporated in the People’s Republic of China with limited
liability)
(Stock Code: 1171)
NOTIFICATION OF BOARD MEETING
The board of directors (the “Board”) of Yanzhou Coal Mining Company Limited (the “Company”)
hereby announces that a meeting of the Board will be held at the headquarters of the Company
on Friday, 26 August 2016, for the purpose of considering, among other matters, the publication
of the unaudited interim results of the Company and its subsidiaries for the six months ended
30 June 2016.
By order of the Board
Yanzhou Coal Mining Company
Limited
Li Xiyong
Chairman of the Board
Zoucheng, Shandong Province, the PRC
16 August 2016
As at the date of this announcement, the directors of the Company are Mr. Li Xiyong, Mr. Li Wei,
Mr. Wu Xiangqian, Mr. Wu Yuxiang, Mr. Zhao Qingchun, Mr. Guo Dechun and Mr. Guo Jun; and
the independent non-executive directors of the Company are Mr. Wang Li Jie, Mr. Jia Shaohua,
Mr. Wang Xiaojun and Mr. Qi Anbang.
About the Company
For more information, please contact:
Yanzhou Coal Mining Company Limited
Zhang Baocai, Director
Tel: +86 537 538 3310
Address: 298 Fushan South Road, Zoucheng, Shandong Province, 273500 PRC