
ASX Announcement 
Company Presentation
Emerging Australian tungsten developer, Tungsten Mining NL (ASX: TGN) (“Tungsten Mining” or “the 
Company”) is pleased to attach a revised Company Presentation.
The attached presentation includes a revision which has removed the words “70,000-100,000 MTU’s per 
year of” from slide 21, this estimate had previously been included to give some context to the term “small 
scale production”.
For Broker and Media Enquiries: 
Andrew Rowell / Matt Birney 
Cannings Purple 
Ph: +61 400 466 226 / +61 419 217 090 
E:   arowell@canningspurple.com.au / 
       mbirney@canningspurple.com.au
About Tungsten Mining
-ENDS- 
29 August 2016 
 
For further information:  
Craig Ferrier 
 
Chief Executive Officer   
Ph: +61 8 9486 8492 
 
E:   craig.ferrier@tungstenmining.com
Emerging Australian tungsten developer, Tungsten Mining NL is an Australian based resources company 
listed  on  the  Australian  Securities  Exchange.  The  Company’s  prime  focus  is  the  exploration  and 
development of tungsten projects in Australia.
Tungsten (chemical symbol W), occurs naturally on Earth, not in its pure form but as a constituent of other 
minerals, only two of which support commercial extraction and processing - wolframite ((Fe, Mn)WO4) and 
scheelite (CaWO4).
Tungsten has the highest melting point of all elements except carbon – around 3400°C giving it excellent 
high temperature mechanical properties and the lowest expansion coefficient of all metals.  Tungsten is a 
metal of considerable strategic importance, essential to modern industrial development (across aerospace 
and defence, electronics, automotive, extractive and construction sectors) with uses in cemented carbides, 
high-speed steels and super alloys, tungsten mill products and chemicals.
Tungsten Mining has three advanced tungsten projects in Australia: the Mt Mulgine Project in the Murchison 
region, the Big Hill Project in the Pilbara region and the Kilba Project in the Ashburton region of Western 
Australia.  The  Mt  Mulgine,  Big  Hill  and Kilba Projects,  together  contain  Mineral  Resources  reported  at  a 
0.10%WO3  cut-off  grade  comprising  Indicated  Resources  of  15.4Mt  at  0.20% WO3  and  26ppm  Mo  and 
Inferred Resources of 73.2Mt at 0.17% WO3 and 220ppm Mo, totalling 88.6Mt at 0.18% WO3 and 186ppm 
Mo.    This  represents  more  than  15.5  million  MTU  (metric  tonne  units)  of  WO3  and  16,480  tonnes  of 
contained Molybdenum.
Tungsten Mining is currently identifying opportunities for near term tungsten production, particularly from 
the Mulgine Hill and Mulgine Trench deposits within the Mt Mulgine Project.
Tungsten Mining NL 
ABN 67 152 084 403
97 Outram Street 
West Perth WA 6005
PO Box 517 
West Perth WA 6872
T +61 8 9486 8492 
F +61 8 9322 2370
E info@tungstenmining.com 
                 W www.tungstenmining.com
Progressing towards Production
August 2016
Disclaimer
This presentation includes certain statements that may be deemed ‘forward-looking statements’.  All statements, other 
than statements of historical fact, that refer to any future production, resources or reserves, exploration results and 
events that Tungsten Mining NL (‘TGN’ or ‘the Company’) expects to occur are forward-looking statements.  Although 
the Company believes that the expectations in those forward looking statements are based upon reasonable 
assumptions, such statements are not a guarantee of future performance and actual results or developments may 
differ materially from the outcomes. This may be due to several factors, including market prices, exploration and 
exploitation success, and the continued availability of capital and financing, plus general economic, market or business 
conditions. Investors are cautioned that any such statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual 
results or performance may differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. The Company 
does not assume any obligation to update or revise its forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new 
information, future events or otherwise. 
The information contained in the report that relates to Mineral Resources, Exploration Targets and Exploration Results  
is based on information compiled or reviewed by Peter Bleakley, who is a Member of the Australasian Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgy.  Mr Bleakley is not a full-time employee of the company.  Mr Bleakley is a consultant to the 
mining industry.  Mr Bleakley has sufficient experience that is relevant to the style of mineralisation and type of deposit 
under consideration and to the activity being undertaken to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 
Edition of the ‘Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves’. Mr 
Bleakley consents to the inclusion in the report of the matters based on his information in the form and context in 
which it appears. 
Where the Company refers to previous ASX announcements it has made, throughout this presentation and in the 
Appendices, it confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the information 
included in those announcements and all material assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the resource 
estimates referred to continue to apply and have not materially changed.
Tungsten Mining NL
Tungsten Mining NL is an emerging Australian tungsten developer listed on the 
Australian Securities Exchange.
The Company’s prime focus is the development of tungsten projects in Australia.
Corporate Overview
Capital Structure
Shares on issue
Unlisted Options
ASX: TGN
263,652,708 ordinary shares
Nil
Market Capitalisation
$13.2 (at 5 cps)
Cash as at 30 June 2016
$1.56 million
Top 20 shareholders
79%
Board and Management
Gary Lyons 
Chew Wai Chuen
Jimmy Lee 
Teck Siong Wong
Non-Exec Chairman
Non-Exec Director
Non-Exec Director
Non-Exec Director
Experienced company director and businessman
Singapore based financial advisor
Experienced mining engineer
Malaysian based international business experience
Craig Ferrier
Mark Pitts
Chief Executive Officer
Company Secretary
20 yrs senior management experience
25 yrs corporate and compliance management
Project Portfolio
• Tungsten Mining has established a 
portfolio of advanced tungsten 
(scheelite) development projects
• Mineral Resources* of 88.6 Million 
tonnes at 0.18% WO3, containing more 
than 15.5 million MTU (metric tonne 
units) of WO3 at a 0.10% cut-off grade.
• Mt Mulgine Strategic Development Plan 
 focused on concentrate production 
in 2018
* Comprising Indicated Resources of 15.4Mt @ 0.20% W03 and Inferred
Resources 73.2Mt @ 0.17% W03  (refer Annexure 1)
Tungsten - a unique metal
Tungsten a metal of unique 
characteristics
 Highest melting point
 Highest tensile strength
 Lowest co-efficient of expansion 
 High density
 Non-corrosive
Making it a commodity of critical 
importance in today’s global 
industry
Period 6      /      Group 6
74
183.85
5700°C W3422°C
[Xe]4f145d46s2
19.3g/cm3
Wolfram
Tungsten
Tungsten uses
• Tungsten plays a critical role in industrial
engineering and extractive industries reliant 
on high speed, wear resistant cutting tools 
and wear plates.
• The main constituent of cemented carbides is
tungsten monocarbide (WC), which has 
hardness close to diamond.
• Cemented carbides account for
approximately 60% of global tungsten 
consumption with a further 24% consumed in 
the production of steel alloys (high speed 
steels and tools) and super alloys 
(aerospace).
• The balance of demand is driven by demand 
from the electronics and chemical industries.
Tungsten – a strategic element
• Tungsten’s unique properties means limited or no substitution from
other metals
• Global tungsten (W) production is estimated to be circa 90,000 tpa
from both primary (mine production) and secondary (recycled) 
sources.
• Roskill estimates that China accounts for approximately 80% of global 
primary production with minimal exports of tungsten concentrates by 
China.  China represents approximately 48% of global tungsten 
consumption.
• The EU and UK have listed tungsten as a critical raw material.  Non-
Chinese supply is limited and security of supply is of strategic 
importance to Western off-takers.
Market low creates opportunity
• Ammonium paratungstate (APT) is a
key intermediate tungsten product and 
pricing benchmark quoted in 
$US/MTU.
• Concentrates typically traded at ~20%
discount to APT price.
• Tungsten Mining has taken the
opportunity to acquire quality assets at 
the bottom of cycle
• Resource depletion and lower grade 
ore to constrain existing producers.
• Low prices disincentive to new supply.
• Improving outlook through 2017 to
provide opportunity for small scale (low 
cost) production
Source: Argus, TGN reports
The basics:
A metric tonne unit (MTU) 
is 10 kilograms.
100 MTU’s in a tonne
WO3 = tungsten trioxide
W = tungsten
Delivering scale and leverage
Tungsten Mining has the second largest Mineral Resource inventory of ASX 
listed tungsten companies providing the platform for the Company to become 
a globally significant player within the primary tungsten market.
Peer Comparison
The graph depicts 
Tungsten Mining’s relative 
Resource size. Wolf 
Minerals1 utilises a 0.063% 
WO3 cut-off grade (COG) 
for its Mineral Resource 
estimates. For comparative 
purposes a 0.05% COG 
has been used for TGN.
1. Refer Annexure 2 for Tungsten Mining’s Mineral Resource estimates based on a 0.05% WO3 cut-off grade 
2. Refer Wolf Minerals Ltd 2015 Annual Report, p 6. There is some variation in cut-off grades adopted for Annual Mineral Resource and Reserve Statements
3. Contained Metal is based on the data disclosed in the published 2015 Annual Mineral Resource and Reserve Statements of peer entities
…and positioned for growth
s
r
e
c
u
d
o
r
P
s
r
e
p
o
e
v
e
D
l
Notes:
1. Market Capitalisation is as at close of trading 25 July 2016
2. Contained Metal is based on the data disclosed in the published 2015 Annual Mineral Resource and Reserve Statements of peer entities
3. TGN contained metal is based on Mineral Resource data adopting a 0.05% WO3 cut-off grade for comparative purposes (refer Annexure 2)
Factors for success
 Large scale deposits supporting robust
project economics
 Existing infrastructure driving low capital
expenditure
 Low mining costs from near surface
mineralisation and low strip ratios
 Simple metallurgical recovery and
processing route
 Stable political climate and regulatory
environment supportive of mining
 Competent and experienced management
Targeted acquisition & development plan
Dec 2015 – Mt Mulgine and Big Hill acquisition
$1.2m
low acquisition
cost
+$15m
historical spend
on projects
50,000m
historical
drilling
(incl 40km DDH)
83.7Mt1
@ 0.17% WO3
and 197ppm Mo
Advanced project at Mt Mulgine
Near term production potential from Mulgine Hill
Globally significant project size
Potential to utilise existing infrastructure
1. Refer to Annexure 1 for resource details – Mt Mulgine and Big Hill
Mt Mulgine Tungsten Project
 Globally significant JORC 2012 Mineral Resource (updated in June 2016)
 Substantial past exploration and feasibility Study work.
 Tungsten and molybdenum rights held by Tungsten Mining
 Minjar Gold Pty Ltd, subsidiary of Shandong Tianye Group of China, holds
gold and other mineral rights on Project tenements.
 Proximity to available supporting infrastructure such as power, water, roads
and accommodation at adjacent Minjar Gold operations 
 Minjar Gold and Tungsten Mining working collaboratively
Mt Mulgine - Bobby McGee pit, mined for gold, with tungsten mineralisation exposed and 
open
Minjar core farm – trays of diamond drilling core
Located in a mining province
• Mt Mulgine project located in mining
province
• Less than 20 kilometres from Karara iron
ore mine
• Existing haul roads link Mt Mulgine
tenements and Minjar processing plant 
and facilities
• Mid-West region infrastructure rich, with
extensive rail and road network 
connecting to Geraldton Port
• Camp accommodation, airstrip, water,
power and other facilities servicing 
existing operations and utilised by 
Tungsten Mining
Image from Google Earth showing proximity to existing mines and 
existing infrastructure – 37km from Mt Mulgine project to Minjar Mill
Mt Mulgine – Summary Plan
Mulgine Hill – Summary Plan
Mulgine Hill Cross Section
Cross section showing planned RC drilling targeting extensions of existing mineralisation
Mt Mulgine Strategic Development Plan
Staged development approach targeting production of tungsten concentrate
and early cash flow within 2 years
Focus on shallow mineralisation at Mulgine Hill, previously mined and
stockpiled material and exposed ore in Bobby McGee pit at Trench
Historical metallurgical studies indicated conventional metallurgical treatment
produces a saleable WO3 concentrate from Mulgine Hill deposit
Drilling and metallurgical test work approved and to commence in Q3 2016.
Initial production planned from small scale production leveraging off existing
infrastructure operated by Minjar Gold
CSIRO engaged to help understanding the distribution and mineralogy of
tungsten mineralisation in Trench oxide zone and potential methods of 
extraction and by-product recovery
Mt Mulgine Strategic Development Plan
Targeting small scale production facility capable of producing saleable concentrate and by-products by end 2018.  In order to 
achieve this target the Company will undertake the following measured approach:
DRILLING
METALLURGICAL 
TESTWORK
PILOT PLANT
Phase 1 RC and PQ diamond drilling in progress (August 2016) – targeting shallow 
mineralisation at  Mulgine Hill
Program designed and scheduled to commence in September 2016 – building on previous work
Nagrom and Guangzhou Research Institute of Non-ferrous Metals preferred specialist 
laboratories
INFRASTRUCTURE
Discussions advancing with regional operators for infrastructure access
ENGINEERING
Specialist equipment vendors including ore sorting technologies being assessed for early 
contractor involvement (ECI) to enable expedited engineering and equipment supply schedule
 Engineering work undertaken by previous owners on 330ktpa concentrator 
 Production to leverage off existing infrastructure
 Modular plant where feasible
Mt Mulgine Development Timeline
Task
Sep 16
Dec 16 Mar 17
Jun 17
Sep 17
Dec 17 Mar 18
Jun 18
Geology and resource development
Metallurgy
Engineering
Pilot Scale Testwork
Project management, permitting and approvals
Marketing and Commercial
Mining
Summary
 Second largest resource inventory on ASX
 Globally significant project scale
 Significant historical exploration
 Underutilised infrastructure available
 Clear low cost pathway to production
 Strong management team
Thank you
Primary contact:
Media & Broker Enquiries:
Craig Ferrier
Chief Executive Officer
t: +618 9486 8492
e: craig.ferrier@tungstenmining.com
Andrew Rowell
Cannings Purple
t: +61 400 466 226
e: arowell@canningspurple.com.au
Annexure 1
JORC 2012 Mineral Resources
Annexure 2 
Mineral Resources – 0.05% COG