
-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 U+iIZ+Bl4RaOEsowOyAT1tt/m2uJ9mDg5RhKD3GCSautFd79HdqEZeB9Xkq4HvWs
 0TwnjD7M+QClAtry/950hw==
<SEC-DOCUMENT>0001170423-05-000448.txt : 20080317
<SEC-HEADER>0001170423-05-000448.hdr.sgml : 20080317
<ACCEPTANCE-DATETIME>20051216143742
<PRIVATE-TO-PUBLIC>
ACCESSION NUMBER:
0001170423-05-000448
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:
SB-2/A
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:
3
FILED AS OF DATE:
20051216
DATE AS OF CHANGE:
20060414
FILER:
COMPANY DATA:
COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:
CENTRAL INDEX KEY:
Azzoro Inc.
0001300450
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION: METAL MINING [1000]
IRS NUMBER:
000000000
STATE OF INCORPORATION:
NV
FISCAL YEAR END:
0331
FILING VALUES:
FORM TYPE:
SB-2/A
SEC ACT:
1933 Act
SEC FILE NUMBER: 333-118262
FILM NUMBER:
051269392
BUSINESS ADDRESS:
STREET 1:
455 GRANVILLE STREET, SUITE 500
CITY:
VANCOUVER
STATE:
ZIP:
A1
V6C 1T1
BUSINESS PHONE:
604-209-4522
MAIL ADDRESS:
STREET 1:
455 GRANVILLE STREET, SUITE 500
CITY:
STATE:
ZIP:
VANCOUVER
A1
V6C 1T1
</SEC-HEADER>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>SB-2/A
<SEQUENCE>1
<FILENAME>azzorosb2am4.txt
<DESCRIPTION>SB-2 AMENDMENT #4
<TEXT>
================================================================================
U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
                             WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM SB-2
             REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
                               FILE NO: 333-118262
Amendment #4
AZZORO INC.
                           ---------------------------
             (Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
NEVADA                     1000                    77-0622733
- ----------------------        -------------------      ---------------------
(State or other jurisdiction  Standard Industrial      IRS Employer
of incorporation or           Classification           Identification Number
organization)
AZZORO INC.
Ted Burylo, President
455 Granville Street, Suite 500,
Vancouver, British Columbia
Canada                                                V6C 1T1
- ------------------------------                       ----------
(Name and address of principal                       (Zip Code)
executive offices)
Registrant's telephone number,
including area code:                                (604) 209-4522
                                               Fax: (604) 681-7622
                                                    --------------
Approximate date of commencement of Proposed sale to the public:
as soon as practicable after the effective date of this
                  Registration Statement.
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant
to Rule 462(b) under the  Securities  Act,  check the following box and list the
Securities  Act  registration   statement   number  of  the  earlier   effective
registration statement for the same offering.
                                                               |--|
If this Form is a  post-effective  amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under
the  Securities  Act,  check  the  following  box and  list the  Securities  Act
registration  statement number of the earlier effective  registration  statement
for the same offering. |__|
If this Form is a  post-effective  amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under
the  Securities  Act,  check  the  following  box and  list the  Securities  Act
registration  statement number of the earlier effective  registration  statement
for the same offering. |__|
If delivery of the prospectus is expected to be made pursuant to Rule 434, check
the following.
                                                               |--|
<page>
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
- 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TITLE OF         AMOUNT TO           PROPOSED         PROPOSED      AMOUNT OF
EACH CLASS       BE                  MAXIMUM          MAXIMUM       REGISTRATION
OF               REGISTERED          OFFERING         AGGREGATE     FEE (2)
SECURITIES                           PRICE PER        OFFERING
TO BE                                SHARE (1)        PRICE (2)
REGISTERED
- 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Common Stock     2,710,000 shares    $0.20            $542,000      $66.14
(1)   Based on the last sales price on April 19, 2004.
(2)   Estimated  solely for the purpose of calculating the  registration  fee in
      accordance with Rule 457 under the Securities Act.
THE REGISTRANT HEREBY AMENDS THIS  REGISTRATION  STATEMENT ON SUCH DATE OR DATES
AS MAY BE NECESSARY TO DELAY ITS EFFECTIVE DATE UNTIL THE REGISTRANT  SHALL FILE
A FURTHER AMENDMENT WHICH SPECIFICALLY  STATES THAT THIS REGISTRATION  STATEMENT
SHALL  THEREAFTER  BECOME  EFFECTIVE  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  SECTION  8(a) OF THE
SECURITIES  ACT OF  1933  OR  UNTIL  THE  REGISTRATION  STATEMENT  SHALL  BECOME
EFFECTIVE ON SUCH DATE AS THE  COMMISSION,  ACTING PURSUANT TO SECTION 8(a), MAY
DETERMINE.
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, Dated December 16, 2005
Agent for service of process:       Empire Stock Transfer Inc.
                                    7251 West Lake Mead Boulevard Suite 300
                                    Las Vegas, NV 89128
-2-
<page>
PROSPECTUS
                                   AZZORO INC.
                                2,710,000 SHARES
                                  COMMON STOCK
                                ----------------
The selling shareholders named in this prospectus are offering all of the shares
of common stock offered through this prospectus.
Our common stock is presently not traded on any market or securities exchange.
                                ----------------
The purchase of the securities  offered through this prospectus  involves a high
degree of risk. SEE SECTION ENTITLED "RISK FACTORS ON PAGES 6 - 9.
The  information in this  prospectus is not complete and may be changed.  We may
not sell  these  securities  until the  registration  statement  filed  with the
Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer
to  sell  these  securities  and it is not  soliciting  an  offer  to buy  these
securities in any state where the offer or sale is not permitted.
The  selling  shareholders  will sell our  shares  at $0.20 per share  until our
shares are quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board, and thereafter at prevailing market
prices or privately  negotiated  prices. We determined this offering price based
upon the price of the last sale of our common stock to investors.
Neither  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  nor  any  state  securities
commission has approved or  disapproved  of these  securities or passed upon the
adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a
criminal offense.
----------------
The Date of This Prospectus Is: December 16, 2005
-3-
<page>
Table Of Contents
PAGE
Summary .......................................................  5
Risk Factors ..................................................  6
  -  If we do not obtain additional financing, our business
     will fail ................................................  6
  -  Because we have not commenced business operations, we face
     a high risk of business failure ..........................  6
  -  Because of the speculative nature of exploration of mining
     properties, there is substantial risk that our business
     will fail ................................................  7
  -  We need to continue as a going concern if our business is
     to succeed.  Our independent auditor has raised doubt about
     our ability to continue as a going concern................  7
  -  Because of the inherent dangers involved in mineral
     exploration, there is a risk that we may incur liability or
     damages as we conduct our business .......................  7
  -  Even if we discover commercial reserves of precious metals
     on the Surprise Lake property, we may not be able to
     successfully commence commercial production ..............  7
  -  Because our directors own 64.9% of our outstanding stock,
     they could control and make corporate decisions that may
     be disadvantageous to other minority stockholders ......... 8
-  Because our president and secretary  have other business
     interests, they may not be able or willing to devote a
     sufficient amount of time to our  business operations,
     causing our business to fail..............................  8
  -  Because our management has only limited experience in
     mineral exploration, our business has a higher risk of
     failure...................................................  8
  -  If a market for our common stock does not develop,
     shareholders may be unable to sell their shares .........   8
  -  A purchaser is purchasing penny stock which limits the
     sell the ability to stock ................................  8
Forward-Looking Statements.....................................  9
Use of Proceeds ...............................................  9
Determination of Offering Price ...............................  9
Dilution ......................................................  9
Selling Shareholders ..........................................  9
Plan of Distribution .......................................... 13
Legal Proceedings ............................................. 14
Directors, Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons..  14
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management  16
Description of Securities ..................................... 16
Interest of Named Experts and Counsel ......................... 17
Disclosure of Commission Position of Indemnification for
Securities Act Liabilities .................................... 18
Organization Within Last Five Years ........................... 18
Description of Business ....................................... 18
Plan of Operations ............................................ 22
Description of Property ....................................... 22
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions ................ 23
Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters ...... 23
Executive Compensation ........................................ 24
Financial Statements .......................................... 25
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants ................. 50
-4-
<page>
Summary
Prospective investors are urged to read this prospectus in its entirety.
We intend to be in the business of mineral  property  exploration.  To date,  we
have not conducted any  exploration on our sole mineral  property,  the Surprise
Lake  property,  also known as the Short  claims,  located in British  Columbia,
Canada.  We own a 100%  interest  in the eight  mineral  claims  comprising  the
Surprise Lake property.  We purchased these claims from Peter Burjoski of Atlin,
British Columbia for a cash payment of $5,000.
Our objective is to conduct mineral exploration  activities on the Surprise Lake
property  in order to assess  whether it  possesses  economic  reserves of gold,
tungsten and molybdenum.  We have not yet identified any economic mineralization
on the property.  Our proposed  exploration program is designed to search for an
economic mineral deposit.
There is currently no public market for our common stock and no certainty that a
market will develop. If no market is ever developed for our shares, it   will be
difficult for shareholders to sell their stock. In such a case, shareholders may
find that they are unable to achieve benefits from their investment.
We were  incorporated on January 15, 2004 under the laws of the state of Nevada.
Our principal offices are located at 455 Granville Street, Suite 500, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. Our telephone number is (604) 209-4522.
The Offering:
Securities Being Offered     Up to 2,710,000 shares of common stock.
Offering Price               The selling shareholders  will sell  our shares  at
                             $0.20 per share until our shares are quoted on  the
                             OTC Bulletin Board, and  thereafter  at  prevailing
                             market prices or  privately  negotiated  prices. We
                             determined this offering price based upon the price
                             of the last sale of our common stock to investors.
Terms of the Offering        The selling  shareholders will  determine  when and
                             how they will sell the common stock offered in this
                             prospectus.
Termination of the Offering  The  offering  will  conclude  when  all   of   the
                             2,710,000 shares of common stock have been sold,the
                             shares no longer need to be registered to  be  sold
                             or we decide to terminate the registration  of  the
                             shares.
Securities Issued and to
be Issued                    7,710,000 shares of our common stock are issued and
                             outstanding as of the date of this prospectus.  All
                             of  the   common  stock   to  be  sold  under  this
                             prospectus will be sold by existing shareholders.
Use of Proceeds              We will not receive any proceeds from the  sale  of
                             the common stock by the selling shareholders.
Summary Financial Information
Balance Sheet            September 30, 2005    March 31, 2005    March 31, 2004
                            (unaudited)          (audited)         (audited)
Cash                          $14,966             $22,429           $26,371
Total Assets                  $14,966             $22,429           $26,371
Liabilities                    $4,280              $7,111            $2,930
Total Stockholders' Equity    $10,686             $15,318           $23,441
-5-
<page>
Statement of Loss and Deficit
From Incorporation on January 15, 2004 to September 30, 2005 (unaudited)
Revenue                                 $      0
Net Loss                                ($23,314)
Risk Factors
An  investment  in our common stock  involves a high degree of risk.  You should
carefully  consider the risks described below and the other  information in this
prospectus  before  investing in our common stock. If any of the following risks
occur,  our  business,  operating  results  and  financial  condition  could  be
seriously harmed. The trading price of our common stock could decline due to any
of these risks, and you may lose all or part of your investment.
IF WE DO NOT OBTAIN ADDITIONAL FINANCING, OUR BUSINESS WILL FAIL.
Our current  operating  funds are less than  necessary  to complete all intended
exploration of the Surprise Lake property,  and therefore we will need to obtain
additional  financing in order to complete our business plan. As of December 16,
2005,  we had  cash in the  amount  of  $13,453.  We  currently  do not have any
operations  and we have no income.  As well,  we will not receive any funds from
this registration.
Our  business  plan  calls  for  significant  expenses  in  connection  with the
exploration of the Surprise Lake  property.  While we have  sufficient  funds to
conduct most of the initial exploration  on  the  property,  estimated  to  cost
$15,000, we will   require additional financing, likely in excess of $2,000,000,
in order to determine whether the   property    contains economic mineralization
and an additional $15,000 to cover    our anticipated administrative  costs over
the next year. We will also require  additional financing   if the costs of  the
exploration of the Surprise Lake property are greater than  anticipated.
Even after completing   all   proposed    exploration,  we   will not know if we
have a commercially   viable   mineral   deposit. We will need   to commission a
feasibility study,   prepared by  a professional geologist, which will determine
whether mining operations are   justified   based   on the costs to erect mining
facilities on the property and   the   current sale prices of the mineralization
discovered.  We estimate that the cost of such   a   feasibility study  would be
$250,000.
We will require  additional  financing to sustain our business  operations if we
are not successful in earning revenues once  exploration is complete.  We do not
currently have any  arrangements  for financing and may not be able to find such
financing  if required.  Obtaining  additional  financing  would be subject to a
number  of  factors,   including  the  market  price  for  gold,   tungsten  and
molybdenite,  and  investor  acceptance  of  our  property  and  general  market
conditions.  These factors may make the timing,  amount,  terms or conditions of
additional financing unavailable to us.
The most likely source of future funds presently  available to us is through the
sale of equity  capital.  Any sale of share  capital  will result in dilution to
existing shareholders.  The only other anticipated alternative for the financing
of further  exploration  would be our sale of a partial interest in the Surprise
Lake property to a third party in exchange for cash or exploration expenditures,
which is not presently contemplated.
BECAUSE  WE HAVE  NOT  COMMENCED  BUSINESS  OPERATIONS,  WE FACE A HIGH  RISK OF
BUSINESS FAILURE.
We  have  not  yet  commenced   exploration   on  the  Surprise  Lake  property.
Accordingly, we have no way to evaluate the likelihood that our business will be
successful.  We were  incorporated  on  January  15,  2004 and to date have been
involved  primarily in  organizational  activities  and the  acquisition  of our
mineral  property.  We have  not  earned  any  revenues  as of the  date of this
-6-
<page>
prospectus.  Potential  investors should be aware of the  difficulties  normally
encountered by new mineral exploration companies and the high rate of failure of
such  enterprises.  The likelihood of success must be considered in light of the
problems,  expenses,  difficulties,  complications  and  delays  encountered  in
connection  with  the  exploration  of the  mineral  properties  that we plan to
undertake.   These  potential   problems  include,   but  are  not  limited  to,
unanticipated  problems  relating  to  exploration,  and  additional  costs  and
expenses that may exceed current estimates.
Prior to completion of our  exploration  stage, we anticipate that we will incur
increased operating expenses without realizing any revenues. We therefore expect
to incur significant losses into the foreseeable future. We recognize that if we
are unable to generate  significant  revenues from  development  of the Surprise
Lake property and the  production  of minerals  from the claims,  we will not be
able to earn profits or continue operations.
There is no history upon which to base any assumption as to the likelihood  that
we will prove successful, and it is doubtful that we will generate any operating
revenues  or ever  achieve  profitable  operations.  If we are  unsuccessful  in
addressing these risks, our business will most likely fail. If we determine that
the Surprise Lake property does not contain any reserves and that we are  unable
to complete our business plan with respect to the claims, we intend to   acquire
an interest or interests in additional mineral  claims for exploration purposes.
Additional acquisitions will depend upon our ability to raise additional funding
through our sale of common stock.
BECAUSE OF THE SPECULATIVE NATURE OF EXPLORATION OF MINING PROPERTIES,  THERE IS
A SUBSTANTIAL RISK THAT OUR BUSINESS WILL FAIL.
The  search  for  valuable  minerals  as a  business  is  extremely  risky.  The
likelihood of our mineral claims containing economic  mineralization or reserves
is  extremely  remote.   Exploration  for  minerals  is  a  speculative  venture
necessarily  involving  substantial risk. In all probability,  the Surprise Lake
property  does not contain any reserves  and funds that we spend on  exploration
will be lost. As well,  problems such as unusual or  unexpected  formations  and
other  conditions  are  involved  in  mineral  exploration  and often  result in
unsuccessful exploration efforts. In such a case, we would be unable to complete
our business plan.
WE NEED TO  CONTINUE  AS A GOING  CONCERN IF OUR  BUSINESS  IS TO  SUCCEED.  OUR
INDEPENDENT  AUDITOR  HAS RAISED  DOUBT ABOUT OUR ABILITY TO CONTINUE AS A GOING
CONCERN.
The Independent  Auditor's  Report to our audited  financial  statements for the
period ended March 31, 2004 and 2005 indicates that there are a number of
factors that raise substantial  doubt about our ability to continue as a going
concern.  Such factors  identified  in the report are that we have no source of
revenue and our dependence upon obtaining adequate financing.  If we are not
able to continue as a going concern, it is likely investors will lose all of
their investment.
BECAUSE OF THE INHERENT DANGERS INVOLVED IN MINERAL EXPLORATION, THERE IS A RISK
THAT WE MAY INCUR LIABILITY OR DAMAGES AS WE CONDUCT OUR BUSINESS.
The search for valuable minerals involves numerous hazards.  As a result, we may
become subject to liability for such hazards, including pollution,  cave-ins and
other  hazards  against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not
to insure. The payment of such liabilities may have a material adverse effect on
our financial position.
EVEN IF WE DISCOVER  COMMERCIAL RESERVES OF PRECIOUS METALS ON THE SURPRISE LAKE
PROPERTY, WE MAY NOT BE ABLE TO SUCCESSFULLY COMMENCE COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION.
-7-
<page>
The Surprise Lake property does not contain any known bodies of  mineralization.
If our exploration  programs are successful in establishing  gold,  tungsten and
molybdenum of commercial  tonnage and grade, we will require additional funds in
order to place the property into  commercial  production.  We may not be able to
obtain such financing.
BECAUSE OUR DIRECTORS OWN 64.9% OF OUR OUTSTANDING COMMON STOCK, THEY COULD MAKE
AND CONTROL CORPORATE  DECISIONS THAT MAY BE  DISADVANTAGEOUS  TO OTHER MINORITY
SHAREHOLDERS.
Our directors own  approximately  64.9% of the outstanding  shares of our common
stock.  Accordingly,  they will have a significant  influence in determining the
outcome of all  corporate  transactions  or other  matters,  including  mergers,
consolidations,  and the sale of all or  substantially  all of our assets.  They
will also have the power to prevent or cause a change in control.  The interests
of our  directors may differ from the  interests of the other  stockholders  and
thus  result  in  corporate   decisions  that  are   disadvantageous   to  other
shareholders.
BECAUSE OUR PRESIDENT AND SECRETARY HAVE OTHER BUSINESS INTERESTS,  THEY MAY NOT
BE ABLE OR  WILLING  TO  DEVOTE  A  SUFFICIENT  AMOUNT  OF TIME TO OUR  BUSINESS
OPERATIONS, CAUSING OUR BUSINESS TO FAIL.
Our president, Mr.  Ted  Burylo  spends  approximately  50%  his  business  time
providing his services to us. Our secretary, Mr. Jeff Murdock spends only  about
10% of his business time providing his services to us. While Mr. Burylo and  Mr.
Murdock presently possess adequate  time  to  attend  to  our interests,  it  is
possible that  the  demands  on  Mr. Burylo  and  Mr. Murdock  from  their other
obligations could increase with the result that they would no longer be  able to
devote sufficient time to the management of our business.
BECAUSE  MANAGEMENT  HAS ONLY LIMITED  EXPERIENCE  IN MINERAL  EXPLORATION,  OUR
BUSINESS HAS A HIGHER RISK OF FAILURE.
None of our  directors  has any  technical  training in the field of geology and
specifically in the areas of exploring for,  starting and operating a mine. As a
result,  we may  not be  able to  recognize  and  take  advantage  of  potential
acquisition  and  exploration  opportunities  in the sector  without  the aid of
qualified  geological   consultants.   As  well,  with  no  direct  training  or
experience,  our management may not be fully aware of the specific  requirements
related to working in this industry. Their decisions and choices may not be well
thought out and our  operations,  earnings  and ultimate  financial  success may
suffer irreparable harm as a result.
IF A MARKET FOR OUR COMMON STOCK DOES NOT DEVELOP, SHAREHOLDERS MAY BE UNABLE TO
SELL THEIR SHARES.
There is currently no market for our common stock and no certainty that a market
will develop.  We currently plan to apply for listing of our common stock on the
over the  counter  bulletin  board upon the  effectiveness  of the  registration
statement,  of which this prospectus forms a part. Our shares may never trade on
the bulletin board.
 If no  market  is ever  developed  for our  shares,  it will be  difficult  for
shareholders  to sell their stock.  In such a case,  shareholders  may find that
they are unable to achieve benefits from their investment.
A PURCHASER  IS  PURCHASING  PENNY STOCK WHICH LIMITS HIS OR HER ABILITY TO SELL
THE STOCK.
-8-
<page>
The shares offered by this prospectus  constitute penny stock under the Exchange
Act.  The  shares  will  remain  penny  stock for the  foreseeable  future.  The
classification  of penny stock makes it more  difficult for a  broker-dealer  to
sell the stock into a secondary market, thus limiting investment liquidity.  Any
broker-dealer  engaged by the  purchaser  for the  purpose of selling his or her
shares in our  company  will be subject  to rules  15g-1  through  15g-10 of the
Exchange  Act.  Rather  than  creating a need to comply with those  rules,  some
broker-dealers will refuse to attempt to sell penny stock.
Please  refer  to  the  "Plan  of  Distribution"  section  for a  more  detailed
discussion of penny stock and related broker-dealer restrictions.
Forward-Looking Statements
This  prospectus  contains  forward-looking  statements  that involve  risks and
uncertainties.  We use words such as anticipate,  believe, plan, expect, future,
intend and similar expressions to identify such forward-looking  statements. You
should not place too much  reliance  on these  forward-looking  statements.  Our
actual  results  may  differ   materially   from  those   anticipated  in  these
forward-looking  statements  for many  reasons,  including the risks faced by us
described in the "Risk Factors" section and elsewhere in this prospectus.
Use Of Proceeds
We will not  receive  any  proceeds  from the sale of the common  stock  offered
through this prospectus by the selling shareholders.
Determination of Offering Price
The  selling  shareholders  will sell our  shares  at $0.20 per share  until our
shares are quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board, and thereafter at prevailing market
prices or privately  negotiated prices. We determined this offering price, based
upon the price of the last sale of our common stock to investors.
Dilution
The common stock to be sold by the selling  shareholders is common stock that is
currently  issued and outstanding. Accordingly, there will be no dilution to our
existing shareholders.
Selling Shareholders
The  selling  shareholders  named in this  prospectus  are  offering  all of the
2,710,000 shares of common stock offered through this  prospectus.  These shares
were acquired from us in private  placements that were exempt from  registration
under  Regulation  S of the  Securities  Act of 1933.  The  shares  include  the
following:
1.  2,700,000  shares of  our  common  stock  that   the  selling   shareholders
acquired from us  in  an  offering  that  was  exempt  from  registration  under
Regulation S of the Securities Act of 1933 and was completed  on March 31, 2004;
and
2. 10,000 shares of our common stock that the selling shareholders acquired from
us in an offering that was exempt from  registration  under  Regulation S of the
Securities Act of 1933 and was completed on April 19, 2004.
-9-
<page>
The  following  table  provides as of the date of this  prospectus,  information
regarding  the  beneficial  ownership  of our  common  stock held by each of the
selling shareholders, including:
1. the number of shares owned by each prior to this offering
2. the total number of shares that are to be offered for each;
3. the total number of shares that will be owned by each upon completion of the
   offering; and
4. the percentage owned by each upon completion of the offering
<table>
<caption>
Name of Selling                  Shares owned   Total Number of      Total 
Shares     Percent Owned
Stockholder                      Prior To This  Shares To Be         Owned Upon 
Upon Completion
                                 Offering       Offered For Selling  Completion 
Of This Offering
                                                Shareholders         of this
                                                Account              Offering
- 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------
<s>                              <c>            <c>                  <c>        
<c>
James Thiede
550 Beatty Street Suite 412
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
David Anderson
955 Burrard Street
Vancouver, B.C                   100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Kevin Klassen
50 West Cordova St Suite 201
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Sharon Lee-White
50 West Cordova St Suite 528
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Peter Burjoski
Box 176
Atlin, B.C                       100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Jonathan Shea
2726 Alder Street Suite 304
Vancouver, B.C.                  200,000        200,000              Nil        
Nil
William Butler
2341 York Avenue Suite 29
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
William McCormack
2050 Rupert Street Suite 121
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Lorne Wenn
340 8th Street Suite 306
New Westminster, B.C.            100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
</table>
-10-
<page>
<table>
<caption>
Name of Selling                  Shares owned   Total Number of      Total 
Shares     Percent Owned
Stockholder                      Prior To This  Shares To Be         Owned Upon 
Upon Completion
                                 Offering       Offered For Selling  Completion 
Of This Offering
                                                Shareholders         of this
                                                Account              Offering
- 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------
<s>                              <c>            <c>                  <c>        
<c>
Parvin Selseleh
7478 Sandborne Ave.
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Chris Roger
7576 17th Avenue
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
G.E. Fenwick
755 Abbott Street Suite 365
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Shahram Fasihy
7478 Sandborne Ave.
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Michelle Janes
1435 Nelson Street Suite 209
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Marni Ziegler
7576 17th Avenue
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Hailey Wenn
2715 Blackwood Street
Victoria, B.C.                   100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Lara Wenn
2715 Blackwood Street
Victoria, B.C.                   100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Ben McCormack
3350 East 5th Avenue
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Guy Lawson
340 8th Street
New Westminster, B.C.            100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Ron Teti
4101 Rose Crescent
West Vancouver, B.C.             100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
</table>
-11-
<page>
<table>
<caption>
Name of Selling                  Shares owned   Total Number of      Total 
Shares     Percent Owned
Stockholder                      Prior To This  Shares To Be         Owned Upon 
Upon Completion
                                 Offering       Offered For Selling  Completion 
Of This Offering
                                                Shareholders         of this
                                                Account              Offering
- 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------
<s>                              <c>            <c>                  <c>        
<c>
Elaheh Fasihy
7478 Sandborne Ave
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Seyed Mostafa Fasihi
7478 Sandborne Ave
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
E. Edwards
7576 17th Avenue
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Brian Glaum
5145 Sperling Avenue
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Randy Pesto
5189 Norfolk Street
Burnaby, B.C.                    100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
Harold McDougall
450 Cordova Street, Suite 231
Vancouver, B.C.                  100,000        100,000              Nil        
Nil
William McMillan
1435 Nelson Street Suite 209
Vancouver, B.C.                    5,000          5,000              Nil        
Nil
Frank Kramaric
518 Richards Street Suite 315
Vancouver, B.C.                    5,000          5,000              Nil        
Nil
</table>
The named party  beneficially  owns and has sole voting and investment  over all
shares or rights to these shares. The numbers in this  table assume that none of
the selling shareholders sells shares of common stock not being offered in  this
prospectus or purchases  additional shares of common stock, and assumes that all
shares offered are sold. The percentages are based on 7,710,000 shares of common
stock outstanding on the date of this prospectus.
None of the selling shareholders:
(1)  has had a material relationship with us other than as a shareholder  at
         any time within the past three years; or
(2)  has ever been one of our officers or directors.
-12-
<page>
Plan Of Distribution
The selling  shareholders  may sell some or all of their  common stock in one or
more transactions, including block transactions.
The  selling  shareholders  will sell our  shares  at $0.20 per share  until our
shares are quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board, and thereafter at prevailing market
prices or  privately  negotiated  prices.  We  determined  this  offering  price
arbitrarily  based  upon  the  price  of the last  sale of our  common  stock to
investors.  The shares may also be sold in compliance  with the  Securities  and
Exchange Commission's Rule 144.
The selling  shareholders  may also sell their shares  directly to market makers
acting as  principals,  brokers or dealers,  who may act as agent or acquire the
common  stock  as  principal.   Any  broker  or  dealer  participating  in  such
transactions  as agent may receive a commission  from the selling  shareholders,
or, if they act as agent  for the  purchaser  of such  common  stock,  from such
purchaser.  The selling  shareholders  will  likely pay the usual and  customary
brokerage fees for such services.  Brokers or dealers may agree with the selling
shareholders  to sell a  specified  number of shares at a  stipulated  price per
share and, to the extent  such broker or dealer is unable to do so while  acting
as agent for the selling  shareholders,  to purchase,  as principal,  any unsold
shares at the price  required  to fulfill  the  respective  broker's or dealer's
commitment to the selling shareholders.
Brokers or dealers who acquire shares as principals  may thereafter  resell such
shares  from  time to time in  transactions  in a market or on an  exchange,  in
negotiated transactions or otherwise, at market prices prevailing at the time of
sale or at negotiated  prices,  and in connection  with such re-sales may pay or
receive commissions to or from the purchasers of such shares. These transactions
may involve cross and block  transactions  that may involve sales to and through
other brokers or dealers. If applicable, the selling shareholders may distribute
shares  to one or more of their  partners  who are  unaffiliated  with us.  Such
partners may, in turn, distribute such shares as described above. We can provide
no  assurance  that all or any of the common  stock  offered will be sold by the
selling shareholders.
We are bearing all costs relating to the registration of the common stock. These
are estimated to be $15,000.  The selling  shareholders,  however,  will pay any
commissions  or other fees payable to brokers or dealers in connection  with any
sale of the common stock.
The selling shareholders must comply with the requirements of the Securities Act
and the Exchange Act in the offer and sale of the common stock.  In  particular,
during such times as the selling  shareholders  may be deemed to be engaged in a
distribution  of  the  common  stock,  and  therefore  be  considered  to  be an
underwriter, they must comply with applicable law and may, among other things:
1. Not engage in any stabilization activities  in  connection  with  our  common
   stock;
2. Furnish each broker or dealer through which common stock may be offered, such
copies of this  prospectus,  as amended from time to time, as may be required by
such broker or dealer; and
3. Not bid for or purchase any of our securities or attempt to induce any person
to purchase any of our  securities  other than as  permitted  under the Exchange
Act.
The  Securities  Exchange  Commission  has  also  adopted  rules  that  regulate
broker-dealer  practices in connection with transactions in penny stocks.  Penny
stocks are generally  equity  securities  with a price of less than $5.00 (other
than securities registered on certain national securities exchanges or quoted on
-13-
<page>
the Nasdaq  system,  provided  that current  price and volume  information  with
respect to  transactions  in such  securities  is  provided  by the  exchange or
system).
The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny
stock not  otherwise  exempt  from  those  rules,  deliver a  standardized  risk
disclosure document prepared by the Commission, which:
*      contains a description of the nature and level of risk in the  market for
       penny stocks in both public offerings and secondary trading;
*      contains a description of the broker's or dealer's duties to the customer
       and of the rights and remedies  available to the customer with respect to
       a violation of such duties;
*      contains  a brief,  clear,  narrative  description  of a  dealer  market,
       including "bid" and "ask" prices for penny stocks and the significance of
       the spread between the bid and ask price;
*      contains a toll-free  telephone  number  for  inquiries  on  disciplinary
       actions;
*      defines significant terms in the disclosure document or in the conduct of
       trading penny stocks;  and
*      contains such other information and is in such form  (including language,
       type, size, and format)  as  the  Commission  shall  require  by  rule or
regulation;
The broker-dealer also must provide, prior to proceeding with any transaction in
a penny stock, the customer:
*      with bid and offer quotations for the penny stock;
*      details of the compensation of the broker-dealer and its  salesperson  in
       the transaction;
*      the number of shares to which such bid  and  ask  prices  apply, or other
       comparable information relating to the depth and liquidity of  the market
       for such stock; and
*      monthly account  statements  showing the market value of each penny stock
       held in the customer's account.
In  addition,  the penny stock rules  require that prior to a  transaction  in a
penny stock not otherwise exempt from those rules; the broker-dealer must make a
special written  determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for
the purchaser and receive the purchaser's written  acknowledgment of the receipt
of a risk disclosure  statement,  a written agreement to transactions  involving
penny stocks,  and a signed and dated copy of a written  suitability  statement.
These  disclosure  requirements  will have the effect of  reducing  the  trading
activity  in the  secondary  market for our stock  because it will be subject to
these penny stock rules.  Therefore,  stockholders  may have difficulty  selling
those securities.
Legal Proceedings
We are not currently a party to any legal  proceedings.  Our address for service
of process in Nevada is 7251 West Lake Mead Boulevard,  Suite 300, Las Vegas, NV
89128.
Directors, Executive Officers, Promoters And Control Persons
Our executive officers and directors and their respective ages as of the date of
this prospectus are as follows:
Directors:
-14-
<page>
Name of Director                 Age
- ----------------                 ---
Ted Burylo                        64
Jeff Murdock                      36
Executive Officers:
Name of Officer                  Age               Office
- ---------------------            ---               -------
Ted Burylo                        64               President, Chief Executive
                                                   Officer, Treasurer, Principal
                                                   Accounting Officer
                                                   and a Director
Jeff Murdock                      36               Secretary and a Director
Biographical Information
Set forth below is a brief description of the background and business experience
of each of our executive officers and directors for the past five years.
Mr. Ted Burylo has acted as our president, chief executive officer treasurer and
as a director since our  incorporation on January 15, 2004. He is an independent
businessman that provides consulting services to junior venture companies.  From
March 2001 to January 2003, Mr. Burylo acted as online  marketing  executive for
Stockscape  Network Group,  Inc., a private  investor  relations  consulting and
marketing firm for publicly trading companies.
Since August 2002 and October 2003  respectively,  Mr. Burylo  has  acted  as  a
director of Algorithm Media Inc. and Bellhaven Ventures Inc., both of which  are
reporting issuers in  Alberta  and  British  Columbia.  Algorithm Media Inc.  is
involved in the operation of a music recording studio.  Bellhaven Ventures  Inc.
is involved in the exploration of mineral properties.
Mr. Burylo does not have any professional training or technical  credentials  in
the exploration, development and operation of mines.
Mr. Burylo intends to devote 50% of his business time per week to our affairs.
Mr. Jeff Murdock has acted as our secretary and as a director  since January 21,
2004.  Since  March  1999  has  acted  as a  corporate  communications  services
consultant for Iciena  Ventures Inc., an Alberta and British  Columbia reporting
company that is involved in silver and diamond property exploration.
Term of Office
Our  directors  are  appointed for a one-year term to hold office until the next
annual  general  meeting of our  shareholders  or until  removed  from office in
accordance with our bylaws. Our officers are appointed by our board of directors
and hold office until removed by the board.
Significant Employees
We have no significant employees other than the officers and directors described
above.
-15-
<page>
Conflicts of Interest
We do not have any written  procedures in place to address conflicts of interest
that may arise in our  directors  between our business and their other  business
activities.
Security Ownership Of Certain Beneficial Owners And Management
The following  table provides the names and addresses of each person known to us
to own  more  than 5% of our  outstanding  common  stock  as of the date of this
prospectus,  and by the officers  and  directors,  individually  and as a group.
Except as otherwise indicated, all shares are owned directly.
Title of Class    Name and address         Amount of beneficial      Percent of
                  of beneficial owner      ownership                 class
Common Stock      Ted Burylo               2,500,000                 32.43%
                  President, Chief
                  Executive Officer,
                  Principal Accounting
                  Officer, Director
                  455 Granville Street
                  Suite 500
                  Vancouver, B.C.
Common Stock      Jeff Murdock             2,500,000                 32.43%
                  Secretary and Director
                  1422 East 3rd Avenue
                  Suite 201
                  Vancouver, B.C.,
                  V5N 5R5
Common Stock      All officers and
                  directors as a group
                  that consists of two
                  people                   5,000,000                 64.86%
The percent of class is based on  7,710,000  shares of common  stock  issued and
outstanding as of the date of this prospectus.
Description Of Securities
General
Our authorized  capital stock consists of 75,000,000 shares of common stock at a
par value of $0.001 per share.
Common Stock
As of December 16, 2005, there were 7,710,000  shares of our common stock issued
and outstanding that are held by 30 stockholders of record.
Holders  of our  common  stock are  entitled  to one vote for each  share on all
matters  submitted to a  stockholder  vote.  Holders of common stock do not have
cumulative  voting  rights.  Therefore,  holders of a majority  of the shares of
common  stock  voting  for  the  election  of  directors  can  elect  all of the
directors. Two persons present and being, or representing by proxy, shareholders
are necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting of our stockholders.  A vote
by the holders of a majority of our outstanding shares is required to effectuate
certain  fundamental  corporate  changes  such  as  liquidation,  merger  or  an
amendment to our articles of incorporation.
-16-
<page>
Holders of common stock are entitled to share in all dividends that the board of
directors,  in its  discretion,  declares from legally  available  funds. In the
event of a  liquidation,  dissolution  or winding  up,  each  outstanding  share
entitles  its holder to  participate  pro rata in all assets that  remain  after
payment of  liabilities  and after  providing  for each class of stock,  if any,
having preference over the common stock.
Holders of our common stock have no pre-emptive rights, no conversion rights and
there are no redemption provisions applicable to our common stock.
Preferred Stock
We do not have an authorized class of preferred stock.
Dividend Policy
We have  never  declared  or paid any cash  dividends  on our common  stock.  We
currently intend to retain future earnings,  if any, to finance the expansion of
our business. As a result, we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the
foreseeable future.
Share Purchase Warrants
We have not issued and do not have  outstanding  any warrants to purchase shares
of our common stock.
Options
We have not issued and do not have outstanding any options to purchase shares of
our common stock.
Convertible Securities
We have not issued and do not have  outstanding any securities  convertible into
shares of our common stock or any rights convertible or exchangeable into shares
of our common stock.
Interests Of Named Experts And Counsel
No expert or counsel named in this  prospectus  as having  prepared or certified
any part of this  prospectus or having given an opinion upon the validity of the
securities  being  registered or upon other legal matters in connection with the
registration  or offering  of the common  stock was  employed  on a  contingency
basis, or had, or is to receive, in connection with the offering,  a substantial
interest, direct or indirect, in the registrant.
 Nor was any such person  connected with the registrant as a promoter,  managing
or principal underwriter, voting trustee, director, officer, or employee.
The  financial  statements  included  in this  prospectus  and the  registration
statement  have been audited by Dale  Matheson  Carr-Hilton  LaBonte,  Chartered
Accountants,  to the  extent  and for the  periods  set  forth in  their  report
appearing  elsewhere in this document and in the  registration  statement  filed
with the SEC,  and are  included  in reliance  upon such  report  given upon the
authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
-17-
<page>
Disclosure Of Commission Position Of Indemnification For Securities Act
Liabilities
Our directors  and officers are  indemnified  as provided by the Nevada  Revised
Statutes and our Bylaws.  These  provisions  provide  that we shall  indemnify a
director or former  director  against all expenses  incurred by him by reason of
him acting in that  position.  The  directors  may also cause us to indemnify an
officer, employee or agent in the same fashion.
We have  been  advised  that  in the  opinion  of the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission  indemnification  for liabilities arising under the Securities Act is
against  public policy as expressed in the  Securities  Act, and is,  therefore,
unenforceable.  In the  event  that a claim  for  indemnification  against  such
liabilities  is  asserted  by one of our  directors,  officers,  or  controlling
persons in connection with the securities being  registered,  we will, unless in
the  opinion of our legal  counsel  the matter has been  settled by  controlling
precedent, submit the question of whether such indemnification is against public
policy to a court of appropriate  jurisdiction.  We will then be governed by the
court's decision.
Organization Within Last Five Years
We were  incorporated on January 15, 2004 under the laws of the state of Nevada.
On that date, Ted Burylo was appointed as president,  secretary, chief executive
officer, principle accounting officer and director. Mr. Burylo acts as our  sole
promoter. Mr. Murdock was appointed as our  secretary  and a director on January
21,  2004.  Concurrently,  Ted Burylo resigned as our secretary.
Mr. Burylo has not received, and has no agreement to receive, anything of value,
directly or indirectly, from us.
Description Of Business
In General
We intend to commence  operations as an exploration  stage  company.  We will be
engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral  properties with a view to
exploiting  any  mineral   deposits  we  discover  that   demonstrate   economic
feasibility.  We own a 100%  interest in eight  contiguous  lode mineral  claims
collectively  known as the Surprise  Lake  property and also  referred to as the
Short claims.  There is no assurance that a commercially  viable mineral deposit
exists on the  property.  Further  exploration  will be required  before a final
evaluation as to the economic and legal feasibility is determined.
Our plan of  operation  is to  conduct  exploration  work on the  Surprise  Lake
property in order to ascertain whether it possesses economic quantities of gold,
tungsten  and  molybdenite.  There can be no  assurance  that  economic  mineral
deposits or reserves  exist on the  Surprise  Lake  property  until  appropriate
exploration work is done and an economic evaluation based on such work concludes
that production of minerals from the property is economically feasible.
Even if we complete  our  proposed  exploration  programs on the  Surprise  Lake
property and they are successful in identifying a mineral deposit,  we will have
to spend substantial funds on further drilling and engineering studies before we
will know if we have a commercially viable mineral deposit.
Description, Location and Access
The Surprise Lake Property is located approximately 22 miles northeast of Atlin,
British Columbia at the north end of Surprise Lake. Atlin is located on the east
shore of Atlin Lake in northwestern  British  Columbia and is  approximately  61
miles south of Jakes Corner,  Yukon on the Alaska Highway and  approximately 113
miles from Whitehorse,  Yukon. A community air strip enables air access by small
planes into Atlin. The south end of Surprise Lake may be accessed by local roads
that are passable by wheeled vehicles in the summer months and by snowmobiles in
winter. The north end of the lake can be reached by circuitous routes comprising
placer miners' roads.
-18-
<page>
Surprise  Lake is about 16 miles long,  varies in width from about 0.62 miles to
1.86 miles across and is oriented  north-northeasterly  in a sub-alpine  valley.
The nearby  terrain is typically  post-glacial  and features  gentle  slopes and
poplar thickets of willow brush and berry bushes,  sparse  evergreen  stands and
poplar  thickets.  The lake is at an  elevation  of 3,090  feet and  surrounding
mountain  ranges rise to about 6,561 feet.  The claims are located in the valley
bottom of upper Pine Creek that enters the north end of Surprise Lake.
The Atlin area enjoys a favorable  climate with warm  summers,  cold winters and
only slight  precipitation,  equally in the form of rain and snow. Permafrost is
present  in  sheltered  areas,  but  is  not  a  serious  impediment  to  mining
operations.
Surprise Lake Property Staking and Purchase Agreement
On January 29, 2004,  we entered into an  agreement  with Mr. Peter  Burjoski of
Atlin, British Columbia, whereby he agreed stake and sell to us a total of eight
mineral  claims  located  approximately  22 miles  northeast  of Atlin,  British
Columbia  in an  area  having  the  potential  to  contain  gold,  tungsten  and
molybdenum  mineralization  or deposits.  In order to acquire a 100% interest in
these claims, we paid $5,000 to Mr. Burjoski.
Exploration History
The Atlin mining  district,  inclusive of the Surprise Lake  property,  achieved
recognition in 1898 with the discovery of placer gold. The term placer refers to
the natural tendency of heavy minerals to sink in moving water. Gold, due to its
high density and coupled with the effect of gravity,  will naturally concentrate
and settle in areas of moving streams and lakes where other,  lighter substances
have been carried away by the flow of water and other moving particles.
Following  the 1898  discovery,  several  government  geological  reconnaissance
missions were sent to the Atlin area where attention was focused on placer mines
and the  interpretation  of glacial  history as a guide to prospective  areas of
gold accumulation.
Although mining exploration in this area was most active from 1898 through 1910,
it has been  continuous  through the present time.  During the 1970s,  technical
surveys and drillings  were  conducted on  molybdenum  deposits west of Surprise
Lake.  A  regional  geochemical  survey  of  Atlin  was  completed  in 1977  and
geochemists  of the  Geological  Survey of Canada  conducted  field  studies  in
selected  parts  of  the  Atlin  district  as  part  of the  focused  geological
initiative.
In recent years,  staff of the Geological Survey Branch have undertaken a number
of focused  initiatives  in the area,  particularly  with  respect to  potential
mineralized areas located in a northwesterly trending belt that lies immediately
east of Atlin Lake and nearby placer mining areas.
Geological Assessment Report: Surprise Lake Property
We have obtained a geological  summary report on the Surprise Lake property that
was prepared by Mr. Erik A. Ostensoe,  a professional  geologist,  of Vancouver,
British  Columbia.  The report discusses the geology of the area surrounding and
particular to the Surprise Lake property, and makes a recommendation for further
exploration work.
-19-
<page>
In his report,  Mr.  Ostensoe  concludes that the Surprise Lake property has the
potential  to host  skarn  mineral  deposits.  A skarn is  broadly  defined as a
concentration of volcanic rocks that are found alongside and host occurrences of
ore. Since skarns are often associated with  mineralization,  they are generally
targets for mineral exploration.
Conclusions
Mr. Ostensoe, the author of the geological report on the Surprise Lake property,
believes that the area has potential for skarn occurrences of gold, tungsten and
molybdenum.  Since  placer gold in nearby  streams  has not been  related to any
source, he recommends that all drainages in and near the claims be prospected by
panning  techniques.  Further  exploration for placer gold bearing  channels may
involve the use of seismic  refraction  surveys to locate and  delineate  buried
channels.  Heavy  equipment  may be required to excavate  and access the gravels
therein.   Investigation  of  possible  bedrock  sources  related  to  anomalous
geochemical  results may require one or more  geophysical  surveys.  Geophysical
surveying is the search for mineral deposits by measuring the physical  property
of near-surface  rocks, and looking for unusual responses caused by the presence
of mineralization.  Electrical, magnetic, gravitational, seismic and radioactive
properties are the ones most commonly measured.
An initial  examination  could be completed  in about two to three weeks.  Costs
including wages, camp, access, transportation and contingencies are estimated to
be less than $15,000.
Compliance with Government Regulation
We will be required  to comply with all  regulations,  rules and  directives  of
governmental  authorities and agencies applicable to the exploration of minerals
in Canada  generally,  and in the  Province of British  Columbia,  specifically.
The governmental agencies responsible for overseeing the exploration of minerals
in Canada are primarily the Ministry   of   Natural   Resources   Canada and the
Ministry of the  Environment.  In British Columbia, the responsible   government
agency is the Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources.
Under  these  laws,  prior to  production,  we have the  right  to  explore  the
property,  subject only to a notice of work which may entail  posting a bond. In
addition,  production  of minerals  in the  Province  of British  Columbia  will
require prior approval of applicable  governmental  regulatory agencies.  We can
provide no assurance to investors that such approvals will be obtained. The cost
and delay  involved in  attempting to obtain such  approvals  cannot be known at
this time.
We have budgeted for  regulatory  compliance  costs in the proposed work program
recommended  by the  geological  report.  Such costs will be less than $500  and
will consist of having any significant soil or rock  that is  moved   during the
exploration process returned to its original location.  Soil   and rock movement
during proposed exploration is anticipated to be negligible.
We will  have to  sustain  the cost of reclamation and  environmental  mediation
for all exploration (and  development) work  undertaken.  The amount of    these
costs is not known at this time as we do not know the extent of the  exploration
program that will be undertaken  beyond  completion  of   the  recommended  work
program. However, it is anticipated that such costs will not exceed $20,000  for
future exploration phases. Because  there is  presently no information  on   the
size,tenor, or quality of any resource or reserve at this time, it is impossible
to assess the impact of any  capital  expenditures  on earnings, our competitive
position or us in the event a potentially  economic deposit is discovered.
If we enter into  production,  the cost of complying  with permit and regulatory
environment  laws will be greater  than in phase one  because  the impact on the
project area is greater. Permits and regulations will control all aspects of any
production  program  if the  project  continues  to that  stage  because  of the
potential  impact  on  the  environment.  Examples  of  regulatory  requirements
include:
-   Water discharge will have to meet water standards;
-   Dust generation will have to be minimal or otherwise re-mediated;
-20-
<page>
-   Dumping of material on the surface will have to be re-contoured  and
          re-vegetated;
-   An assessment of all material to be left on the surface will need  to
          be environmentally benign;
-   Ground water will have to be monitored for any potential contaminants;
-   The socio-economic impact of the project will have to be evaluated and
if deemed negative, will have to be re-mediated; and
-   There will have to be an impact report of the work on the local  fauna
          and flora.
During the exploration  phase, a bond will need to be provided covering possible
land disturbance.  In the case of normal fieldwork,  this should be minimal. The
costs of compliance with  environmental  regulations in the production phase are
variable and cannot be determined at this time.
Employees
We have no  employees  as of the  date of this  prospectus  other  than  our two
directors.
Research and Development Expenditures
We have not incurred any other  research or development  expenditures  since our
incorporation.
Subsidiaries
We do not have any subsidiaries.
Patents and Trademarks
We do not own, either legally or beneficially, any patents or trademarks.
Reports to Security Holders
Although  we are not  required  to  deliver a copy of our  annual  report to our
security  holders,  we  will  voluntarily  send a copy  of  our  annual  report,
including  audited  financial  statements,  to any  registered  shareholder  who
requests  it. We will not be a reporting  issuer with the  Securities & Exchange
Commission until our registration statement on Form SB-2 is declared effective.
We have filed a registration  statement on form SB-2 under the Securities Act of
1933 with the Securities and Exchange  Commission  with respect to the shares of
our common stock offered through this prospectus.  This prospectus is filed as a
part of that registration statement, but does not contain all of the information
contained in the  registration  statement and exhibits.  Statements  made in the
registration  statement  are summaries of the material  terms of the  referenced
contracts,  agreements  or  documents  of  the  company.  We  refer  you  to our
registration  statement  and each  exhibit  attached  to it for a more  detailed
description of matters involving the company, and the statements we have made in
this prospectus are qualified in their entirety by reference to these additional
materials.  You may inspect the registration  statement,  exhibits and schedules
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission at the Commission's  principal
office in Washington, D.C.
-21-
<page>
Copies  of all or any part of the  registration  statement  may be obtained from
the Public  Reference  Section of the  Securities and Exchange  Commission,  100
F  Street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20549.  Please   call   the  Commission at
1-800-SEC-0330 for further  information on the operation of the public reference
rooms.  The  Securities  and Exchange  Commission  also  maintains a web site at
http://www.sec.gov  that contains  reports,  proxy  statements  and  information
regarding  registrants  that  file  electronically  with  the  Commission.   Our
registration  statement  and the  referenced  exhibits can also be found on this
site.
Plan Of Operations
Our  plan  of  operation  for  the  twelve  months  following  the  date of this
prospectus is to complete the  recommended  exploration  program on the Surprise
Lake property  consisting of panning  techniques,  a seismic  refraction survey,
excavation,  and one or more of an  electromagnetic,  magnetic,  resistivity and
induced   polarization   survey.  We  anticipate  that  the  program  will  cost
approximately  $15,000.  To  date,  we have  not  commenced  exploration  on the
Surprise Lake property.
Panning involves placing loose soil and water   in a container   shaped   like a
frying pan. Through movement of the soil in the water, heavier minerals, such as
gold, are separated from lighter material in the  soil. The technique is used to
determine the whether valuable   minerals   are   present in surface soil on the
property. Panning is usually conducted by a geologist or his assistant.
Seismic refraction surveys are used in mineral exploration   to   define flat to
moderately-dipping deposits by determine soil and rock mass. A geologist  uses a
machine known as a seismograph in order to determine distances of certain  rocks
from sound emitted by the seismograph.  The results provide the  geologist  with
information concerning the distance of rock formations  underneath   the earth's
surface.
Excavation will involve removing the surface soil using a  backhoe or bulldozer.
Our consulting geologist will then take rock and soil samples from the   bedrock
below and analyze them for mineral content.
Electromagnetic surveys involve measuring whether or not rocks on  the   surface
and subsurface of the   property   conduct   electricity.  Copper   and gold are
excellent conductors of electricity.  Areas of high conductivity are targets for
follow-up exploration.
Magnetic surveys involve searching for changes in  the   magnetic   field   over
property areas.  Magnetic anomalies may be a result of accumulations of  certain
magnetic rocks such as phrrhotite, hematite and magnetite.  These rock types are
often found alongside base metals such as copper, zinc and nickel, or precious
metals such as gold and silver.
Resistivity surveying involves measuring the flow of electrical current  through
subsurface layers of rock.  The results help detect lateral and vertical changes
in subsurface electrical properties.
Induced polarization surveys measure various electrical responses to the passage
of alternating currents of different frequencies.
For each of the above surveys, the geologist  and   an   assistant use hand held
equipment that provides readings that   can   indicate the potential for certain
types of mineral deposits to be present.
In the next 12 months,  we also  anticipate  spending an  additional  $15,000 on
professional  fees  and  administrative  expenses,  including  fees  payable  in
connection  with the filing of this  registration  statement and complying  with
reporting obligations.
Total expenditures over the next 12 months are therefore expected to be $30,000.
Our  cash  reserves  are not  sufficient  to meet our  obligations  for the next
twelve-month period. As a result, we will need to seek additional funding in the
near future. We currently do not have a specific plan of how we will obtain such
funding;  however,  we anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of
equity  financing from the sale of our common stock.  We may also seek to obtain
short-term loans from our directors, although no such arrangement has been made.
At this time, we cannot  provide  investors  with any assurance  that we will be
able to raise sufficient  funding from the sale of our common stock or through a
loan from our directors to meet our obligations over the next twelve months.  We
do not have any arrangements in place for any future equity financing.
As well, in order to determine whether the Surprise  Lake    property   contains
economic mineralization, it is likely that we will have to spend in excess of an
additional $2,000,000. We would expect to incur these expenses over   five years
following the   completion    of   the   proposed   exploration discussed above.
Such    funds     would     either    be     raised     through  the sale of our
common stock or by approaching a joint venture partner, likely a  larger mineral
exploration and development company, to    provide   the   required   funding in
consideration of an interest in the property. We have not undertaken any efforts
to locate a joint venture partner.
Even once we have completed all    proposed   exploration   on the Surprise Lake
property, we will need to    commission   a feasibility    study,  prepared by a
professional geologist, which will determine whether   mining   operations   are
justified based on the costs to erect mining facilities on the  property and the
current sale prices of the mineralization discovered. We estimate  that the cost
of such a feasibility study would be $250,000. This  study  would be   completed
following our completion of the additional $2,000,000 in exploration  that would
be necessary to determine whether the property contains economic mineralization,
or in approximately six years.
We do not expect to earn any revenue from  operations   until   we   have either
commenced mining operations on the Surprise Lake   property   or   have  sold an
interest in the property to a third party. Before this occurs, we expect that we
will have to complete current recommended exploration on the  property,  as well
as additional exploration recommended by a geologist.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have  or   are reasonably
likely to have a current or future effect on   the   small   business   issuer's
financial condition, changes in   financial   condition,   revenues or expenses,
results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that
are material to investors.
Results Of Operations For Period Ending September 30, 2005
We have not earned any revenues  from our  incorporation  on January 15, 2004 to
September 30, 2005. We do not anticipate  earning  revenues unless we enter into
commercial production on the Surprise Lake property,  which is doubtful. We have
not commenced the exploration stage of our business and can provide no assurance
that  we will  discover  economic  mineralization  on the  property,  or if such
minerals are discovered, that we will enter into commercial production.
We incurred  operating expenses in the amount of $23,314 for the period from our
inception on January 15, 2004 to September 30, 2005.  These  operating  expenses
were  comprised  of  $7,000  for  mineral  property  expenditures,   $14,070  in
accounting and audit fees, $1,035 in office and miscellaneous fees and $1,209 in
filing fees.
We have not attained  profitable  operations  and are dependent  upon  obtaining
financing  to pursue  exploration  activities.  For these  reasons our  auditors
believe  that there is  substantial  doubt that we will be able to continue as a
going concern.
Description Of Property
We own a 100% interest in eight lode mineral claims comprising the Surprise Lake
property.  We do not own or lease any  property  other  than the  Surprise  Lake
property.
-22-
<page>
Certain Relationships And Related Transactions
None of the  following  parties has,  since our date of  incorporation,  had any
material  interest,  direct or indirect,  in any  transaction  with us or in any
presently proposed transaction that has or will materially affect us:
*  Any of our directors or officers;
  *  Any person proposed as a nominee for election as a director;
  *  Any person who beneficially owns,  directly or  indirectly, shares carrying
     more than 10% of the voting rights  attached  to  our outstanding shares of
     common stock;
  *  Our sole promoter, Ted Burylo;
  *  Any member of the immediate family of any of the foregoing persons.
Market For Common Equity And Related Stockholder Matters
No Public Market for Common Stock
There is presently no public market for our common stock. We anticipate applying
for trading of our common stock on the over the counter  bulletin board upon the
effectiveness  of the  registration  statement of which this prospectus  forms a
part. However, we can provide no assurance that our shares will be traded on the
bulletin board or, if traded, that a public market  will   materialize. As well,
there is no assurance that our stock may be resold at the offered   price if and
when an active secondary  market   might   develop.  Even if developed, a public
market for our securities may not be sustained.
We have not taken any steps to engage a market-marker to apply for quotation  on
the OTC Bulletin Board on our behalf.  If we are able to engage a  market-maker,
we anticipate that it will take approximately two months for our securities   to
be quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board following submission of   the   application.
However, there is no guarantee that our application will be approved. Even if we
obtain an OTC Bulletin Board quotation, there is no assurance that there will be
a liquid market for our stock.
Stockholders of Our Common Shares
As  of  the  date  of  this  registration   statement,  we  have  30  registered
shareholders.
Rule 144 Shares
A total of 2,500,000  shares of our common stock are available for resale to the
public  after  January  20, 2005 and a total of  2,500,000  shares of our common
stock  are  available  for  resale  to the  public  after  January  23,  2005 in
accordance  with the volume and trading  limitations  of Rule 144 of the Act. In
general,  under Rule 144 as currently in effect,  a person who has  beneficially
owned  shares of a company's  common  stock for at least one year is entitled to
sell within any three  month  period a number of shares that does not exceed the
greater of:
1.     1% of the number of shares of our common  stock  then  outstanding which,
       in our case, will equal 76,100 shares as of the date of this prospectus;
       or
2.     the average weekly  trading  volume of the company's  common stock during
       the four calendar weeks preceding the filing of a notice on Form 144 with
       respect to the sale.
Sales under Rule 144 are also  subject to manner of sale  provisions  and notice
requirements  and to the  availability of current public  information  about the
company.
Under Rule 144(k),  a person who is not one of the  company's  affiliates at any
time during the three months  preceding a sale, and who has  beneficially  owned
the shares  proposed  to be sold for at least two  years,  is  entitled  to sell
shares without  complying with the manner of sale,  public  information,  volume
limitation or notice provisions of Rule 144.
As of the date of this  prospectus,  persons who are our affiliates  hold all of
the 5,000,000 shares that may be sold pursuant to Rule 144.
-23-
<page>
Registration Rights
We have not granted  registration  rights to the selling  shareholders or to any
other persons.
Dividends
There are no  restrictions  in our  articles  of  incorporation  or bylaws  that
prevent us from declaring  dividends.  The Nevada Revised Statutes,  however, do
prohibit  us  from  declaring  dividends  where,  after  giving  effect  to  the
distribution of the dividend:
1. we would not be able to pay our debts as they become due in the  usual course
   of business; or
2. our total assets would be less than the sum of our total liabilities plus the
amount  that would be needed to  satisfy  the  rights of  shareholders  who have
preferential rights superior to those receiving the distribution.
We have not declared any dividends,  and we do not plan to declare any dividends
in the foreseeable future.
Executive Compensation
Summary Compensation Table
The table below  summarizes all  compensation  awarded to, earned by, or paid to
our executive officers by any person for all services rendered in all capacities
to us for the fiscal  period ended March 31, 2004 and  subsequent to that period
to the date of this prospectus.
Annual Compensation
Restricted Options/ LTIP  Other
                                          Other Stock      * SARs  payouts Comp
Name    Title       Year   Salary  Bonus  Comp. Awarded      (#)     ($)
- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ted    Pres., CEO   2005     $0      0     0     0             0     0
Burylo & Director   2004     $0      0     0     0             0     0
Jeff    Sec. and    2005     $0      0     0     0             0     0
Murdock Director    2004     $0      0     0     0             0     0
Stock Option Grants
We have not  granted  any stock  options  to the  executive  officers  since our
inception.
Consulting Agreements
We do not have any employment or consulting agreement  with  Mr. Burylo  or  Mr.
Murdock. We do not pay them any amount for acting as a director.
-24-
<page>
Financial Statements
Index to Financial Statements:
1. Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm;
2. Audited financial statements for the period ending March 31, 2005 and 2004,
   including:
a. Balance Sheets;
b. Statements of Operations;
c. Statements of Cash Flows;
d. Statements of Stockholders' Equity; and
e. Notes to the Financial Statements
3.  Interim  financial  statements  for  the  period  ending September 30, 2005,
    including:
a. Balance Sheets;
b. Statements of Operations;
c. Statements of Cash Flows;
d. Statements of Stockholders' Equity; and
e. Notes to the Financial Statements
-25-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
March 31, 2005 and 2004
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
BALANCE SHEETS
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
-26-
<page>
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
<S>                      <C>                       <C>                        
<C>
[DALE MATHESON           Partnership of:           Robert J Burkart, Inc.     
James F Carr-Hilton, Ltd.
[CARR-HILTON LABONTE     Alvin F Dale, Ltd.        Peter J Donaldson, Inc.    
R.J. LaBonte, Ltd.
- -------------------      Robert J Matheson, Inc.   Fraser G Ross, Ltd.
[CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS LOGO]
</TABLE>
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of Azzoro Inc.
We have audited the balance sheets of Azzoro Inc. (an exploration stage company)
as at March 31,  2005 and  March  31,  2004 and the  statements  of  operations,
stockholders'  equity  and cash  flows for the year ended  March 31,  2005,  the
period from  inception on January 15, 2004 to March 31, 2004 and the period from
inception on January 15, 2004 to March 31, 2005. These financial  statements are
the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance  with the standards of the Public  Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and  perform  an audit to obtain  reasonable  assurance  whether  the  financial
statements are free of material misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a
test basis,  evidence  supporting  the amounts and  disclosures in the financial
statements.  An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and
significant  estimates  made by  management,  as well as evaluating  the overall
financial  statement  presentation.   We  believe  that  our  audits  provide  a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion,  these  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in all material
respects,  the financial  position of the Company as at March 31, 2005 and March
31, 2004 and the statements of operations,  stockholders'  equity and cash flows
for the year ended  December 31, 2005,  the period from inception on January 15,
2004 to March 31,  2004 and the period  from  inception  on January  15, 2004 to
March 31, 2005 in conformity with accounting  principles  generally  accepted in
the United States of America.
The  accompanying  financial  statements  have been  prepared  assuming that the
Company  will  continue  as a  going  concern.  As  discussed  in  Note 1 to the
financial statements, to date the Company has reported losses since inception of
operations and requires  additional  funds to meet its  obligations and fund the
costs of its operations.  These factors raise doubt about the Company's  ability
to continue as a going concern.  Management's plans in this regard are described
in Note 1. The financial  statements do not include any  adjustments  that might
result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
"Dale Matheson Carr-Hilton LaBonte"
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
Vancouver, B.C.
July 4, 2005
-27-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                                 BALANCE SHEETS
                             March 31, 2005 and 2004
<table>
<caption>
                                                                                
2005                2004
                                                                                
----                ----
<s>                                                                       <c>   
<c>
                                     ASSETS
                                     ------
CURRENT ASSETS
   Cash                                                                  $      
22,429     $         26,371
                                                                          
===============      ===============
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
                      ------------------------------------
CURRENT LIABILITIES
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                              $      
7,111     $          2,930
                                                                          
---------------      ---------------
NATURE AND CONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS (Note 1)
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Capital stock (Note 4)
     Authorized:
        75,000,000 common shares, $0.001 par value,
     Issued and outstanding:
        7,710,000 common shares (March 31, 2004 - 7,700,000)                    
7,710                7,700
Additional paid in capital                                                      
26,290               24,300
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage                            (
18,682)        (      8,559)
                                                                          
---------------      ---------------
                                                                                
15,318               23,441
                                                                          
---------------      ---------------
                                                                         $      
22,429     $         26,371
                                                                          
===============      ===============
</table>
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
-28-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                            STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
             for the year ended March 31, 2005, for the period from
                 January 15, 2004 (inception) to March 31, 2004
             and for the period from January 15, 2004 (inception) to
                                 March 31, 2005
<table>
<caption>
                                                                 Year           
January 15, 2004     January 15, 2004
                                                                ended           
(Inception) to       (Inception) to
                                                              March 31,         
March 31,            March 31,
                                                                 2005           
2004                 2005
                                                                 ----           
----                 ----
<s>                                                        <c>                  
<c>                  <c>
Expenses
   Accounting and audit fees                              $          7,284     $
2,930     $         10,214
   Filing                                                              685      
-                  685
   Office and miscellaneous                                            154      
629                  783
   Mineral property costs (Note 3)                                   2,000      
5,000                7,000
                                                           ---------------      
---------------      ---------------
Net loss for the period                                   $         10,123     $
8,559     $         18,682
                                                           ===============      
================     ===============
Basic loss per share                                      $           0.00     $
0.00
                                                           ===============      
===============
Weighted average number of shares outstanding                    7,709,548      
5,464,474
                                                           ===============
===============
</table>
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
-29-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                            STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
             for the year ended March 31, 2005, for the period from
                 January 15, 2004 (inception) to March 31, 2004
             and for the period from January 15, 2004 (inception) to
                                 March 31, 2005
<table>
<caption>
                                                              Year           
January 15, 2004       January 15, 2004
                                                             ended         
(Inception) to March      (Inception) to
                                                           March 31,            
31,                 March 31,
                                                              2005              
2004                   2005
                                                              ----              
----                   ----
<s>                                                     <c>                  <c>
<c>
Operating Activities
   Net loss for the period                             $  (       10,123)   $  (
8,559)    $  (       18,682)
   Change in non-cash working capital balance
   related to operations
     Accounts payable and accrued
     Liabilities                                                   4,181        
2,930                 7,111
                                                        ----------------     
----------------      ----------------
Net Cash used in operating activities                     (        5,942)      (
5,629)       (       11,571)
                                                        ----------------     
----------------      ----------------
Financing Activity
   Proceeds on sale of common stock                                2,000        
32,000                34,000
                                                        ----------------     
----------------      ----------------
Net Cash from financing activity                                   2,000        
32,000                34,000
                                                        ----------------     
----------------      ----------------
(Decrease) increase in cash during the period                     (3,942)       
26,371                22,429
Cash, beginning of the period                                     26,371        
-                     -
                                                        ----------------     
----------------      ----------------
Cash, end of the period                                $          22,429    $   
26,371     $          22,429
                                                        ================
================      ================
Supplemental cash flow information:
     Interest paid                                    $                -    $   
-     $               -
                                                       =================     
=================     ================
     Income taxes paid                                $                -    $   
-     $               -
                                                       =================     
=================     ================
</table>
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
-30-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                      STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY for
              the period January 15, 2004 (Inception) to March 31,
                                      2005
<table>
<caption>
                                                                                
Deficit
                                                                                
Accumulated
                                                                         
Additional       During the
                                               Common Shares               Paid-
in       Exploration
                                     ----------------------------------
                                          Number         Par Value         
Capital          Stage            Total
                                          ------         ---------         
-------          -----            -----
<s>                                     <c>             <c>             <c>     
<c>              <c>
Balance, January 15, 2004                         -   $            -   $        
-  $            -   $            -
Capital stock issued for cash
 - at $0.001 per share                    5,000,000            5,000            
-               -            5,000
 - at $0.01 per share                     2,700,000            2,700           
24,300               -           27,000
Net loss for the period                           -                -            
-      (    8,559)     (     8,559)
                                       ------------    -------------    
-------------   -------------    -------------
Balance, March 31, 2004                   7,700,000            7,700           
24,300      (    8,559)          23,441
Capital stock issued for cash
 - at $0.20 per share                        10,000               10            
1,990               -            2,000
Net loss for the period                           -                -            
-      (   10,123)     (    10,123)
                                       ------------    -------------    
-------------   --------------   -------------
Balance, March 31, 2005                   7,710,000   $        7,710   $       
26,290  $   (   18,682)  $       15,318
                                      =============    =============    
=============   ==============   =============
</table>
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
-31-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                        NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                                 March 31, 2005
Note 1        Nature and Continuance of Operations
              ------------------------------------
              The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January 15,
              2004 and is in the exploration  stage.  The Company has acquired a
              mineral  property  located in the  Province  of British  Columbia,
              Canada and has not yet determined  whether this property  contains
              reserves that are economically recoverable.  The recoverability of
              costs  incurred for  acquisition  and  exploration of the property
              will be dependent upon the discovery of  economically  recoverable
              reserves, confirmation of the Company's interest in the underlying
              property, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary financing
              to  satisfy  the  expenditure   requirements  under  the  property
              agreement and to complete the development of the property and upon
              future profitable production or proceeds for the sale thereof.
These  financial  statements have been prepared on a going concern
              basis which  assumes  that the Company will be able to realize its
              assets and  discharge  its  liabilities  in the  normal  course of
              business  for the  foreseeable  future.  The Company has  incurred
              losses  since  inception  resulting in an  accumulated  deficit of
              $18,682 and further losses are  anticipated in the  development of
              its business raising doubt about the Company's ability to continue
              as a going concern.  The ability to continue as a going concern is
              dependent upon the Company generating profitable operations in the
              future  and/or  to  obtain  the  necessary  financing  to meet its
              obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business
              operations  when they  come due.  Management  intends  to  finance
              operating  costs over the next twelve months with existing cash on
              hand and loans form  directors and or private  placement of common
              stock.
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
              ------------------------------------------
              Basis of Presentation
              ---------------------
              The  financial  statements  of the Company  have been  prepared in
              accordance with generally  accepted  accounting  principles in the
              United States of America and are presented in US dollars.
Exploration Stage Company
              -------------------------
              The Company  complies with Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board
Statement No. 7 and Securities and Exchange Commission Act Guide 7
              for its  characterization  of the Company as an exploration  stage
              enterprise.
-32-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2005 - Page 2
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
              ------------------------------------------
Mineral Property
              ----------------
              Mineral property  acquisition,  exploration and development  costs
              are expensed as incurred until such time as economic  reserves are
              quantified.  To date the Company has not established any proven or
              probable  reserves  on its  mineral  properties.  The  Company has
              adopted  the  provisions  of SFAS No.  143  "Accounting  for Asset
              Retirement   Obligations"  which  establishes  standards  for  the
              initial  measurement  and subsequent  accounting  for  obligations
              associated  with  the  sale,  abandonment,  or other  disposal  of
              long-lived   tangible   assets   arising  from  the   acquisition,
              construction  or  development  and for normal  operations  of such
              assets.  The  adoption of this  standard  has had no effect on the
              Company's financial position or results of operations. As at March
              31, 2005,  any potential  costs  relating to the retirement of the
              Company's mineral property interest are not yet determinable.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
              --------------------------------
              The  preparation  of  financial   statements  in  conformity  with
              generally accepted  accounting  principles  requires management to
              make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of
              assets and  liabilities  and  disclosure of contingent  assets and
              liabilities  at the  date  of the  financial  statements  and  the
              reported  amounts of  revenues  and  expenses  during the  period.
              Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Foreign Currency Translation
              ----------------------------
              The financial  statements are presented in United States  dollars.
              In accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
              52, "Foreign Currency  Translation",  foreign denominated monetary
              assets and  liabilities  are  translated  into their United States
              dollar equivalents using foreign exchange rates which prevailed at
              the balance  sheet date.  Revenue and expenses are  translated  at
              average  rates of  exchange  during  the  year.  Gains  or  losses
              resulting  from  foreign  currency  transactions  are  included in
              results of operations.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
              -----------------------------------
              The  carrying  value  of cash and  accounts  payable  and  accrued
              liabilities  approximates  their fair  value  because of the short
              maturity  of these  instruments.  Unless  otherwise  noted,  it is
              management's   opinion   that  the   Company  is  not  exposed  to
              significant interest,  currency or credit risks arising from these
              financial instruments.
-33-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2005 - Page 3
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
              ------------------------------------------
Environmental Costs
              -------------------
              Environmental  expenditures that relate to current  operations are
              expensed or capitalized as appropriate.  Expenditures  that relate
              to an existing  condition caused by past operations,  and which do
              not  contribute  to  current  or future  revenue  generation,  are
              expensed.  Liabilities are recorded when environmental assessments
              and/or  remedial  efforts  are  probable,  and  the  cost  can  be
              reasonably  estimated.  Generally,  the  timing of these  accruals
              coincides with the earlier of completion of a feasibility study or
              the  Company's  commitments  to plan of  action  based on the then
              known facts.
Income Taxes
              ------------
              The Company follows the liability  method of accounting for income
              taxes.   Under  this  method,   deferred  income  tax  assets  and
              liabilities  are  recognized  for the estimated  tax  consequences
              attributable  to  differences   between  the  financial  statement
              carrying values and their  respective  income tax basis (temporary
              differences).  The  effect  on  deferred  income  tax  assets  and
              liabilities  of a change in tax rates is  recognized  in income in
              the period that includes the enactment date.
At March 31, 2005 a full deferred tax  asset  valuation  allowance
              has been provided and no  deferred  tax  asset  benefit  has  been
              recorded.
Basic and Diluted Loss Per Share
              --------------------------------
Basic  earnings per share  includes no dilution and is computed by
              dividing income  available to common  stockholders by the weighted
              average  number  of  common  shares  outstanding  for the  period.
              Dilutive  earnings per share  reflects the  potential  dilution of
              securities  that  could  share  in the  earnings  of the  Company.
              Because  the  Company  does  not  have  any  potentially  dilutive
              securities,  the  accompanying  presentation is only of basic loss
              per share.
Stock-based Compensation
              ------------------------
              In  December  2002,  the  Financial   Accounting  Standards  Board
              ("FASB") issued Financial Accounting Standard No. 148, "Accounting
              for Stock-Based  Compensation - Transition and Disclosure"  ("SFAS
              No. 148"), an amendment of Financial  Accounting  Standard No. 123
              "Accounting for Stock-Based  Compensation"  ("SFAS No. 123").  The
              purpose of SFAS No. 148 is to: (1) provide  alternative methods of
              transition  for an entity  that  voluntarily  changes  to the fair
              value  based  method  of  accounting  for   stock-based   employee
              compensation,  (2)  amend the  disclosure  provisions  to  require
prominent  disclosure  about the effects on reported net income of
              an  entity's   accounting   policy   decisions   with  respect  to
              stock-based employee  compensation,  and (3) to require disclosure
              of those effects in interim financial information.
-34-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2005 - Page 4
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
              ------------------------------------------
Stock-based Compensation - (cont'd)
              ------------------------
              The  Company  has  elected to  account  for  stock-based  employee
              compensation  arrangements  in accordance  with the  provisions of
              Accounting  Principles Board Opinion No. 25, "Accounting for Stock
              Issued  to  Employees",   ("APB  No.  25")  and  comply  with  the
              disclosure  provisions  of SFAS No. 123 as amended by SFAS No. 148
              as described  above. In addition,  in accordance with SFAS No. 123
              the  Company   will  apply  the  fair  value   method   using  the
              Black-Scholes  option-pricing  model  in  accounting  for  options
              granted to consultants. Under APB No. 25, compensation expense for
              employees is recognized  based on the  difference,  if any, on the
              date of grant  between the  estimated  fair value of the Company's
              stock and the amount an  employee  must pay to acquire  the stock.
              Compensation  expense is recognized  immediately for past services
              and pro-rata for future services over the  option-vesting  period.
              To March 31, 2005 the Company has not granted any stock options.
The Company accounts for equity instruments issued in exchange for
              the  receipt of goods or  services  from other than  employees  in
              accordance  with SFAS No. 123 and the  conclusions  reached by the
              Emerging Issues Task Force in Issue No. 96-18.  Costs are measured
              at the estimated fair market value of the  consideration  received
              or the  estimated  fair  value of the equity  instruments  issued,
              whichever  is  more  reliably  measurable.  The  value  of  equity
              instruments issued for consideration  other than employee services
              is  determined  on the  earliest of a  performance  commitment  or
              completion of  performance by the provider of goods or services as
              defined by EITF 96-18.
The  Company  has also  adopted the  provisions  of the  Financial
              Accounting  Standards Board  Interpretation No. 44, Accounting for
              Certain   Transactions   Involving   Stock   Compensation   -   An
              Interpretation  of APB Opinion No. 25 ("FIN 44"),  which  provides
              guidance as to certain applications of APB 25. FIN 44 is generally
              effective  July 1,  2000  with the  exception  of  certain  events
              occurring after December 15, 1998.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
              --------------------------------
              In December  2004,  the FASB issued  SFAS No. 153,  "Exchanges  of
              Nonmonetary  Assets - An  Amendment  of APB Opinion  No. 29".  The
              guidance  in APB  Opinion  No.  29,  "Accounting  for  Nonmonetary
              Transactions",  is  based  on  the  principle  that  exchanges  of
              nonmonetary  assets should be measured  based on the fair value of
              the assets  exchanged.  The  guidance  in that  Opinion,  however,
              included certain exceptions to that principle. SFAS No. 153 amends
Opinion  No.  29  to  eliminate  the  exception  for   nonmonetary
              exchanges  of similar  productive  assets and  replaces  it with a
              general exception for exchanges of nonmonetary  assets that do not
              have commercial  substance.  A nonmonetary exchange has commercial
              substance  if the future cash flows of the entity are  expected to
              change  significantly as a result of the exchange.  The provisions
              of SFAS No. 153 are  effective  for  nonmonetary  asset  exchanges
              occurring in fiscal periods  beginning after June 15, 2005.  Early
              application  is permitted  and  companies  must apply the standard
              prospectively. The adoption of this
-35-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2005 - Page 5
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
              ------------------------------------------
Recent Accounting Pronouncements - (cont'd)
              --------------------------------
              standard  is  not  expected  to  have  a  material  effect  on the
              Company's results of operations or financial position.
In December  2004,  the FASB issued SFAS No.  123R,  "Share  Based
              Payment".  SFAS 123R is a revision of SFAS No. 123 "Accounting for
              Stock-Based  Compensation",  and  supersedes  APB  Opinion No. 25,
              "Accounting  for  Stock  Issued  to  Employees"  and  its  related
              implementation  guidance.  SFAS 123R establishes standards for the
              accounting  for  transactions  in which an  entity  exchanges  its
              equity  instruments  for  goods  or  services.  It also  addresses
              transactions in which an entity incurs liabilities in exchange for
              goods or services that are based on the fair value of the entity's
              equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of those
              equity instruments.  SFAS 123R focuses primarily on accounting for
              transactions  in which an  entity  obtains  employee  services  in
              share-based  payment  transactions.  SFAS 123R does not change the
              accounting  guidance for  share-based  payment  transactions  with
              parties  other than  employees  provided in SFAS 123 as originally
              issued  and  EITF  Issue  No.   96-18,   "Accounting   for  Equity
              Instruments That Are Issued to Other Than Employees for Acquiring,
              or in Conjunction with Selling, Goods or Services". SFAS 123R does
              not address the  accounting for employee  share  ownership  plans,
              which are subject to AICPA Statement of Position 93-6, "Employers'
              Accounting for Employee Stock Ownership Plans". SFAS 123R requires
              a public entity to measure the cost of employee  services received
              in  exchange  for an  award  of  equity  instruments  based on the
              grant-date fair value of the award (with limited exceptions). That
              cost will be  recognized  over the period during which an employee
              is  required to provide  service in  exchange  for the award - the
              requisite  service period (usually the vesting period).  SFAS 123R
              requires  that  the  compensation  cost  relating  to  share-based
              payment transactions be recognized in financial  statements.  That
              cost will be  measured  based on the fair  value of the  equity or
              liability  instruments  issued.  The scope of SFAS 123R includes a
              wide  range of  share-based  compensation  arrangements  including
              share options,  restricted share plans,  performance-based awards,
              share  appreciation  rights,  and employee share  purchase  plans.
              Public  entities  (other  than  those  filing  as  small  business
              issuers)  will be  required  to apply  SFAS  123R as of the  first
interim or annual  reporting  period  that  begins  after June 15,
              2005.  Public entities that file as small business issuers will be
              required  to  apply  SFAS  123R in the  first  interim  or  annual
              reporting  period that begins after December 15, 2005.  Management
              is  currently  evaluating  the impact,  which the adoption of this
              standard  will have on the  Company's  results  of  operations  or
              financial position.
Note 3        Mineral Property
              ----------------
              Shorts Claims
              -------------
              By a mineral property staking and purchase agreement dated January
              29, 2004, the Company acquired a 100% undivided  right,  title and
              interest in and to eight mineral claims, known as "Shorts Claims",
              located in the province of British Columbia, Canada by the payment
              of $5,000.  During the year the Company  also  incurred  $2,000 of
              mineral  property costs. To date the Company has incurred costs of
              $7,000 on the Short Claims.
-36-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2005 - Page 6
Note 3        Mineral Property - (cont'd)
              ----------------
              Shorts Claims (cont'd)
              -------------
              The Property is held in trust for the  Company.  Upon request from
              the  Company the title will be recorded in the name of the Company
              with the appropriate mining recorder.  At March 31, 2005 the title
              to the Property has not been recorded in the name of the Company.
Note 4        Capital Stock
              -------------
The total number of common shares authorized that may be issued by
              the Company is 75,000,000  shares with a par value of one tenth of
              one cent  ($0.001)  per  share  and no other  class of  shares  is
              authorized.
During the period from January 15, 2004  (Inception)  to March 31,
              2004 the Company issued 7,700,000 shares of common stock for total
              proceeds  of  $32,000.  During the year ended  March 31,  2005 the
              Company issued 10,000 shares of common stock for total proceeds of
              $2,000.  At March 31, 2005 there were no outstanding stock options
              or warrants.
Note 5        Income Taxes
              ------------
              The  significant  components of the Company's  deferred tax assets
              are as follows:
<table>
<caption>
                                                                                
March 31,             March 31,
                                                                                
2005                   2004
-----                  ----
             <s>                                                          <c>   
<c>
             Deferred Tax Assets
             Non-capital loss carryforward                               $      
2,802        $        1,284
             Less:  valuation allowance for deferred tax asset            (     
2,802)        (       1,284)
                                                                          
-------------         -------------
                                                                         $      
-        $            -
                                                                          
=============         =============
</table>
              There were no temporary  differences between the Company's tax and
              financial bases that result in deferred tax assets, except for the
              Company's   net   operating   loss   carryforwards   amounting  to
              approximately  $18,700 at March 31, 2005 which may be available to
              reduce future year's  taxable  income.  These  carryforwards  will
              expire, if not utilized,  commencing in 2025.  Management believes
              that the  realization  of the  benefits  from these  deferred  tax
              assets appears  uncertain due to the Company's  limited  operating
              history and continuing  losses.  Accordingly a full,  deferred tax
              asset  valuation  allowance  has been provided and no deferred tax
              asset benefit has been recorded.
-37-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
September 30, 2005
(Unaudited)
BALANCE SHEETS
INTERIM STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
INTERIM STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
NOTES TO THE INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
-38-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                                 BALANCE SHEETS
<table>
<caption>
                                                                            
September 30,         March 31,
                                                                                
2005                2005
                                                                                
----                ----
                                                                             
(Unaudited)
<s>                                                                       <c>   
<c>
                                     ASSETS
                                     ------
CURRENT ASSETS
   Cash                                                                  $      
14,966     $         22,429
                                                                         
-----------------    ----------------
                      LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
                      ------------------------------------
CURRENT LIABILITIES
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                              $      
4,280     $          7,111
                                                                         
-----------------    ----------------
NATURE AND CONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS (Note 1)
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Capital stock (Note 4)
     Authorized:
        75,000,000 common shares, $0.001 par value
     Issued and outstanding:
        7,710,000 common shares (March 31, 2005 - 7,710,000)                    
7,710                7,710
Additional paid in capital                                                      
26,290               26,290
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage                            (   
23,314)       (      18,682)
                                                                         
-----------------    -----------------
                                                                                
10,686               15,318
                                                                         
-----------------    -----------------
                                                                         $      
14,966     $         22,429
                                                                         
-----------------    -----------------
</table>
The  accompanying  notes  are  an  integral  part  of  these  interim  financial
                                   statements
-39-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                        INTERIM STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
                    for the three months and six months ended
                September 30, 2005, and 2004, and for the period
                 from January 15, 2004 (inception) to September
                                    30, 2005
                                   (Unaudited)
<table>
<caption>
                                                                                
January 15, 2004
                                       Three months ended              Six 
months ended            (Inception) to
                                         September 30,                   
September 30,               September 30,
                                     2005              2004           2005      
2004                2005
                                     ----              ----           ----      
----                ----
<s>                               <c>              <c>              <c>         
<c>             <c>
Expenses
   Accounting and audit fees      $      1,928     $      1,821     $      3,856
$    1,821     $     14,070
   Filing                                  200                -              524
-            1,209
   Office and miscellaneous                142              109              252
155            1,035
   Mineral property costs (Note 3)           -                -                -
-            7,000
                                  ------------     ------------     ------------
----------     ------------
Net loss for the period           $      2,270     $      1,930     $      4,632
$    1,976     $     23,314
                                  ------------     ------------     ------------
----------
Basic loss per share              $       0.00     $       0.00     $       0.00
$    0.00
                                  ------------     ------------     ------------
----------
Weighted average number of
shares outstanding                   7,710,000        7,710,000        7,710,000
7,709,098
                                  ------------     ------------     ------------
----------
</table>
The  accompanying  notes  are  an  integral  par  of  these  interim   financial
                                   statements
-40-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
INTERIM STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
                    for the three months and six months ended
                September 30, 2005, and 2004, and for the period
                 from January 15, 2004 (inception) to September
                                    30, 2005
                                   (Unaudited)
<table>
<caption>
                                                                                
January 15, 2004
                                                                  Three months 
ended                 (Inception) to
                                                                    September 
30,                     September 30,
                                                              2005              
2004                   2005
                                                              ----              
----                   ----
<s>                                                     <c>                  <c>
<c>
Operating Activities
   Net loss for the period                             $  (        4,632)   $  (
1,976)    $  (       23,314)
   Change in non-cash working capital balance          ------------------   
------------------    ------------------
   related to operations
     Accounts payable and accrued
     liabilities                                          (        2,831)       
1,393                 4,280
                                                       ------------------   
------------------    ------------------
Net Cash used in operating activities                     (        7,463)      (
583)       (       19,034)
                                                       ------------------   
------------------    ------------------
Financing Activity
   Proceeds on sale of common stock                                    -        
2,000                34,000
Net Cash from financing activity                                       -        
2,000                34,000
(Decrease) increase in cash during the period             (        7,463)       
1,417                14,966
Cash, beginning of the period                                     22,429        
26,371                     -
Cash, end of the period                                $          14,966    $   
27,788     $          14,966
                                                       -----------------    
-----------------     ------------------
Supplemental cash flow information:
     Interest paid                                     $               -    $   
-     $               -
                                                       -----------------    
-----------------     ------------------
     Income taxes paid                                 $               -    $   
-     $               -
                                                       -----------------    
-----------------     ------------------
</table>
The  accompanying  notes  are  an  integral  part  of  these  interim  financial
                                   statements
-41-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                        STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
        for the period January 15, 2004 (Inception) to September 30, 2005
                                   (Unaudited)
<table>
<caption>
                                                                                
Deficit
                                                                                
Accumulated
                                                                         
Additional       During the
                                               Common Shares               Paid-
in       Exploration
                                     ----------------------------------
                                          Number         Par Value         
Capital          Stage            Total
<s>                                     <c>           <c>               <c>     
<c>             <c>
Balance, January 15, 2004                         -   $            -   $        
-  $            -   $            -
                                         -----------  --------------   
--------------  --------------   ---------------
Capital stock issued for cash
 - at $0.001 per share                    5,000,000            5,000            
-               -            5,000
 - at $0.01 per share                     2,700,000            2,700           
24,300               -           27,000
Net loss for the period                           -                -            
-      (    8,559)     (     8,559)
                                         -----------  --------------   
--------------  ---------------  ---------------
Balance, March 31, 2004                   7,700,000            7,700           
24,300      (    8,559)          23,441
                                         ----------   --------------   
--------------  ---------------  ---------------
Capital stock issued for cash
 - at $0.20 per share                        10,000               10            
1,990               -            2,000
Net loss for the period                           -                -            
-      (   10,123)     (    10,123)
                                         ----------   --------------   
--------------  ---------------  ---------------
Balance, March 31, 2005                   7,710,000            7,710           
26,290      (   18,682)          15,318
Net loss for the period                           -                -            
-      (    4,632)     (     4,632)
                                         ----------   --------------   
--------------  ---------------  ---------------
Balance, September 30, 2005               7,710,000   $        7,710   $       
26,290  $   (   23,314)  $       10,686
                                         ----------   --------------   
--------------  ---------------  ---------------
</table>
The  accompanying  notes  are  an  integral  part  of  these  interim  financial
                                   statements
-42-
<page>
AZZORO INC.
                         (An Exploration Stage Company)
                    NOTES TO THE INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                               September 30, 2005
                                   (Unaudited)
Note 1        Nature and Continuance of Operations
The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January 15,
              2004 and is in the exploration  stage.  The Company has acquired a
              mineral  property  located in the  Province  of British  Columbia,
              Canada and has not yet determined  whether this property  contains
              reserves that are economically recoverable.  The recoverability of
              costs  incurred for  acquisition  and  exploration of the property
              will be dependent upon the discovery of  economically  recoverable
              reserves, confirmation of the Company's interest in the underlying
              property, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary financing
              to  satisfy  the  expenditure   requirements  under  the  property
              agreement and to complete the development of the property and upon
              future profitable production or proceeds for the sale thereof.
These  financial  statements have been prepared on a going concern
              basis which  assumes  that the Company will be able to realize its
              assets and  discharge  its  liabilities  in the  normal  course of
              business  for the  foreseeable  future.  The Company has  incurred
              losses  since  inception  resulting in an  accumulated  deficit of
              $23,314 and further losses are  anticipated in the  development of
              its business raising doubt about the Company's ability to continue
              as a going concern.  The ability to continue as a going concern is
              dependent upon the Company generating profitable operations in the
              future  and/or  to  obtain  the  necessary  financing  to meet its
              obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business
              operations  when they  come due.  Management  intends  to  finance
              operating  costs over the next twelve months with existing cash on
              hand and loans from  directors and or private  placement of common
              stock.
Unaudited Interim Financial Statements
The accompanying  unaudited interim financial statements have been
              prepared in  accordance  with  United  States  generally  accepted
              accounting  principles for interim financial  information and with
              the  instructions  to Form 10-QSB of Regulation  S-B. They may not
              include all  information  and footnotes  required by United States
              generally  accepted  accounting  principles for complete financial
              statements.  However,  except as disclosed herein, there have been
              no material  changes in the information  disclosed in the notes to
              the  financial  statements  for the period  ended  March 31,  2005
              included  in the  Company's  SB-2  filed with the  Securities  and
              Exchange  Commission.  The interim unaudited financial  statements
              should be read in  conjunction  with  those  financial  statements
              included  in the Form  SB-2.  In the  opinion of  Management,  all
              adjustments   considered   necessary  for  a  fair   presentation,
              consisting solely of normal recurring adjustments, have been made.
              Operating  results for the six months ended September 30, 2005 are
not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for
              the year ending March 31, 2006.
-43-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Interim Financial Statements
September 30, 2005 - Page 2
(Unaudited)
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Exploration Stage Company
The Company  complies with Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board
              Statement  ("FASB") No. 7 and Securities  and Exchange  Commission
              Act  Guide  7  for  its  characterization  of  the  Company  as an
              exploration stage enterprise.
Mineral Property
Mineral property  acquisition,  exploration and development  costs
              are expensed as incurred until such time as economic  reserves are
              quantified.  To date the Company has not established any proven or
              probable  reserves  on its  mineral  properties.  The  Company has
              adopted  the  provisions  of SFAS No.  143  "Accounting  for Asset
              Retirement   Obligations"  which  establishes  standards  for  the
              initial  measurement  and subsequent  accounting  for  obligations
              associated  with  the  sale,  abandonment,  or other  disposal  of
              long-lived   tangible   assets   arising  from  the   acquisition,
              construction  or  development  and for normal  operations  of such
              assets.  The  adoption of this  standard  has had no effect on the
              Company's  financial  position  or  results of  operations.  As at
              September 30, 2005, any potential costs relating to the retirement
              of  the  Company's   mineral   property   interest  has  not  been
              determined.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial  statements in conformity with United
              States   generally   accepted   accounting   principles   requires
              management  to make  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect the
              reported  amounts  of assets and  liabilities  and  disclosure  of
              contingent  assets and  liabilities  at the date of the  financial
              statements  and the  reported  amounts of  revenues  and  expenses
              during  the  period.   Actual  results  could  differ  from  those
              estimates.
Foreign Currency Translation
The financial  statements are presented in United States  dollars.
              In accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
              52, "Foreign Currency  Translation",  foreign denominated monetary
              assets and  liabilities  are  translated  into their United States
              dollar equivalents using foreign exchange rates which prevailed at
              the balance  sheet date.  Revenue and expenses are  translated  at
              average  rates of  exchange  during  the  period.  Gains or losses
              resulting  from  foreign  currency  transactions  are  included in
              results of operations.
-44-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Interim Financial Statements
September 30, 2005 - Page 3
(Unaudited)
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
              ------------------------------------------
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The  carrying  value  of cash and  accounts  payable  and  accrued
              liabilities  approximates  their fair  value  because of the short
              maturity  of these  instruments.  Unless  otherwise  noted,  it is
              management's   opinion   that  the   Company  is  not  exposed  to
              significant interest,  currency or credit risks arising from these
              financial instruments.
Environmental Costs
Environmental  expenditures that relate to current  operations are
              expensed or capitalized as appropriate.  Expenditures  that relate
              to an existing  condition caused by past operations,  and which do
              not  contribute  to  current  or future  revenue  generation,  are
              expensed.  Liabilities are recorded when environmental assessments
              and/or  remedial  efforts  are  probable,  and  the  cost  can  be
              reasonably  estimated.  Generally,  the  timing of these  accruals
              coincides with the earlier of completion of a feasibility study or
              the  Company's  commitments  to plan of  action  based on the then
              known facts.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the liability  method of accounting for income
              taxes.   Under  this  method,   deferred  income  tax  assets  and
              liabilities  are  recognized  for the estimated  tax  consequences
              attributable  to  differences   between  the  financial  statement
              carrying values and their  respective  income tax basis (temporary
              differences).  The  effect  on  deferred  income  tax  assets  and
              liabilities  of a change in tax rates is  recognized  in income in
              the period that includes the enactment date.
At  September  30,  2005  a  full  deferred  tax  asset  valuation
              allowance  has been provided and no deferred tax asset benefit has
              been recorded.
Basic and Diluted Loss Per Share
Basic  earnings per share  includes no dilution and is computed by
              dividing income  available to common  stockholders by the weighted
              average  number  of  common  shares  outstanding  for the  period.
              Dilutive  earnings per share  reflects the  potential  dilution of
              securities  that  could  share  in the  earnings  of the  Company.
              Because  the  Company  does  not  have  any  potentially  dilutive
              securities,  the  accompanying  presentation is only of basic loss
              per share.
-45-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Interim Financial Statements
September 30, 2005 - Page 4
(Unaudited)
Note 2   Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
         ------------------------------------------
Stock-based Compensation
In December 2002, the FASB issued  Financial  Accounting  Standard
              No. 148, "Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation - Transition and
              Disclosure" ("SFAS No. 148"), an amendment of Financial Accounting
              Standard No. 123 "Accounting for Stock-Based  Compensation" ("SFAS
              No.  123").  The  purpose  of  SFAS  No.  148 is to:  (1)  provide
              alternative  methods of transition for an entity that  voluntarily
              changes  to  the  fair  value  based  method  of  accounting   for
              stock-based  employee  compensation,   (2)  amend  the  disclosure
              provisions to require  prominent  disclosure  about the effects on
              reported  net income of an entity's  accounting  policy  decisions
              with  respect to  stock-based  employee  compensation,  and (3) to
              require   disclosure  of  those   effects  in  interim   financial
              information.
The  Company  has  elected to  account  for  stock-based  employee
              compensation  arrangements  in accordance  with the  provisions of
              Accounting  Principles Board Opinion No. 25, "Accounting for Stock
              Issued  to  Employees",   ("APB  No.  25")  and  comply  with  the
              disclosure  provisions  of SFAS No. 123 as amended by SFAS No. 148
              as described  above. In addition,  in accordance with SFAS No. 123
              the  Company   will  apply  the  fair  value   method   using  the
              Black-Scholes  option-pricing  model  in  accounting  for  options
              granted to consultants. Under APB No. 25, compensation expense for
              employees is recognized  based on the  difference,  if any, on the
              date of grant  between the  estimated  fair value of the Company's
              stock and the amount an  employee  must pay to acquire  the stock.
              Compensation  expense is recognized  immediately for past services
              and pro-rata for future services over the  option-vesting  period.
              To  September  30,  2005 the  Company  has not  granted  any stock
              options or recoded any stock based compensation expense.
The Company accounts for equity instruments issued in exchange for
              the  receipt of goods or  services  from other than  employees  in
              accordance  with SFAS No. 123 and the  conclusions  reached by the
              Emerging Issues Task Force ("EITF") in Issue No. 96-18.  Costs are
              measured at the estimated  fair market value of the  consideration
              received  or the  estimated  fair value of the equity  instruments
              issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. The value of equity
              instruments issued for consideration  other than employee services
              is  determined  on the  earliest of a  performance  commitment  or
              completion of  performance by the provider of goods or services as
              defined by EITF 96-18.
The  Company  has  also  adopted  the  provisions   of   the  FASB
              Interpretation  No. 44,   Accounting   for  Certain   Transactions
              Involving Stock Compensation - An
-46-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Interim Financial Statements
September 30, 2005 - Page 5
(Unaudited)
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
              ------------------------------------------
Interpretation  of APB Opinion No. 25 ("FIN 44"),  which  provides
              guidance as to certain applications of APB 25. FIN 44 is generally
              effective  July 1,  2000  with the  exception  of  certain  events
              occurring after December 15, 1998.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December  2004,  the FASB issued  SFAS No. 153,  "Exchanges  of
              Nonmonetary  Assets - An  Amendment  of APB Opinion  No. 29".  The
              guidance  in APB  Opinion  No.  29,  "Accounting  for  Nonmonetary
              Transactions",  is  based  on  the  principle  that  exchanges  of
              nonmonetary  assets should be measured  based on the fair value of
              the assets  exchanged.  The  guidance  in that  Opinion,  however,
              included certain exceptions to that principle. SFAS No. 153 amends
              Opinion  No.  29  to  eliminate  the  exception  for   nonmonetary
              exchanges  of similar  productive  assets and  replaces  it with a
              general exception for exchanges of nonmonetary  assets that do not
              have commercial  substance.  A nonmonetary exchange has commercial
              substance  if the future cash flows of the entity are  expected to
              change  significantly as a result of the exchange.  The provisions
              of SFAS No. 153 are  effective  for  nonmonetary  asset  exchanges
              occurring in fiscal periods  beginning after June 15, 2005.  Early
              application  is permitted  and  companies  must apply the standard
              prospectively.  The  adoption of this  standard is not expected to
              have a material  effect on the Company's  results of operations or
              financial position.
In December  2004,  the FASB issued SFAS No.  123R,  "Share  Based
              Payment".  SFAS 123R is a revision of SFAS No. 123 "Accounting for
              Stock-Based  Compensation",  and  supersedes  APB  Opinion No. 25,
              "Accounting  for  Stock  Issued  to  Employees"  and  its  related
              implementation  guidance.  SFAS 123R establishes standards for the
              accounting  for  transactions  in which an  entity  exchanges  its
              equity  instruments  for  goods  or  services.  It also  addresses
              transactions in which an entity incurs liabilities in exchange for
              goods or services that are based on the fair value of the entity's
              equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of those
              equity instruments.  SFAS 123R focuses primarily on accounting for
              transactions  in which an  entity  obtains  employee  services  in
              share-based  payment  transactions.  SFAS 123R does not change the
              accounting  guidance for  share-based  payment  transactions  with
              parties  other than  employees  provided in SFAS 123 as originally
              issued  and  EITF  Issue  No.   96-18,   "Accounting   for  Equity
              Instruments That Are Issued to Other Than Employees for Acquiring,
              or in Conjunction with Selling, Goods or Services". SFAS 123R does
              not address the  accounting for employee  share  ownership  plans,
              which are subject to AICPA Statement of Position 93-6, "Employers'
              Accounting for Employee Stock Ownership Plans". SFAS 123R requires
              a public entity to measure the cost of
-47-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Interim Financial Statements
September 30, 2005 - Page 6
(Unaudited)
Note 2        Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (cont'd)
              ------------------------------------------
employee  services  received  in  exchange  for an award of equity
              instruments  based on the grant-date fair value of the award (with
              limited exceptions).  That cost will be recognized over the period
              during  which an  employee  is  required  to  provide  service  in
              exchange for the award - the requisite service period (usually the
              vesting  period).  SFAS 123R requires that the  compensation  cost
              relating to  share-based  payment  transactions  be  recognized in
              financial statements. That cost will be measured based on the fair
              value of the equity or liability  instruments issued. The scope of
              SFAS  123R  includes  a wide  range  of  share-based  compensation
              arrangements  including  share  options,  restricted  share plans,
              performance-based  awards, share appreciation rights, and employee
              share purchase plans.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements - (cont'd)
              --------------------------------
Public  entities  (other  than  those  filing  as  small  business
              issuers)  will be  required  to apply  SFAS  123R as of the  first
              interim or annual  reporting  period  that  begins  after June 15,
              2005.  Public entities that file as small business issuers will be
              required  to  apply  SFAS  123R in the  first  interim  or  annual
              reporting  period that begins after December 15, 2005.  Management
              is  currently  evaluating  the impact,  which the adoption of this
              standard  will have on the  Company's  results  of  operations  or
              financial position.
FASB  has  also  issued  SFAS  No.  151  Inventory  Cost  and  152
              Accounting for Real Estate Time Sharing Transactions but they will
              not  have  any  relationship  to the  operations  of the  Company,
              therefore a description and its impact on the Company's operations
              for each, have not been disclosed.
In March 2005, the SEC staff  issued  Staff  Accounting   Bulletin
              No. 107 ("SAB 107") to give guidance on the implementation of SFAS
              No. 123R.  The   Company   will   consider  SAB  107   during  the
              implementation of SFAS No. 123R.
Note 3        Mineral Property
Shorts Claims
By a mineral property staking and purchase agreement dated January
              29, 2004, the Company acquired a 100% undivided  right,  title and
              interest in and to eight mineral claims, known as "Shorts Claims",
              located in the province of British Columbia, Canada by the payment
              of  $5,000.  During  the year  ended  March 31,  2005 the  Company
              incurred $2,000 of mineral property costs. To date the Company has
              incurred costs of $7,000 on the Short Claims.
The Property is held in trust for the  Company.  Upon request from
              the  Company the title will be recorded in the name of the Company
              with the appropriate mining
-48-
<page>
Azzoro Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
Notes to the Interim Financial Statements
September 30, 2005 - Page 6
(Unaudited)
Note 3        Mineral Property - (cont'd)
recorder. At September 30, 2005 the title to the Property has  not
              been recorded in the name of the Company.
Note 4        Capital Stock
The total number of common shares authorized that may be issued by
              the Company is 75,000,000  shares with a par value of one tenth of
              one cent  ($0.001)  per  share  and no other  class of  shares  is
              authorized.
During the period from January 15, 2004  (Inception)  to March 31,
              2004 the Company issued 7,700,000 shares of common stock for total
              proceeds  of  $32,000.  During the year ended  March 31,  2005 the
              Company issued 10,000 shares of common stock for total proceeds of
              $2,000.  At  September  30, 2005 there were no  outstanding  stock
              options or warrants.
-49-
<page>
Changes In And Disagreements With Accountants
We have had no changes in or disagreements with our accountants.
Until   _________________,   all  dealers  that  effect  transactions  in  these
securities  whether or not  participating  in this offering,  may be required to
deliver a prospectus.  This is in addition to the dealer's obligation to deliver
a  prospectus  when  acting as  underwriters  and with  respect to their  unsold
allotments or subscriptions.
Part II
Information Not Required In The Prospectus
Indemnification Of Directors And Officers
Our officers and directors  are  indemnified  as provided by the Nevada  Revised
Statutes and our bylaws.
Under the NRS, director immunity from liability to a company or its shareholders
for monetary liabilities applies automatically unless it is specifically limited
by a company's  articles of incorporation that is not the case with our articles
of incorporation. Excepted from that immunity are:
(1)      a willful failure to deal  fairly  with  the  company  or  its
                  shareholders in connection with a matter in which the director
                  has a material conflict of interest;
(2)      a  violation   of  criminal   law  (unless  the  director  had
                  reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct was lawful
                  or no reasonable  cause to believe that his or her conduct was
                  unlawful);
-50-
<page>
(3)      a transaction from which  the  director  derived  an  improper
                  personal profit; and
(4)      willful misconduct.
Our bylaws  provide that we will  indemnify  our  directors  and officers to the
fullest  extent not  prohibited by Nevada law;  provided,  however,  that we may
modify the  extent of such  indemnification  by  individual  contracts  with our
directors and officers; and, provided, further, that we shall not be required to
indemnify any director or officer in  connection  with any  proceeding  (or part
thereof) initiated by such person unless:
(1)      such indemnification is expressly required to be made by law;
(2)      the proceeding was authorized by our Board of Directors;
(3)      such indemnification is provided by us,in our sole discretion,
                  pursuant to the powers vested us under Nevada law; or
(4)      such indemnification is required to be made  pursuant  to  the
                  bylaws.
Our bylaws provide that we will advance all expenses  incurred to any person who
was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending
or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative
or  investigative,  by  reason  of the fact  that he is or was our  director  or
officer,  or is or was serving at our request as a director or executive officer
of another company, partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise, prior
to the final disposition of the proceeding,  promptly  following  request.  This
advanced  of  expenses  is to be made upon  receipt of an  undertaking  by or on
behalf of such person to repay said amounts  should it be ultimately  determined
that  the  person  was not  entitled  to be  indemnified  under  our  bylaws  or
otherwise.
Our bylaws also  provide  that no advance  shall be made by us to any officer in
any action,  suit or proceeding,  whether  civil,  criminal,  administrative  or
investigative,  if a  determination  is reasonably and promptly made: (a) by the
board of directors by a majority  vote of a quorum  consisting  of directors who
were not parties to the proceeding; or (b) if such quorum is not obtainable, or,
even  if  obtainable,  a  quorum  of  disinterested  directors  so  directs,  by
independent  legal  counsel in a written  opinion,  that the facts  known to the
decision-  making  party  at the time  such  determination  is made  demonstrate
clearly and convincingly that such person acted in bad faith or in a manner that
such person did not believe to be in or not opposed to our best interests.
Other Expenses Of Issuance And Distribution
The estimated costs of this offering are as follows:
Securities and Exchange Commission registration fee           $      66.14
Transfer Agent Fees                                           $   1,000.00
Accounting and auditing fees and expenses                     $   5,000.00
Legal fees and expenses                                       $   7,500.00
Edgar filing fees                                             $   1,500.00
                                                              ------------
Total                                                         $  15,066.14
                                                              ============
-51-
<page>
All amounts are estimates other than the Commission's registration fee.
We are paying all expenses of the  offering  listed  above.  No portion of these
expenses will be borne by the selling  shareholders.  The selling  shareholders,
however,  will pay any other  expenses  incurred in selling  their common stock,
including any brokerage commissions or costs of sale.
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
We completed  an offering of 5,000,000  shares of our common stock at a price of
$0.001 per share to a total of two  purchasers  on January 23,  2004.  The total
amount  received from this  offering was $5,000.  As part of this  offering,  we
issued  2,500,000  shares of our common  stock to Mr. Ted Burylo on January  20,
2004 and 2,500,000 shares to Mr. Jeff Murdock on January 23, 2004. Mr. Burylo is
our  president,  chief  executive  officer  and a director.  Mr.  Murdock is our
secretary and a director.
These  shares  were issued  pursuant  to  Regulation  S of the  Securities  Act.
Appropriate  legends were affixed to the stock  certificates  representing these
shares.
We completed  an offering of 2,700,000  shares of our common stock at a price of
$0.01 per share to a total of 26 purchasers on March 31, 2004.  The total amount
received from this offering was $26,000.  We completed this offering pursuant to
Regulation S of the Securities Act. The purchasers were as follows:
Name of Shareholder              Number of Shares
                       -----------------------          ----------------
James Thiede                          100,000
                       David Anderson                        100,000
                       Kevin Klassen                         100,000
                       Sharon Lee-White                      100,000
                       Peter Burjoski                        100,000
                       Johnathan Shea                        200,000
                       William Butler                        100,000
                       William McCormack                     100,000
                       Lorne Wenn                            100,000
                       Parvin Selseleh                       100,000
                       Chris Roger                           100,000
                       Harold McDougall                      100,000
                       G.E. Fenwick                          100,000
                       Shahram Fasihy                        100,000
                       Michelle Janes                        100,000
                       Marni Ziegler                         100,000
                       Hailey Wenn                           100,000
                       Lara Wenn                             100,000
                       Ben McCormack                         100,000
                       Guy Lawson                            100,000
                       Ron Teti                              100,000
                       Elaheh Fasihy                         100,000
                       Seyed Mostafa Fasihi                  100,000
                       E. Edwards                            100,000
                       Brian Glaum                           100,000
                       Randy Pesto                           100,000
-52-
<page>
We  completed  an  offering of 10,000  shares of our common  stock at a price of
$0.20 per share to a total of two purchasers on April 19, 2004. The total amount
received from this offering was $2,000.  We completed this offering  pursuant to
Regulation S of the Securities Act. The purchasers were as follows:
Name of Shareholder               Number of Shares
                       -------------------               ----------------
William McMillan                        5,000
                       Frank Kramaric                          5,000
Regulation S Compliance
Each offer or sale was made in an offshore transaction;
Neither we, a distributor, any respective affiliates nor any person on behalf of
any of the foregoing made any directed selling efforts in the United States;
Offering restrictions were, and are, implemented;
No offer or sale was made to a U.S. person or for the account or benefit of a
U.S. person;
Each purchaser of the securities certifies that it was not a U.S. person and was
not acquiring the securities for the account or benefit of any U.S. person;
Each  purchaser  of the  securities  agreed to resell  such  securities  only in
accordance with the provisions of Regulation S, pursuant to  registration  under
the Act, or pursuant to an available exemption from registration; and agreed not
to engage in  hedging  transactions  with  regard to such  securities  unless in
compliance with the Act;
The securities contain a legend to the effect that transfer is prohibited except
in accordance  with the  provisions  of  Regulation S, pursuant to  registration
under the Act, or pursuant to an available exemption from registration; and that
hedging  transactions  involving those securities may not be conducted unless in
compliance with the Act; and
We are  required,  either by contract or a  provision  in its bylaws,  articles,
charter or  comparable  document,  to refuse to  register  any  transfer  of the
securities  not made in accordance  with the provisions of Regulation S pursuant
to  registration  under the Act,  or  pursuant to an  available  exemption  from
registration;  provided,  however,  that  if any  law of any  Canadian  province
prevents us from refusing to register  securities  transfers,  other  reasonable
procedures,  such  as a  legend  described  in  paragraph  (b)(3)(iii)(B)(3)  of
Regulation S have been implemented to prevent any transfer of the securities not
made in accordance with the provisions of Regulation S.
-53-
<page>
Exhibits
Exhibit
Number             Description
3.1*             Articles of Incorporation
  3.2*             Bylaws
  5.1*             Legal opinion
 10.1*             Mineral  Property  Staking  and   Purchase   Agreement  dated
                   January 29, 2004
 23.1              Consent  of  Dale  Matheson  Carr-Hilton  LaBonte,  Chartered
                   Accountants
* filed  as  an  exhibit  to  our  registration  statement on Form SB-2 filed on
August 16, 2004
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
1. To file,  during  any  period  in  which it  offers  or sells  securities,  a
post-effective amendment to this registration statement to:
(a)       include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities
          Act of 1933;
(b)       reflect in the prospectus any facts or events  which, individually  or
          together, represent a fundamental change in the  information set forth
          in this registration statement; and notwithstanding  the forgoing, any
          increase or decrease in volume of  securities  offered (if  the  total
          dollar value of securities offered would not  exceed  that  which  was
          registered) and any  deviation  from  the  low  or  high  end  of  the
          estimated maximum offering range may  be  reflected  in  the  form  of
          prospectus filed with the  commission  pursuant to Rule  424(b) if, in
          the aggregate, the changes in the volume and price  represent  no more
          than a 20% change in the  maximum  aggregate offering  price set forth
          in  the "Calculation  of  Registration Fee"  table  in  the  effective
          registration Statement; and
(c)       include any additional or changed material information on the  plan of
          distribution.
2. That, for the purpose of determining  any liability under the Securities Act,
each such  post-effective  amendment  shall be  deemed to be a new  registration
statement  relating to the securities  offered herein,  and the offering of such
securities  at that time shall be deemed to be the  initial  bona fide  offering
thereof.
3. To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the
securities being registered hereby which remain unsold at the termination of the
offering.   Insofar  as  indemnification   for  liabilities  arising  under  the
Securities  Act may be permitted  to our  directors,  officers  and  controlling
persons  pursuant to the provisions  above,  or otherwise,  we have been advised
that  in  the  opinion  of  the   Securities   and  Exchange   Commission   such
indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act, and
is, therefore, unenforceable.
In the event that a claim for  indemnification  against such liabilities,  other
than the  payment by us of expenses  incurred  or paid by one of our  directors,
officers,  or controlling  persons in the successful defense of any action, suit
or  proceeding,  is asserted by one of our directors,  officers,  or controlling
person in connection with the securities being  registered,  we will,  unless in
the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent,
submit  to a  court  of  appropriate  jurisdiction  the  question  whether  such
indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act, and
we will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
-54-
<page>
Signatures
In  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Act of  1933,  the
registrant certifies that it has reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all
of the  requirements  for filing on Form SB-2 and authorized  this  registration
statement  to be  signed  on its  behalf  by the  undersigned,  in the  City  of
Vancouver, Province of British Columbia on December 16, 2005.
Azzoro Inc.
By: /s/ Ted Burylo
                                                ------------------------------
                                                Ted Burylo, President, Chief
                                                Executive Officer, Principal
                                                Accounting Officer and
                                                Director
Power of Attorney
ALL MEN BY THESE  PRESENTS,  that each  person  whose  signature  appears  below
constitutes and appoints Ted Burylo,  his true and lawful  attorney-in-fact  and
agent, with full power of substitution and  re-substitution,  for him and in his
name,  place and stead, in any and all  capacities,  to sign any and all pre- or
post-effective  amendments to this registration statement,  and to file the same
with all exhibits thereto, and other documents in connection therewith, with the
Securities and Exchange  Commission,  granting unto said  attorneys-in-fact  and
agents,  and each of them,  full power and  authority to do and perform each and
every act and thing requisite or necessary to be done in and about the premises,
as fully to all intents and  purposes as he might or could do in person,  hereby
ratifying and confirming all that said  attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any one
of them,  or their or his  substitutes,  may  lawfully do or cause to be done by
virtue hereof.
In  accordance  with  the  requirements  of the  Securities  Act of  1933,  this
registration statement was signed by the following persons in the capacities and
on the dates stated.
SIGNATURE                  CAPACITY IN WHICH SIGNED             DATE
/s/ Ted Burylo             President, Chief Executive          December 16, 2005
- -----------------------    Officer, Treasurer, Principal
Ted Burylo                 Accounting Officer, Chief Financial
                           Officer and Director
/s/ Jeff Murdock           Secretary and Director              December 16, 2005
- -----------------------
Jeff Murdock
-55-
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-23.1
<SEQUENCE>3
<FILENAME>exhibit231azzoro.txt
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 23.1
<TEXT>
================================================================================
EXHIBIT 23.1
[DALE MATHESON           Partnership of:           Robert J Burkart, Inc.
[CARR-HILTON LABONTE     Alvin F Dale, Ltd.        Peter J Donaldson, Inc.
- -------------------      Robert J Matheson, Inc.   Fraser G Ross, Ltd.
James F Carr-Hilton, Ltd
R.J. LaBonte, Ltd.
[CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS LOGO]
December 15, 2005
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
Division of Corporation Finance
450 Fifth St. N.W.
Washington  DC  20549
Re: Azzoro Inc. - Form SB-2 Registration Statement
- --------------------------------------------------
Dear Sirs:
As an independent  registered  public  accounting firm, we hereby consent to the
inclusion or incorporation by reference in this Form SB-2 Registration Statement
dated December 15, 2005, of the following:
Our report to the Stockholders and Board of Directors of Azzoro Inc. dated
      July 4, 2005 on the financial statements of the Company for the year ended
      March 31, 2005.
In addition,  we also consent to the  reference to our firm  included  under the
heading "Experts" in this Registration Statement.
Yours truly,
"Dale Matheson Carr-Hilton LaBonte"
Dale Matheson Carr-Hilton LaBonte
Chartered Accountants
Vancouver, Canada
A MEMBER OF MMGI INTERNATIONAL, A WORLDWIDE NETWORK OF INDEPENDENT ACCOUNTANTS
                              AND BUSINESS ADVISORS
Vancouver   Suite 1700-1140 West Pender Street, Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6E 4G1
Offices:    Suite 610-938 Howe Street, Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6Z 1N9
Surrey      Suite 303-7337 -137th Street, Surrey, B.C., Canada V3W 1A4
Office
Tel: 604 687 4747  Fax: 604 687 4216
Tel: 604 682 2778  Fax: 604 689 2778
Tel: 604 572 4586  Fax: 604 572 4587
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>CORRESP
<SEQUENCE>4
<FILENAME>filename4.txt
<TEXT>
================================================================================
AZZORO INC.
                        1802 N. Carson Street, Suite 212
                               Carson City, Nevada
                              United States, 89701
December 16, 2005
U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission
Division of Corporate Finance
450 Fifth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20549
Mail Stop 0305
Attention:   Kurt K. Murao
Dear Sirs:
Re:      Azzoro, Inc.  - Registration Statement on Form SB-2
         ---------------------------------------------------
         Amendment No. 3 - File No. 333-118262
         -------------------------------------
Further to your letter dated November 16, 2005  concerning the  deficiencies  in
our registration statement on Form SB-2, we provide the following responses:
Description of Business, page 18
- --------------------------------
Geological Assessment Report:  Surprise Lake Property, page 19
- --------------------------------------------------------------
1.       We note that in response to prior  comment 2 in our letter dated August
         29,  2005,  you stated in the  response  letter  that you have  enclose
         another  copy of the Mr.  Ostensoe's  geological  report.  It  appears,
         however,  that we are still not able to locate the  geological  report.
         Please  direct  us to its  location  or  provide  us with a copy of the
         geological  assessment  report. If you elect to furnish another copy of
         the report,  please  indicate in the response letter the specific means
         by which you have furnished the report, e.g. via EDGAR, mail, etc.
We have enclosed a copy of Mr.  Ostensoe's  geological  report with our
         couriered copy of our filing.
Results of Operations for Period Ending March 31, 2005, page 22
- ---------------------------------------------------------------
2.       As you have included interim financial  statements as of June 30, 2005,
         please update your  disclosure to reflect your results of operations as
         of June 30, 2005.
We have updated our  disclosure to reflect  results of operations as of
         September 30, 2005.
<page>
Financial Statements
- --------------------
3.       Please  revise  the  documents  to  include  updated interim  financial
         statements as of September 30, 2005 in accordance with Item   310(g) of
         Regulation S-B.
We have  included  updated  financial  statements  for the period ended
         September  30, 2005 with our  amended  registration  statement  on Form
         SB-2.
Yours truly,
/s/ Ted Burylo
Azzoro, Inc.
         Ted Burylo, President
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
</SEC-DOCUMENT>
-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----