
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
Washington, D.C. 20549 
FORM 10-K
[X] ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Fiscal Year Ended May 31, 2015
[  ] TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from ________________ to ________________.
Commission file number 000-50907
HANDENI GOLD INC. 
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
Nevada
98-0430222
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
P.O. Box 33507,
Plot 82A, ITV Road, Mikocheni Light Industrial Area,
Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania
(Address of principal executive offices)
N/A
(Zip Code)
+255-222-70-00-84
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
228 Regent Estate
Dar es Salaam, Republic of Tanzania
(Former name, former address and former fiscal year, if changed since last report
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: None
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, Par Value $0.001
(Title of class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. 
[  ] Yes     [X] No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act. 
[  ] Yes     [X] No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act during the preceding 12 months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. 
[X] Yes     [  ] No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
and post such files. 
[X] Yes     [  ] No
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers in response to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K. [ ]
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  an  accelerated  filer,  a  non-accelerated  filer,  or  a  smaller  reporting  company.  See  the
definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
i
Large accelerated filer [  ] 
Non-accelerated filer [  ]      (do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Accelerated filer [  ] 
Smaller reporting company [X]
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). 
Yes [  ]     No [X]
The aggregate market value of the registrant’s stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed
second fiscal quarter ended November 30, 2014, computed by reference to the price at which such stock was last sold on the OTC Bulletin Board ($0.0017 per share)
on that date, was approximately $293,222.
The registrant had 321,416,654 shares of common stock outstanding as of August 18, 2015.
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ITEM 1. 
ITEM 1A. 
ITEM 1B. 
ITEM 2. 
ITEM 3. 
ITEM 4. 
ITEM 5.
ITEM 6. 
ITEM 7. 
ITEM 7A. 
ITEM 8. 
ITEM 9. 
ITEM 9A. 
ITEM 9B. 
ITEM 10. 
ITEM 11. 
ITEM 12.
ITEM 13. 
ITEM 14. 
ITEM 15.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS 
BUSINESS 
RISK FACTORS 
UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
PROPERTIES 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES 
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF 
EQUITY SECURITIES 
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA 
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
OTHER INFORMATION 
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER 
MATTERS 
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE 
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES 
EXHIBITS
1
3
10
14
14
15
15
15
17
17
22
23
24
24
24
25
30
31
32
33
34
__________
iii
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This annual report on Form 10-K and the documents incorporated herein by reference contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Such
forward-looking statements concern our anticipated results and developments in our operations in future periods, planned exploration and, if warranted, development
of our properties, plans related to our business and other matters that may occur in the future. These statements relate to analyses and other information that are based
on forecasts of future results, estimates of amounts not yet determinable and assumptions of management.
Any statements contained herein that are not statements of historical fact and that express or involve discussions with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs,
plans,  projections,  objectives,  assumptions  or  future  events  or  performance  may  be  deemed  to  be  forward-looking  statements.  In  some  cases,  you  can  identify
forward-looking  statements  by  terminology  such  as  “may”,  “might”,  “could”,  “will”,  “would”,  “should”,  “expect”,  “plan”,  “intend”,  “anticipate”,  “believe”,
“estimate”, “predict”, “potential” or “continue”, the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology. In evaluating these statements, you should consider
various factors, including the assumptions, risks and uncertainties outlined in this annual report under “Risk Factors”. These factors or any of them may cause our
actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statement made in this annual report. Forward-looking statements in this annual report include, among
others, statements regarding:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
our capital needs; 
business plans; 
drilling plans, timing of drilling and costs; 
results of our various projects; 
ability to lower cost structure in certain of our projects; 
our growth expectations; 
timing of exploration of the Company’s properties; 
the performance and characteristics of the Company’s mineral properties; 
capital expenditure programs; 
the impact of national, federal, provincial, and state governmental regulation on the Company; 
expected levels of exploration costs, general administrative costs, costs of services and other costs and expenses; 
expectations regarding our ability to raise capital and to add reserves through acquisitions, exploration and development; and 
other expectations.
While these forward-looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith and reflect our current judgment regarding future
events, the forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors. Our actual results will likely vary,
sometimes materially, from any estimates, predictions, projections, assumptions or other future performance suggested herein. Some of the risks and assumptions
include, without limitation:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
our need for additional financing; 
our limited operating history; 
our history of operating losses; 
our exploration activities may not result in commercially exploitable quantities of ore on our current or any future mineral properties; 
the risks inherent in the exploration for minerals such as geologic formation, weather, accidents, equipment failures and governmental restrictions; 
the competitive environment in which we operate; 
changes in governmental regulation and administrative practices; 
our dependence on key personnel; 
conflicts of interest of our directors and officers; 
our ability to fully implement our business plan; 
our ability to effectively manage our growth; 
risks related to our ability to execute projects being dependent on factors outside our control; 
risks related to seasonal factors and unexpected weather; 
risks related to title to our properties; 
risks related to our being able to find, acquire, develop and commercially produce mineral reserves; 
risks related to our stock price being volatile; and 
other regulatory, legislative and judicial developments.
This list is not exhaustive of the factors that may affect any of our forward-looking statements. We advise the reader that these cautionary remarks expressly qualify
in their entirety all forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf. Important factors that you should also consider, include, but are not
limited to, the factors discussed under “Risk Factors” in this annual report. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materializes, or if underlying assumptions
prove incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from those expected, estimated or projected.
1
Forward-looking statements in this document are not a prediction of future events or circumstances, and those future events or circumstances may not occur. Given
these uncertainties, users of the information included herein, including investors and prospective investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-
looking statements. Investors should consult our quarterly and annual filings with U.S. securities commissions for additional information on risks and uncertainties
relating to forward-looking statements. We do not assume responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of these statements.
The forward-looking statements in this annual report are made as of the date of this annual report and based on our beliefs, opinions and expectations at the time they
are made. We do not assume any obligation to update our forward-looking statements if those beliefs, opinions, or expectations, or other circumstances, should
change, to conform these statements to actual results, except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
Handeni  Gold  Inc.  files  annual,  quarterly  and  current  reports,  proxy  statements,  and  other  information  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the
“Commission” or “SEC”). You may read and copy documents referred to in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that have been filed with the Commission at the
Commission’s Public Reference Room, 450 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. You may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by
calling the Commission at 1-800-SEC-0330. You can also obtain copies of our Commission filings by going to the Commission’s website at http://www.sec.gov.
REFERENCES
As used in this annual report on Form 10-K: (i) the terms “we”, “us”, “our”, “Handeni”, “Handeni Gold”, and the “Company” mean Handeni Gold Inc.; (ii) “SEC”
refers to the Securities and Exchange Commission; (iii) “Securities Act” refers to the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended; (iv) “Exchange Act” refers to
the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and (v) all dollar amounts refer to United States dollars unless otherwise indicated.
2
ITEM 1.
BUSINESS
Corporate Organization
PART I
We were incorporated on January 5, 2004 under the laws of the State of Nevada. Effective January 21, 2009, we effected a five for one stock split of our common
stock and increased our authorized capital to 500,000,000 shares of common stock having a $0.001 par value. On February 14, 2012, the Company changed its name
from Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. to Handeni Gold Inc.
Our principal office is currently located at P.O. Box 33507, Plot 82A, ITV Road, Mikocheni Light Industrial Area, Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania,
with the phone number of +255 222 70 0084 and the fax number of +255 222 70 00 52. Our Canadian office is located at Suite 200, 5700 Yonge Street, Toronto,
ON, Canada, M2M 4K2, with the telephone number of 647-560-5548.
General
Handeni Gold Inc. is an exploration stage company engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. Our principal area of focus is the Handeni Gold
Project located in the Handeni district, within the Tanga region of the Republic of Tanzania in East Africa, in which we have interests in mineral claims through
prospecting licenses (“PLs”) and/or primary mining licenses (“PMLs”) issued by the government of the Republic of Tanzania.
None of our mineral claims contain any substantiated mineral deposits, resources or reserves of minerals to date. Exploration, including drilling of more than 10,000
meter of core, has been carried out on these claims, in particular the 4 PLs in the Handeni District. Accordingly, additional exploration of these mineral claims is
required before any conclusion can be drawn as to whether any commercially viable mineral deposit may exist on any of our mineral claims. Our plan of operations
is to continue exploration and drilling work in order to ascertain whether our mineral claims warrant further advanced exploration to determine whether they possess
commercially  exploitable  deposits  of  minerals.  We  will  not  be  able  to  determine  whether  or  not  any  of  our  mineral  claims  contain  a  commercially  exploitable
mineral deposit, resource or reserve, until appropriate exploratory work has been completed and an economic evaluation based on that work concludes economic
viability.
We are considered an exploration or exploratory stage company, because we are involved in the examination and investigation of land that we believe may contain
valuable minerals, for the purpose of discovering the presence of ore, if any, and its extent. There is no assurance that a commercially viable mineral deposit exists
on the properties underlying our mineral claim interests, and considerable further exploration will be required before a final evaluation as to the economic and legal
feasibility for our future exploration is determined.
Our Mineral Claims
Handeni District Gold Project
Location and Access
The Handeni Gold properties lie within the historic Handeni artisanal gold mining district, located in Tanga Province, roughly 175 km northwest of Tanzania’s
largest  city,  Dar  Es  Salaam,  and  100  km  southwest  of  the  more  northerly  coastal  city  of  Tanga  (Fig. 1).  The  road  from  Dar  Es  Salaam  to  Tanga  is  paved;  the
secondary road that heads northwest from this road to the town of Handeni, a distance of 65 km, has recently been paved. The Handeni property is located roughly
35 km south of the town of Handeni along a secondary gravel road. From this point, a number of dirt roads head south across various portions of the Handeni
property and beyond. Driving time from Dar Es Salaam to the Handeni Gold properties is approximately five hours, depending on traffic and the weather.
Fig. 1: Location Map: Handeni Property in Tanzania.
3
Prospecting Licenses (PLs)
Currently, our primary focus is on the undivided 100% legal, beneficial and registerable interest in and to eight PLs, located in the Handeni District of Tanzania. The
total area held by the Company in the Handeni district is now 423.03 km2 (Fig. 2) (Table 1).
Fig. 2. Outline of Handeni Gold PLs in the Handeni district. An area containing 32 PMLs is represented in black
Table 1: List of Prospecting Licenses, Handeni Property (prior to the 2013 renewal of the licenses)
PL No.
Area
(Sq Km)
Issue Date
Original Recipient Transfer Date
(To IPP Gold)
Transfer Date
(To Handeni
Gold)
Expiry
Date
Renewal
Date
6742/2010
6743/2010 
6744/2010 
6779/2010
197.98
195.48 
198.70 
197.74
05/10/10
13/10/10 
13/09/10 
13/09/10
Diamonds Africa 
Ltd. 
Gold Africa Ltd. 
M-Mining Ltd. 
Tanzania Gem 
Center Ltd.
18/11/10
12/12/10
04/10/13
05/10/13
18/11/10 
18/11/10 
18/11/10
12/12/10 
12/12/10 
12/12/10
12/10/13 
12/09/13 
12/09/13
13/10/13 
13/09/13 
13/09/13
Following the 2013 renewal of the properties and acquisition of PLs in the current period, the Company now holds interests in PLs with details as described in Table
2, below.
PL Number
6742/2010 
6743/2010 
6744/2010 
6779/2010 
9853/2014 
10000/2014 
10262/2014 
10409/2014
Primary Mining Licenses (PMLs)
Table 2: Handeni Gold Prospecting Licenses
Granted Date
5/10/2013 
13/10/2013 
13/9/2013 
13/9/2013 
2/7/2014 
22/7/2014 
25/9/2014 
02/12/2014
Expiry Date
4/10/2016 
12/10/2016 
12/9/2016 
12/9/2016 
1/7/2018 
21/7/2018 
24/9/2018 
01/12/2018
Area Size (km2)
70.32 
95.08 
97.56 
96.84 
12.32 
33.62 
6.97 
10.32
On November 30, 2011, the Company acquired from Handeni Resources a 100% interest in primary mining licenses covering an area of approximately 2.67 square
kilometers to the east of Magambazi Hill (Figs. 2 and 3). To comply with the laws and regulations of the Republic of Tanzania whereby foreign companies may not
own PMLs, on July 19, 2012, the Company:
(1)
entered into an Addendum agreement to the 2011 Acquisition Agreement whereby Handeni Resources will administer the 32 PMLs until such time
as a mining license (“ML”) on the 32 PMLs (2.67 km2) have been allocated; and
4
(2)
during this period Handeni Resources will be conducting exploration and mining activities on the PMLs as directed by the Company.
An enlargement of the “excluded area” as delineated on Fig. 2 is presented below (Fig. 3). An area within the outline of the 32 PML’s without a PML number (Fig.
3) has now been confirmed to be part of PL6743/2010. The block of 32 PMLs, shown in grey below, belongs to the Company as described above and are being
explored
West of the western border of PL 6743/2010 are several more PMLs that do not belong to the Company. The area colored in green (Fig. 3) is a unitized block of four
PMLs that were apparently acquired by Canaco Resources Inc. (“CRI”) (now East Africa Metals Inc.) from their owners.
Fig. 3: Exclusion areas within PL6743/2010. Note area in white within PML’s is part of PL6743/2010.
Handeni District Project
We obtained a Technical Report on the Handeni Property (the “Handeni Report”), dated April 25, 2011, as prepared at our request by Avrom E. Howard, MSc, FGA,
PGeol  (Ontario),  Principal  Consultant  at  Nebu  Consulting  LLC.  Mr.  Howard  is  a  Qualified  Person  in  accordance  with  Canadian  National  Instrument  43-101
“Standards for Disclosure of Mineral Projects” and its Companion Policy (collectively, “NI 43-101”) and is a Practicing Professional Geologist registered with the
Association of Professional Geoscientists of Ontario (registration number 0380).
Subsequent to the publishing of the April 25, 2011 NI 43-101 report by Mr. Howard, the Company produced numerous in-house technical reports and is in the
process of compiling an updated NI 43-101 report that will include the updated model for mineralization on our Handeni property. The drilling conducted by the
Company was done implementing and following Quality Control and Quality Assessment procedures recommended by SRK (Stephen, Robertson and Kirsten).
Property Description
General
Mining in Tanzania in the modern era dates back over one hundred years, first under German colonial rule and then under British control under whose authority
mining  and  other  activities  continued  and  expanded.  Beginning  in  the  1990s,  in  line  with  many  other  developing  countries  around  the  world,  the  Tanzanian
government instituted several reforms to move towards a free market economy, privatize the mining industry and encourage both domestic and foreign investment in
all economic sectors. In the case of the mining industry, this was supplemented, in 1998, through the passage of a new, more industry-friendly mining code. This
code has been streamlined under the Mining Act of 1998 (revised 2010) (the “Mining Act”) currently controlling exploration, mining and related activities in the
country.
Tanzania is Africa’s fourth leading gold producer, with several major companies producing and exploring for gold, mostly in northwestern Tanzania, south of Lake
Victoria, in an area informally known as the Lake Victoria gold belt.
The Handeni Property
Gold has been known in the Handeni area for many years with some attributing its discovery to the Germans prior to World War One; however, it was the increase in
gold prices and consequent increase in artisanal gold mining activity in the Handeni area that led to the discovery of deposits of placer gold, in turn leading in 2003
to  a  classic  gold  rush. The  discovery  and  mining of lode  deposits followed, soon  after,  along  with  the growth  of a shanty  mining  town  at  the northern  base of
Magambazi Hill.
Between 2005 and 2010, IPP Gold carried out exploration over its PLR leading to the upgrading of its holdings from one PLR to four PL’s of 800 km2, in August
2010. Exploration work included airborne magnetic and radiometric surveys, ground magnetic surveys, reconnaissance geological mapping, soil sampling, pitting
and trenching. It is these four PLs that were acquired by the Company from IPP Gold under a September 2010 agreement.
5
Geological Setting
Regional Geology
Regional geological mapping programs led to the recognition of several major litho-structural provinces from Archean to recent age in Tanzania. The Archean craton
covers most of the western two thirds of the country, roughly bounded to the east by the East African Rift. Archean rocks host all of the country’s kimberlite pipes
and contained lode diamond deposits, and most of its lode gold deposits. The Archean basement terrain is bounded to the east and west by a series of Proterozoic
mobile  belts;  this  area,  particularly  that  to  the  east,  hosts  most  of  the  country’s  wide  variety  of  colored  gemstone  deposits.  Some  recent  research  suggests  that
portions of this assumed Proterozoic terrane may actually consist of Archean crust that has undergone a later phase of higher grade metamorphism.
The Handeni district forms part of the Tanzanian Mozambique belt. The belt was subjected to four tectonothermal events at 830-800Ma, ~760Ma, 630-580Ma and
560-520Ma. All except the last attained upper amphibolites / granulite grade.
Property Geology
The Handeni area is situated in the Palaeoproterozoic Usugaran/Ubendian Metamorphic Terrane of Tanzania, along the northern extension of the north–trending
Proterozoic Mozambique Mobile Belt.
The geology of the Handeni area comprises amphibolite to granulite facies metamorphic rocks interpreted to originally have formed a sequence of ultramafic to
felsic  volcanic  flows,  black  shales  and  quartz-bearing  sedimentary  rocks.  It  is  furthermore  interpreted  to  comprise  a  metamorphosed/overprinted  eastern
extension/remnant of the Lake Victoria cratonic greenstone belt. High grade metamorphism has converted these original lithologies to a variety of metamorphic
equivalents,  including  biotite-hornblende-garnet-pyroxene  gneiss,  migmatitic  augen  garnet- hornblende-pyroxene  gneiss,  quartzo-feldspathic  hornblende-biotite-
pyroxene gneiss, pyroxene-hornblende-biotite-garnet granulite and others.
Recent research by geologists from the University of Western Australia suggests that much of what has previously been considered to be of Proterozic age (Usagaran
System) may in fact be overprinted Archean crust. This hypothesis has been invoked to help interpret the geology within which gold in this area is found and as the
basis  for  an  analogy between this gold  mineralization and that found in less  metamorphosed, bona  fide Archean  rocks  in  the Lake Victoria gold district, a  few
hundred km to the northwest. However, this is a hypothesis, only, one that may be used for exploration modeling purposes but one that still requires more work.
Mineralization
The Handeni property is at  an early  stage of exploration. There are no  known mineral resources or reserves on the Handeni property, nor are there any  known
economically mineable deposits on the property. Gold is found within garnet-amphibolite zones within biotite-feldspar gneiss at three k n o w n locations in the
Company’s property, locations where historical lode gold occurrences have been documented. Gold occurs in quartz veins as well as within the garnet amphibolites
adjacent to the quartz veins. Proof of this association is informally corroborated by the testimony of local, illegal artisanal miners, who recover gold both from quartz
veins and gold-bearing gneiss that is not quartz vein bearing. Gold in the Company’s property has also been documented in soils and placers, at a variety of locations,
as well.
Our geophysical and structural geological interpretation on which the drilling program conducted in 2012 was based, supported the mineralization model described
above in broad terms.
Whereas gold was known in the Handeni area prior to the arrival in 2005 of the Company’s predecessor, IPP Gold, there is no history of any formal exploration in
the area aside from limited work at Magambazi Hill itself and the work conducted in recent years by Canaco (East African Metals) in the region
The foundation for modern exploration activities on the Company’s properties were laid by the exploration work conducted by IPP. Their initial work consisted of
soil  sampling  and  a  ground  magnetic  survey  over  an  area  of  200  square  kilometers  covering  the  area  now  located  within  PL6743/2010  immediately  east  of
Magambazi Hill. Over the five years that ensued, this was followed by a series of exploration campaigns involving a variety of exploration methods, in turn followed
by interpretation and further work in an iterative fashion. Notable programs during this period included a fixed – wing airborne Magnetic and Radiometric Survey, a
ground magnetic survey, geological mapping and structural interpretation as well as several large soil sampling and geochemical surveys.
Handeni Gold’s intensive early exploration program following the Company’s September 2010 agreement with IPP achieved the following in terms of mineralization
on the properties:
•
•
•
•
It outlined a number of locations where intensive placer and illegal artisanal gold mining took place within the Handeni property, notably the Kwandege,
Magambazi and Mjembe areas.
Processed  airborne  magnetic  and  radiometric  data  have  delineated  linear  features  that  have  been  interpreted  to  represent  a  variety  of  structures  such  as
shears, thrust faults and cross faults, which undoubtedly influences the location of gold mineralized zones in the properties.
Soil  geochemical  surveying,  carried  out  across  some  of  these  interpreted  northwest-southeast  trending  structural  features,  has  revealed  several  locations
hosting anomalous gold in soils.
Gold appeared to be further concentrated at the intersection between the northwest-southeast trending structural features and northeast-southwest trending
structural features, interpreted to represent later cross faults.
6
•
These associations suggest a relationship between structures and gold, which provided a basis upon which additional areas within the Handeni property are 
selected for more detailed gold exploration.
Exploration conducted during the fiscal years 2011 to 2013
The foregoing exploration by IPP was used as a foundation and followed by:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
A helicopter based TEM electromagnetic and radiometric aerial survey program was completed by FUGRO over the entire Company licence area (800 km2)
at 200  meter  spaced flight lines  in  a north-south  direction. Electromagnetic (TEM) as  well as radiometric data for K (Potassium),  U (Uranium)  and  Th
(Thorium), as well as total count was collected simultaneously for the 4740 line kilometres flown. Selected areas were flown at a line spacing of 100 meters.
The interpreted data clearly delineated subsurface geological features of importance to gold and base metal mineralization in this high grade metamorphic
terrain. The data proved to be invaluable in the definition of structurally important sites and target definition.
An intensive ground based geophysical program on the Magambazi East as well as the Kwandege target zones was completed. This data (combined with
geochemical results) were used to create drill targets on the two selected areas, the results of which are reported below.
A  multi-element  soil  geochemical  program  was  completed  on  the  Kwandege  target  delineating  the  extent  of  the  mineralization  zone  and  assisting  the
interpretation of the geophysical data to locate drill positions.
A large soil sampling program of two targets in PL6743/2010 was initiated.
Twenty-eight (28) diamond core holes (5,347 meters) were drilled on the Magambazi East and related targets and delineated a gold enriched mineralization
zone extending for a distance of approximately 500 meters to the south east of the Magambazi Hill mineralization as defined by CRI.
Evaluation  of  the  economic  potential  of  the  three  mineralization  zones  will  only  be  possible  with  closely  spaced  directional  drilling  to  follow  out  the
mineralization.  We  evaluated  the  Magambazi  East  project  based  on  an  interpretation  of  the  available  drill  core  and  detailed  mapping.  Based  on  this
information and our model of the mineralization at Magambazi East we are now convinced that the gold potential of this target may be proven or disproven
with drilling of 5 directional drill holes.
Thirty-seven (37) drill holes (4,989 meters in total) have been drilled on the Kwandege mineralized zone, completing the first phase drilling program on this
project. Twenty-six of the 32 drill holes on the main Kwandege target yielded gold assay values of more than 0.5 g/t over a one-meter interval or thicker
intersection, whereas four of the remaining holes had anomalous gold values of up to 0.49 g/t. An important feature of the Kwandege target is the fact that
low  level  gold  values  (0.5  g/t  to  1  g/t)  were  encountered  in  numerous  intersections  in  the  drill  holes  and  also  confirmed  by  the  latest  assay  results.
Anomalous gold with some potentially economic intersections have been encountered in an E - W (strike) direction of 1,501 meters (based on the results of
the completed phase 1 drilling program). The open ended nature of the mineralization in an E-W direction was confirmed.
The  results  of  the  soil  sampling  program  on  Target  5  yielded  gold  in  soil  values  of  up  to  200  ppb.  Au  (gold)  assay  results  received  for  2331  samples
coincides  with  a  magnetic  and  electro-magnetic  geophysical  anomaly  on  surface  over  an  area  of  approximately  1.8  km  (N-S)  by  900  m  (E-W).  The
evaluation of this target is to be continued by pitting, trenching and ground IP.
Exploration conducted during the fiscal year 2014:
During this period, we achieved the following:
•
•
•
collected  a  total  of  5,050  soil  samples  (including  blanks  and  standards)  from  targets  in  PL6743  that  were  analyzed  by  XRF  and  submitted  to  assay
laboratories for gold analyses.
A soil sampling program on Target 6 (in collaboration with the Tanzania Geological Survey) was completed. Of a total of 2,756 soil samples collected on an
area of approximately 16 km2, 935 were analysed by XRF. The results were not highly encouraging and this target did not receive priority status.
An area to the east of Magambazi hill was selected as a first target and pilot study area to test the gold distribution in various secondary geological regimes
in the Handeni terrain. The following conclusions were drawn from the alluvial program:
a)
b)
c)
d)
The fluvial environment has the largest potential for the extraction of coarse grained gold.
A large proportion of gold is contained as fine grained gold. This conclusion was based on the fact that geochemically analyzed samples of the same
locations as the bulk sampled areas yielded significantly higher gold values.
Some specific horizons in the fluvial horizon yield higher values than others.
Allowing for a mere 50% efficiency of the applied processes and the overburden, the grade as well as consistency of gold on this target indicated
that it is not economically mineable as an alluvial mining program.
Plans to investigate the alluvial potential of the area surrounding the Kwandege project anomaly as well as several other alluvial targets identified using
airborne techniques did not progress due to lack of funding and the resulting shortage of personnel to conduct the program.
•
completed the geophysical evaluation of our four PLs, subsequently reduced in size to eight PL’s covering approximately 423 km2.
7
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
completed a detailed structural investigation into structural controls on gold mineralization on our prospecting licenses.
completed a ground geophysics investigation on the Mjembe target to the southeast of Magambazi.
Completed our evaluation process of the application of XRF to identify soil samples with a high likelihood to contain anomalous gold values, proving to be
highly successful on the Mjembe target. Following the success of the XRF program described above, the Company embarked on the evaluation of XRF
applications to its Magambazi and Kwandege drill core. The aim of the program is to:
a)
b)
Identify more potential gold bearing intersections in the core than that was previously analyzed.
Combine the results of the soil sample XRF results with the drill core results to further refine our XRF applications to our exploration program.
Completed a detailed structural interpretation of the Kwandege target with the aim of completion the final recommendations for the further drilling of this
target.
Submitted 84 samples for gold assay as a pilot investigation on one of the targets on PL6743/2010. In combination with the large amount of XRF results
conducted on this target the soil sampling method will be adapted to yield the best possible results in the Handeni district.
Completed mapping and lithogeochemical sampling on Target 5 and submitted samples for gold assays. This remains a target with high potential based on
the results of the lithogeochemical gold assays and soil sample results combined with the geophysics.
Completed a detailed geological map, a preliminary structural interpretation, a ground magnetic survey as well as detailed soil sampling and XRF analyses
on  our  Mjembe  target.  The  results  defined  a  significant  potential  gold  mineralization  zone  with  a  high  correlation  between  geochemical,  structural  and
geophysical data. Mjembe will be the Company’s primary target during the 2014/2015 field season.
Initiated mapping programs on Target 8 which was subsequently completed.
An extensive soil sampling program and ground magnetic survey on the Mjembe target has been completed. Mjembe is located on PL6744/2010 and is a
known illegal artisanal mining site. The selected survey and sample area consisted of an approximately 23 km2 block. A total of 5,068 soil samples have
been analysed for a suite of major and trace elements by desk top Energy Dispersive XRF. Preliminary interpretation suggests that the Mjembe anomalous
area represents a target within a plunging sheeth fold on a scale of 10 km by 3.5 km. The geophysics indicates the continuation of this structure in depth to
the east of the surface geochemical anomaly. Exploration on each of the anomalies within this structure will now focus on more detailed ground geophysics
and mapping to be able to prepare drill targets within the larger Mjembe target area.
Completed mapping and soil sampling programs on target 15 along 47 km line traverses and collected 932 soil samples. XRF analyses on soil samples
completed. Selected samples submitted for Au assays.
Initiated and completed mapping programs on Target 10 and completed a preliminary soil sampling program on this target (673 samples). XRF analyses
were completed and samples selected for Au assays.
Initiated and completed mapping programs on target 16 and planning of soil sampling program.
Exploration conducted during the fiscal year 2015:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
The Company now has 5 high potential drill targets of the 17 areas investigated in detail on its approximately 423 km2 license areas in the Handeni district.
Significant anomalous results have been achieved on 3 additional targets.
In addition to the geological and geophysical maps produced using remote sensing techniques, a total of 143 km2 (35%) of the license area has been mapped
in detail (1:2500 and 1:5000 scale). To date, a total of 37,153 drill and soil samples were taken of which 16,212 were assayed for gold and 19,992 by XRF.
Target 5 is now a fully fledged drill target based on the geochemistry and geophysics results obtained. Grab samples on this target yielded a maximum of
3.12 g/t of gold.
Nine hundred and thirty five (935) soil samples collected on Target 6 have been analysed by XRF. The results are discouraging and this target did not
receive priority status.
Exploration on Target 7 (Mjembe) was highly successful and 3 potential drill sites have been delineated within the larger Mjembe target area. The Company
is experiencing serious interference and illegal mining activities on all of its Mjembe targets which pose a serious restriction on our exploration activities and
the future of our exploration on this target as reported under “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Company”.
Target  8  has  been  mapped  in  detail  covering  an  area  of  approximately  36  km2.  The  Company  is  currently  evaluating  this  target  for  selection  of  a  soil
sampling and potential detail geophysics program. The outcome of this will be based on prioritizing this area in relation to the Gole structure program as
discussed below.
Target 10 has been mapped in detail and 674 soil samples taken of which 149 were selected based on our XRF screening technique. Although some elevated
gold values were obtained the Company will follow this area up utilizing a newly developed assay technique developed and successfully applied to target 16
as reported below. Due to a lack of funding we cannot immediately embark on this planned work.
8
•
•
•
•
Mapping and XRF analyses on 793 samples from Target 15 (Dolly) have been completed. Mineralization and structural features on this anomaly show many
similarities with that of Magambazi hill.
Geological  mapping  on  target  16  has  been  completed  and  a  preliminary  1,923  soil  samples  taken.  Of  these  20  high  priority  samples  were  selected  for
evaluation of a specialized technique designed to detect gold anomalies in geological terrains with a complex gold in soil distribution profile. The results
were highly encouraging and values of up to 8 g/t in soils were obtained. The Company will undoubtedly apply this technique to some selected other targets
as funding becomes available.
Detail geological mapping on the Gole sheath fold, a structural feature of 11 km by 4.5 km (Targets 12, 13, 14 and 17), have commenced and is continuing.
Potential gold bearing amphibolite zones have been identified, which will be the focus of further investigation.
Further detailed mapping was conducted on Target 16. This was followed by gold assays using specialized geochemical techniques to test the potential of
increasing the effectivity of the Company’s soil sampling program. The results were highly successful and the Company will implement this technique on
Target 10 when funds become available.
Glossary of Terms
The definitions of geological and technical terms used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are provided below:
Archaean
Feldspars
The 3,800 million to 2,500 million years period in the earth’s history.
A group of minerals most abundant on earth and consisting mainly of K, Na, Ca and Al as well as O (oxygen).
Ferromagnesian minerals
Minerals with Fe or Mg as a major chemical component in their composition.
Granulites
Granulites  are  medium  to  coarse–grained  metamorphic  rocks  that  have  experienced  high  temperature  metamorphism,  composed
mainly of feldspars sometimes associated with quartz and anhydrous ferromagnesian minerals.
Metamorphic rocks
Rocks that have been subjected to pressure, temperature or chemical conditions different from which they were formed under.
Mobile belt
A long, relatively narrow crustal region of tectonic activity.
PL
PLR
PML
Proterozoic
Quartz
Ubendian
Usagaran
Prospecting license.
Reconnaissance prospecting license.
Primary mining license.
The time period from 2,500 million years to 500 million years in the history of the earth.
A mineral Group consisting mainly of Si and O (oxygen).
A phase of mountain building whose precise dates are uncertain but which probably occurred about 1800–1700 Ma ago, producing
what is now a NW—SE belt in southern Tanzania, northern Zambia, and the eastern Congo.
A metamorphic belt in Tanzania in which deformation took place at about 2,000 million years ago.
Compliance with Government Regulation
We are subject to local laws and regulation governing the exploration, development, mining, production, importing and exporting of minerals; taxes; labor standards;
occupational health; waste disposal; protection of the environment; mine safety; toxic substances; and other matters. We require licenses and permits to conduct
exploration  and  mining  operations.  Amendments  to  current  laws  and  regulations  governing  operations  and  activities  of  mining  companies  or  more  stringent
implementation thereof could have a material adverse impact on our Company. Applicable laws and regulations will require us to make certain capital and operating
expenditures  to  initiate  new  operations.  Under  certain  circumstances,  we  may  be  required  to  close  an  operation  once  it  is  started  until  a  particular  problem  is
remedied or to undertake other remedial actions. This would have a material adverse effect on our results and financial condition.
Four of our mineral interests in Tanzania are currently held under PLs granted pursuant to the Mining Act for an initial period of three years and are renewable in
two successive periods of two years only. The remaining four PL’s are being held under the 2010 Mining Act and are valid for an initial period of 4 years (the initial
period expiring in 2018 (Table 2)). Following this the first renewal is for 3 years and the second renewal for 2 years, each renewal accompanied by a mandatory
relinquishment of at least 50% of the license area. The application fees are $300 on initial application and $300 for each renewal. There is a preparation fee of $500
applicable on each license. The annual rent for the licenses are $100/km2 (initial period), $150/km2 (1st renewal) and $200/km2 (2nd renewal).
9
All PLs in Tanzania require the holder to employ and train local residents, typically amounting to $5,000 per year, and make exploration expenditures, as set out in
the Mining Act. At each renewal, at least 50% of our licensed area must be relinquished. If we wish to keep the relinquished one-half portion, we must file a new
application for the relinquished portion.
The  geographical  area  covered  by  a  PL  may  contain  one  or  more  previously  granted  PML’s.  A  PML  is  a  mining  license  granted  only  to  a  Tanzanian  citizen
consisting of an area of not to exceed 10 hectares. Once a PL is granted, no additional PMLs can be granted within the geographical area covered by the PL. The PL
is subject to the rights of previously granted and existing PMLs. The holder of a PL will have to work around the geographical area of the PML unless the PL holder
acquires the PML and any rights to the land covered by the PML.
We must hold a mining license to carry out mining activities, which are granted only to the holder of a PL covering a particular area. A mining license is granted for
a period of 25 years or the life of the mine. It is renewable after 10 years for a period not exceeding 15 years. Other than the PMLs being held under Handeni
Resources, we do not hold any mining licenses, only PL’s. An application for the 32 PMLs being held under agreement by Handeni Resources to be changed into a
mining license (ML) is underway. Prospecting and mining license holders must submit regular reports in accordance with mining regulations. Upon commercial
production, the government of Tanzania imposes a royalty on the gross value of all production at the rate of 3% of all gold produced. The applicable regulatory body
in Tanzania is the Ministry of Energy and Minerals.
In  July  1999,  environmental  management  and  protection  regulations  under  the  Mining  Act  came  into  force.  An  environmental  impact  statement  and  an
environmental management plan must accompany special mining license, mining license and gemstone mining license applications for mineral rights. In addition to
the establishment of environmental regulations, the Tanzanian government has improved management procedures for effective monitoring and enforcement of these
regulations by strengthening the institutional capacity, especially in the field offices. The government has provided rules for the creation of reclamation funds to
reinstate land to alternative uses after mining and it has developed guidelines for mining in restricted areas, such as forest reserves, national parks, near sources of
water and other designated areas. These regulations have not had any material effect on our operations to date.
Competition
We operate in a highly competitive industry, competing with other mining and exploration companies, and institutional and individual investors, which are actively
seeking minerals exploration properties throughout the world together with the equipment, labour and materials required to exploit such properties. Many of our
competitors have financial resources, staff and facilities substantially greater than ours. The principal area of competition is encountered in the financial ability to
cost effectively acquire prime minerals exploration prospects and then exploit such prospects. Competition for the acquisition of minerals exploration properties is
intense, with many properties available in a competitive bidding process in which we may lack technological information or expertise available to other bidders.
Therefore, we may not be successful in acquiring, exploring and developing profitable properties in the face of this competition. No assurance can be given that a
sufficient number of suitable minerals exploration properties will be available for acquisition, exploration and development.
Employees
Other than our directors and executive officers, we had approximate four full-time equivalent employees and consultants as of May 31, 2015 located in Tanzania. We
also utilize independent geologists and consultants on a contract basis to conduct the work programs on our mineral properties in order to carry out our plan of
operations.
Research and Development Expenditures
We have not incurred any research or development expenditures since our incorporation.
Subsidiaries
The Company has two subsidiaries, both of which are Tanzanian companies: (i) HG Limited (formerly DLM Tanzania Limited); and (ii) Douglas Lake Tanzania
Limited, which is inactive.
Patents and Trademarks
We do not own, either legally or beneficially, any patent or trademark.
ITEM 1A.
RISK FACTORS
An investment  in a company  engaged in  mineral  exploration  involves an unusually high amount of risk, both unknown and  known, present and  potential,
including, but not limited to the risks enumerated below. An investment in our common stock involves a number of very significant risks. You should carefully
consider  the  following  risks  and  uncertainties  in  addition  to  other  information  in  this  annual  report  in  evaluating  our  Company  and  its  business  before
purchasing shares of our common stock. Our business, operating results and financial condition could be seriously harmed or cause actual results to differ
materially from those projected in any forward-looking statements due to any of the following risks. The risks described below may not be all of the risks facing
our Company. Additional risks not presently known to us or that we currently consider immaterial may also impair our business operations and we cannot
assure you that we will successfully address these risks or other unknown risks that may affect our business. You could lose all or part of your investment due to
any of these risks.
10
Risks Related to Our Company
We have incurred net losses since our inception and expect losses to continue.
We have not been profitable since our inception. For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, we had a net loss of $1,165,962. Since our inception on January 5, 2004 to
May 31, 2015, we had an accumulated net loss of $117,108,249. We have not generated revenues from operations and do not expect to generate revenues from
operations unless and until we are able to bring a mineral property into production. The expenditures to be made by us in the exploration of our properties may not
result in discoveries of commercially recoverable mineral reserves. There is a risk that we may never bring a mineral property into production that our operations will
not be profitable in the future and you could lose your entire investment.
We may not be able to continue as a going concern if we do not obtain additional financing or attain profitable operations. Our independent accountants’ audit
report states that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The Company's ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon
attaining profitable operations and obtaining sufficient financing to meet obligations and continue exploration and development activities. We have incurred only
losses  since  our  inception.  Whether  and  when  the  Company  can  attain  profitability  is  uncertain.  These  uncertainties  cast  significant  doubt upon  the  Company’s
ability to continue as going concern, because we will be required to obtain additional funds in the future to continue our operations and there is no assurance that we
will be able to obtain such funds, through equity or debt financing, or any combination thereof, or we are able to raise additional funds, that such funds will be in the
amounts required or on terms favourable to us.
Our exploration activities are highly speculative and involve substantial risks.
The  mineral  properties  that  we  held  interests  in  during  our  year  ended  May  31,  2015  are  in  the  exploration  stage  and  no  proven  mineral  reserves  have  been
established.  Our  exploration  work  may  not  result  in  the  discovery  of  mineable  deposits  of  ore  in  a  commercially  economical  manner.  There  may  be  limited
availability of water, which is essential to mining operations, and interruptions may be caused by adverse weather conditions. Our operations are subject to a variety
of  existing  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  exploration  and  development,  permitting  procedures,  safety  precautions,  property  reclamation,  employee  health  and
safety, air quality standards, pollution and other environmental protection controls. Our exploration activities are subject to substantial hazards, some of which are
not insurable or may not be insured for economic reasons. Any of these factors could have a material adverse effect on our results and financial condition.
We cannot accurately predict whether commercial quantities of ores will be established.
Whether an ore body will be commercially viable depends on a number of factors beyond our control, including the particular attributes of the deposit such as size,
grade and proximity to infrastructure, as well as mineral prices and government regulations, including regulations relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, land
use, importing and exporting of minerals and environmental protection. We cannot predict the exact effect of these factors, but the combination of these factors may
result in a mineral deposit being unprofitable which would have a material adverse effect on our business. We have no mineral producing properties at this time. We
have not defined or delineated any proven or probable reserves or resources on any of our properties to date.
We may not be able to establish the presence of minerals on a commercially viable basis.
Substantial expenditures will be required to develop the exploration infrastructure at any site chosen for exploration, to establish ore reserves through drilling, to
carry out environmental and social impact assessments, and to develop metallurgical processes to extract the metal from the ore. We may not be able to discover
minerals in sufficient quantities to justify commercial operation, and we may not be able to obtain funds required for exploration on a timely basis. Accordingly, you
could lose your entire investment.
We  will  need  to  incur  substantial  expenditures  in  an  attempt  to  establish  the  economic  feasibility  of  mining  operations  by  identifying  mineral  deposits  and
establishing  ore  reserves  through  drilling  and  other  techniques,  developing  metallurgical  processes  to  extract  metals  from  ore,  designing  facilities  and  planning
mining operations. The economic feasibility of a project depends on numerous factors beyond our control, including the cost of mining and production facilities
required to extract the desired minerals, the total mineral deposits that can be mined using a given facility, the proximity of the mineral deposits to a user of the
minerals, and the market price of the minerals at the time of sale. Our existing or future exploration programs or acquisitions may not result in the identification of
deposits that can be mined profitably and you could lose your entire investment.
Our competition is intense in all phase of our business.
We operate in a highly competitive industry, competing with other mining and exploration companies, and institutional and individual investors, which are actively
seeking minerals exploration properties throughout the world together with the equipment, labour and materials required to exploit such properties. Many of our
competitors have financial resources, staff and facilities substantially greater than ours. The principal area of competition is encountered in the financial ability to
cost effectively acquire prime minerals exploration prospects and then exploit such prospects. Competition for the acquisition of minerals exploration properties is
intense, with many properties available in a competitive bidding process in which we may lack technological information or expertise available to other bidders.
Therefore, we may not be successful in acquiring, exploring and developing profitable properties in the face of this competition. No assurance can be given that a
sufficient number of suitable minerals exploration properties will be available for acquisition, exploration and development.
11
Our exploration activities are subject to various local laws and regulations
We are subject to local laws and regulation governing the exploration, development, mining, production, importing and exporting of minerals; taxes; labor standards;
occupational health; waste disposal; protection of the environment; mine safety; toxic substances; and other matters. We require licenses and permits to conduct
exploration  and  mining  operations.  Amendments  to  current  laws  and  regulations  governing  operations  and  activities  of  mining  companies  or  more  stringent
implementation thereof could have a material adverse impact on our Company. Applicable laws and regulations will require us to make certain capital and operating
expenditures  to  initiate  new  operations.  Under  certain  circumstances,  we  may  be  required  to  close  an  operation  once  it  is  started  until  a  particular  problem  is
remedied or to undertake other remedial actions. This would have a material adverse effect on our results and financial condition.
We have uninsurable risks.
We may be subject to unforeseen hazards such as unusual or unexpected formations and other conditions. We may become subject to liability for pollution, cave-ins
or hazards against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure. The payment of such liabilities may have a material adverse effect on our
financial position.
Exploration activities, including test mining and operating activities are inherently hazardous.
Mineral exploration activities, including test mining activities, involve many risks that even a combination of experience, knowledge and careful evaluation may not
be able to overcome.
Operations that we undertake will be subject to all the hazards and risks normally incidental to exploration, test mining and recovery of gold and other metals, any of
which could result in work stoppages, damage to property and possible environmental damage. The nature of these risks are such that liabilities might result in us
being forced to incur significant costs that could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and business prospects.
We depend on key management personnel.
The success of our operations and activities is dependent to a significant extent on the efforts and abilities to attract and maintain qualified key management and
technical  personnel.  Competition  for  such  personnel  is  intense  and  we  may  not  be  able  to  attract  and  retain  such  personnel.  We  do  not  maintain  key-man  life
insurance on any of our officers. A loss of any of them could adversely affect our business.
Our officers and directors may have potential conflicts of interest due to their responsibilities with other entities.
The  officers  and  directors  of  the  Company  serve  as  officers  and/or  directors  of  other  companies  in  the  mining  industry,  which  may  create  situations  where  the
interests of the director or officer may become conflicted. The companies to which some of our officers and directors provide services may be potential competitors
with the Company at some point in the future. The directors and officers owe the Company fiduciary duties with respect to any current or future conflicts of interest.
We may experience difficulty managing our anticipated growth.
We may be subject to growth-related risks including capacity constraints and pressure on our internal systems and controls. Our ability to manage growth effectively
will require us to continue to implement and improve our operational and financial systems and to attract and retain qualified management and technical personnel to
meet the needs of our anticipated growth. Our inability to deal with this growth could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of
operations and prospects.
We are subject to the volatility of metal and mineral prices.
The economics of developing metal and mineral properties are affected by many factors beyond our control including, without limitation, the cost of operations,
variations in the grade ore or resource mined, and the price of such resources. The market prices of the metals for which we are exploring are highly speculative and
volatile. Depending on the price of gold or other resources, we may determine that it is impractical to commence or continue commercial production. The price of
gold has fluctuated widely in recent years. The price of gold and other metals and minerals may not remain stable, and such prices may not be at levels that will make
it feasible to continue our exploration activities, or commence or continue commercial production.
We may not have clear title to our properties.
Acquisition of title to mineral properties is a very detailed and time-consuming process, and title to our properties may be affected by prior unregistered agreements
or transfer, or undetected defects. Our prospecting licenses are subject to renewal by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals of Tanzania. There is a risk that we may
not have clear title to all our mineral property interests, or they may be subject to challenge or impugned in the future, which would have a material adverse effect on
our business.
We are currently experiencing an unprecedented influx of illegal artisanal activity on our Kwandege target area as well as (particularly) on several high priority
targets on our larger Mjembe target area. We have lodged formal complaints on several occasions to local, regional and central government authorities including the
Commissioner of Energy and Minerals at the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. To date, we have had little success with the removal of the illegal artisanal miners
from our target areas. Despite our having clearly defined rights and there being no dispute that the activities of the artisanal miners are illegal, the political will to
address the issue seems to be lacking. We see this as a serious threat to our on-going activities in Tanzania.
12
Our mineral property interests may be subject to other mining licenses.
Local residents in Tanzania may have registered the right to mine in small areas located within a prospecting license; such rights are evidenced by a mining license.
There can be no guarantee that we will be successful in negotiating with mining license owners to acquire their rights if we determine that we need their permission
to drill or mine on the land covered by such mining licenses.
We have requirements for and there is an uncertainty of access to additional capital.
At May 31, 2015, we had cash of $85,985 and a working capital deficiency of $382,358. We will continue to incur exploration costs to fund our plan of operations
and intend to fund our plan of operations from working capital, equity subscriptions and debt financing. Ultimately, our ability to continue our exploration activities
depends  in  part  on  our  ability  to  commence  operations  and  generate  revenues  or  to  obtain  financing  through  joint  ventures,  debt  financing,  equity  financing,
production sharing agreements or some combination of these or other means. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any such financing.
We have no cash flow from operations and depend on equity financing for our operations.
Our current operations do not generate any cash flow. Any work on our properties may require additional equity financing. If we seek funding from existing or new
joint venture partners, our project interests will be diluted. If we seek additional equity financing, the issuance of additional shares will dilute the current interests of
our shareholders. We may not be able to obtain additional funding to allow us to fulfill our obligations on our existing exploration property or any future exploration
properties. Our failure to obtain such additional financing could result in delay or indefinite postponement of further exploration and the possible partial or total loss
of our potential interest in certain properties or dilution of our interest in certain properties which would have a material adverse effect on our business.
Our directors and officers are indemnified for any monies they pay in settlement of actions performed while a director or officer.
Sections  78.7502  and  78.751  of  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes  provide  for  indemnification  of  our  officers  and  directors  in  certain  situations  where  they  might
otherwise personally incur liability, judgments, penalties, fines and expenses in connection with a proceeding or lawsuit to which they might become parties because
of their position with our Company. We have authorized the indemnification of our officers and directors to the full extent available under the Nevada Revised
Statutes.
Risks related to government controls and regulations
We are subject to complex federal, provincial, state, local and other laws, controls and regulations that could adversely affect the cost, manner and feasibility of
conducting our operations.
Mineral exploration, production, marketing and transportation activities are subject to extensive controls and regulations imposed by various levels of government,
which may be amended from time to time. Governments may regulate or intervene with respect to price, taxes, and the exportation. Regulations may be changed
from time to time in response to economic or political conditions. The implementation of new regulations or the modification of existing regulations affecting the
mining industry could increase our costs, any of which may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects. In
addition, in order to conduct operations, we require licenses from various governmental authorities. We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain all of the
licenses and permits that may be required to conduct operations that we may desire to undertake.
Our business activities are conducted in Tanzania.
Our mineral exploration activities in Tanzania may be affected in varying degrees by political stability and government regulations relating to the mining industry
and foreign investment in that country. The government of Tanzania may institute regulatory policies that adversely affect the exploration and development (if any)
of our properties. Any changes in regulations or shifts in political conditions in this country are beyond our control and may materially adversely affect our business.
While the Company’s management will propose a measure to mitigate the effects, our operations may be affected in varying degrees by government regulations with
respect to restrictions on production, price controls, export controls, foreign exchange controls, income taxes, expropriation of property, environmental legislation
and mine safety.
As a public company, our compliance costs and risks have increased in recent years.
Legal, accounting and other expenses associated with public company reporting requirements have increased significantly in the past few years. We anticipate that
general and administrative costs associated with regulatory compliance will continue to increase with on-going compliance requirements under the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act  of  2002,  as  well  as  any  new  rules  implemented  by  the  SEC  in  the  future.  These  rules  and  regulations  have  significantly  increased  our  legal  and  financial
compliance costs and made some activities more time consuming and costly. We cannot assure you that we will effectively meet all of the requirements of these
regulations, including Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Any failure to effectively implement internal controls, or to resolve difficulties encountered in their
implementation, could harm our operating results, cause us to fail to meet reporting obligations, or result in our principal executive officer and principal financial
officer being required to give a qualified assessment of our internal control over financial reporting. Any such result could cause investors to lose confidence in our
reported financial information, which could have a material adverse effect on the trading price of our common stock and our ability to raise capital. These rules and
regulations have made it more difficult and more expensive for us to obtain director and officer liability insurance in the future. As a result, it may be more difficult
for us to attract and retain qualified individuals to serve on our board of directors or as executive officers.
13
Risks Related to Our Common Stock
The trading price of our common stock may be volatile.
The price of our common shares may increase or decrease in response to a number of events and factors, including: trends in the mineral sector in which we operate;
changes in the market price of gold; current events affecting the global economic situation; changes in financial estimates; our acquisitions and financings; quarterly
variations in our operating results; the operating and share price performance of other companies that investors may deem comparable; and purchase or sale of blocks
of our common shares. These factors, or any of them, may materially adversely affect the prices of our common shares regardless of our operating performance.
A decline in the price of our common stock could affect our ability to raise further working capital and adversely impact our operations.
A decline in the price of our common stock could result in a reduction in the liquidity of our common stock and a reduction in our ability to raise additional capital
for our operations. Because our operations to date have been principally financed through the sale of equity securities, a decline in the price of our common stock
could have an adverse effect upon our liquidity and our continued operations. A reduction in our ability to raise equity capital in the future would have a material
adverse effect upon our business plan and operations, including our ability to continue our current operations. If our stock price declines, we may not be able to raise
additional capital or generate funds from operations sufficient to meet our obligations.
We could be required to rescind an offering of our shares.
On  January  23,  2006,  the  Pennsylvania  Securities  Commission  (“PSC”)  issued  an  inquiry  letter  to  our  Company.  The  inquiry  alleged  that  we  offered  and  sold
securities to investors without being in compliance with Regulation D and without registration. The PSC notified us that an acceptable course of action was for us to
offer the Pennsylvania state residents an opportunity to rescind their investment with us. While the Pennsylvania state residents have rejected our offer to repurchase
their shares, we do not plan to make the same offer to our other US investors, residents of California, or our British Columbia resident investors. If the investors
invoke their rescission right or if any securities commission requires us to offer a right of rescission to the investors, we may have to refund the related funds.
Our stock is a penny stock. Trading of our stock may be restricted by the SEC’s penny stock regulations and FINRA’s sales practice requirements, which may
limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock.
Our common stock will be subject to the “Penny Stock” Rules of the SEC, which will make transactions in our common stock cumbersome and may reduce the value
of an investment in our common stock.
Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Pink, which is generally considered to be a less efficient market than markets such as NASDAQ or the national exchanges,
and which may cause difficulty in conducting trades and difficulty in obtaining future financing. Further, our securities will be subject to the “penny stock rules”
adopted pursuant to Section 15(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). The penny stock rules apply generally to companies
whose common stock trades at less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain limited exemptions. Such rules require, among other things, that brokers who trade “penny
stock” to  persons  other  than  “established  customers” complete  certain  documentation,  make  suitability  inquiries  of  investors  and  provide  investors  with  certain
information concerning trading in the security, including a risk disclosure document and quote information under certain circumstances. Many brokers have decided
not to trade “penny stock” because of the requirements of the “penny stock rules” and, as a result, the number of broker-dealers willing to act as market makers in
such securities is limited. In the event that we remain subject to the “penny stock rules” for any significant period, there may develop an adverse impact on the
market, if any, for our securities. Because our securities are  subject to the “penny stock rules”,  investors will find it more difficult to dispose of our securities.
Further, it is more difficult: (i) to obtain accurate quotations, (ii) to obtain coverage for significant news events because major wire services, such as the Dow Jones
News Service, generally do not publish press releases about such companies, and (iii) to obtain needed capital.
In addition to the “penny stock” rules promulgated by the SEC, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) has adopted rules that require a broker-
dealer  to  have  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  an  investment  is  suitable  for  a  customer  when  recommending  the  investment  to  that  customer.  Prior  to
recommending speculative low-priced securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must make reasonable efforts to obtain information about the
customer’s  financial  status,  tax  status,  investment  objectives  and  other  information.  Under  interpretations  of  these  rules,  FINRA  believes  that  there  is  a  high
probability that speculative low priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers. FINRA requirements make it more difficult for broker-dealers to
recommend that their customers buy our common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our stock and have an adverse effect on the market for our
shares.
ITEM 1B.
UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
ITEM 2.
PROPERTIES
Our principal office is currently located at P.O. Box 33507, Plot 82A, ITV Road, Mikocheni Light Industrial Area, Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania
and our Canada office is located at Suite 200, 5700 Yonge Street, Toronto, Ontario, M2M 4K2, Canada.
Our mineral claim interests and the properties underlying such interests are described above under Item 1, “Business”.
14
ITEM 3.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Except as disclosed below, management is not aware of any legal proceedings contemplated by any governmental authority or any other party involving us or our
properties. As of the date of this report, no director, officer or affiliate is (i) a party adverse to us in any legal proceeding or (ii) has an adverse interest to us in any
legal proceedings. Management is not aware of any other legal proceedings pending or that have been threatened against us or our properties.
On February 8, 2012, Ruby Creek Resources Inc. (“RCR”) filed a lawsuit against the Company in the Supreme Court, State of New York, in which RCR alleges that
the  Company  participated  in  a  fraudulent  transfer  of  certain  mineral  property  interests  in  Tanzania  that  RCR  had  the  right  to  purchase  pursuant  to  a  series  of
agreements with the Company. The Company is of the view that such allegations were without merit and vigorously contested the action.
On February 23, 2012, the Company filed a lawsuit against RCR in the Supreme Court of British Columbia (the “British Columbia Action”), seeking relief for
RCR’s breach of its payment obligations under the above-referenced agreements and seeking an order that RCR remove the U.S. restrictive legend from 4,000,000
RCR shares issued to the Company under the agreements.
In addition to the British Columbia Action, on May 21, 2012 in answering RCR’s claim in New York, the Company counterclaimed against RCR on the basis of the
alleged breaches set out in the British Columbia Action (the “New York Counter Claim”). On November 19, 2012, the British Columbia Action was dismissed on the
grounds that the Court in British Columbia did not have jurisdiction and further that the dismissal was without prejudice to either of the Company’s and RCR’s
respective actions in New York against one another. This Order was granted by consent of both the Company and RCR.
On January 13, 2015, the Company and RCR reached a binding settlement regarding the above-referenced litigation. The settlement does not require any monetary
payment by the Company to RCR. Under the terms of the settlement, the Company will turn over its interest in Ruby Creek Resources (Tanzania) Limited and has
agreed  to  return  to  RCR  the  4,000,000  shares  of  restricted  RCR  common  stock  previously  issued  to  the  Company.  Both  parties  have  agreed  to  dismiss  their
respective  claims,  with  prejudice,  and  the  litigation  is  now  concluded.  Although  the  Company  has  not  yet  received  formal  settlement  documents  from  RCR  as
agreed, the settlement is binding and the litigation is concluded.
On October 25, 2012, Craig Alford filed a lawsuit against the Company in the Supreme Court of British Columbia for breach of an alleged employment agreement.
Mr.  Alford  claims  the  agreement  was  for  a  term  of  three  years,  commencing  on  March  1,  2011,  with  a  monthly  salary  of  $12,500.  Mr.  Alford  claims  that  the
Company wrongfully terminated the agreement in October 2011 and is seeking judgment in the amount of $362,500. The Company is of the view that the allegation
is without merit and intends to vigorously contest the action. On February 4, 2013 the Company filed its response to Mr. Alford’s claim with the Supreme Court of
British Columbia.
ITEM 4.
MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
PART II
ITEM 5.
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF 
EQUITY SECURITIES
Market Information
Our shares of common stock were quoted for trading on the OTC Bulletin Board under the symbol “DLKM.OB” on March 23, 2005. On February 14, 2012, the
Company changed its name to Handeni Gold Inc., and its trading symbol was changed to “HNDI”. Our common stock is currently trading on OTC Pink market tier.
The market for our common stock is limited, volatile and sporadic. The following table sets forth the high and low prices relating to our common stock for the
periods indicated, as provided by the OTC Bulletin Board. These quotations reflect inter-dealer prices without retail mark-up, mark-down, or commissions, and may
not reflect actual transactions.
QUARTER ENDED
May 31, 2015 
February 28, 2015 
November 30, 2014 
August 31, 2014 
May 31, 2014 
February 28, 2014 
November 30, 2013 
August 31, 2013 
May 31, 2013
HIGH
$0.007 
$0.017 
$0.004 
$0.007 
$0.025 
$0.010 
$0.024 
$0.020 
$0.029
15
LOW
$0.002 
$0.002 
$0.002 
$0.002 
$0.003 
$0.002 
$0.003 
$0.007 
$0.008
Holders
As at August 18, 2015, we had 321,416,654 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding, which were held by approximately 152 registered holders.
Our transfer agent is Transhare Corporation, whose address is 4626 S. Broadway, Englewood, CO 80113, U.S.A., telephone phone number is 303-662-1112 and fax
number is 303-662-1113.
Dividend Policy
No dividends have been declared or paid on our common stock. We have incurred recurring losses and do not currently intend to pay any cash dividends in the
foreseeable future.
Securities Authorized For Issuance Under Compensation Plans
We adopted a Stock Option Plan, dated April 27, 2007 (the “2007 Stock Option Plan”), under which we were authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to a
total of 10,000,000 shares of common stock. No more options may be granted or exercised under the 2007 Stock Option Plan.
We adopted an additional Stock Option Plan, dated October 20, 2008 (the “2008 Stock Option Plan”), under which we were authorized to grant stock options to
acquire up to a total of 10,000,000 shares of common stock. No more options may be granted or exercised under the 2008 Stock Option Plan.
We adopted an additional Stock Option Plan, dated August 11, 2010 (the “August 2010 Stock Option Plan”), under which we were authorized to grant stock options
to acquire up to a total of 10,000,000 shares of common shares. No more options may be granted or exercised under the August 2010 Stock Option.
We adopted an additional Stock Incentive Plan, dated November 29, 2010 (the “November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan”), under which we are authorized to grant
stock and/or stock options to acquire up to a total of 40,000,000 shares of common shares. The following summary of the November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan is not
complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan, a copy of which is incorporated by reference to our Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2011.
The  November  2010  Stock  Incentive  Plan  provides  for  the  granting  of  stock  options,  stock  appreciation  rights,  stock  and  other  equity  awards  as  set  out  in  the
November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan to our directors, officers, employees or consultants. The maximum number of shares that may be issued under the November
2010 Stock Incentive Plan are 40,000,000 shares of our common stock. As of May 31, 2015 and the date of this report, there remained 10,700,000 shares of common
stock available to be issued under the November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan. No insider of the Company is eligible to receive an award under the Plan where (i) the
insider is not a director or senior officer of the Company, (ii) any award, together with all of the Company’s previously established or proposed awards under the
Plan could result at any time in (a) the number of shares reserved for issuance pursuant to options granted to the insider exceeding 50% of the outstanding issue of
common  stock  or  (b)  the  issuance  to  the  insider  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  options  within  a  one-year  period  of  the  number  of  shares  exceeding  50%  of  the
outstanding issue of our common stock. Unless the administrator under the Plan determines that an award to a grantee is not designed to qualify as performance-
based compensation, the maximum number of shares with respect to options and/or stock appreciation rights that may be granted during any one calendar year under
the November 2010 Stock Option Plan to any one grantee is 20,000,000, all of which may be granted as incentive stock options, and the maximum aggregate grant of
restricted stock, unrestricted shares, restricted stock units and deferred stock units in any one calendar year to any one grantee is 20,000,000. The November 2010
Stock Incentive Plan is administered by a committee consisting of two or more members of our Board of Directors, who have the authority to, among other things,
interpret the November 2010 Stock Option Plan, select eligible participants, determine whether and to what extent awards are granted under the November 2010
Stock Option Plan, approve award agreements under the November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan and amend the terms of any outstanding award granted under the
November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan.
The table set forth below presenting information relating to our equity compensation plans as of the date of May 31, 2015:
Plan Category
Equity Compensation Plans to be 
Approved by Security Holders 
Equity Compensation Plans Not 
Approved by Security Holders (2007, 
2008, August 2010 and November 
2010 Stock Incentive Plans)
Number of Securities to
be Issued Upon Exercise
of Outstanding Options,
Warrants and Rights
(a)
Weighted-Average
Exercise Price of
Outstanding Options,
Warrants and Rights
(b)
Number of Securities
Remaining Available for
Future Issuance Under Equity
Compensation Plans (excluding
column (a))
N/A
N/A
N/A
28,300,000
$0.23
10,700,000
16
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
None.
No Repurchases
Neither we nor any affiliated purchaser has made any purchases of our equity securities during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended May 31, 2015.
ITEM 6.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition, changes in financial position, plan of operations and results of operations should be read in conjunction with (i)
our  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  as  at  May  31,  2015  and  2014  and  (ii)  the  section  entitled  “Business” included  in  this  annual  report.  All  financial
information in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A” or the “discussion”) is expressed and prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles. All dollar references are to the U.S. dollar, the Company’s reporting currency, unless otherwise noted. Some numbers in this MD&A have
been rounded to the nearest thousand for discussion purposes.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This MD&A contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions with respect to the Company’s activities and future financial
results, which are made based upon management’s current expectations and beliefs. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties, including
statements  regarding  the  Company’s  capital  needs,  business  plans  and  expectations.  Our  actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated  in  these
forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report. Any
statements contained herein that are not statements of historical facts may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Management disclaims any obligation to
publicly update these statements, or disclose any difference between its actual results and those reflected in these statements. Given these uncertainties, readers are
cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
Overview
The Company is engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties in the United Republic of Tanzania, Africa, through its wholly-owned subsidiaries,
HG Limited (formerly: DLM Tanzania Limited), and Douglas Lake Tanzania Limited which is inactive. Over these years, the Company has built strong relationships
with the Ministry of Mines, the Geological Survey of Tanzania, and other government agencies in Tanzania.
In the past five years, the Company has focused exclusively on its Handeni Gold Project located in Tanzania. The Company’s exploration activities conducted in the
past two fiscal years were outlined under Item 1. Business – Our Mineral Claims, above.
Our exploration program and achievements during our fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 are highlighted as follows:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
The Company now has 5 high potential drill targets (1, 2, 5, 7 and 16) of the 17 areas investigated in detail on its approximately 423 km2 license areas in the
Handeni district. Significant anomalous results have been achieved on 3 additional targets. We consider this a major achievement, specifically with reference
to the Handeni terrane and complexity of gold occurrences in the district. We envisage drilling programs on each of these targets.
Three (3) more targets (8, 10 and 15) have significant gold anomalies based on exploration conducted thus far. Progress in terms of soil sampling, detail
ground geophysics, pitting, trenching and assaying on these are hampered by a lack of funding and the Company may need to re-evaluate its exploration
program  by  relinquishing  lower  priority  targets  (such  as  those  on  the  Gole  structure)  to  focus  on  those  on  which  anomalous  gold  have  already  been
delineated.
Targets 4 and 11 are considered lower priority, but work on them will continue as funds become available. The major effort for the time being on these areas
will be focused on XRF analyses.
Mapping and geophysics conducted thus far on the four (4) Gole targets (12, 13, 14 and 17) point towards the need for an intensive ground geophysics
program followed by trenching and pitting over a large area. The Company is not currently in a position to fund thus and will, for the time being, focus its
efforts on higher priority areas.
We completed our evaluation process of the application of XRF to identify soil samples with a high likelihood to contain anomalous gold values based on
the meticulous analyses of 19,992 soil samples. The Company was successful in delineating anomalous gold occurrences based on a combination of major
and trace elements, thus pre-selecting samples to be submitted for gold assay. We have shown (specifically on Target 7) that this made can be applied very
successfully in the Handeni region.
17
f)
g)
h)
i)
j)
k)
l)
m)
We analysed a total of 7,426 drill core samples by XRF to evaluate the correlation (if any) between particular major and trace elements and Au anomalies in
gold containing lithologies as well as hanging wall and footwall sequences. Due to a lack of funding and manpower this project is yet to be completed. We
aim to have these results ready prior to commencing our next drilling phase.
We  completed  the  XRF  analyses  of  5,672  soil  samples,  standards  and  blanks  of  a  25km2  area  within  PL6743/2010,  previously  selected  based  on  a
geophysical anomaly. These samples will be treated statistically and those with a high likelihood of anomalous gold will be submitted for assays.
We completed a detailed structural interpretation of the Kwandege target with the aim of completion the final recommendations for the further drilling of this
target.
We submitted 84 samples for gold assay as a pilot investigation on one of the targets on PL6743/2010. In combination with the large amount of XRF results
conducted on this target the soil sampling method will be adapted to yield the best possible results in the Handeni district.
We completed mapping and lithogeochemical sampling on Target 5 and submitted samples for gold assays. This remains a target with high potential based
on the results of the lithogeochemical gold assays and soil sample results combined with the geophysics.
We  completed  a  detailed  geological  map,  a  preliminary  structural  interpretation,  a  ground  magnetic  survey  as  well  as  detailed  soil  sampling  and  XRF
analyses on our Mjembe target. The results defined a significant potential gold mineralization zone with a high correlation between geochemical, structural
and geophysical data. The success of the Company’s exploration program is illustrated by the high correlation between illegal artisanal mining activities and
our anomalous areas. The illegal mining activity issue on the Mjembe targets are highlighted in this document under “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our
Company”
We envisage that we will dramatically reduce our ground holding in the Handeni district within the next few months to only retain areas of proven high
value such as targets that will have drill status at that stage.
During October 2014, the Company fulfilled the requirements for its licenses to be uploaded on the Topo Cadastral system of the Ministry of Minerals and
Energy of Tanzania. This enables rigorous control and transparency of all aspects of licensing, reporting and renewal of properties.
Plan of Operations
Our plan of operations through our next fiscal year ending May 31, 2016 is to continue to focus on the exploration of our Handeni mineral property in Tanzania, and
the budget for this plan requires approximately $0.6 million for our plan of the exploration work, $100,000 for mineral licenses fees and a minimum of $0.6 million
for our general and administration expenses, professional and consulting fees and other operating expenses.
Handeni Gold Inc. has clearly identifiable goals for its exploration program in Tanzania:
a)
b)
c)
d)
As previously reported the Company will focus on its regional target identification for the remainder of the fiscal year 2016 on the Gole 11 km by 4.5 km
sheath fold, a feature with a combination of geological elements rendering it having high potential for gold mineralization based on experience in the district.
This will conclude the Company’s regional target identification program in the Handeni area.
Continue exploration on drill targets simultaneously with the completing of the regional program.
Reduce the Company’s license holding in the Handeni district significantly by the end of the fiscal year 2016 to include only identified drill targets.
Continue efforts to secure funding for drilling on drill targets.
Management believes that the Company is on its way to achieve these goals.
Illegal  artisanal  activity  on  the  Company’s  license  areas  is  increasing.  The  Company  is  addressing  this  issue  with  responsible  local  and  central  government
authorities. The Company will follow all available legal structures to protect its interests.
Other low cost exploration activities being conducted on a continuous basis on the Company’s Handeni licenses include:
a)
b)
c)
d)
Identification of potential alluvial mining areas other than those currently known and being evaluated by utilizing remote sensing activities.
A detailed interpretation of already collected geophysical data, specifically aimed at Target 8 and the Mjembe target.
A petrological, geochemical and mineralogical investigation of the Kwandege drill core to understand the style of gold mineralization at this locality.
The planning and siting of drill holes as a follow up Reverse Circulation program to evaluate the near – surface potential of the Kwandege target.
The estimated budget for the completion of these exploration programs is provided below:
18
EXPLORATION WORK
Ground Geophysics 
Mapping, trenching, sampling, etc. 
Drilling 
Geologists, field personnel and general exploration 
Sundry & contingencies 
TOTAL
BUDGET (US$)
10,000 
20,000 
350,000 
150,000 
50,000 
$580,000
At May 31, 2015, we had cash of $86,000 but a working capital deficit of $382,000. In addition, we have a total of $285,000 funds available to be withdrawn
pursuant to a facility agreement with a related party. As such, we estimated that we will still need a minimum of $1.4 million additional funds in order to cover our
planned operations over the next twelve months ending May 31, 2016. Our actual expenditures may exceed our estimations.
We anticipate that we will not generate any revenues for so long as we are an exploration stage company. Accordingly, we will be required to obtain additional
financing in order to pursue our plan of operations.
We believe that external debt financing will not be an alternative for funding our next fiscal year exploration, as we do not have significant tangible assets to secure
any debt financing. Therefore, we anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock and/or related parties
debt financing. We cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to obtain sufficient financing to fund our acquisition and exploration program
going forward. In the absence of sufficient funding, we will not be able to continue acquisition and exploration of mineral claims and we will be forced to abandon
our mineral claims and our plan of operations. Even if we are successful in obtaining financing to fund our acquisition and exploration program, there is no assurance
that we will obtain the funding necessary to pursue any advanced exploration of any mineral claims.
Results of Operations
During the year ended May 31, 2015, we spent approximately $214,000 (2014 - $222,000) cash on exploration, annual property rental and licenses renewal fees. We
were not able to make further expenditures with respect to our 2015 plan of operations due to our funding limitation. During the year ended May 31, 2015, we also
spent approximately $543,000 (2014 - $799,000) cash expenditures on other operating expenses.
We have had no operating revenues since our inception (January 5, 2004) to May 31, 2015. The following table sets out our losses for the periods indicated:
Revenue 
Expenses 
       Consulting fees 
       Depreciation 
       Exploration expenses 
       General and administrative 
       Interest expense 
       Professional 
       Rent 
       Travel and investor relations 
Total Expenses 
Loss From Operations 
Other Income (Expenses) 
       Gain on disposal or write-down of equipment 
       Impairment of restricted marketable securities (Note 6) 
       Loss on restricted marketable securities (Note 6) 
       Interest income 
Total other (Expenses) / Income
Net Loss
Year Ended May 31, 2015 Compared to Year Ended May 31, 2014
For the Years Ended,
May 31, 2015
May 31, 2014
$
-
$
-
17,070 
53,822 
213,953 
442,966 
92,487 
124,552 
59,924 
36,435 
1,041,209 
(1,041,209)
35,058 
(140,000) 
(20,000) 
189 
(124,753)
$
(1,165,962)  $
22,500 
189,200 
221,977 
524,088 
89,869 
141,356 
83,994 
24,111 
1,297,095 
(1,297,095)
3,210 
(1,000,000) 
-
290 
(996,500)
(2,293,595)
Our net loss for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 was $1,166,000, compared to $2,294,000 for the same period ended May 31, 2014, mainly due to $160,000
(2014 - $1,000,000) loss and permanent impairment of marketable securities and the changes in operating expenses set forth below.
Our operating expenses for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 decreased by $256,000 to $1,041,000 from $1,297,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014, as
follows:
19
•
•
•
•
•
•
our consulting, general and administrative fees decreased by $87,000 to $460,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 (2014 - $547,000), primarily
due to decreased independent directors’ fees, fewer employees and consultants, and continuing cost management; At May 31, 2015, approximately $455,000
(2014 - $278,000) of general and administrative fees remained as payables due to related parties; 
depreciation  decreased  by  $135,000  to  $54,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2015  (2014  - $189,000)  mainly  due  to  less  net  book  value  on
equipment; 
our exploration expenses decreased by $8,000 to $214,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 (2014 - $222,000) due to further decreased exploration
and drilling activities caused by our funding limitation during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015; 
our professional fees decreased by $17,000 to $124,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 (2014 - $141,000) primarily due to continuing decreased
legal and accounting services as a result of more work performed in-house by management to reduce costs. 
our rent expenses decreased by $24,000 to $60,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 (2014 - $84,000) due to a significant decrease on office rent as
a result of our Tanzania office moving to a small office in March 2014 and the Vancouver office lease expiry in September 2014. Included in the fiscal year
ended May 31, 2015, there was an increased rent of $36,000 (2014 - $25,200) representing 60% of the rental expense associated with renting our Chief
Executive Officer’s family house in Tanzania; 
our travel and investor relations expenses increased by $12,000 to $36,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 (2014 - $24,000) primarily due to
travel expenses incurred for an in-person Board of Directors meeting held in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Year Ended May 31, 2014 Compared to Year Ended May 31, 2013
Our net loss for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 was $2,294,000, compared to $4,238,000 for the same period ended May 31, 2013, mainly due to $1,000,000
(2013 - $1,600,000) permanent impairment of marketable securities and the following operation expenses changes.
Our operating expenses for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 decreased by $1.36 million to $1,297,000 from $2,653,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2013, as
follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
our consulting, general and administrative fees decreased by $834,000 to $547,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 (2013 - $1,381,000), primarily
due to decreases of $345,000 in cash expenditures and $489,000 in stock-based compensation. The stock-based compensation included in consulting, general
and  administrative  fees  was  $Nil  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2014  (2013  - $489,000);  Excluding  the  stock-based  compensation,  our  other
consulting,  general  and  administrative  fees  was  decreased  to  $547,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2014  (2013  - $892,000),  primarily  due  to
decreased independent directors’ fees, less employees and consultants, and continuing cost management; At May 31, 2014, approximately $278,000 (2013 -
$145,000) of general and administrative fees remained as payables due to the related parties; 
depreciation increased  by  $14,000  to  $189,000  during the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2014 (2013  - $203,000)  mainly due  to  less net  book  value  on  the
equipment; 
our  exploration  expenses  decreased  by  $437,000  to  $222,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2014  (2013  - $659,000)  due  to  further  decreased
exploration and drilling activities caused by our funding limitation during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014; 
interest expenses increased to $90,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 (2013 - $28,000), mainly due to increased deemed interest on an interest
free unsecured loan from a related party. Such deemed interest was recorded as donated capital; 
our professional fees decreased by $45,000 to $141,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 (2012 - $186,000) primarily due to continuing decreased
legal and accounting services as a result of more work performed in-house by management to save the cost. 
our rent expenses decreased by $10,000 to $84,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 (2013 - $94,000) mainly due to our Tanzania office reduced to
half commencing March 2013 and further moved to a smaller office commencing March 2014. In addition, included in the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014,
there was $25,200 rent representing 60% of rental expense associated with renting our Chief Executive Officer’s family house in Tanzania pursuant to the
Executive Services Agreement. Such rent for 2012 was paid and included in the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012. 
our travel and investor relations expenses decreased by $75,000 to $24,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 (2013 - $99,000) primarily due to
significantly less travel expenses and investor relations expenses and cost management.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has been reviewing its budgets for its current business needs and its further exploration. We estimate that our total expenditures for our fiscal year
ending May 31, 2016 will be approximately $1.3 million, as outlined above under the heading “Plan of Operations”. At May 31, 2015, we had cash of $86,000 but a
working capital deficit of $382,000. We believe that we have insufficient capital to fund our plan of operations in the next 12 months and we estimate we will be
required to obtain a minimum of $1.4 million additional funds in order to pursue our planned operations over the fiscal year ending May 31, 2016.
On November 20, 2014, the Company entered into a credit facility agreement with a private company controlled by our Chairman of the Board of Directors. The
funding is also in the form of an interest-free unsecured loan to the Company of up to $500,000 due May 31, 2017. As of the date of this report, we received a total
of $350,000, with $150,000 available to be withdrawn pursuant to this facility agreement.
20
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, we received $10,000 of recoverable goods and services tax/harmonized sales tax from Canada Revenue Agency. Based
on requirements of the Tanzania Revenue Authority (“TRA”), we had submitted recoverable value added tax (“VAT”) refund certificates in January 2015 with TRA
to request a VAT refund of $24,000 (TZS 49,061,634). However, as of the date of this report, we have not received the claimed refund yet.
As at May 31, 2015, there was $29,000 of recoverable VAT paid in Tanzania and $10,000 of recoverable goods and services tax paid in Canada. Such recoverable
amounts were included in our working capital and expected to be refunded during the fiscal year 2016.
We have not generated revenues since the date of inception on January 5, 2004, and our cash has been generated primarily from the sale of our securities. During the
12-month period following the date of this annual report, we anticipate that we will not generate any revenue. We anticipate that additional funding will be in the
form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock, debt financing, joint ventures or some combination of these or other means. We believe that external
debt financing will not be an alternative at this stage for funding additional phases of our exploration as we do not have significant tangible assets to secure any debt
financing.
We cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding to continue our acquisition and exploration program going forward. If
we are not able to obtain financing in the amounts required or on terms that are acceptable to us, we may be forced to scale back, or abandon, our plan of operations.
Even if we are successful in obtaining equity and/or debt financing to fund our acquisition and exploration program, there is no assurance that we will obtain the
funding necessary to pursue any advanced exploration of any mineral claims. If we do not continue to obtain additional funding, we will be forced to abandon our
mineral claims and our plan of operations.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $762,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, as compared to $203,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014.
The increase was mainly due to $538,000 of recoverable VAT received from TRA in the year ended May 31, 2014.
During the fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2015, net cash used in operating activities was $147,000, while net cash provided by operating activities was $342,000
during the same period in 2014. Net cash used in operating activities from our inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2015 was $20.2 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $46,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015. During the year, we received $35,000 from disposal of vehicles
and $11,000 from redemption of restricted cash equivalent. During the year ended May 31, 2014, we purchased $3,000 of office equipment and computer software,
and received $7,000 from disposal of office furniture and vehicle.
During the fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2015, we received $15,000 from disposal of vehicle. During the same period in 2014, net cash used in investing activities
was $1,000. Net cash used in investing activities from our inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2015 was $786,000 mainly used in purchase of property and
equipment.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, we received $269,000 (2014 – $525,000) cash from a related party as interest-free loans. During the fiscal quarter ended
May 31, 2015, net cash from financing activities was $135,000 (2014 - $50,000) received from a related party as interest-free loans. We have funded our business to
date primarily from sales of our common stock. From our inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2015, net cash provided by sales of our common stock was $20
million and interest-free loans from a related party were $1.3 million.
There are no assurances that we will be able to achieve further sales of our common stock or any other form of additional financing. If we are unable to achieve the
financing necessary to continue our plan of operations, then we will not be able to continue our exploration of the property underlying our mineral claim interest and
our venture will fail.
Going Concern
We  have  not  attained  profitable  operations  and  are  dependent  upon  obtaining  financing  to  pursue  any  extensive  exploration  activities.  The  Company  has  not
generated any revenues and has accumulated losses of $117 million since inception to May 31, 2015. In addition, we had working capital deficit of $382,000 as of
May 31, 2015. For these reasons our auditors stated in their report on our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended May 31, 2015 that they have
substantial doubt we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Future Financings
We anticipate continuing to rely on equity sales of our common shares, debt financing from our related parties, and/or other financing in order to continue to fund
our business operations over next fiscal year ending May 31, 2016. Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to our existing shareholders. There is no
assurance that we will achieve any additional sales of our equity securities or arrange for debt or other financing to fund our planned exploration activities.
21
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in
financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Related Party Transactions
The details of related party transactions are disclosed in footnote 9 of our Company’s audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended May 31,
2015 (Item 8 – FINANCIAL STATEMENTS, below).
Segment Disclosures
The Company operates in one reportable segment, located in Tanzania Africa, being the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. The details of segment
disclosures are disclosed in footnote 15 of our Company’s audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 (Item 8 – FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS, below).
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial condition.
Contractual Obligations
a)
b)
c)
d)
On December 7, 2012, and as amended on September 4, 2013, June 18, 2014 and March 20, 2015, the Company entered into a facility agreement with IPP
Ltd., a private company controlled by the Chairman of the Company. The funding is in the form of an interest free unsecured loan to the Company of up to
$720,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, IPP Ltd. has fully advanced $720,000 to the Company pursuant to this facility agreement.
On October 9, 2013, and as amended on June 18, 2014 and March 20, 2015, the Company entered into a facility agreement with Consultancy & Finance
Company Associates Ltd. (“C&F”), a private company controlled by the Chairman of the Company. The funding is in the form of an interest free unsecured
loan to the Company of up to $405,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, C&F has fully advanced $405,000 to the Company pursuant to this facility
agreement.
On November 20, 2014, the Company entered into a facility agreement with C&F. The funding is in the form of an interest- free unsecured loan to the
Company of up to $500,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, C&F has advanced $215,000 to the Company pursuant to this facility agreement.
On June 23, 2014, the Company’s Tanzania subsidiary, HG Limited, entered into a lease agreement associated with renting our Chief Executive Officer’s
(the “CEO”) family house in Tanzania. The lease is for a period of 24 months commencing on August 1, 2014 and expiring July 31, 2016 extendable for one
year till July 31, 2017 by mutual agreement. The annual rent is $60,000, of which 40% ($24,000) should be reimbursed by another Company which is related
to the Chairman of the Company and the CEO has been also working for. As of the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company has to pay $60,000 prior to
August 1, 2015, the beginning of the second year of lease period, pursuant to this lease agreement. The lease agreement may be terminated by first giving
notice not less than three months after the initial nine months leased.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our  consolidated  financial  statements  and  accompanying  notes  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  United  States  generally  accepted  accounting  principles
applied  on  a  consistent  basis.  The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our consolidated financial statements. In general, management’s estimates are
based on historical experience, on information from third party professionals, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and
circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
We believe our critical accounting policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
The details of our critical accounting policies are disclosed in footnote 2 of our Company’s audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended May
31, 2015 (Item 8 – FINANCIAL STATEMENTS, below).
ITEM 7A.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
22
ITEM 8.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
Consolidated Balance Sheets, May 31, 2015 and 2014 
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficiency) for the years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
23
F-1
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
F-6
To the Stockholders of 
Handeni Gold Inc.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We  have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of  Handeni  Gold  Inc.  as of  May 31,  2015  and  2014  and  the related consolidated statements of
operations  and  comprehensive  loss,  cash  flows  and  stockholders'  equity  (deficiency)  for  the  years  then  ended.  These  consolidated  financial  statements  are  the
responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidation financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. The Company is not required to have, nor were
we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. An audit includes consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis
for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Handeni Gold Inc. as of May
31, 2015 and 2014, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the
consolidated financial statements, the Company has not generated any revenues and has incurred operating losses since inception. These factors raise substantial
doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also discussed in Note 1. The consolidated
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ “Manning Elliott LLP”
CHARTERED PROFESSIONAL ACCOUNTANTS
Vancouver, Canada
August 18, 2015
F-1
Handeni Gold Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Current Assets 
         Cash 
         Amounts receivable (Note 3) 
         Prepaid expenses and deposits (Note 4) 
Total Current Assets 
Restricted cash equivalent (Note 5) 
Restricted marketable securities (Note 6) 
Mineral licenses (Note 7) 
Property and equipment, net (Note 8)
TOTAL ASSETS
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
Current Liabilities 
         Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
         Accounts payable and accrued liabilities - related parties (Note 9) 
         Current portion of loans from related parties (Note 9 (a)) 
Total Current Liabilities 
Loans from related parties (Note 9 (a)) 
Total Liabilities 
Nature of Operations and Going Concern (Note 1) 
Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 7 and 13) 
Stockholders' Equity (Deficiency) 
Common stock (Note 10) 
     Authorized: 500,000,000 shares, $0.001 par value 
     Issued and outstanding: 321,416,654 shares 
     (May 31, 2014 – 321,416,654 shares) 
Additional paid-in capital (Note 10) 
Donated capital 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss 
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage 
Total Stockholders' (Deficiency) / Equity
ASSETS
May 31, 2015
May 31, 2014
$
$
$
$
85,985 
38,751 
306 
125,042 
13,858 
-
1,650,000 
1,474
1,790,374
$
$
52,785 
454,615 
-
507,400 
1,340,000 
1,847,400
532,694 
34,326 
15,076 
582,096 
26,522 
73,600 
1,650,000 
55,446
2,387,664
109,432 
277,500 
1,070,683 
1,457,615 
-
1,457,615
321,417 
116,414,824 
314,982 
-
(117,108,249) 
(57,026)
321,417 
116,414,824 
222,495 
(86,400) 
(115,942,287) 
930,049
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
$
1,790,374
$
2,387,664
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-2
Handeni Gold Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Revenue
Expenses 
       Consulting fees 
       Depreciation 
       Exploration expenses 
       General and administrative 
       Interest expense 
       Professional 
       Rent 
       Travel and investor relations
Total Expenses 
Loss From Operations 
Other Income (Expenses) 
       Gain on disposal of equipment 
       Impairment of restricted marketable securities (Note 6) 
       Loss on restricted marketable securities (Note 6) 
       Interest income 
Total other Expenses
Net Loss 
Other Comprehensive Loss 
       Unrealized loss on marketable securities
Comprehensive Loss
Net Loss per Share - Basic and Diluted 
Basic and Diluted Weighted Average Number of Common Shares Outstanding
For the Years Ended,
May 31, 2015
May 31, 2014
$
-
$
-
17,070 
53,822 
213,953 
442,966 
92,487 
124,552 
59,924 
36,435
1,041,209 
(1,041,209)
35,058 
(140,000) 
(20,000) 
189 
(124,753)
(1,165,962)
-
22,500 
189,200 
221,977 
524,088 
89,869 
141,356 
83,994 
24,111
1,297,095 
(1,297,095)
3,210 
(1,000,000) 
-
290 
(996,500)
(2,293,595)
(66,400)
$
$
(1,165,962)  $
(2,359,995)
(0.00)  $
321,416,654
(0.01) 
321,416,654
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-3
Handeni Gold Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficiency) 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Shares
#
$
Amount
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
Donated 
Capital
$
$
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive 
Income (Loss)
Deficit
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Total
$
Balance – May 31, 2013
321,416,654
321,417
116,414,824
137,379
(1,020,000)
(113,648,692)
2,204,928
Deemed interest on interest-free loan 
from a related party
Impairment of restricted marketable 
securities
Unrealized loss on restricted 
marketable securities
Net loss for the year
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
85,116
–
1,000,000
(66,400)
–
–
–
–
–
–
85,116
1,000,000
(66,400)
–
(2,293,595)
(2,293,595)
Balance – May 31, 2014
321,416,654
321,417
116,414,824
222,495
(86,400)
(115,942,287)
930,049
Deemed interest on interest-free loan 
from a related party
Impairment of restricted marketable 
securities
Realized loss on restricted 
marketable securities
Net loss for the year
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
92,487
–
–
–
Balance – May 31, 2015
321,416,654
321,417
116,414,824
314,982
–
66,400
20,000
–
–
–
–
–
92,487
66,400
20,000
(1,165,962)
(1,165,962)
(117,108,249)
(57,026)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-4
Handeni Gold Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS PROVIDED BY (USED IN): 
Operating Activities: 
     Net loss 
     Adjustments for non-cash items in net loss: 
             Depreciation 
             Donated interest 
             Impairment of marketable securities 
             Loss on restricted marketable securities 
             Loss on unrealized foreign exchange 
             Gain on disposal of equipment 
     Changes in non-cash operating working capital: 
             Amounts receivable 
             Prepaid expenses and deposits 
             Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
             Due to related parties 
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Investing Activities: 
     Proceeds from disposal of equipment 
     Redemption of restricted cash equivalent 
     Purchase of property and equipment 
Cash Provided by Investing Activities
Financing Activities: 
     Loan from a related party 
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
(Decrease) / increase in cash
Cash, at beginning of the year
Cash, at end of the year
For the Years Ended,
May 31, 2015
May 31, 2014
$
(1,165,962)  $
(2,293,595)
53,822 
92,487 
140,000 
20,000 
2,280 
(35,058)
(4,425) 
14,770 
(56,647) 
177,115 
(761,618)
35,208 
10,384 
-
45,592
269,317 
269,317
(446,709)
532,694
$
85,985
$
189,200 
85,116 
1,000,000 
-
1,283 
(3,210)
591,619 
72,710 
22,063 
132,069 
(202,745)
7,013 
-
(2,976) 
4,037
525,000 
525,000
326,292
206,402
532,694
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-5
Handeni Gold Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
1.
Nature of Operations and Going Concern
The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January 5, 2004. On February 14, 2012, the Company changed its name from Douglas Lake
Minerals Inc. to Handeni Gold Inc. (the “Company”). The Company’s principal business is the acquisition and exploration of mineral resources located in
Tanzania, Africa. The Company has not presently determined whether its properties contain mineral reserves that are economically recoverable.
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and
discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has never generated revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends and is
unlikely to pay dividends or generate earnings in the immediate or foreseeable future. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent
upon the continued financial support from its stockholders, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary equity financing to continue operations and to
determine  the  existence,  discovery  and  successful  exploitation  of  economically  recoverable  reserves  in  its  resource  properties,  confirmation  of  the
Company’s interests in the underlying properties, and the attainment of profitable operations.
As  at  May  31,  2015,  the  Company  has  not  generated  any  revenues,  has  a  working  capital  deficiency  of  $382,358,  and  has  accumulated  losses  of
$117,108,249 since inception. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company plans to
raise equity and/or debt financing to fund its operations which may result in substantial dilution to the Company’s stockholders or may not be available, if at
all,  in  amounts  or  on  terms  acceptable  to  the  Company.  If  additional  capital  is  not  obtained,  the  Company  may  be  forced  to  cease  operations.  These
consolidated  financial  statements  do  not include  any  adjustments  to  the  recoverability  and  classification  of  recorded  asset  amounts  and  classification  of
liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
2.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
a)
Basis of Presentation
These consolidated financial statements and related notes are presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States, and are expressed in United States dollars. These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries
described as follows. In June 2011, the Company incorporated in Tanzania a wholly- owned subsidiary, HG Limited, which undertakes mineral
property exploration activities in Tanzania. The Company also has a wholly-owned non-operating Tanzanian subsidiary (Douglas Lake Tanzania
Limited).
All significant intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated. The Company’s fiscal year-end is May 31.
b)
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  United  States  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the reporting period. The Company regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions
related  to  the  estimated  deemed  interest  rates  on  interest-free  related  party  loans,  recoverability  and  useful  life  of  long-lived  assets,  mineral
prospecting licenses, stock-based compensation, deferred income tax asset valuation allowances and contingent liabilities. The Company bases its
estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances,
the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that
are  not  readily  apparent  from  other  sources.  The  actual  results  experienced  by  the  Company  may  differ  materially  and  adversely  from  the
Company’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be
affected.
c)
Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Share
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, Earnings per Share which requires presentation of both basic and
diluted earnings per share (EPS) on the face of the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. Basic EPS is computed by dividing
net income (loss) available to common stockholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the
period.  Diluted  EPS  gives  effect  to  all  dilutive  potential  common  shares  outstanding  during  the  period  using  the  treasury  stock  method  and
convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining
the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants. Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential shares if
their effect is anti-dilutive.
d)
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
ASC 220, Comprehensive Income establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive income (loss) and its components in the
consolidated financial statements. For the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company has no component of other comprehensive loss and accumulated
other comprehensive loss.
e)
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at fair value and they comprise cash on hand, deposits held with banks and other highly liquid investments.
Highly liquid investments are readily convertible to cash and generally have maturities of three months or less from the time acquired. The Company
places its cash and cash equivalents with high quality financial institutions which the Company believes limits credit risk.
F - 6
Handeni Gold Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
2.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
f)
Marketable Securities
The  Company  reports  investments  in  marketable  equity  securities  at  fair  value  based  on  quoted  market  prices.  All  investment  securities  are
designated as available for sale with unrealized gains and losses included in stockholders’ equity. Realized gains and losses are accounted for based
on the specific identification method.
The Company periodically reviews these investments for other-than-temporary declines in fair value based on the specific identification method.
When an other-than-temporary decline has occurred, unrealized losses that are other than temporary are recognized in earnings. When determining
whether a decline is other-than-temporary, the Company examines (i) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value of an investment has
been  lower  than  its  carrying  value;  (ii)  the  financial  condition  and  near- term  prospects  of  the  investee,  including  any  specific  events  that  may
influence the operations of the investee such as changes in technology that may impair the earnings potential of the investee; and (iii) the Company’s
intent and ability to retain its investment in the investee for a sufficient period of time to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. The
Company generally believes that an other-than-temporary decline has occurred when the fair value of the investment is below the carrying value for
one year, in the absence of evidence to the contrary.
g)
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment consists of office equipment, automobiles and computer software recorded at cost and depreciated on a straight-line basis as
follows:
Automobiles 
Camp and equipment 
Office furniture and equipment 
Software
h)
Mineral Property Costs
3 years 
3 years 
3 years 
1 year
The  Company  has  been  in  the  exploration  stage  since  its  inception  on  January  5,  2004  and  has  not  yet  realized  any  revenues  from  its  planned
operations.  It  is  primarily  engaged  in  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  mining  properties.  Mineral  property  exploration  costs  are  expensed  as
incurred.  Mineral  prospecting  licenses  and  mineral  property  acquisition  costs  are  initially  capitalized  in  accordance  with  ASC  805-20-55-37,
whether  Mineral  Rights  are  Tangibel  or  Intangible  Assets.  The  Company  assesses  the  carrying  costs  for  impairment  under  ASC  360-10-35-21,
Accounting for Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying costs may not
be recoverable.
When it has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves, the
costs then incurred to develop such property, are capitalized. Such costs will be amortized using the units-of- production method over the estimated
life of the probable reserve. If mineral properties are subsequently abandoned or impaired, any capitalized costs will be charged to operations.
i)
Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant and Equipment the Company tests long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability when events or
changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are
not  limited  to:  significant  decreases  in  the  market  price  of  the  asset;  significant  adverse  changes  in  the  business  climate  or  legal  factors;
accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset; current period cash
flow  or  operating  losses  combined  with  a  history  of  losses  or  a  forecast  of  continuing  losses  associated  with  the  use  of  the  asset;  and  current
expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. Recoverability is
assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value, which is generally determined based on the sum of the undiscounted cash flows
expected  to  result  from  the  use  and  the  eventual  disposal  of  the  asset,  as  well  as  specific  appraisal  in  certain  instances.  An  impairment  loss  is
recognized when the carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value.
j)
Asset Retirement Obligations
The  Company  accounts  for  asset  retirement  obligations  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  ASC  440  Asset  Retirement  and  Environmental
Obligations which requires the Company to record the fair value of an asset retirement obligation as a liability in the period in which it incurs a legal
obligation associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use
of the assets. The Company did not have any asset retirement obligations as of May 31, 2015 and 2014.
F - 7
Handeni Gold Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
2.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
k)
Financial Instruments
ASC 825, Financial  Instruments requires an entity to maximize the use  of observable  inputs, and the fair value of financial instruments, which
include cash, restricted cash equivalent, restricted marketable securities, and accounts payable were estimated to approximate their carrying values
due to the immediate or short-term maturities of these financial instruments.
The Company’s operations are in Canada and Africa, which results in exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates. The financial
risk  is  the  risk  to  the  Company’s  operations  that  arise  from  fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates  and  the  degree  of  volatility  of  these  rates.
Currently, the Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk.
l)
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. The asset and liability
method provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the
financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are
measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company records a
valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
m)
Foreign Currency Translation
The  functional  and  reporting  currency  of  the  Company  is  the  United  States  dollar.  The  functional  currency  of  the  Company’s  subsidiaries  is
Tanzania shillings. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated to United States dollars in accordance with ASC
830 Foreign  Currency  Translation  Matters, using  the  exchange  rate prevailing  at the  consolidated balance  sheet date. Non-monetary assets  and
liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at rates of exchange in effect at the date of the transaction. Average rates are used to
translate revenues and expenses.
Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of
income. The Company has not, to the date of these consolidated financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of
foreign currency fluctuations.
To the extent that the Company incurs transactions that are not denominated in its functional currency, they are undertaken in Canadian dollars
(“Cdn$”) and Tanzanian shillings. The Company has not, to the date of these consolidated financial statements, entered into derivative instruments
to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
n)
Stock-based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation – Stock Based Compensation and ASC 505, Equity
Based Payments to Non-Employees, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense based on estimated fair values for all
share-based awards made to employees and directors, including stock options.
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The Company uses
the Black-Scholes option-pricing model as its method of determining fair value. This model is affected by the Company’s stock price as well as
assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. These subjective variables include, but are not limited to the Company’s expected stock
price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviours. The value of the portion of the
award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss over the
requisite service period.
All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair
value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable.
o)
Reclassification
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior year’s consolidated financial statements to conform to the current year’s presentation.
p)
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has adopted all new accounting pronouncements that are mandatorily effective and none have a material impact on its consolidated
financial statements.
New accounting pronouncements effective June 1, 2015
During the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company elected to early adopt Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-10, Development Stage Entities
(Topic  915):  Elimination  of  Certain  Financial  Reporting  Requirements.  The  adoption  of  this  standard  allowed  the  Company  to  remove  the
previously disclosed inception-to-date information and all references to exploration stage.
The Company does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that are expected to have a material
impact on its financial position or results of operations.
F - 8
Handeni Gold Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
3.
Amounts Receivable
The components of amounts receivable are as follows:
Recoverable value added tax 
Recoverable harmonized sales tax 
Other receivable
May 31, 2015 
$
May 31, 2014 
$
28,797 
9,830 
124
38,751
23,202 
9,765 
1,359
34,326
The Company had recoverable value added tax (“VAT”) of $28,797 (TZS 57,511,042) as at May 31, 2015 and $23,202 (TZS 38,566,758) as at May 31,
2014.  In  January  2015,  the  Company  submitted  VAT  refund  certificates  to  the  Tanzania  Revenue  Authority  requesting  $24,566  (TZS  49,061,634)
recoverable VAT refund. As of May 31, 2015, the Company had not received such entitled VAT refund. During the year ended May 31, 2014, the Company
had received from the Tanzania Revenue Authority $507,916 (TZS 845,117,520) VAT refund, net of taxes and interest.
4.
Prepaid Expenses and Deposits
The components of prepaid expenses and deposits are as follows:
General and administrative 
Rent
Restricted Cash Equivalent
May 31, 2015 
 $
May 31, 2014 
$
-
306
306
2,343 
12,733
15,076
As of May 31, 2015, the Company has pledged a GIC of $13,858 (May 31, 2014: $26,522) as security held on a corporate credit card.
Restricted Marketable Securities
5.
6.
Ruby Creek 
Resources Inc., 4,000,000 shares
Cost
$ 
2,760,000
May 31, 2015
Other-than-
temporary
Impairment
Loss
$ 
(2,740,000)
Loss on 
Marketable 
Securities 
$
(20,000)
Fair Value 
Based On 
Quoted 
Market Price 
 $
73,600
May 31, 2014 
Other-than-
temporary 
Impairment 
Loss 
$ 
(2,600,000)
Accumulated 
Unrealized 
Loss 
$ 
(86,400)
The 4,000,000 restricted shares of common stock of Ruby Creek Resources Inc. (“RCR”) were issued to the Company on December 16, 2010 as partial
consideration to purchase the mineral property interests under the agreements between RCR and the Company. The initial fair market value of these shares
was $2,760,000 based on RCR’s quoted stock price on the issuance date.
On January 13, 2015, the Company reached a binding settlement to its litigation with RCR. Under the terms of the settlement, the Company will return the
4,000,000 restricted shares of RCR common stock to RCR (see Note 13, below). As a result, the Company has recorded a loss on marketable securities of
$20,000 related to the pending return of these shares. As of May 31, 2015, the Company has recognized a total of $2,740,000 (May 31, 2014: $2,600,000) in
other than temporary impairment losses on these restricted shares.
7.
Mineral Properties and Licenses
a)
Handeni Properties, Tanzania, Africa
Prospecting Licenses (“PLs”)
On September 21, 2010, the Company completed a Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement with IPP Gold Limited (“IPP Gold”), and the Company
acquired four PLs totaling approximately 800 square kilometers, located in the Handeni District of Tanzania (the “Handeni Properties”). IPP Gold
retained a 2.5% net smelter royalty (“NSR”) on the Handeni Properties and the Company has the option to reduce the NSR to 1.25% by paying
$5,000,000. If the NSR is reduced to 1.25% the maximum NSR for any year is capped at $1,000,000. In any year the NSR payment is less than
$1,000,000 the difference between the actual NSR payment and $1,000,000 will be carried forward to subsequent years. In addition if the London
spot price for gold is equal to or greater than $1,500 then the NSR will increase from 2.5% to 3%. The Company issued 133,333,333 restricted
shares of common stock to IPP Gold to acquire the Handeni Properties and no further payments to IPP Gold in shares or cash are required.
F - 9
Handeni Gold Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
7.
Mineral Properties and Licenses (continued)
a)
Handeni Properties, Tanzania, Africa (continued)
Prospecting Licenses (“PLs”) (continued)
On September 1, 2010, the Company entered into a Transaction Fee Agreement with a consultant for services related to soliciting offers from and in
assisting in the negotiation with potential Company financiers, purchasers, acquisition targets and/or joint venture development partners (each such
party being a “Potential Investor”). The initial term of the agreement was a period of 60 days and automatically renews monthly unless otherwise
specifically renewed in writing by each party or terminated by the Company. Pursuant to the agreement, the Company agreed to pay the consultant a
transaction fee for each completed property acquisition transaction in Tanzania (a “Completed Transaction”). The transaction fee is 12.5% of the
shares issuable under each Completed Transaction, payable in restricted common shares at the lowest priced security issuable under each Completed
Transaction. On September 30, 2010, the Company issued 16,666,667 restricted shares of common stock pursuant to the Transaction Fee Agreement
in relation to the acquisition of the Handeni Properties.
The  fair  value  of  the  133,333,333  shares  of  the  Company’s  common  stock  issued  to  IPP  Gold  pursuant  to  the  Acquisition  Agreement  and  the
16,666,667 shares of the Company’s common stock issued pursuant to the Transaction Fee Agreement totaled $60,000,000.
On November 30, 2010, the capitalized acquisition costs of the Handeni Properties were tested for impairment by the Company’s management as
required by ASC 360. Management determined that no positive cash flows from the Handeni Properties could be identified or supported and a full
impairment loss was recognized in expenses for the $60,000,000 acquisition cost.
Under Tanzanian law, 50% of the area of PLs need to be relinquished following a period of three years after allocation of the PLs to the Company
(1998  Mining  Act  applicable  to  the  Companies’ PLs).  The  Company  has  received  four  renewal  PLs  of  the  renewal  areas  under  PL6742/2010,
PL6744/2010,  PL6743/2010  and  PL6779/2010  effective  on  October  5,  2013,  September  13,  2013,  October  13,  2013  and  September  13,  2013,
respectively. These four PLs are valid until October 4, 2016, September 12, 2016, October 12, 2016 and September 12, 2016, respectively. The total
area occupied by the renewal licenses is approximately 359.80 km2 or 45% of the original area.
In addition to the renewal areas, the Company had also applied for the remainder of the license areas and has received four additional PLs. The
Company now holds a total license area of approximately 423.03 km2 (53% of its original 800 km2license area).
During the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company paid $62,584 (2014: $59,333) in annual rental and licenses renewal fees for PLs. Such license
related fees have been recorded as exploration expenses.
Primary Mining Licenses (“PMLs”),
On August 5, 2011, the Company entered a Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement (the “2011 Acquisition Agreement”) with Handeni Resources
Limited (“Handeni Resources”), a limited liability company registered under the laws of Tanzania. The Chairman of the Board of Directors of the
Company has an existing ownership and/or beneficial interest(s) in Handeni Resources. Pursuant to the 2011 Acquisition Agreement, the Company
had  an  exclusive option  to  acquire  from  Handeni  Resources  a  100%  interest  in  mineral  licenses  covering  an  area  of  approximately  2.67  square
kilometers to the east of Magambazi Hill, which is adjacent to the area covered by the Company’s existing PLs in the Handeni District.
On November  30,  2011, the  Company  completed  the  2011 Acquisition  Agreement  and  issued  15,000,000 restricted  common  shares to Handeni
Resources as payment. As at November 30, 2011, the fair market price of the Company’s common stock was $0.11 per share; accordingly, the
Company recorded a total fair market value of $1,650,000 as the mineral licenses acquisition cost.
To  comply  with  the  laws  and  regulations  of  the  Republic  of  Tanzania  whereby  foreign  companies  may  not  own  PMLs,  on  July  19,  2012,  the
Company  entered  into  an  Addendum  agreement  to  the  2011  Acquisition  Agreement  whereby  Handeni  Resources,  on  behalf  of  the  Company,
administers the 32 PMLs until such time as a mining license on the 32 PMLs (2.67 km2) have been allocated. During this period Handeni Resources
is conducting exploration and mining activities on the PMLs as directed by the Company.
b)
Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project, Tanzania, Africa
The Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project was comprised of four PLs covering a total area of 380 square kilometers located in the Nachingwea District,
Lindi Region of the Republic of Tanzania. The Company is aware that the four PLs expired during May and June of 2012. As at May 31, 2015 and
2014, the Company has no capitalized costs related to the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project.
On January 13, 2015, the Company reached a binding settlement agreement with regards to its litigation with RCR (see Note 13, below). Based on
this agreement with RCR, the Company will relinquish its interest in the Mkuvia Alluvial Project after the formal agreement delivered by RCR as
agreed.
F - 10
Handeni Gold Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
8.
Property and Equipment
Automobiles 
Camp and equipment 
Office furniture and equipment 
Software
9.
Related Party Transactions
May 31, 2015 
Accumulated 
Depreciation 
$
257,300 
197,011 
98,970 
7,708
560,989
Cost 
$
257,300 
197,011 
100,222 
7,930
562,463
Net Book 
Value 
$
-
-
1,252 
222
1,474
May 31, 2014 
Net Book 
Value 
$
4,583 
42,242 
6,635 
1,986
55,446
a)
The Company has entered into the following facility agreements with related parties:
i)
ii)
iii)
On December 7, 2012, and as amended on September 4, 2013, June 18, 2014 and March 20, 2015, the Company entered into a facility
agreement with IPP Ltd., a private company controlled by the Chairman of the Company. The funding is in the form of an interest free
unsecured loan to the Company of up to $720,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, IPP Ltd. has fully advanced $720,000 (May 31,
2014: $695,683) to the Company pursuant to this facility agreement.
On  October  9,  2013,  and  as  amended  on  June  18,  2014  and  March  20,  2015,  the  Company  entered  into  a  facility  agreement  with
Consultancy & Finance Company Associates Ltd. (“C&F”), a private company controlled by the Chairman of the Company. The funding is
in the form of an interest free unsecured loan to the Company of up to $405,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, C&F has fully
advanced $405,000 (May 31, 2014: $375,000) to the Company pursuant to this facility agreement.
On November 20, 2014, the Company entered into a facility agreement with C&F. The funding is in the form of an interest-free unsecured
loan to the Company of up to $500,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, C&F has advanced $215,000 to the Company pursuant to
this facility agreement.
For the year ended May 31, 2015, $92,487 of deemed interest was calculated at an annual interest rate of 8% (2014: $85,116 calculated at an annual
interest rate of 10%). Such deemed interest approximates the fair market value of the borrowings and was recorded as interest expense and donated
capital.
b)
c)
d)
During the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company incurred administration and professional services fees of $144,000 to a director, the
current President and Chief Executive Officer (the “CEO”), and there was a total of $306,000 remaining payable as at May 31, 2015 (May 31, 2014:
$162,000). In addition, during the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company incurred geological and other service fees of $36,000 to a
private company controlled by a person who is related to the CEO and there was a total of $Nil fees remaining payable as at May 31, 2015 (May 31,
2014: $3,000).
During the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company also paid $36,000 (the year ended May 31, 2014: $25,200) representing 60% of annual rental
expenses associated with renting the CEO’s family house in Tanzania, pursuant to the Executive Services Agreement.
During the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company incurred administration and professional services fees of $125,197 (the year ended May 31,
2014: $135,100) to the Company’s Chief Financial Officer (the “CFO”), and there was a total of $3,615 remaining payable as at May 31, 2015.
During the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company incurred independent and non-executive directors’ fees of $72,500 (the ear ended May 31, 2014:
$68,750). As at May 31, 2015, the Company had $145,000 (May 31, 2014: $112,500) of unpaid independent directors’ fees in related party accounts
payable and accrued liabilities.
10.
Common Stock and Additional Paid-in Capital
The authorized common stock of the Company consists of 500,000,000 shares, with $0.001 par value. During the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, the
Company had no changes in its common stock and additional paid-in capital.
F - 11
Handeni Gold Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
11.
Stock Options
The  Company  adopted  a  Stock  Option  Plan,  dated  November  29,  2010  (the  “November  2010  Stock  Incentive  Plan”),  under  which  the  Company  is
authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to a total of 40,000,000 shares of common shares. During the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, there were
no stock options granted. At May 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company had 10,700,000 shares of common stock available to be issued under the November 2010
Stock Incentive Plan.
There were no stock options exercised during the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, and there were no intrinsic values of outstanding options at May 31,
2015 and 2014. As at May 31, 2015 and 2014, all stock options were fully vested. The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s stock
options:
Outstanding, May 31, 2013 
Outstanding, May 31, 2014 
Outstanding and exercisable, May 31, 2015
Number of
Options
#
28,300,000
28,300,000
28,300,000
Weighted Weighted Average
Average
Remaining
Contractual Term
Exercise Price
(years)
$ 
0.23
7.56
6.56
0.23
0.23
5.56
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value 
$ 
-
-
-
The stock options outstanding are exercisable for cash or on a cashless exercise basis using a prorated formula whereby the number of shares issuable is
equal  to  (a) the average closing price for the five  days prior  to  exercise  date (“ACP”)  in  excess of the exercise price,  divided by (b) the exercise price
multiplied by (c) the number of options exercised. During the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, no cashless stock options were exercised.
12.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants
During the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, there were no stock purchase warrants granted. During the year ended May 31, 2014, 13,554,155 stock
purchase warrants expired. The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s share purchase warrants:
Balance, May 31, 2013 
Expired 
Balance, May 31, 2015 and 2014
13.
Commitments and Contingencies
Number of Warrants 
# 
13,554,155 
(13,554,155) 
-
Weighted Average Weighted Average Remaining 
Contractual Life 
(years) 
0.33 
-
-
Exercise Price
$
0.52
-
-
On  February  8,  2012,  RCR  filed  a  lawsuit  against  the  Company  in  the  Supreme  Court,  State  of  New  York,  in  which  RCR  alleged  that  the  Company
participated in a fraudulent transfer of certain mineral property interests in Tanzania that RCR had the right to purchase pursuant to a series of agreements
with the Company.
On January 13, 2015, the Company reached a binding settlement of its litigation with RCR, and is currently waiting for RCR to finalize the formal settlement
documentation. The settlement does not require any monetary payment by the Company to RCR. Under the terms of the settlement, the Company will turn
over its interest in Ruby Creek Resources (Tanzania) Limited and has agreed to return the 4,000,000 shares of restricted RCR common stock to RCR (See
Note 6, above). Both parties have agreed to dismiss their respective claims, with prejudice, and the litigation is now concluded.
14.
Fair Value Measurements
ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable
inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs
used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to
the fair value measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability such as quoted
prices  for  similar  assets  or  liabilities  in  active  markets;  quoted  prices  for  identical  assets  or  liabilities  in  markets  with  insufficient  volume  or
infrequent transactions (less active markets); or model-derived valuations in which significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally
from, or corroborated by, observable market data.
Level 3 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that are significant to the measurement of
the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Pursuant to ASC 820, the fair value of cash, restricted cash equivalent and restricted marketable securities are determined based on Level 1 inputs, which
consist  of  quoted  prices  in  active  markets  for  identical  assets.  Management  believes  that  the  recorded  values  of  all  of  the  Company’s  other  financial
instruments approximate their current fair values because of their nature and respective maturity dates or durations.
F - 12
Handeni Gold Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
14.
Fair Value Measurements (continued)
As at May 31, 2015, there were no liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis presented on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet. Assets
measured at fair value on a recurring basis were presented on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of May 31, 2015, as follows:
Assets: 
Cash 
Restricted cash equivalent
Total assets measured at fair value
Quoted Prices in 
Active Markets 
For Identical 
Instruments 
(Level 1)
$
$
85,985 
13,858
99,843
$
$
Fair Value Measurements Using 
Significant 
Other 
Observable 
Inputs 
(Level 2)
Significant 
Unobservable 
Inputs 
(Level 3)
–
–
–
$
$
–
–
–
$
$
Balance as of 
May 31, 
2015
85,985 
13,858
99,843
As at May 31, 2014, there were no liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis presented on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet. Assets
measured at fair value on a recurring basis were presented on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of May 31, 2014, as follows:
Assets: 
Cash 
Restricted cash equivalent 
Restricted marketable securities
Total assets measured at fair value
15.
Segment Disclosures
Quoted Prices in 
Active Markets 
For Identical 
Instruments 
(Level 1)
$
$
$
532,694 
26,522 
73,600
632,816
$
Fair Value Measurements Using 
Significant 
Other 
Observable 
Inputs 
(Level 2)
Significant 
Unobservable 
Inputs 
(Level 3)
–
–
–
–
$
$
–
–
–
–
$
$
Balance as of 
May 31, 
2014
532,694 
26,522 
73,600
632,816
The Company operates in one reportable segment, being the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. Segmented information has been compiled
based  on  the  geographic  regions  that  the  Company  and  its  subsidiary  registered  and  performed  exploration  and  administration  activities.  Assets  by
geographical segment are as follows:
Current assets 
     Restricted cash equivalent 
     Mineral licenses 
     Equipment, net 
Total assets, at May 31, 2015
Current assets 
     Restricted cash equivalent 
     Restricted marketable securities 
     Mineral licenses 
     Property and equipment, net 
Total assets, at May 31, 2014
For the Year Ended May 31, 2015
     Net Loss
For the Year Ended May 31, 2014
     Net Loss
Canada
61,447
13,858
-
332
75,637
Canada 
147,957 
26,522 
73,600 
-
4,061 
252,140
Tanzania, Africa
 63,595
-
1,650,000
1,142
 1,714,737
$
$
Tanzania, Africa  
 434,139 
-
-
1,650,000 
51,385 
 2,135,524
$
$
692,604
1,421,669
$
$
473,358
871,926
$
$
$
$
$
$
Total 
125,042 
13,858 
1,650,000 
1,474 
1,790,374
Total 
582,096
26,522
73,600
1,650,000
55,446
2,387,664
1,165,962
2,293,595
$
$
$
$
$
$
F - 13
Handeni Gold Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2015 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
16.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under ASC 740, Income Taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon differences
between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the
differences are expected to reverse. The measurement of deferred income tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits,
which are, on a more likely than not basis, not expected to be realized. The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is
recognized in the period that such tax rate changes are enacted.
The Company is subject to U.S. federal and state income tax and has concluded substantially all U.S. federal and state income tax matters for tax years
through May 31, 2012. The tax filings for years from 2013 to 2015 are subject to audit by U.S. jurisdictions. The Company’s Canadian office has filed its
Canadian corporate income tax returns under the “Voluntary Disclosure Program”, and the tax filings for years from 2013 to 2015 are subject to audit by
Canadian  jurisdictions.  The  Company’s  Tanzania  subsidiaries  are  subject  to  Tanzania  income  tax,  the  tax  filings  for  the  years  from  2013  to  2015  are
subjected to audit by Tanzania jurisdictions.
Income  tax  expense  differs  from  the  amount  that  would  result  from  applying  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  rates  to  earnings  before  income  taxes.  The
Company has net operating losses carried forward of approximately $29 million available to offset taxable income in future years which begin expiring in
fiscal 2026. Pursuant to ASC 740, the potential benefits of the net operating losses carried forward has not been recognized in the consolidated financial
statements since the Company cannot be assured that it is more likely than not that such benefit will be utilized in future years.
The income tax benefit differs from the amount computed by applying the federal income tax rate of 35% to net loss before income taxes for the years ended
May 31, 2015 and 2014 as a result of the following:
Loss before taxes
Statutory rate
Computed expected tax recovery 
Permanent differences 
Foreign tax rate differences 
Valuation allowance change
Provision for income taxes
May 31, 
2015 
$
May 31, 
2014 
$
(1,165,962)
(2,293,595)
35%
(408,087) 
397,865 
(27,168) 
37,390
–
35%
(802,758) 
305,184 
43,597 
453,977
–
The significant components of deferred income tax assets and liabilities at May 31, 2015 and 2014, after applying enacted federal income tax rates, are as
follows:
Net operating losses carried forward 
Capital losses available 
Mineral properties tax basis in excess of book value 
Valuation allowance
Net deferred income tax assets
May 31, 
2015 
$
10,734,304 
19,975 
2,218,155 
(12,972,434)
–
May 31, 
2014 
$
9,979,715 
19,975 
2,935,354 
(12,935,044)
–
The Company has recognized a valuation allowance for the deferred income tax asset since the Company cannot be assured that it is more likely than not
that such benefit will be utilized in future years. When circumstances change and which cause a change in management’s judgment about the realizability of
deferred income tax assets, the impact of the change on the valuation allowance is generally reflected in current income.
F - 14
ITEM 9.
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
We have had no disagreements with our principal independent accountants.
ITEM 9A.
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
An evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of the Company’s management, including the Company’s Chief Executive Officer
(“CEO”), Reyno Scheepers, and the Company’s Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”), Melinda Hsu, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s
disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to Rules 13a-15b) and 15d-15b) under the Exchange Act as of the end of the period covered by this annual report. Based
upon the evaluation, the Company’s CEO and CFO have concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under
the Exchange Act) were not effective as of the end of the period covered by this annual report, due to the deficiencies in our internal control over financial reporting
as described below under Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) under
the Exchange Act.
The management of the Company assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria for effective internal
control  over  financial  reporting  established  in  Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission (“COSO”) and SEC guidance on conducting such assessments. Based on this assessment, management concluded that, as of the end of our fiscal year
ended May 31, 2015, our internal control over financial reporting was not effective due to material weaknesses, as more fully described below.
Management identified the following material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting:
1.
2.
3.
Certain entity level controls establishing a “tone at the top” were considered material weaknesses.
The Company’s board of directors and executive officers are located in multiple countries, which have caused limited segregation of duties and are
not consistent with good internal control procedures.
The Company has a limited management team with limited employees to establish sufficient segregation of duties, which was considered a material
weakness.
Management believes that the material weaknesses set forth above did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial results and information required to be
disclosed by the Company in its reports that it files or submits to the SEC under the Exchange Act within the time period specified in applicable rules and forms.
However, management believes that these material weaknesses resulting in ineffective oversight in the establishment and monitoring of required internal control over
financial reporting can impact the Company’s financial statements for future years. As a result material errors could occur.
The Company and its management are endeavoring to correct the above noted weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting. We have established an audit
committee, corporate governance and compensation committee with sufficient independent members, and we have identified an “expert” for the audit committee to
advise other members as to correct accounting and reporting procedures. In addition, we are establishing written policies outlining the duties of each of the directors
and officers of the Company to facilitate better internal control procedures.
Management  will  continue  to  monitor  and  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s  internal  controls  and  procedures  and  its  internal  controls  over  financial
reporting on an ongoing basis and is committed to taking further action and implementing additional enhancements or improvements, as necessary and as funds
allow.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
There were no changes to our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the last quarter of our fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2015, that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B.
OTHER INFORMATION
None.
24
ITEM 10.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Our executive officers and directors and their respective ages as of the date of this annual report are as follows:
Name
Reginald Mengi
Reyno Scheepers
William Lamarque
Emmanuel Ole Naiko
Douglas Boateng
Gizman Abbas
Melinda Hsu
Age
72
58
60
63
50
42
51
Position Held
Chairman and Director
President, Chief Executive Officer and a 
director
Board Committee Memberships
N/A
N/A
Vice Chairman and Director Director
Audit Committee (Chair)
Director
Director
Corporate Governance and Compensation 
Committee (Chair); Audit Committee
Corporate Governance and Compensation 
Committee
Audit Committee
Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and 
Treasurer
N/A
The following describes the business experience of each of our directors and executive officers, including other directorships held in reporting companies:
Reginald Mengi has served as our Chairman of our Board of Directors since September 21, 2010. Mr. Reginald Mengi is the Chairman and owner of IPP Gold
Limited. He also chairs IPP Ltd., one of the largest private sector holding companies in Tanzania. Mr. Mengi commenced IPP Ltd.’s business in the mid 1980’s
manufacturing  ball  point  pens.  Today  the  IPP  group  of  companies  is  engaged  in  various  areas  including  bottling  of  Coca  Cola  products,  drinking  water,
manufacturing and bottling of drinks and spirits, mining of minerals and gemstones, gemstone cutting, lapidary and media.
Until 1985, Mr. Mengi also worked as a Chartered Accountant for Coopers & Lybrand Tanzania where he served in the role as Chairman and Managing Partner and
led auditing and consultancy teams and participated in the establishment of companies and institutions.
Reyno  Scheepers  has  served  as  a  director  since  September  21,  2010  and  as  our  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  since  November  21,  2011.  Dr.  Reyno
Scheepers’ involvement with the mining industry stretches for a period of 29 years. He started off as a researcher at the Fuel Research Institute (CSIR) of South
Africa where he gained experience in the composition and characteristics of various South African coal fields. This was followed by a two year period as a geologist
at a South African gold mine where he gained experience in underground geology, underground and surface exploration and gold exploration project planning. He
then joined the University of Stellenbosch where he became a professor in petrology/mineralogy in 1999.
Since 1995 Dr. Scheepers directed his efforts towards the investigation of gemstone deposits covering alluvial and kimberlitic diamond deposits in South Africa, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Tanzania. One of his major achievements in Tanzania was the investigation of the geology and technical aspects of the
Merelani tanzanite deposit which eventually led to the successful listing of the first colored gemstone company on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.
Dr.  Scheepers  is  also  closely  involved  in  the  application  and  development  of  geochemical  analytical  techniques  and  was  in  charge  of  the  running  of  an  XRF
laboratory, an ICP=AES laboratory and a micro thermometric laboratory. He participated in the development of international geochemical reference standards and
completed numerous challenging analytical problems for the industry over the years.
Dr. Scheepers’ interest in providing small scale miners with the necessary skills to conduct safe and effective mining led to the establishment of the Gemstone
Research Centre at Stellenbosch University.Dr. Scheepers received his B.Sc. (Hons), Cum Laude in 1979, his M.Sc, Cum Laude in 1982 and his PhD in 1990 from
the University of Stellenbosch.
William Lamarque has served as a director since March 15, 2012, our Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors and the Chairman of the Audit Committee since
April 10, 2012. Mr. Lamarque currently serves as the Chief Executive Officer of Ecometals Ltd. He is also a Partner and co-founder of Balor Capital Management,
LLC. Mr. Lamarque is, prior to his Handeni Gold appointment, on the board of three privately held and one publicly traded mining company, and President of
Hanson Capital Asia Ltd.
On graduating from Cambridge University where he won an Open Exhibition in Classics, Mr Lamarque joined Jardine Matheson and Co, a Hong Kong based group
with interests in trading, shipping, civil aviation, engineering, construction, property and financial services, focused on East Asia. He had postings in London, Hong
Kong and Shanghai and studied Chinese at the Mandarin Daily News Institute in Taipei, before becoming the General Manager responsible for the Group's overall
activities in the Peoples’ Republic of China (“PRC”).
25
Mr Lamarque joined NM Rothschild and Sons, the London based investment bank, in 1986, as PRC country manager, on the boards of the bank's affiliates in Hong
Kong and Singapore. Returning to London in 1989, Mr Lamarque became a main board director of the bank and held various positions within the Treasury Division,
with an emphasis on precious and LME metals trading and mine finance, and the bank's activities in emerging markets, in particular with the official sector. He
moved to New York in 2000, to head the Group's Treasury activities in the Americas. Mr Lamarque left Rothschilds in 2002 to join Hanson Capital, a London based
boutique  investment  bank  and  was  a  founding  partner  of  Balor  Capital,  a  private  trading  and  derivative  advisory  business  based  on  Wall  Street  in  2006.  Mr
Lamarque sits on various mining company boards including those of Ecometals (for which he is also CEO) and Ivanplats, a large privately held exploration company
with interests in the DRC and South Africa. He is also a non-executive director of a UK-based warehousing and trucking company, Hanson Logistics. At various
times Mr Lamarque has served on the World Gold Council's Central Bank Committee and the China Committee of British Invisibles and has chaired the Public
Affairs Committee of the London Bullion Market Association. He was also for several years a Member of the Comex.
Emmanuel Ole Naiko has served as a director since April 16, 2012. Mr. Naiko currently serves as the managing director of Stesta Consulting, a firm focusing on
among other things, mining advisory services. Mr. Naiko is a qualified mining and metallurgical engineer and a professional member of the American Society of
Mining  Engineers  and  Metallurgists.  In  2011,  Mr.  Naiko  retired  after  five  years  as  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Tanzanian  Investment  Centre.  Mr.  Naiko’s
extensive  experience  during  the  course  of  his  career  includes  serving  in  the  following  positions:  Vice  President,  World  Association  of  Investment  Promotion
Agencies (WAIPA); board member, Tanzania State Mining Corporation; board member, Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation; board member, Bank of
Africa;  board  member,  Tanzania  Private  Sector  Foundation;  board  member,  Maganga-Mtatitu  Iron  Project;  and  board  member,  University  of  Dar-es-Salaam
Investment Committee.
Mr. Naiko graduated from the Haileybury School of Mines (Canada) and Colorado School of Mines (USA). He also holds investment educational certificates from
the  Centre  for  Applied  Studies  on  International  Negotiations  (Switzerland),  Nanning  Technological  University  (Singapore)  and  the  Hans  Seidel  Foundation
(Germany).
Douglas Boateng has served as a director since September 21, 2010 and as our President and Chief Executive Officer from August 18, 2011 to November 20, 2011.
Dr.  Douglas  Boateng  has  over  18  years  of  extensive  multi-sector  international  experience.  His  career  includes  positions  as  a  CEO,  director  and  senior  level
consulting  in  Technology  (ICT),  Chemicals/Pharma-chemical,  Pharmaceutical  and  Biotechnology,  Aviation,  Engineering,  Business  management,  Mergers  and
Acquisitions,  Strategic  alliance  and  partnerships,  Logistics  and  Supply  Chain  Management,  Media,  Consulting,  Corporate  and  Strategic  Business  Development,
Corporate Governance and Advisory services to selected Government ministries. Dr. Boateng has also successfully worked and consulted for some of the world’s
leading corporation’s in Europe, the United States and Africa.
Prior to joining the Company, Dr. Boateng founded PanAvest International, an organization with a vision to assist companies profitably extend their market reach
through  the  application  of  innovative  Business  Development  Logistics  and  Supply  Chain  Management  solutions.  He  has  acted  as  an  independent  advisor  and
consultant to one of Scandinavia’s largest generic pharmaceutical companies on logistics, supply chain and business development and strategies and one of Africa’s
leading healthcare distributors. Dr. Boateng is also a post graduate visiting professor on logistics and supply chain management and a Masters and Doctoral project
supervisor at one of Africa’s largest and most respected business schools. He current sits on the editorial board of Smart Procurement, the largest supply chain
related portal in Africa and the Middle East.
Dr. Boateng holds a Graduate Diploma in Company Direction from the Institute of Directors, a Doctorate in Engineering Business Management from the University
of Warwick-UK, an MSc in Industrial Logistics from the University of Central England-UK and a post graduate diploma in transport and logistics from Cranfield
Institute of Technology, UK.
Gizman Abbas has served as a director since February 1, 2012. Mr. Gizman Abbas is Managing Partner, DI Development LLC, a development company focusing
on the New York City real estate market, which he founded in 2011 to take advantage of the opportunities resulting from the 2008 financial downturn. Before DI
Development, Mr. Abbas was a Partner at Apollo Commodities Partners, L.P., where he helped build Apollo Global Management’s newly established commodities
business. He joined Apollo from Goldman Sachs where he was a Vice President in the Commodities Asset Investment business. While at Goldman, he worked on
transactions involving resources, power, biofuels, emissions and agriculture. Prior to joining Goldman, he was a banker at Morgan Stanley where he spent time in the
power and energy banking group.
Mr. Abbas began his career at Southern Company working at a coal-fired power plant, followed by a period as an oil and gas engineer at Exxon Mobil. Mr. Abbas
graduated with a B.S. in Electrical Engineering from Auburn University and received his MBA from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.
Melinda Hsu has served as our Secretary, Treasurer and Chief Financial Officer since March 1, 2012 and as our controller since November 2011. Ms. Hsu has been
the president and principal of AMICA Resource Inc. (“AMICA”), a private company, since September 2007. Ms. Hsu had worked for various public and private
companies, including Dejour Energy Inc. as a senior consultant from February 2011to April 2013 and as a controller from September 2007 to April 2008, Silverado
Gold Mines Ltd. as a controller from April 2008 to October 2010 and Manex Resource Group from December 2005 to September 2007.
26
Ms. Hsu has been directly involved in mining and oil and gas industries for more than ten years, with strengths in Canadian and U.S. public financial reporting and
regulatory compliance, Canadian and U.S. tax, internal control policies, budgeting and strategic planning. In addition, Ms. Hsu has over 25 years of diversified
business experience in areas of accounting, finance, budget, corporate development, marketing and administration experience in Canada and China. She received her
Certified General Accountant designation from the CGA Association of British Columbia, Canada, in 2004 and graduated from the People’s University of China in
1988 with a Master’s degree in Business Administration.
Term of Office
Our directors are appointed for a one-year term to hold office until the next annual general meeting of our stockholders or until removed from office in accordance
with our bylaws. Our officers are appointed by our Board of Directors and hold office until removed by the Board.
Board of Directors Meetings
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, our board of directors had two Board of Directors meetings, four Audit Committee meetings, and none of Corporate
Governance and Compensation Committee meetings.
Significant Employees
Other  than  the  officers  and  directors  described  above,  as  at  May  31,  2015,  we  had  approximate  four  full-time  equivalent  employees  and  consultants  located  in
Tanzania. We also retain independent geologists and consultants on a contract basis to conduct the work programs on our mineral properties in order to carry out our
plan of operations.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among our directors or officers.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
To the best of our knowledge and belief, none of our directors or executive officers has been involved in any of the following events during the past ten years that is
material to an evaluation of the ability of such person to serve as an executive officer or director of our Company:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
a petition under the Federal bankruptcy laws or any state insolvency law was filed by or against, or a receiver, fiscal agent or similar officer was
appointed by a court for the business or property of such person, or any partnership in which he was a general partner at or within two years before
the time of such filing, or any corporation or business association of which he was an executive officer at or within two years before the time of such
filing;
such person was convicted in a criminal proceeding or is a named subject of a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and other
minor offenses);
such  person  was  the  subject  of  any  order,  judgment,  or  decree,  not  subsequently  reversed,  suspended  or  vacated,  of  any  court  of  competent
jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining him from, or otherwise limiting, the following activities:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
acting as a futures commission merchant, introducing broker, commodity trading advisor, commodity pool operator, floor broker, leverage
transaction merchant, any other person regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, or an associated person of any of the
foregoing, or as an investment adviser, underwriter, broker or dealer in securities, or as an affiliated person, director or employee of any
investment company, bank, savings and loan association or insurance company, or engaging in or continuing any conduct or practice in
connection with such activity;
engaging in any type of business practice; or
engaging in any activity in connection with the purchase or sale of any security or commodity or in connection with any violation of Federal
or State securities laws or Federal commodities laws;
such person was the subject of any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any Federal or State authority
barring, suspending or otherwise limiting for more than 60 days the right of such person to engage in any activity described in paragraph 3(i) above,
or to be associated with persons engaged in any such activity;
such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commission to have violated any Federal or State securities
law, and the judgment in such civil action or finding by the Commission has not been subsequently reversed, suspended, or vacated;
such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to have violated any
Federal  commodities  law,  and  the  judgment  in  such  civil  action  or  finding  by  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  has  not  been
subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated;
such person was the subject of, or a party to, any Federal or State judicial or administrative order, judgment, decree, or finding, not subsequently
reversed, suspended or vacated, relating to an alleged violation of:
(i)
any Federal or State securities or commodities law or regulation;
27
(ii)
any  law  or  regulation  respecting  financial  institutions  or  insurance  companies  including,  but  not  limited  to,  a  temporary  or  permanent
injunction,  order  of  disgorgement  or  restitution,  civil  money  penalty  or  temporary  or  permanent  cease-and-desist  order,  or  removal  or
prohibition order; or
(iii)
any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any business entity; or
8.
such  person  was  the  subject  of,  or  a  party  to,  any  sanction  or  order,  not  subsequently  reversed,  suspended  or  vacated,  of  any  self-regulatory
organization  (as  defined  in  Section  3(a)(26)  of  the  Exchange  Act),  any  registered  entity  (as  defined  in  Section  1(a)(29)  of  the  United  States
Commodity  Exchange  Act),  or  any  equivalent  exchange,  association,  entity  or  organization  that  has  disciplinary  authority  over  its  members  or
persons associated with a member.
We are not aware of any material legal proceedings in which any of the following persons is a party adverse to our Company or has a material interest adverse to our
Company: (a) any current director, officer, or affiliate of the Company, or any owner of record or beneficial owner of more than five percent of any class of voting
securities of the Company; (b) any person proposed for appointment or election as a director or officer of our Company; or (c) any associate of any such person.
Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act requires our directors and officers, and the persons who beneficially own more than ten percent of our common stock, to file
reports of ownership and changes in ownership with the SEC. Copies of all filed reports are required to be furnished to us pursuant to Rule 16a-3 promulgated under
the Exchange Act. Based solely on the reports received by us and on the representations of the reporting persons with respect to our most recent fiscal year, we
believe that these persons have complied with all applicable filing requirements during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a code of ethics applicable to our directors, principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or
persons performing similar functions. A copy of our code of ethics is incorporated by reference as an exhibit to this Report and can be reviewed on our corporate
website  located  at  www.handenigold.com.  If  we  make  any  amendments  to  our  Code  of  Ethics  other  than  technical,  administrative,  or  other  non-substantive
amendments, or grant any waivers, including implicit waivers, from a provision of our Code of Ethics, we will disclose the nature of the amendment or waiver, its
effective date and to whom it applies on our website or in a report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC.
Committees
Audit Committee
The Company’s Board of Directors has a separately-designated standing Audit Committee established for the purpose of overseeing the accounting and financial
reporting processes of the Company and audits of the Company’s annual financial statements in accordance with Section 3(a)(58)(A) of the Exchange Act. As of the
date  of  this  annual  report  on  Form  10-K,  the  Company’s  Audit  Committee  is  comprised  of  William  Lamarque  (who  acts  as  Chairman),  Gizman  Abbas  and
Emmanuel Ole Naiko.
In the opinion of the Company’s Board of Directors, all the members of the Audit Committee are independent (as defined under Rule 5605(c)(2) of the NASDAQ
listing rules and as determined under Rule 10A-3 of the Exchange Act). Mr. William Lamarque services as the Chairman of the Audit Committee and is qualified as
an  audit  committee  financial  expert  pursuant  to  the  definition  adopted  by  SEC  and  Sections  407  of  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act.  All  three  members  of  the  Audit
Committee are financially literate, meaning they are able to read and understand the Company’s financial statements and to understand the breadth and level of
complexity of the issues that can reasonably be expected to be raised by the Company’s financial statements.
The members of the Audit Committee do not have fixed terms and are appointed and replaced from time to time by resolution of the Board of Directors.
The Audit Committee is to assist the Board of Directors in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities and its primary duties and responsibilities are to:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
review management’s identification of principal financial risks and monitor the process to manage such risks; 
oversee and monitor the Company’s compliance with legal and regulatory requirements; 
receive and review the reports of the Audit Committee of any subsidiary with public securities; 
oversee  and  monitor  the  integrity  of  the  Company’s  accounting  and  financial  reporting  processes,  financial  statements  and  system  of  internal
controls regarding accounting and financial reporting and accounting compliance; 
oversee the audit of the Company’s financial statements; 
oversee and monitor the qualifications, independence and performance of the Company’s external auditors and internal auditing department; 
provide an avenue of communication among the external auditors, management, the internal auditing department and the Board of Directors; and 
report to the Board of Directors regularly.
The  Audit  Committee  has  the  authority  to  conduct  any  review  or  investigation  appropriate  to  fulfilling  its  responsibilities.  It  shall  have  unrestricted  access  to
personnel and information, and any resources necessary to carry out its responsibility. In this regard, the Audit Committee may direct internal audit personnel to
particular areas of examination.
28
Corporate Governance and Compensation Committee
The Company has combined the Corporate Governance Committee and the Compensation Committee into a Corporate Governance and Compensation Committee
since January 22, 2013. As of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, the Company’s Corporate Governance and Compensation Committee is comprised of
three directors, Emmanuel Ole Naiko (who acts as Chairman), Reyno Scheepers and Douglas Boateng. Mr. Reyno Scheepers and Mr. Douglas Boateng are not
independent as defined under Rule 5605(c)(2) of the NASDAQ listing rules and as determined under Rule 10A-3 of the Exchange Act.
The Corporate Governance and Compensation Committee is to (i) identify and recommend to the Board individuals qualified to be nominated for election to the
Board,  (ii)  recommend  to  the  Board  the  members  and  Chair  for  each  Board  committee  and  (iii)  periodically  review  and  assess  the  Corporation’s  corporate
governance principles and make recommendations for changes thereto to the Board, (iv) assist the Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities relating to officer
and director compensation, succession planning for senior managements, development and retention of senior management, and such other duties as directed by the
Board.
Steering Committee
Since January 2013, the Steering Committee has been specifically established for the purpose of overseeing, directing and monitoring administrative and financial
affairs, corporate priorities and future direction, key business issues and major operation activities through conference meetings when needed.
Currently the Company’s Steering Committee consists of the following members:
• 
• 
• 
•
William Lamarque (who acts as Chairman), Vice Chairman and Director
Reyno Scheepers, President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Gizman Abbas, Director
Melinda Hsu, Chief Financial Officer
Technical Advisory Committee
The Technical Advisory Committee has been specifically constituted to enable the Company to effectively operate in the geological environments associated with
mineralized systems in Archaean and Proterozoic terranes. Additional expertise comprising other disciplines may be co-opted to the committee from time to time, as
the situation may require.
Currently the Company’s Technical Committee consists of the following members:
Dr. P.G. Gresse (Structural- and Exploration Geology) is a renowned structural geologist with a lifetime experience in Africa. He has extensive experience in field
geological mapping, structural geology and basin analysis. Dr. Gresse has been involved in various international research and mapping programs specialising in Late
Proterozoic  geology.  Dr.  Gresse  has  published  widely  in  local  and  international  journals  (33)  and  has  attended  and  presented  papers  at  numerous  international
conferences and symposia (25).
Mr. C. Lötter (Geophysics and Exploration Geology) has 30 years’ experience in mining and exploration geophysics and has run his own consulting and contracting
business for 20 years. He has extensive experience in the Greenstone terrains of southern, eastern and western Africa as well as the Zambian and Botswana Copper
belts. Mr. Lotter is involved in survey planning and design and QC/QA and interpretation, including 2D/3D forward and inversion modelling, on a daily basis.
Mr. E. D. Ole Naiko (Mining Engineering and Mineral Economics) conducted his post graduate studies in Mineral Economics and Metallurgical Engineering at the
Colorado School of Mines. He has been an executive director of the Tanzania Investment Centre and the manager of various state mining companies, including gold
mining companies, as well as an executive director of the TIC (Tanzania Investment Centre) in Tanzania. Mr. Naiko plays a major role in promoting the minerals
industry of the country and attracting investment to the sector.
Mr. B. McDonald (Exploration- and Economic Geology) is an exploration geologist with vast experience in Africa, South America, Mexico, and Cuba. He has been
exploration manager on numerous successful projects for various prestigious companies including Billiton S.A.(aka BHP Billiton) and GENCOR S.A. as well as
managing exploration projects for smaller companies including Trans Hex, the O’Okiep Copper Company, and along with numerous others. The commodities within
his  experience  portfolio  span  from  base  metals,  gold,  precious  metals,  asbestos,  uranium,  diamonds,  and  coloured  gemstones.  His  gold  experience  covers  the
spectrum from sedimentary to high grade metamorphic related gold. Complementing his geological achievements are his people skills, often successfully managing a
work force of more than 100 people, including several teams of professionals concurrently under difficult operational conditions.
Dr. R. Scheepers (Petrology, Geochemistry, Exploration Geology) has been involved with geology and the mining industry over a period of 28 years. He is the
Company’s CEO and a director. Dr. Scheepers is a registered Professional Natural Scientist in Geological Science and a member of:
• 
• 
• 
•
Geological Society of South Africa (since 1984); 
SACNASP Registered (since 1984); 
The Mineralogical Society of South Africa (1996 to 2001); 
Geological Society Western Province Branch (1985 to 2002);
29
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
Society of Geology Applied to Mineral Deposits (1989 to 1997); 
Council member: Geological Society of South Africa (1996 to 1999); 
Council member: The Mineralogical Society of South Africa (2002); 
Committee member: Geological Society Western Province Branch (1985 to 1989); and 
Committee member: The S.A. Code for Stratigraphy Committee, since 1993.
ITEM 11.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
The table below summarizes all compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to our executive officers by any person for all services rendered in all capacities to us
during our fiscal years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014.
Summary Compensation Table
Name and Principal
Position
Reyno Scheepers (1)
President & Chief
Executive Officer
Melinda Hsu (2)
Chief Financial Officer,
Secretary and Treasurer
Douglas Boateng (3)
Former President &
Chief Executive Officer
Year
2015
2014 
2015
2014 
2015
2014
Salary
($)
Nil
Bonus
($)
Nil
Stock
Awards
($)
Nil
Option
Awards
($)
Nil
Non-
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Comp-
ensation
($)
Nil
Non-
qualified
Deferred
Comp-
ensation
Earnings
($)
Nil
Nil 
47,553
50,662 
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
All Other
Compensation
($)
180,000(1a)
169,200(1b)
77,644(2a)
84,438(2b)
7,500(3a)
Total
($)
169,200
169,200 
125,197
135,100 
7,500
3,750(3b)
3,750
(1)
Mr. Scheepers was appointed as our President and Chief Executive Officer effective on November 21, 2011 and as our Chief Operating Officer effective on
October 6, 2011. Mr. Scheepers has been a director since September 21, 2010. The “Other Compensation” to Mr. Scheepers consists of:
a)
b)
$144,000 in executive and administration service fees incurred during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 and $36,000 which represents the payment
of 60% of rental expenses associated with renting Mr. Scheepers’ family house in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania pursuant to his Executive Services
Agreement with the Company; As at May 31, 2015, a total of $306,000 remained as payable.
$144,000 in executive and administration service fees incurred during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 and $25,200 which represents the payment
of 60% of rental expenses associated with renting Mr. Scheepers’ family house in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania pursuant to his Executive Services
Agreement with the Company; As at May 31, 2014, a total of $162,000 remained as payable.
(2)
Ms. Hsu was appointed as our Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer effective on March 1, 2012. The “Other Compensation” to Ms. Hsu consists
of:
a)
b)
$77,644 in executive and administration service fees during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 earned by a private company controlled by Ms. Hsu.
As at May 31, 2015, a total of $3,615 remained as a payable.
$84,438 in executive and administration service fees during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014 earned by a private company controlled by Ms. Hsu.
(3)
Mr. Boateng was appointed as our President and Chief Executive Officer effective on August 18, 2011 and resigned effective on November 21, 2011. Mr.
Boateng has been a director since September 21, 2010. The “Other Compensation” to Mr. Boateng consists of:
a) 
b)
$7,500 of director’s fees incurred during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015; a total of $21,250 fees remained as payable as at May 31, 2015.
$3,750 of director’s fees incurred during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014; a total of $23,750 fees remained as payable as at May 31, 2014.
Compensation of Directors
Effective on June 1,  2013, the Board of Directors  (the “Board”) approved a reduction of monetary compensation to independent directors and/or non-executive
directors of the Company as follows:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
annual independent director fees of $30,000 has been reduced to $15,000, subject to attending a minimum of four Board meeting a year; any applicable
director’s fees shall be reduced by 25% for each board meeting less than four which is not attended.
meeting attendance fees of $1,000 per meeting has been waived;
additional annual fees of $10,000 to the Company’s Board Committee Chairperson has been reduced to $5,000; and
additional annual fees of $20,000 to the Vice Chairman of the Board has been reduced to $10,000.
30
The table below summarizes all compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to our current or former directors during our fiscal year ended May 31, 2015. Certain of
our current or former directors served or have served as officers of the Company and any compensation they received due to their services are disclosed in the table
above and are not included in the table below.
Director Compensation
Name and Principal
Position
Reginald Mengi 
Reyno Scheepers (1)
Douglas Boateng (1)
William Lamarque (2)
Emmanuel Naiko (3)
Gizman Abbas (4)
Fees earned
or paid in
cash
($)
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
30,000 
20,000 
15,000
Stock
Awards
($)
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Option
Awards
($)
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4)
See summary compensation table above.
A total of 26,500 director’s fees remained as payable as of May 31, 2015.
A total of 55,500 director’s fees remained as payable as of May 31, 2015.
A total of 41,750 director’s fees remained as payable as of May 31, 2015.
Outstanding Equity Awards
Non-Equity
Incentive
Plan
Compen-
sation
($)
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nonqualified
Deferred
Compen-
sation
Earnings
($)
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
All Other
Compen-
sation
($)
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Total
($)
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
30,000 
20,000 
15,000
The following table sets forth information at our fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 relating to outstanding equity awards that have been granted to the directors and
named executive officers listed in the tables above:
OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT FISCAL YEAR-END
OPTION AWARDS
STOCK AWARDS
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Awards:
Number
of
Unearned 
Shares,
Units or
Other
Rights
That
Have Not 
Vested
(#)
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Awards:
Market or
Payout
Value of
Unearned
Shares,
Units or
Other
Rights
That Have
Not Vested
(#)
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER 
MATTERS
The following table sets forth certain information concerning the number of shares of our common stock owned beneficially as of the date of this annual report by:
(i) each person (including any group) known to us to own more than 5% of any class of our voting securities, (ii) each of our directors, (iii) each of our officers and
(iv) our officers and directors as a group. Each stockholder listed possesses sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares shown.
31
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Awards:
Number of
Number of
Securities
Securities
Underlying
Underlying
Unexercised Unexercised Unexercised
Unearned
Options
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Exercisable Unexercisable
Options
Options
(#)
(#)
(#)
10,000,000
4,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
4,500,000
3,000,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
N/A
N/A
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
N/A 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
N/A 
N/A
N/A
N/A
Option
Exercise
Price
($)
$0.20
$0.20
$0.45 
$0.11 
$0.20
$0.45 
$0.08
$0.08
$0.08
Name
Reginald 
Mengi 
Reyno 
Scheepers
Melinda Hsu 
Douglas 
Boateng
William 
Lamarque 
Emmanuel 
Naiko 
Gizman 
Abbas
ITEM 12.
Number of
Shares or
Units of
Stock That
Have Not
Vested
(#)
Market
Value of
Shares or
Units of
Stock
That
Have Not 
Vested
($)
Option
Expiration
Date
11/29/2020
11/29/2020
11/30/2021 
03/01/2017 
11/29/2020
11/30/2021 
07/04/2022
07/04/2022
07/04/2022
N/A
N/A
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
N/A 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
N/A 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
N/A 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
N/A 
N/A
N/A
N/A
Officers and Directors
Title of class
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock
5% or Greater Shareholders:
Name and address of beneficial owner(1)
Reginald Mengi(1) 
Reyno Scheepers(1) 
Douglas Boateng(1) 
William Lamarque (1) 
Emmanuel Naiko (1) 
Gizman Abbas (1) 
Melinda Hsu (1) 
All executive officers and directors as a group
Amount and nature of 
beneficial owner (2)
Percentage of class(3)
158,333,333(4) 
5,500,000(5) 
7,500,000(6) 
400,000(7) 
400,000(7) 
400,000(7) 
1,000,000(8) 
173,533,333
49.26% 
1.71% 
2.33% 
0.12% 
0.12% 
0.12% 
0.31% 
53.99%
Title of class
Common Stock 
Common Stock
Name and address of beneficial owner
Reginald Mengi(1) 
Zoeb Hassuji(9)
Amount and nature of
beneficial owner(2)
158,333,333(4) 
16,666,667
Percentage of class(3)
49.26% 
5.19%
1.
2.
3. 
4.
5.
6.
7. 
8. 
9.
The address of our officers and directors is our Company’s address, which is P.O. Box 33507, Plot 82A, ITV Road, Mikocheni Light Industrial Area, Dar es
Salaam, Republic of Tanzania.
Under Rule 13d-3 of the Exchange Act a beneficial owner of a security includes any person who, directly or indirectly, through any contract, arrangement,
understanding,  relationship  or  otherwise  has  or  shares:  (i)  voting  power,  which  includes  the  power  to  vote  or  to  direct  the  voting  of  shares;  and  (ii)
investment power, which includes the power to dispose or direct the disposition of shares. Certain shares may be deemed to be beneficially owned by more
than one person (if, for example, persons share the power to vote or the power to dispose of the shares). In addition, shares are deemed to be beneficially
owned by a person if the person has the right to acquire the shares (for example, upon exercise of an option) within 60 days of the date as of which the
information is provided. In computing the percentage ownership of any person, the amount of shares outstanding is deemed to include the amount of shares
beneficially owned by such person (and only such person) by reason of these acquisition rights.
Based on 321,416,654 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding as of August 18, 2015.
Includes 133,333,333 shares held by IPP Gold Limited, 15,000,000 shares held by Handeni Resources Limited, and 10,000,000 fully vested stock options
held by Mr. Mengi with an exercise price at $0.20 per share exercisable by November 29, 2020.
Represents 4,000,000 fully vested stock options with an exercise price at $0.20 per share exercisable by November 29, 2020 and 1,500,000 fully vested stock
options with an exercise price at $0.45 per share exercisable by November 30, 2021.
Represents 4,500,000 fully vested stock options with an exercise price at $0.20 per share exercisable by November 29, 2020 and 3,000,000 fully vested stock
options with an exercise price at $0.45 per share exercisable by November 30, 2021.
Represents 200,000 shares of our common stock and 200,000 fully vested stock options with an exercise price at $0.08 per share exercisable by July 4, 2022.
Represents fully vested stock options with an exercise price at $0.11 per share exercisable by March 1, 2017.
The registered address of this shareholder is Bonite Bottlers, Moshi, Kilimanjaro, Tanzania.
Changes in Control
We are unaware of any contract, or other arrangement or provision of our Articles, the operation of which may at any subsequent date result in a change in control of
the Company.
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
Refer to Item 5. above.
ITEM 13.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Except as described below, none of the following parties has, in the last two fiscal years, had any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction with us or in
any presently proposed transaction that has or will materially affect us:
1.
2.
3.
any of our directors or officers;
any person proposed as a nominee for election as a director;
any person who beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, shares carrying more than 10% of the voting rights attached to our outstanding shares of
common stock; or
32
4.
any member of the immediate family (including spouse, parents, children, siblings and in-laws) of any of the above persons.
Related Party Transactions
a)
The Company has entered into the following facility agreements with related parties:
i)
ii)
iii)
On December 7, 2012, and as amended on September 4, 2013, June 18, 2014 and March 20, 2015, the Company entered into a facility agreement
with IPP Ltd., a private company controlled by the Chairman of the Company. The funding is in the form of an interest free unsecured loan to the
Company  of  up  to  $720,000  due  May  31,  2017.  As  of  May  31,  2015,  IPP  Ltd.  has  fully  advanced  $720,000  (May  31,  2014:  $695,683)  to  the
Company pursuant to this facility agreement.
On October 9, 2013, and as amended on June 18, 2014 and March 20, 2015, the Company entered into a facility agreement with Consultancy &
Finance  Company  Associates  Ltd.  (“C&F”),  a  private  company  controlled  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Company.  The  funding  is  in  the  form  of  an
interest free unsecured loan to the Company of up to $405,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, C&F has fully advanced $405,000 (May 31,
2014: $375,000) to the Company pursuant to this facility agreement.
On November 20, 2014, the Company entered into a facility agreement with C&F. The funding is in the form of an interest-free unsecured loan to
the Company of up to $500,000 due May 31, 2017. As of May 31, 2015, C&F has advanced $215,000 to the Company pursuant to this facility
agreement.
During the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company incurred administration and professional services fees of $144,000 to a director, the current
President and Chief Executive Officer (the “CEO”), and there was a total of $306,000 remaining payable as at May 31, 2015 (May 31, 2014: $162,000). In
addition, during the year ended May 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company incurred geological and other service fees of $36,000 to a private company controlled
by a person who is related to the CEO and there was a total of $Nil fees remaining payable as at May 31, 2015 (May 31, 2014: $3,000).
During the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company also paid $36,000 (the year ended May 31, 2014: $25,200) representing 60% of annual rental expenses
associated with renting the CEO’s family house in Tanzania, pursuant to the Executive Services Agreement.
During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2015,  the  Company  incurred  administration  and  professional  services  fees  of  $125,197  (the  year  ended  May  31,  2014:
$135,100) to the Company’s Chief Financial Officer (the “CFO”), and there was a total of $3,615 remaining payable as at May 31, 2015.
During the year ended May 31, 2015, the Company incurred independent and non-executive directors’ fees of $72,500 (2014: $68,750). As at May 31, 2015,
the Company had $145,000 (May 31, 2014: $112,500) of unpaid independent directors’ fees in related party accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
b)
c)
d)
e)
Director Independence
The Board has analyzed the independence of each director and has determined that the members of the Board listed below are independent as that term is defined
under Rule 5605(a)(2) of the NASDAQ listing rules. Each director is free of relationships that would interfere with the individual exercise of independent judgment.
Based on these standards, the Board determined that each of the following directors is independent and has no relationship with the Company, except as a director
and shareholder:
• 
• 
•
William Lamarque; 
Emmanuel Ole Naiko; and 
Gizman Abbas.
ITEM 14.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
Manning Elliott LLP served as our independent registered public accounting firm and audited our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended May
31, 2015 and 2014. Aggregate fees billed during fiscal years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 to the Company by Manning Elliott LLP for rendered professional
services are set forth below:
Audit Fees 
Audit-Related Fees 
Tax Fees 
All Other Fees 
Total
Year Ended
May 31, 2015
$28,833
--
$3,058
--
$31,892
33
Year Ended
May 31, 2014
$24,400
--
$3,290
--
$27,690
Audit Fees
Audit fees are the aggregate fees billed for professional services rendered by our independent auditors for the audit of our annual consolidated financial statements,
the review of the interim consolidated financial statements included in each of our quarterly reports and services provided in connection with statutory and regulatory
filings or engagements.
Audit Related Fees
Audit related fees are the aggregate fees billed by our independent auditors for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to the performance of the
audit or review of our consolidated financial statements and are not described in the preceding category.
Tax Fees
Tax fees are billed by our independent auditors for tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning.
All Other Fees
All other fees include fees billed by our independent auditors for products or services other than as described in the immediately preceding three categories.
Policy on Pre-Approval of Services Performed by Independent Auditors
It  is  our  Board  of  Directors’ policy  to  pre-approve  all  audit and  permissible  non-audit  services  performed  by  the  independent  auditors.  The  Board  of  Directors
approved all services that our independent accountants provided to us in the past two fiscal years.
The Audit Committee is responsible for appointing, setting compensation for and overseeing the work of the independent registered public accounting firm. The
Audit Committee requires its pre-approval of all audit and permissible non-audit services provided by the independent registered public accounting firm. The Audit
Committee considers whether such services are consistent with the rules of the SEC on auditor independence.
ITEM 15.
EXHIBITS
The following exhibits are filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K:
Exhibit
Number
3.1(1)
3.2(12)
3.3(21)
3.3(3)
10.1(4)
10.2(4)
10.3(4)
10.4(5)
10.5(5)
10.6(5)
10.7(6)
10.8(6)
10.9(6)
10.10(7)
10.11(8)
10.12(9)
10.13(9)
Description of Exhibit
Articles of Incorporation. 
Certificate of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation. 
Articles of Merger as filed with the Nevada Secretary of State. 
Amended Bylaws, as amended on September 5, 2006. 
Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd. 
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd. 
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd. 
Strategic Alliance Agreement between the Company and Canaco Resources Inc. 
Option Agreement between the Company and Canaco Resources Inc. 
Amendment No. 1 to Strategic Alliance Agreement between the Company and Canaco Resources Inc. 
Kwadijava Option Agreement.
34
10.14(9) 
10.15(10) 
10.16(11) 
10.17(14) 
10.18(11) 
10.19(11) 
10.20(13) 
10.21(15) 
10.22(16) 
10.23(17) 
10.24(18)
10.26(19) 
10.27(20) 
10.28(22) 
10.29(23)  
10.30(24) 
14.1(2) 
21.1
23.1*
31.1*
31.2*
32.1*
Negero Option Agreement. 
Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita. 
2007 Stock Incentive Plan. 
2008 Stock Incentive Plan. 
Consulting Agreement with Harpreet Sangha. 
Consulting Agreement with Rovingi. 
Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita dated June 5, 2009. 
Agreement with Ruby Creek Resources, Inc. dated November 7, 2009. 
Purchase Agreement with Ruby Creek Resources, Inc., dated for reference May 19, 2010. 
August 2010 Stock Incentive Plan. 
Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement between the Company and IPP Gold Limited, dated September 15, 2010, ratified by the Company’s Board 
of Directors on September 21, 2010. 
November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan. 
Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement between the Company and Handeni Resources Limited, dated August 5, 2011. 
Executive Consulting Services Agreement between the Company and Amica Resource Inc., dated February 28, 2012. 
Unsecured Term Loan Facility Agreement between the Company and IPP Ltd. dated December 7, 2012 
Unsecured Term Loan Facility Agreement between the Company and Consultancy & Finance Company Associates Ltd. dated October 9, 2013 
Code of Ethics. 
Subsidiaries of the Registrant: 
a. Douglas Lake Tanzania Limited (Tanzania); and 
b. HG Limited (Tanzania) (formerly: DLM Tanzania Limited (Tanzania)). 
Consent of Auditor.
Certifications of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Certifications of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Certifications of Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes- Oxley Act of 2002.
* 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11)  
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(19)
Filed herewith. 
Incorporated by reference to Form SB-2 Registration Statement filed on July 22, 2004. 
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2005. 
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2006. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 4, 2005. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 21, 2005. 
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended November 30, 2005. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 4, 2006. 
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended August 31, 2006. 
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended August 31, 2007. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 6, 2008. 
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2007.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 27, 2009 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 16, 2009 
Incorporated by reference to Registration Statement Form S-8 filed on December 30, 2008. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2009. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 21, 2010. 
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 27, 2010. 
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2011.
35
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
(24)
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 10, 2011.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 15, 2012.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 2, 2012.
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended November 30, 2012.
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended August 31, 2013.
36
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 and 15 (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURES
HANDENI GOLD INC.
“Reyno Scheepers”
Reyno Scheepers 
President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) and 
a director 
Date: August 18, 2015.
“Melinda Hsu”
Melinda Hsu 
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and Principal 
Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer 
Date: August 18, 2015.
__________
By:
By:
37
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
SIGNATURES
Signature
“Reyno Scheepers”
Reyno Scheepers
“Reginald Mengi”
Reginald Mengi
“William Lamarque”
William Lamarque
Douglas Boateng”
Douglas Boateng
“Emmanuel Naiko”
Emmanuel Naiko
“Melinda Hsu”
Melinda Hsu
Title
President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive 
Officer) and a director
Chairman of the Board of Directors and a director
Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors and a director
Director
Director
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and 
Principal Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer
__________
38
Date
August 18, 2015
August 18, 2015
August 18, 2015
August 18, 2015
August 18, 2015
August 18, 2015
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We  consent  to  the  use  of  our  report  dated  August  18,  2015  relating to  the  financial  statements  of  Handeni  Gold  Inc.  (the  “Company”)  that  are  included  in  the
Company’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2015, which is incorporated by reference in each of (i) the Company’s Form S-8 Registr ration
Statement filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on October 9, 2007, (ii) the Company’s Form S-8 Registration Statement filed with the
United States Securities and Exchange Commission on December 30, 2008, and (iii) the Company’s Form S-8 Registration Statement filed with the United States
Securities and Exchange Commission on May 10, 2013.
/s/ “Manning Elliott LLP”
CHARTERED PROFESSIONAL ACCOUNTANTS 
Vancouver, Canada
August 18, 2015
Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Reyno Scheepers, certify that:
1.
2.
3.
4.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Handeni Gold Inc.;
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act  Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e))  and  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  (as  defined  in  Exchange  Act  Rules  13a-15(f)  and  15d-15(f))  for  the
registrant and have:
a.
b.
c.
d.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that  material  information  relating  to  the  registrant,  including  its  consolidated  subsidiaries,  is  made  known  to  us  by  others  within  those  entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision,
to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness
of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent  evaluation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  to  the
registrant’s auditors and the Audit Committee of the registrant’s Board of Directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
b.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting, which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: August 18, 2015.
By: “Reyno Scheepers”
      Reyno Scheepers 
      President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) and a director
__________
Exhibit 31.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Melinda Hsu, certify that:
1.
2.
3.
4.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Handeni Gold Inc.;
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act  Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e))  and  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  (as  defined  in  Exchange  Act  Rules  13a-15(f)  and  15d-15(f))  for  the
registrant and have:
a.
b.
c.
d.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that  material  information  relating  to  the  registrant,  including  its  consolidated  subsidiaries,  is  made  known  to  us  by  others  within  those  entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision,
to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness
of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent  evaluation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  to  the
registrant’s auditors and the Audit Committee of the registrant’s Board of Directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
b.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting, which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: August 18, 2015.
By: “Melinda Hsu”
      Melinda Hsu 
      Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer
__________
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
Exhibit 32.1
The undersigned, Reyno Scheepers, the Chief Executive Officer, and Melinda Hsu, the Chief Financial Officer, of Handeni Gold Inc. (the “Company”), each hereby
certifies, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that, to his knowledge, the Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2015, fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and
that  the  information  contained  in  the  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  as  amended,  fairly  presents  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition  and  results  of
operations of the Company.
Date: August 18, 2015.
By: “Reyno Scheepers”
      Reyno Scheepers 
      President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) and a director
By: “Melinda Hsu”
      Melinda Hsu 
      Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer
A signed original of this written statement required by Section 906, or other document authenticating, acknowledging, or otherwise adopting the signatures that
appear in typed form within the electronic version of this written statement required by Section 906, has been provided to the Company and will be retained by the
Company and furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.