
CRE8TEK
CreBtek
Prospectus


. Cre8tek Limited
ACN 000 031 292
Prospectus
> For an offer of 75,000,000 Shares at a price of $0.04 each to raise $3,000,000 before costs
‘ (Public Offer). The minimum subscription under the Public Offer is $3,000,000.
—
— This Prospectus also contains the following Secondary Offers:
I
— 1. an offer of 272,727,273 Shares and 272,727,273 Performance Shares to the Vendors of
.‘ Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc. (Flamingo) for the acquisition of all the shares in
h-J Flamingo by the Company (Consideration Offer);
5 2. an offer of 13,286,364 Shares and 7,150,000 Performance Shares to the Facilitators
I (Facilitation Offer); and
T, E 3. an offer of 6,567,382 Options to certain employees of Flamingo (Employee Offer),
5 (together, the Offers).
i Re-compliance with Chapters 1 and 2
= In addition to the purpose of raising funds under the Public Offer, this Prospectus is issued for
the purpose of re-complying with the admission requirements under Chapters 1 and 2 of the
 ASX Listing Rules following a change to the scale of the Company's activities.
Conditional Offers
I
.—
all The Offers are conditional upon certain events occurring. Please refer to Section 2.3 for further
‘ formation. The Offers are not underwritten.
I In
"’E IMPORTANT NOTICE
_ This is an important document and investors should read the document in its entirety and are
‘ advised to consult with their professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for
[I securities pursuant to this Prospectus. Any investment in the Company under this Prospectus
_‘ should be considered highly speculative in nature and prospective investors should be aware
a that they may lose some or all of their investment.
.4
_
O,
.I A
OTSANA
C A P I T A L
to
§ Legal Advisor to the Company Lead Manager to the Public Offer
a;
t;
[1
.43
o:
(I)
b


. TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Page No.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION  3
CORPORATE
E LE'I'I'ER FROMTHE 
E KEY OFFER DETAILS 6
5 INDICATIVETIMETABLE..........................................................................7
INVESTMENT
5 1. Transaction
m 2. Details ofthe Offers 
l 3. Overview of the Company, Flamingo and the Merged Group 
i
—J 4. lndependentlndustry Expert's Report 
! 5. Risk
-
E 6. Investigating Accountant's 
i 7. Intellectual Property Experts' Reports 
_
5 8. Directors, Key Management and Corporate Governance 
r 9. Material
a 10. Additional Information 
h
E 11. Directors'Authorisation............................................................103
5 12. Definitions
!
5
‘D


. IMPORTANT INFORMATION
Prospectus expressed or implied by the forwarrHooking statements
. . contained in this Prospectus will actually occur. Further, the
This Prospectus is dated 13 September 2016 and was lodged with . _ .
etc at ttat aata tsic, tsx and ttait rtaaettm amtttt at not 553:; my ezggtgigzﬁezeﬁyv'sggy gsnjzgggﬁgﬁ
 “t "‘5 subsequently becomes available that affects the original
- forward-looking statement.
Within 7 days of the date of this Prospectus, the Company will .
> make an application to Asx for the Shares offered pursuant to Exp°me Pen“
the Prospectus to be admitted for quotation on ASX. This Prospectus will be circulated during the Exposure Period.
‘ S _ _ h be a h_ P l The purpose of the Exposure Period is to enable this Prospectus
= (eggqtertens‘tmhsngttterthisgetem:Entrggpggiusmspectus eter to be examined by market participants bribrto applyirtg ror
— - Securities. This examination may result in the identification of
- Persons wishing to apply for Securities pursuant to the Offers de'iCieheies in this Prosoecthsehda in those circumstances; ahy
— must do so using the applicable Application Form attached to or epohcetroh that has been reee'Ved they heed to he deett W'th 'h
— accompanying this Prospectus. Before applying for Securities accordehce W'th sechoh 714 of the Corporetrohs Act-
. potential investors should carefully read the Prospectus so that AF'Phset'ehs ‘0' Seeur't'es “hder the 5ee°hderv Offers set Out 'h
they can make a" immed assessment 0,: this Prospectus will not be processed by the Company until after
the expiry of the Exposure Period. No preference will be
- the rights and liabilities attaching to the Securities; conferred on applications lodged prior to the expiry of the
- the assets and liabilities of the Company; and Exposure Period.
. the Company's financial position and performance, profits and _ _ _ _
II losses} and meme Re-compllance with chapters 1 and z of the Listing Rules
I investors should carefully consider these factors in light of their The Acqu‘s‘twh EV!“ C°hst‘t“te e shehse t0 the State 0' the
own personal financial and taxation circumstances. Compean ectrvrtreS- Purshent to Lrstrng Rule 11-1-3, the
I 1 Company must re-comply with the admission requirements of
i No person is authorised to give any information or to make any Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules, as if applying for admission
representation in relation to the Offers which is not contained in to the official list of ASX. Accordingly, this Prospectus is issued
- this Prospectus. Any information or representation not so for the purpose of satisfying Chaptersi and 2 of the Listing
contained may not be relied upon as having been authorised by Rules, as well as for the purpose of raising funds under the Public
I the Company or the Directors in relation to the 0ifers. Offer.
_ Risks Conditional Offer
- Any investment in the Company should be considered highly The 0ifers contained in this Prospectus are conditional on
speculative. Before deciding to invest in the Company, potential certain events occurring. if these events do not occur, the Offers
i investors should read the entire Prospectus and, in particular, in will not proceed and investors Will be refunded their application
_ considering the Prospects of the Company, potential investors monies without interest. Please refer to Section 2.3 for further
- should consider the risk factors that could affect the financial details on the conditions attaching to the Offers.
I performance and assets of the Company. investors should _
- carefully consider these factors in light of their personal E'edm'": PrOSPectus
Circumstemes (‘t‘ClUd‘hg finensiel and math" ‘55“eSI- The if you have received this Prospectus as an electronic Prospectus
. Securities offered by this Prospectus should be considered highly eleese ensure that you have ,eeehed the ehthe Prospect“;
speculative. Please refer to Section 5 for details relating to risk accompanied by the Application Form If you have not, please
r factors. Persons considering applying for_ Securities pursuant to contact the Comhehy et ‘61 8 9486 7244 ehd the Cemhehy wht
’ the P’Ospeetus SW“ 0mm meessmml “We "0” 3" send you, at no cost, either a hard copy or a further electronic
accountant, stockbroker, lawyer or other adviser before copy of the Pmpeetusm both Altemethetyt you they obtain a
dec‘dm Whemer ‘0 ‘"V95t- copy of the Prospectus from the Company's website at
'— one” outside Austmhe http://www.cre6tek.com.au.
I F The offer of Securities made pursuant to this Prospectus is not The Compth reserves _the r'sht hot to eecept eh Aophcehoh
made to Demons to whet", o, pteees ht which, it would hot he Form from a person if it has reason to believe_that when that
a lawful to make such an offer of Securities. No action has been person was even access to the electronrc Apphcetroh Form, It
. taken to register the Offers under this Prospectus or otherwise Was not FroV'ded together wrth the electrohrc Prospectus and
permit the Offers to be made in any jurisdiction outside shy reteveht supplementary or replacemeht Prospectus or any or
Australia. The distribution of this Prospectus in Jurisdictions those documents were 'hcorhplete or altered-
I outside Australia may be restricted by law in those jurisdictions Photographs and diagrams
and therefore persons who come into possession of this
-_ Prospectus should seek advice on and observe any of these Photographs used in this Prospectus which do not have
_ restrictions. Failure to comply with these restrictions may descriptions are for illustration only and should not be
3 violate securities laws. interpreted to mean that any person shown endorses the
. . . Prospectus or that the assets shown in them are owned by the
See Section 2.12 for further information on Hong Kong. Cemhehy_ meetems used ht this Pteeheetus they not he drew to
I Forward-looking statements seale-
L This Prospectus contains IorwarrHooking statements which M'see'le"e°“5
incorporate an element of uncertainty or risk, such as 'intends‘, Ah ,e'etehees to as" aw aAUDa "duller. and .teehtsa are
“3% 1°”th “she/€53 'est‘mtes‘: 'te’gets' 0’ expects- These references to Australian currency unIess otherwise stated.
statements are based on an evaluation of current economic and
operating conditions, as well as assumptions regarding future All references to time relate to the time in Perth, Western
events. These events, as at the date of this Prospectus, are Australia unless otherwise stated.
e, expected to take place, but there is no guarantee that such will . . .
3 occur as anticipated or at all given that many of the events are A "umber “I term? and ePhtev‘etmt‘S use? ‘" ""5 PmSPectus
hr oute‘de the Cemhehye eehtmt have defined meanings which appear in Section 12.
E Accordingly, the Company cannot and does not give any
 assurance that the results, performance or achievements
e3 _
‘3 3
i.)


. CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Existing Board of Directors Auditor to the Company‘
Mr Bryn Hardcastle Ernst & Young
Mr Faldi Ismail 11 Mounts Bay Road
Mr Tom Bahen PERTH WA 6000
> Proposed Board of Directors Legal Advisor
‘ Mr Bryn Hardcastle Bellanhouse Legal
— Mr Faldi Ismail Ground Floor, 11 Ventnor Avenue
E Dr Catriona Wallace WEST PERTH WA 6005
! Ms Cathie Reid
— Investigating Accountant
a Company Secretary BDO Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd
Mr Dave Filov 38 Station Street
SUBIACO WA 6008
Registered Office
1] 108 Outram Street Intellectual Property Experts
WEST PERTH WA 6005 (USA)
r] Flynn, Thiel, Boutell & Tanis, P.C.
J Telephone: +61 8 9486 7244 2026 Rambling Road, Kalamazoo
Facsimile: +61 8 9463 6373 MI 49008 USA
5 Email: admin@cre8tek.com.au
(Australia)
I Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc. Williams + Hughes Pty Ltd
= 525 W 28th Street Ground Floor, 25 Richardson Street
Suite A1059, New York WEST PERTH WA 6005
E NY 10001 USA
— Independent Industry Expert
- Level 2, 50 Bridge Street Frost & Sullivan Australia Pty Ltd
= SYDNEY NSW 2000 Suite 1, Level 9, 189 Kent Street
a SYDNEY NSW 2000
ASX Code
r CR8 Lead Manager and Corporate Advisor
J] Otsana Capital
Websites 108 Outram Street
— www.cre8tek.com.au WEST PERTH WA 6005
E flamingo.io
N Share Registry‘
a Automic Registry Services
Level 1, 7 Ventnor Avenue
' WEST PERTH WA 6005
= Telephone: +61 8 9324 2099
a Facsimile: +61 8 9321 2337
g
in: " This entity is included for information purposes only. It has not been involved in the
 preparation of this Prospectus.
Lt
 —4


. LETTER FROM THE BOARD
Dear Investor,
On behalf of the Board of Directors of Cre8tek Limited (Company), we are pleased to present
you with this opportunity to become a shareholder in the Company.
On 2 June 2016, the Company announced it had agreed to acquire the entire issued share capital
> of Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc. (Flamingo) (Acquisition), an innovative software as a
_‘ service (SaaS) company which has developed a customer experience automation platform
= (Flamingo Platform) designed for selling complex financial products online. The Flamingo
- Platform design aims to turn a website's visitors into customers by guiding them online from
= page view to purchase, on both mobile and desktop devices. Using artificial intelligence
. software developed by Flamingo, the Flamingo Platform learns how customers and employees
of financial providers interact, then is able to automate a customer‘s 'journey' through sales,
on-boarding and retention processes. It also delivers insights which facilitate ongoing product
development.
m Flamingo is the second proposed acquisition by the Company in line with the Company‘s new
I' focus, being technology and software development. Subject to Shareholder approval and upon
11‘ successful completion of the Acquisition, the Company will focus on advancing the
commercialisation of Flamingo‘s business as well as ongoing development of the Company's
- existing Agenda Platform, whilst also seeking to further expand its portfolio in technology
I solutions.
= Funds raised under this Prospectus will be used to pursue the development and
IE commercialisation strategy for the Flamingo Platform.
L Flamingo was founded in 2014 by Dr Catriona Wallace and has been funded to date by founder
- contributions and angel investors, including entities associated with Proposed Chair Cathie Reid
— who has chaired Flamingo since 2014. The Flamingo shareholders have approved the sale of the
' business to the Company on the terms outlined in this Prospectus, and will join the share
.1 registry post completion of the Acquisition.
I” I An investment in the Company is considered speculative and it is recommended that you
consider the terms of the Offers contained in this Prospectus carefully and in their entirety. |f
_ you are in any doubt as to the contents of this Prospectus, you should consult your stockbroker,
m lawyer, accountant or other professional adviser.
_‘ On behalf of the Board of the Company, we commend this opportunity to you and look forward
a to welcoming you as a security holder.
I Yours faithfully
.—
Q
II Bryn Hardcastle Cathie Reid
Current Chair Proposed Chair
E Cre8tek Limited Cre8tek Limited
5


. KEY OFFER DETAILS
Key offer details
Offer Price per Share under the Public Offer $0.04 per Share
Shares to be offered under the Public Offer 75,000,000 Shares
Cash raised under the Public Offer (before expenses) $3,000,000
Securities offered pursuant to the Consideration Offer 272,727,273 Shares
272,727,273 Performance Shares
Securities offered pursuant to the Facilitation Offer 13,286,364 Shares
7,150,000 Performance Shares
Securities offered pursuant to the Employee Offer 6,567,382 Options
Existing Shares on issue 234,426,409 Shares
Total number of Shares on issue following the Offers 595,440,046 Shares
Ownership by Vendors at ASX relisting 45.80%
Ownership by investors under Public Offer at ASX relisting 12.60%
Note: The figures shown above assume no Options are exercised and that none of the existing
Performance Rights or Performance Shares to be issued have converted into Shares. Please refer to
Section 2.4 for further details relating to the proposed capital structure of the Company.
113
3
1 6


. INDICATIVE TIMETABLE
Event ‘ Date
Despatch of Notice of General Meeting 11 August 2016
Lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC 13 September 2016
Opening Date for the Public Offer 13 September 2016
General Meeting 14 September 2016
Closing Date for the Offers 30 September 2016
Completion of the Acquisition 7 October 2016
Issue of Securities under the Offers 7 October 2016
Dispatch of holding statements 7 October 2016
Expected date for Shares to be reinstated to trading on ASX 14 October 2016
Note: The dates shown above are indicative only and may vary subject to the Corporations Act, the
Listing Rules and other applicable laws. In particular, the Company reserves the right to vary the Opening
Date and the Closing Date without prior notice, which may have a consequential effect on the other
dates. Applicants are therefore encouraged to lodge their Application Form as soon as possible after the
Opening Date if they wish to invest in the Company‘ The Company also reserves the right not to proceed
with any of the Offers at any time before the issue of Securities to Applicants‘
11$

f
1 7


. INVESTMENT OVERVIEW
This Section is not intended to provide full information for investors intending to apply for
Securities offered pursuant to this Prospectus. This Prospectus should be read and considered
in its entirety. The Securities offered pursuant to this Prospectus carry no guarantee in respect
of return of capital, return on investment, payment of dividends or the future value of the
Securities.
>
‘ Topic Summary More
= ‘ ‘ information
—
5
ﬁ Who is the Cre8tek Limited (ACN 000 031 292) (Company) is an Section 3.1
Company and what Australian incorporated company listed on ASX.
does u do? Following the acquisition of Global Agenda
w Technologies Pty Ltd (Agenda) in Februaw 2016, the
Company became a technology company operating in
r the technology solutions and software development
ﬂ sector, with plans to expand its portfolio.
5 Agenda was the first acquisition made by the
Company in this new area of focus, and the Company
I planned to further expand its portfolio in technology
_ solutions, with a particular focus on software
- marketing solutions, application software,
IE communication software, software as a service,
L online social networking services, and security and
i encryption.
= Consistent with this strategy, since successful
completion of the acquisition of Agenda in February
a 2016, the Company has been developing the Agenda
r Platform, an online platform which proposes to
facilitate sales conversions between businesses and
consumers, whilst also seeking to expand its
— portfolio in technology solutions.
3 What is the The Company intends to acquire 100% of the issued Sections 1,
Acquisition and capital of Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc. 2.2(a) and 3
a what is the (Flamingo). The Company has agreed to issue
Flamingo Platform? 272,727,273 Shares and 272,727,273 Performance
Shares to the vendors of Flamingo under the
Consideration Offer as consideration for the
— acquisition of all the shares in Flamingo by the
5 Company.
Flamingo is an innovative software as a service
1 (SaaS) company which has developed a customer
L experience automation platform (Flamingo
Platform) designed for selling complex financial
products online. The Flamingo Platform design aims
to turn a website: visitors looking for complex
financial products into customers by guiding
 customers online from page view to purchase, on
5; both mobile and desktop devices.
[i


. Topic Summary More
information
Flamingo‘s existing product, known as 'Journey
Assist‘, has been developed, tested and successfully
trialled. This product comprises the current Flamingo
Platform and is ready for sale to a broad market,
initially focused in financial services.
>
a Who are the Flamingo is led by its founder, Dr Catriona Wallace, Section 3.2(e)
= people behind with Ms Cathie Reid as Chair of the board. As part of
- Flamingo? the Acquisition Agreement, each of Ms Reid and Dr
_ Wallace will join the Board of the Company (subject
ﬁ to Shareholder approval).
As at the date of this Prospectus, Flamingo employs
14 people across Australia and the US, including
seven software engineers, the chief data scientist
w (Dr Jack Elliott) and the chief technology officer (Mr
r Joe Waller). Flamingo‘s development team is based
E in Australia.
The profiles of each of the key management
5 personnel are detailed in Section 3.2(e).
I What is the Flamingo is the second proposed acquisition by the Section 3.7
— Company's Company in line with the Company‘s new focus,
- strategy? being technology and software development. The
E Company plans to further expand its portfolio in
technology solutions, with a particular focus on
- software marketing solutions, application software,
— communication software, SaaS, online social
5 networking services, and security and encryption.
It is possible that future acquisitions that may be
r contemplated may exceed the current or projected
financial resources of the Company and it is
expected that these acquisitions would be funded by
— debt and/or equity issues (subject to any required
3 regulatory approvals).
For the immediate future the Merged Group‘s focus
a will be on the continued development and
commercialisation of the Flamingo Platform and
Agenda Platform, together with assessing further
complementaw acquisition opportunities.
—
5.5
What are the The basis for any revenue generated by consumer Sections 3.7
L Merged Group's service offerings such as that of the Flamingo and 3.2(c)
potential revenue Platform and proposed to be offered through the
sources? Agenda Platform, is driven by the acquisition,
retention and engagement of its consumers and
service providers (Providers).
 The Merged Group intends to derive revenue from
 the following possible sources:
 (a) sales revenues from Providers for:
L1


. Topic Summary More
information
(i) trials of the Flamingo Platform;
(ii) subscriptions by Providers using the
Flamingo Platform; and
(iii) success fees per acquisition by Provider‘s
>I customers; and
_— (b) if successfully developed, via the Agenda
— Platform from transaction fees, advertising, in-
! application purchases and software sales.
The Flamingo Platform has generated limited
. revenues, largely from paid trials of the platform to
date.
w What are the key The key factors that the Merged Group will depend Section 3.8
dependencies of on to meet its objectives are:
r the.MergEd GmUPS (a) the successful completion of the Acquisition;
busmess model?
(b) the successful completion of the Public Offer;
.5 (c) the successful execution of service agreements
I with and retention of new and existing
Providers using the Flamingo Platform;
—
- (d) the successful development of the Agenda
E: Platform;
— (e) retaining the key personnel and consultants of
- Flamingo and Agenda; and
—
_ (f) the ability to protect the Merged Group‘s
. intellectual property.
ﬂ, Summary of key risks
I Prospective investors should be aware that subscribing for Securities in the Company
involves a number of risks. The risk factors set out in Section 5, and other general risks
1] applicable to all investments in quoted securities, may affect the value of the Securities in
the future. Accordingly, an investment in the Company should be considered highly
speculative. This Section summarises the key risks which apply to an investment in the
. Company and investors should refer to Section 5 for a more detailed summary of the risks.
I Limited operating Flamingo has limited operating histow and there is Section 5.2(a)
— history uncertainty in relation to the business of Flamingo
and investors should consider Flamingo‘s prospects in
. light of its limited financial history. In addition,
there is no guarantee that Flamingo will be able to
I successfully further develop or commercialise its
products and if it is unable to do so it will not be
able to realise significant revenues in the future.
Failure to attract, The potential revenue streams for the Company Section 5.2(b)
w retain and engage depend on its ability to attract, retain and engage
:2 clients clients (Providers) to the Flamingo Platform. There is
 a risk that the Company may be unable to attract,
 retain and engage sufficient Providers for the
Hi

g, —
i1, 10


. Topic Summary More
information
potential revenue streams to materialise or be
sufficient for the continued operation of the
Flamingo Platform.
Sales and Following completion of the Acquisition, the Section 5.2(c)
> marketing success Company intends to continue with the
g commercialisation of the Flamingo Platform,
= including brand development and sales and
- marketing. By its nature, there is no guarantee that
_ the Company‘s brand development and sales and
ﬁ marketing campaign will be successful. In the event
that it is not, the Company may encounter difficulty
in creating market awareness of the brand. This
would likely have an adverse impact on the
w Company‘s ability to generate revenue.
r Even if the Company does successfully commercialise
l . . ,
the Flamingo Platform, there is a risk the Company
Q will not achieve a commercial return. The Company
5 may not be able to sell products and services to
clients at a rate which covers its operating and
I capital costs, or new technology may overtake the
_ Company‘s technology.
-
IE Competition and The industw in which Flamingo is involved is subject Section 5.2(d)
L new technologies to increasing domestic and global competition which
— is fast-paced and fast-changing. While the Company
! will undertake all reasonable due diligence in its
_ business decisions and operations, the Company will
a have no influence or control over the activities or
actions of its competitors, whose activities or actions
r may positively or negatively affect the operating and
a financial performance of the Company's projects and
— business. For instance, new technologies could
overtake the advancements made by the Flamingo
3 Platform. In that case, the Company's revenues and
profitability could be adversely affected.
a The Company‘s competition may include businesses
with much higher capitalisation and substantially
greater resources. These competitors may succeed in
developing products and services which are either
— superior or additional to the Company's, resulting in
the migration of existing clients and potential clients
. to a competitor's business. Competitors with
increased access to capital could lead to the
L Company‘s business becoming uncompetitive.
Further, the cost and time for a new competitor
(including new entrants) to develop competing
technology or products may not be significant, and
may be substantially less than the implied market
 capitalisation of the Company based on the issue
 price of $0.04 per Share. This may result in a
 heightened risk of competition to the Company. If a
 person or entity successfully develops and
‘D —
‘1: 11


. Topic Summary More
information
commercialises a competing product, this may have
a materially adverse effect on the value and
prospects of the Company and consequently on the
value of your investment.
> Increased There is a risk that maintaining and upgrading Section 5.2(e)
g investment in Flamingo‘s existing products as well as new product
I: product development may lead to a higher than anticipated
- development and investment spend on IT development.
_ support
ﬁ Flamingo's If the Company fails to protect the intellectual Section 5.2(f)
intellectual property rights of Flamingo adequately, competitors
property may gain access which would in turn harm its
w business.
r Legal standards relating to the validity,
enforceability and scope of protection of intellectual
a property rights are uncertain. Effective patent,
E trade mark, copyright and trade secret protection
may not be available to the Company in every
I countw in which products may become available.
_ Accordingly, despite its efforts, the Company may
- not be able to prevent third parties from infringing
E upon or misappropriating its intellectual property.
:_ The Company may be required to incur significant
- expenses in monitoring and protecting its
— intellectual property rights. It may initiate or
_ otherwise be involved in litigation against third
a parties for infringement, or to establish the validity,
r of its rights. Any litigation, whether or not it is
successful, could result in significant expense to the
a Company and cause a distraction to management.
—
Intellectual Flamingo relies in part on confidentiality agreements Section 5.2(g)
1] property with its employees, consultants, contractors and
infringement other third parties to protect its intellectual
a property. These agreements may not effectively
prevent disclosure of confidential information and
may not provide an adequate remedy in the event of
unauthorised disclosure of confidential information.
— Flamingo uses a combination of open source and
5 third party licensed software to develop its own
software and platforms, and relies on its ability to
E protect its intellectual property rights adequately.
Failure to do so may result in competitors gaining
access to its technology, which would harm the
business. Flamingo may be unable to obtain patent
protection in the future. If any patents are issued in
m the future, they may not provide Flamingo with any
 competitive advantages, or may be challenged by
 third parties.
[i
‘D —
 12


. Topic Summary More
information
There is a risk that the validity, ownership or
authorised use of intellectual property relevant to
Flamingo‘s business will be successfully challenged by
third parties. Any litigation, whether or not it is
successful, could result in significant expense to the
% Company and divert the efforts of its personnel.
—
= Reliance on key The emergence and development of the Flamingo Sections 5.2(h)
- personnel and Platform has been in large part due to the talent, and 5.2(i)
_ specialist staff effort, and experience of Dr Catriona Wallace, the
ﬁ Founder of Flamingo. Dr Wallace has signed a
contract to join the Company as Chief Executive
Officer and Executive Director on completion of the
Acquisition.
w There is no assurance that Dr Wallace's contract will
r not be terminated. In addition, there is no assurance
that Dr Wallace will remain healthy and able to
E continue in her role. If her contract were terminated
E or breached, or if Dr Wallace were no longer to
continue in her role, the Company would need to
I employ alternative staff, and the Company's
_ operations and business would be adversely affected.
- Competition for qualified technical, sales and
E marketing staff can be intense and no assurance can
_ be provided that the Company will be able to attract
- or retain key personnel in the future.
= Flamingo is reliant upon employees with specialist IT
a skills in order to develop and maintain its projects.
Any shortage of availability of these skills in the IT
r employment market could impair the development
a of Flamingo's products and business and the rate of
such development. Such a shortage could also cause
— wage inflation, which may impact on the Company's
ﬂ profitability.
Reliance on core The operation of Flamingo‘s business is dependent Section 5.2(k)
. information upon the performance, reliability and availability of
technology and its information technology and security systems. This
I other systems includes its core technologies such as computer
— servers and back-end processing systems. These
systems may be adversely affected by a number of
5 factors including major events such as acts of
terrorism or war or breakdown in utilities such as
1 electricity and fibre optic cabling. Events of that
L nature may cause one or more of those core
technologies to become unavailable. There are also
internal and external factors that may adversely
affect those systems and technologies such as
natural disasters, misuse by employees or
 contractors or other technical issues. The Company
 and Flamingo‘s disaster recovery plans may not cover
[i
‘D —
ll: 13


. Topic Summary More
information
loss or damage that the Company or Flamingo suffers
as a result of such a system failure.
Any damage to, or failure of, Flamingo's key systems
can result in disruption to Flamingo‘s ability to
> operate its business. Such disruptions have the
‘ potential to reduce Flamingo‘s ability to generate
= revenue, impact customer service levels and damage
a Flamingo‘s brand. This could adversely affect
_ Flamingo and the Company‘s ability to generate new
5 business and cause it to suffer financial loss.
. Dilution risk The Company currently has 234,426,409 Shares on Section 5.1(a)
issue. On completion of the Acquisition, the
Company proposes to issue Shares and Performance
w Shares as required pursuant to the Acquisition
r Agreement and issue Shares as part of the Offers.
E On issue of the consideration under the Acquisition
and the subscription of Shares under the Offers
5 (assuming no Securities are exercised or converted),
the existing Shareholders will retain approximately
I 39.37% of the issued capital of the Company, with
— entities associated with proposed directors Dr
- Wallace and Ms Reid holding 19.45% and 10.56%
E respectively, the remaining Vendors holding 15.79%,
_ the Facilitators holding 2.23% and the investors
- under the Public Offer holding 12.60%, of the issued
— '
_ capital of the Company.
a In the event that all Performance Shares convert,
and assuming no other Securities are issued or
r converted, then the existing Shareholders will retain
a approximately 26.78% of the issued capital of the
Company, with entities associated with proposed
— directors Dr Wallace and Ms Reid holding 26.46% and
E 14.36% respectively, the remaining Vendors holding
21.49%, the Facilitators holding 2.33% and the
investors under the Public Offer holding 8.57%, of
. the issued capital of the Company.
There is also a risk that the interests of Shareholders
will be further diluted as a result of future capital
— raisings required in order to fund the future
5 development of the Company.
Liquidity risk On completion of the Acquisition, the Company Section 5.1(b)
L proposes to issue a total of 156,912,882 Initial
Consideration Shares and 156,912,882 Performance
Shares to the Non-Founder Vendors, and 115,814,391
Initial Consideration Shares and 115,814,391
Performance Shares to the Founder. A portion of
m these securities will be subject to escrow restrictions
 in accordance with Chapter 9 of the Listing Rules.
 This could be considered an increased liquidity risk
[i
‘D —
 14


. Topic Summary More
information
as a portion of issued capital will not be able to be
traded freely for a period of time.
Directors and Key Management Personnel
> Directors On completion of the Acquisition and subject to Sections 8.1 -
g Shareholder approval, it is intended that Mr Tom 8.3, 8.5 and
= Bahen will resign as Non-Executive Director and the 8.6
- Company will appoint new Directors. After the
_ Acquisition, it is intended that the Board will
ﬁ comprise:
(a) Ms Cathie Reid - Non-Executive Chair;
(b) Dr Catriona Wallace - Chief Executive Officer
w and Executive Director;
(c) Mr Bryn Hardcastle 7 Non-Executive Director;
a and
(d) Mr Faldi Ismail 7 Non-Executive Director.
5 The profiles of each of these individuals are detailed
I in Section 8.3. Details of the personal interests of
each of the above individuals are in Section 8.5 and
—
- 8.6.
E It is intended that Mr Dave Filov will remain as
' Company Secretary following completion of the
i Acquisition.
—
_ Additional key Apart from the Directors, upon successful completion Sections 8.4
a management of the Acquisition, the Flamingo team will join the and 9.2(d)
Ir personnel Company. The management team will include:
a (a) Mr Joe Waller 7 Chief Technology Officer; and
- (b) Dr Jack Elliott 7 Chief Data Scientist.
El The profiles of Mr Waller and Dr Elliott are detailed
in Section 3.2(e) and details of their employment
agreements with Flamingo are summarised in
. Section 9.2(d).
I Related party Details of Director remuneration and interests in the Sections 8.6 -
transactions Company‘s securities are provided in Section 8.6 and 8.8
h 8.7.
.| Details of related party transactions are set out in
1 Sections 8.8.
L Financial information
How have the A reviewed statement of financial position of the Sections 3.2(c)
Company and Company as at 31 March 2016 and an audited and 6
N Flamingo statement of financial position of Flamingo as at
 performed over 31 March 2016 are set out in the Investigating
i} the past 12 Accountant's Report in Section 6.
 months?
Ci

g] —
.1, 15


. Topic Summary More
information
The Company exited external administration by
effectuating a deed of company arrangement on
28 October 2015 and acquired Agenda in Februaw
2016.
> Flamingo was initially incorporated in May 2013.
g A table setting out the revenue and profit before tax
I: figures of Flamingo since incorporation is set out in
- Section 3.2(c). Shareholders should note that
_ Flamingo has a limited operating histow and has
spent (and still spends) much of its focus on ongoing
. platform development, while conducting paid trials
when opportunities arise. Shareholders should note
that due to Flamingo's infancy its operations are
w inherently uncertain and the figures in the table in
Section 3.2(c) should not be used as a guide as to the
a future performance of Flamingo.
What is the Please refer to the Investigating Accountant's Report Section 6
5 financial outlook in Section 6 for further information.
for the Merged
I Group?
—
- Does the Merged Funding for the Merged Group's short to medium Section 3.9
E Group have term activities will be generated from the funds
_ sufficient funds for raised under the Public Offer, together with the
- its activities? Company‘s existing cash reserves post-Acquisition,
— and anticipated funds received from Auslndustry
_ research and development grants in the next 12
a months following the reinstatement of the
r Company‘s Securities to quotation on the Official List
of ASX.
a The Board is satisfied that upon completion of the
— Offers, the Company will have sufficient working
ﬂ capital to meet its stated objectives.
What is the The Company intends to apply the funds raised under Section 3.9
. proposed use of the Public Offer, together with the Company‘s
funds raised under existing cash reserves post-Acquisition and
I the Public Offer? anticipated funds received from Auslndustry research
_ and development grants in the next 12 months
following the reinstatement of the Company‘s
5 Securities to quotation on the Official List of ASX
towards the following:
E (a) expenses of the Acquisition;
(b) repayment of loans;
(c) Agenda Platform development;
(d) Flamingo Platform development;
 (e) sales and marketing; and
m
[i
g;
")1 —
‘1; 16


. Topic Summary More
information
(f) general working capital, including corporate
and administrative costs.
What are the Offers?
at is t e u lC e u lC er 15 a con Itiona 0 er 1nv1ting t e ection .1
> Wh‘thl‘ Tthl‘Off’ d" lff"‘ h S ‘2
Offer? general public to apply for 75,000,000 Shares at an
Offer Price of $0.04 per Share to raise $3,000,000
(before costs).
The Public Offer is subject to a minimum
subscription requirement to raise $3,000,000.
What are the The Company is undertaking the following Section 2.2
R Secondary Offers? conditional Secondary Offers in connection with the
I Acquisition:
l , (a) Consideration Offer: an offer of 272,727,273
d Shares and 272,727,273 Performance Shares to
‘ the Vendors as consideration for the
‘ acquisition of all the shares in Flamingo by the
Company;
(b) Facilitation Offer: an offer of 13,286,364
Shares and 7,150,000 Performance Shares to
Y) the Facilitators for facilitating the Acquisition;
I and
(c) Employee Offer: an offer of 6,567,382 Options
to certain employees of Flamingo in
consideration for the cancellation of existing
employee incentive scheme options held in
I Flamingo.
Q What are the The Offers remain conditional upon the following Section 2.3
conditions of the events occurring:
R Offers? (a) the Acquisition Agreement becoming
unconditional;
(b) Shareholders approving the Essential
Resolutions;
(c) the Company raising the minimum subscription
($3,000,000) under the Public Offer; and
(d) ASX providing the Company with a list of
conditions which, when satisfied, will result in
ASX reinstating the Shares to quotation on ASX
upon the satisfaction of Chapters 1 and 2 of
the Listing Rules.
If these conditions are not satisfied then the Offers
will not proceed and the Company will repay all
Application Monies received under the Public Offer in
 accordance with the Corporations Act.
11}

E
")1 —
.1, 17


. Topic Summary More
information
Why are the Offers The purposes of the Public Offer are to: Section 2.1(c)
bemg conducted? (a) meet the requirement that the Company re- and 2'2
complies with the ASX‘s admission
requirements in accordance with Chapters 1
>l and 2 of the Listing Rules; and
= (b) provide funding for the purposes outlined in
a Section 3.9.
_ The purpose of the Secondary Offers is to remove
the need for an additional disclosure document to be
. issued upon the sale of any Securities (or any Shares
issued on conversion of any convertible Securities
into Shares) that are issued under the Secondary
w Offers.
r Why is the ASX has determined that the Acquisition, if Section 1.3
a Company required successfully completed, will represent a significant
to re-comply with change in the scale of the Company‘s operations and
.i Chapters 1 & 2 of requires the Company to re-comply with Chapters 1
the Listing Rules? and 2 of the Listing Rules.
I The Company‘s Securities are currently suspended
- from trading on ASX and will not be reinstated unless
W each Essential Resolution is passed by Shareholders
I: (see Section 1.4 for further details), and ASX is
— satisfied the Company has met the requirements of
- Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules. It is expected
_ that the conduct of the Public Offer pursuant to this
.1 Prospectus will enable the Company to satisfy the
above requirements.
I, In the event that the Company does not receive
conditional approval for re-admission to the Official
_ List, the Company will not proceed with the Public
Offer and will repay all Application monies received
1] by it in connection with this Prospectus (without
interest).
5 Additional information
I Will the Company The Board is satisfied that upon completion of the Section 3.9
h be adequately Offers, the Company will have sufficient working
funded after capital to meet its stated objectives.
. completion of the
1 Public Offer?
L What are the key Lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC and Opening "Indicative
dates of the Date for the Public Offer, 13 September 2016 Timetable"
Offers? Closing Date for the Offers 7 30 September 2016
w Completion of the Acquisition, issue of Securities
 under the Offers and dispatch of holding statements-
 7 October 2016

g, —
,1, 18


. Topic Summary More
information
Expected date for Shares to be reinstated to trading
on ASX a 14 October 2016
The above dates are indicative only and may change
without notice.
> . r . .
‘ What rights and All Shares to be issued pursuant to the Offers w1ll Sections 10.1,
= liabilities attach to rank equally in all respects with the existing Shares 10.2 and 10.5
i the Securities on on issue. The rights and liabilities attaching to the
_ issue post- Shares are further described in Section 10.1 of the
Acquisition? Prospectus.
. The terms and conditions of the Performance Shares
to be issued under the Secondary Offers are
described in Section 10.2. The Shares issued upon
II 1 conversion of the Performance Shares will rank
equally in all respects with the existing Shares in the
r Company.
E The terms and conditions of the Employee Options to
be issued under the Employee Offer are described in
5 Section 10.5.
I Is the Public Offer No, the Public Offer is not underwritten. Section 2.5
- underwritten?
El Will the Securities The Company will apply to ASX no later than 7 days "Important
— issued under the from the date of this Prospectus for official Information"
- Offers be quoted? quotation of the Shares on the ASX.
_
.1 What are the tax The tax consequences of any investment in Securities Section 2.14
implications of under the Offers will depend upon your particular
r investing in circumstances.
a fﬁcgglesynder Prospective investors should obtain their own tax
_ e ers' advice before deciding to invest.
15 How do | apply for Applications for Securities under the Offers must be Section 2.6
Securities under made by completing the relevant Application Form
. the Offers? and, for the Public Offer, must be accompanied by a
cheque in Australian dollars for the full amount of
the application, being the number of Shares applied
for multiplied by $0.04 per Share. Cheques must be
— made payable to "Cre8tek Limited a Share
Application Account" and should be crossed "Not
. Negotiable".
'I Who is the lead The Company has appointed Otsana Capital to act as Section 9.3(c)
manager to the lead manager to the Public Offer and corporate
Public Offer? advisor to the Company. The Lead Manager will
receive a capital raising fee in connection with the
Public Offer.
 Otsana Capital is an entity associated with Director
 Mr Faldi Ismail.

g] —
.1, 19


. Topic Summary More
information
What is the The Directors will allocate Shares at their sole Section 2.7
allocation policy? discretion with a view to ensuring an appropriate
Shareholder base for the Company going forward.
The Directors reserve the right to reject any
Application or to allot a lesser number of Securities
than that applied for.
When will I receive It is expected that holding statements will be sent to "Indicative
confirmation that successful applicants by post on or about mid- Timetable"
my application has October 2016.
been successful?
Will any Securities The Shares offered under the Public Offer will not be Section 2.9
be subject to subject to any escrow restrictions.
escrow]? The Securities likely to be subject to escrow are the
Securities issued under the Secondaw Offers. The
Company expects that Consideration Securities
issued to parties classified by ASX as unrelated
vendors will not attract escrow. For Consideration
Securities issued to parties classified by ASX as
related parties and/or promoters, these Securities
will be escrowed for 24 months from the date of
quotation.
What is the As the Company will focus on the commercialisation No further
Company's of its platforms post-Acquisition, it does not expect information
dividend policy? to declare any dividends during this period or in the
short to medium term.
How can I find out Questions relating to the Offers and applications for Section 2.15
more about the Securities can be directed to the Company on
Prospectus or the +61 8 9486 7244.
Offers?
=1.
E
a: _
1 20


. 1. Transaction overview
1.1 The Acquisition
0n 2 June 2016, the Company announced it had agreed to acquire the entire issued
share capital of Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc. (Flamingo) (Acquisition), an
innovative software as a service (SaaS) company which has developed a customer
> experience automation platform (Flamingo Platform) designed for selling complex
‘ financial products online.
-
i A summaw of the Acquisition Agreement between the Company, Flamingo and its
_ major shareholders, including the conditions precedent to settlement occurring on the
— Acquisition, is set out in Section 9.3(a). Separate offers have already been made by
.I the Company to each Minority Flamingo Shareholder and have been accepted by 100%
of the Minority Flamingo Shareholders.
Upon successful completion of the Acquisition, the Company will focus on advancing
I the development of Flamingo‘s business as well as its existing Agenda business, whilst
I also seeking to expand its portfolio in technology solutions. A more detailed summary
’c of Flamingo and the proposed business of the Company following completion of the
Acquisition is set out in Section 3.
5 Completion of the Acquisition is subject to a number of conditions, including the
I following:
- (a) Shareholdings passing each of the Essential Resolutions (see Section 1.4 below
El for further details);
I
i (b) the Company raising the minimum subscription under the Public Offer, being
$3,000,000; and
III
.1 (c) ASX approving the Company's re-compliance with the admission requirements
under Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.
.r‘
I]: 1.2 About Flamingo
_ Flamingo is an innovative SaaS company which has developed a customer experience
I F automation platform (Flamingo Platform) designed for selling Providers' complex
financial products online. The Flamingo Platform design aims to turn a website's visitors
a looking for complex financial products into customers by guiding customers online from
.! page view to purchase, on both mobile and desktop devices. Using artificial
intelligence software developed by Flamingo, the Flamingo Platform learns how
I customers and employees of Providers interact, then is able to automate a customer's
I ‘journey‘ through sales, on-boarding and retention processes. It also delivers insights
_ which facilitate ongoing product development.
a Further information about the Flamingo Platform is contained in Section 3.4 below.
II 1.3 Suspension and reinstatement on ASX
ASX has determined that the Acquisition, if successfully completed, will represent a
significant change in the scale of the Company‘s operations and requires the Company
to re-comply with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.
m
g The change in the scale of the Company's activities requires:
LIL
E (a) the approval of Shareholders; and
'43
E 21
u


. (b) the Company to re-comply with the admission requirements set out in
Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.
The Company's Securities are currently suspended from trading on ASX and will not be
reinstated unless:
(a) each Essential Resolution is passed by Shareholders (see Section 1.4 below for
further details); and

>

‘ (b) ASX is satisfied the Company has met the requirements of Chapters 1 and 2 of

- the Listing Rules.

I

-— Some of the key requirements of Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules are:

.I (a) the Company must satisfy the shareholder spread requirements relating to the
minimum number of Shareholders and the minimum value of the shareholdings
of those Shareholders; and

II J (b) the Company must satisfy the "assets test“ as set out in Listing Rule 1.3.

I” It is expected that the conduct of the Public Offer pursuant to this Prospectus will

enable the Company to satisfy the above requirements.

5 Applicants should be aware that ASX will not re-admit or admit any Shares to Official

I Quotation until the Company re-complies with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules

and is re-admitted by ASX to the Official List.

-

E In the event that the Company does not receive conditional approval for re-admission

L to the Official List, the Company will not proceed with the Public Offer and will repay

— all Application monies received by it in connection with this Prospectus (without

- interest).

5 . . . , l

. |f Shareholder approval to the change in scale of the Company‘s act1VIt1es IS not

obtained, the Company will apply to ASX to have its securities re-instated to trading.

.r‘

J] The Company will apply to ASX no later than 7 days from the date of this Prospectus

for ASX to grant official quotation of the Shares issued pursuant to this Prospectus. If

_ the Shares are not admitted to quotation within three months after the date of this

I F Prospectus, no Shares will be issued and Application Monies received under the Public

Offer will be refunded in full without interest in accordance with the Corporations Act.

. Neither ASX nor ASIC take responsibility for the contents of this Prospectus. The fact

that ASX may grant official quotation to the Shares issued pursuant to this Prospectus

I is not to be taken in any way as an indication by ASX as to the merits of the Company

or the Shares.

.—

_ '

.1 1.4 General Meeting

I The Company has called the General Meeting primarily for the purpose of seeking the

I approval of Shareholders to a number of resolutions required to implement the

Acquisition.
It is a condition to completion of the Offers under this Prospectus, as well as the
Acquisition, that each of the following resolutions is approved by Shareholders:
(a) Change in scale: the Company changing the scale of its activities as a result
of the Acquisition;
22


. (b) Performance Shares: the creation of a class of Performance Shares. Please
refer to Section 10.2 for the terms of the Performance Shares;
(c) Issue of Consideration Securities to the Founder: the issue of 115,814,391
Shares and 115,814,391 Performance Shares to Flamingo's founder and
incoming Company Director, Dr Catriona Wallace (or her associate) in
consideration of acquiring her or her associate's securities in Flamingo;
> (d) Issue of Consideration Securities to the Non-Founder Vendors: the issue of
‘ 156,912,882 Shares and 156,912,882 Performance Shares to the Vendors
- (other than the Founder) in consideration of acquiring 100% of the securities
- in Flamingo;
.—
l (e) Issue of Facilitator Securities: the issue of 7,150,000 Shares and 7,150,000
.1 Performance Shares to the Facilitators (or their nominees) in consideration of
their services in facilitating the Acquisition;
m (f) Public Offer: the issue of 75,000,000 Shares under the Public Offer;
r (g) Employee Options: the issue of 6,567,382 Employee Options to employees of
’c Flamingo in consideration for the cancellation of existing employee incentive
scheme options held in Flamingo. The Company intends to issue the Employee
.3 Options under the Company's Employee Share Option Plan (ESOP). Please refer
to Section 10.5 for the terms of the Employee Options and Section 10.4 for a
I summaw of the ESOP;
- (h) Employee Incentive Scheme: the adoption of the Company‘s Employee
IE Incentive Scheme (Scheme). Please refer to Section 10.6 for a summary of the
' Scheme; and
—
E (i) Appointment of Proposed Directors: the appointment of Dr Catriona Wallace
- and Ms Cathie Reid (Proposed Directors) as directors of the Company.
? (each an Essential Resolution).
I
J] If any of the Essential Resolutions are not approved by Shareholders the Acquisition
(including the Offers under this Prospectus) will not be completed.
:01
I
:0]
i?
E
C:
El
63 —
E 23
t)


. 2. Details of the Offers
2.1 Public Offer
(a) General
By this Prospectus, pursuant to the Public Offer the Company offers
> 75,000,000 Shares at an Offer Price of $0.04 per Share to raise funds of
‘ $3,000,000 (before costs). The Public Offer is open to the general public.
-
i The Shares to be issued pursuant to the Public Offer are of the same class and
-_ will rank equally in all respects with the existing Shares in the Company. The
— rights and liabilities attaching to the Shares are further described in
. Section 10.1 of the Prospectus.
Applications for Shares under the Public Offer must be made on the Public
Offer Application Form accompanying this Prospectus and received by the
I Company on or before the Closing Date. Persons wishing to apply for Shares
I under the Public Offer should refer to Section 2.6 for further details and
I: instructions.
5 (b) Minimum subscription
I The minimum level of subscription for the Public Offer is 75,000,000 Shares to
raise $3,000,000 (before costs). If the minimum subscription has not been
- achieved within four months after the date of this Prospectus (or such period
U as varied by ASIC), the Company will not issue any Securities under this
L Prospectus and will repay all Application Monies in accordance with the
— Corporations Act.
E
- (c) Purpose of the Public Offer
a The purposes of the Public Offer are to:
.r‘
J] (i) meet the requirement that the Company re-complies with the ASX‘s
admission requirements in accordance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the
_ Listing Rules; and
 (ii) provide funding for the purposes outlined in Section 3.9.
I-1
a 2.2 Secondary Offers
I The Company is also undertaking the Secondaw Offers (described below) in connection
with the Acquisition. The Secondaw Offers are being made under this Prospectus to
_ remove the need for an additional disclosure document to be issued upon the sale of
.1 any Securities (or any Shares issued on conversion of any convertible Securities into
Shares) that are issued under the Secondary Offers.
II (3) Consideration Offer
The Prospectus also includes the Consideration Offer, under which the
Company offers:
,2 (i) 272,727,273 Shares (Initial Consideration Shares); and
E (ii) 272,727,273 Performance Shares as follows:
in
C:
a
:5 —
Lv 24
l)


. (A) 90,909,091 Class A Performance Shares;
(B) 90,909,091 Class B Performance Shares; and
(C) 90,909,091 Class C Performance Shares,
(together, the Consideration Securities) to the Vendors (or their nominees)
for the acquisition of all the shares in Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc.
>>
‘ The Initial Consideration Shares to be issued pursuant to the Consideration
- Offer are of the same class and will rank equally in all respects with the
- existing Shares in the Company. A summary of the rights and liabilities
-— attaching to the Shares is set out in Section 10.1 of the Prospectus.
.I The terms and conditions of the Performance Shares to be issued under the
Consideration Offer are described in Section 10.2. If the Performance Shares
convert into Shares upon the relevant performance hurdles being achieved,
then the resultant Shares will be of the same class and will rank equally in all
I respects with the existing Shares in the Company.
 Applications for Securities under the Consideration Offer may only be made
by the Vendors (or their nominees) on the personalised Consideration Offer
5 Application Form issued to the Vendors together with a copy of this
Prospectus, and must be completed and received by the Company on or before
I the Closing Date. The Company will only provide Consideration Offer
_ Application Forms to persons entitled to participate in the Consideration
5 Offer.
L Persons wishing to apply for Securities under the Consideration Offer should
— refer to Section 2.6 for further details and instructions. No Application Monies
! are payable under the Consideration Offer.
III
.I (b) Facilitation Offer
I, This Prospectus includes the Facilitation Offer. The Facilitation Offer is made
in consideration of the Facilitators facilitating the Acquisition and is
comprised of an offer of:
_
m; (i) 7,150,000 Shares and 7,150,000 Performance Shares to Risely
Resources Pty Ltd; and

I-1

. (ii) 6,136,364 Shares to Paul Hunyor (or his nominee) (former Flamingo
director, resigned June 2016).

I Pursuant to the Acquisition Agreement, Mr Hunyor was to receive a payment

_ of $135,000 for his facilitation services. This payment will now be made via

.1 the issue of 6,136,364 Shares to Mr Hunyor (or his nominee) following a
determination by ASX that no cash may be paid to Mr Hunyor for his facilitation

II services.

The Shares to be issued pursuant to the Facilitation Offer are of the same class
and will rank equally in all respects with the existing Shares in the Company.
A summary of the rights and liabilities attaching to the Shares is set out in
Section 10.1 of the Prospectus.

The terms and conditions of the Performance Shares to be issued under the
Facilitation Offer are described in Section 10.2. If the Performance Shares
convert into Shares upon the relevant Milestones being achieved, then the

25


. resultant Shares will be of the same class and will rank equally in all respects
with the existing Shares in the Company.
Applications for Securities under the Facilitation Offer may only be made by
the Facilitators and/or their nominee(s) on the personalised Facilitation Offer
Application Form issued to the Facilitators together with a copy of this
Prospectus, and must be completed and received by the Company on or before
the Closing Date. The Company will only provide Facilitation Offer Application
>' Forms to persons entitled to participate in the Facilitation Offer.
- Persons wishing to apply for Securities under the Facilitation Offer should
- refer to Section 2.6 for further details and instructions. No Application Monies
I: are payable under the Facilitation Offer.
.1 The Company expects all Facilitation Securities will be escrowed for
24 months in accordance with the Listing Rules.
m (c) Employee Offer
r This Prospectus contains an offer of 6,567,382 Options (Employee Options) to
’c certain employees of Flamingo in consideration for the cancellation of existing
employee incentive scheme options held in Flamingo. The unquoted Employee
.5 Options will be exercisable at $0.029 each and will expire 5 years from the
date of issue.
! The Company intends to issue the Employee Options under the Company's
5 Employee Share Option Plan (ESOP).
L The terms and conditions of the Employee Options to be issued under the
— Employee Offer are described in Section 10.5. A summary of the ESOP is set
! out in Section 10.4. If the Options convert into Shares upon the relevant
- vesting conditions being achieved, then the resultant Shares will be of the
.I same class and will rank equally in all respects with the existing Shares in the
r Company.
I
1]: Applications for Employee Options under the Employee Offer may only be
made by certain employees of Flamingo (or their nominees) on the
personalised Employee Offer Application Form issued to each person eligible
 to participate in the Employee Offer together with a copy of this Prospectus,
and must be completed and received by the Company on or before the Closing
a Date. The Company will only provide Employee Offer Application Forms to
.1 persons entitled to participate in the Employee Offer.
I Persons wishing to apply for Employee Options under the Employee Offer
-_ should refer to Section 2.6 for further details and instructions. No Application
_ Monies are payable under the Employee Offer.
is 2.3 Conditional
I The Offers under this Prospectus are conditional upon the following events occurring:
(a) the Acquisition Agreement becoming unconditional;
(b) Shareholders approving the Essential Resolutions;
(c) the Company raising the Minimum Subscription, being $3,000,000, under the
Public Offer (refer to Section 2.1(b)); and
?


. (d) ASX providing the Company with a list of conditions which, when satisfied, will
result in ASX reinstating the Shares to quotation on ASX upon the satisfaction
of Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.

If these conditions are not satisfied then the Offers will not proceed and the Company
will repay all Application Monies received under the Public Offer in accordance with
the Corporations Act.
2.4 Capital structure
The proposed pro forma capital structure of the Company following completion of the
Offers and the Acquisition is as follows:
Shares ‘ Number ‘ %
Shares on issue prior to the Offers‘ 234,426,409 39.37
Initial Consideration Shares to be issued under the 272,727,273 45.80
Consideration Offer (total)
- to be issued to the Founder 115,814,391 19.45
- to be issued to the Non-Founder Vendors 156,912,882 26.35
Shares to be issued to the Facilitators under the 13,286,364 2.23
Facilitation Offer
Shares to be issued under the Public Offer 75,000,000 12.60
Total Shares on issue following completion and re- 595,440,046
compliance
Performance Shares2 ‘ Number ‘ %
Performance Shares on issue prior to the Offers 
Performance Shares to be issued under the Consideration 272,727,273 97.45
Offer (total)
- to be issued to the Founder3 115,814,391 41.38
- to be issued to the Non-Founder Vendors 156,912,882 56.07
Performance Shares to be issued to the Facilitators 7,150,000 2.55
under the Facilitation Offer5
Total Performance Shares on issue following 279,877,273
completion and re-compliance
Performance Rights ‘ Number ‘ %
Performance Rights on issue prior to the Offers“ 30,000,000 E
Total Performance Rights on issue following 30,000,000
completion and re-compliance
Z7


. Options Number %
Options on issue prior to the Offers7 75,475,453 92.00
Employee Options to be issued under the Employee 6,567,382 8.00
Offer“
> Total Options on issue following completion and re- 82,042,835
‘ compliance
—
-
—
- Notes:
_
1. The above table assumes that no Options are exercised and any milestones with respect
. to the Performance Rights and Performance Shares are not achieved so that the
Performance Rights and Performance Shares do not convert into Shares. Shares currently
on issue include 40,000,000 Shares escrowed until 5 February 2018 and 2,500,000 Shares
escrowed until 22 January 2017. In addition, pursuant to the Agenda acquisition in
II February 2016, if by 5 February 2018 the Agenda Platform achieves 500,000 active
registered users and Agenda has a revenue of $500,000, 25,000,000 Shares will be issued
a, to the vendor of the Agenda Platform, Annabel Slade (or her nominee).
2. Full terms of the Performance Shares are contained in Section 10.2.
3 3. Comprised of 38,604,797 Class A Performance Shares, 38,604,797 Class B Performance
I Shares and 38,604,797 Class C Performance Shares.
- 4. Comprised of 52,304,294 Class A Performance Shares, 52,304,294 Class B Performance
W: Shares and 52,304,294 Class C Performance Shares.
I
— 5. Comprised of 2,383,334 Class A Performance Shares, 2,383,333 Class B Performance
- Shares and 2,383,333 Class C Performance Shares.
—
6. Comprised of 3 tranches of Performance Rights which vest over 3 equal portions on
. achievement of a 10 day volume weighted average share price of $0.03, $0.04 and $0.05
I respectively. Held by existing Directors Messrs Hardcastle, Ismail and Bahen in equal
a portions. Escrowed until 5 February 2018.
7. Comprised of the following unquoted Options:
F (a) 25,000,000 Options exercisable at $0.02 each and expiring 4 November 2019
(escrowed until 5 February 2018);
. (b) 50,000,000 Options exercisable at $0.03 each and expiring 5 February 2019
(escrowed until 5 February 2018); and
I (c) legacy Options on issue prior to the Company's release from voluntary
— administration on 28 October 2015, comprised of the following:
.i (i) 98,000 Options exercisable at $6.00 each and expiring 18 September 2016;
1' (ii) 88,705 Options exercisable at $5.00 each and expiring 22 December 2016;
(iii) 221,056 Options exercisable at $3.00 each and expiring 5 February 2018; and
(iv) 67,692 Options exercisable at $6.00 each and expiring 5 February 2018.
g 8. Unquoted Employee Options exercisable at $0.029 each and expiring 5 years from the
f: date of issue, to be issued to Flamingo employees under the ESOP on the terms and
 conditions set out in Section 10.5 to replace existing Flamingo options.
&
S3 _
.1. 28


. 2.5 No underwriting
The Public Offer is not underwritten.
2.6 Applications
Applications for Securities under the Offers can only be made using the relevant
Application Form accompanying this Prospectus. The Application Form must be
% completed in accordance with the instructions set out on the form.
E Applications under the Public Offer must be for a minimum of 50,000 Shares ($2,000)
- and then in increments of 12,500 Shares ($500). No brokerage, stamp duty or other
= costs are payable by applicants. Cheques must be made payable to "Cre8tek Limited 7
Share Application Account" and should be crossed "Not Negotiable". All Application
a Monies will be paid into a trust account.
Completed Application Forms and accompanying cheques must be received by the Lead
1] Manager before 5.00pm WST on the Closing Date by either being delivered to, or posted
r to, the following address:
l
a By hand or by post
5 Cre8tek Limited
I c/o Otsana Capital
108 Outram Street
= WEST PERTH WA 6005
E Applicants are urged to lodge their Application Forms as soon as possible as the Public
a Offer may close early without notice.
—
— An original, completed and lodged Application Form together with a cheque for the
a Application Monies (for applications under the Public Offer), constitutes a binding and
irrevocable offer to subscribe for the number of Securities specified in the Application
r] Form. The Application Form does not need to be signed to be valid. If the Application
‘ Form is not completed correctly or if the accompanying payment is for the wrong
_ amount, it may be treated by the Company as valid. The Directors' decision as to
whether to treat such an application as valid and how to construe amend or complete
3 the Application Form is final; however an applicant will not be treated as having
_‘ applied for more Shares than is indicated by the amount of the cheque for the
a Application Monies.
It is the responsibility of applicants outside Australia to obtain all necessary approvals
' for the allotment and issue of Securities pursuant to this Prospectus. The return of a
— completed Application Form will be taken by the Company to constitute a
_ representation and warranty by the applicant that all relevant approvals have been
3 obtained.
E 2.7 Allocation and allotment of Securities
The Directors will allocate Shares at their sole discretion with a view to ensuring an
appropriate Shareholder base for the Company going forward. The Directors reserve
the right to reject any Application or to allot a lesser number of Securities than that
applied for. If the number of Securities allocated is less than that applied for, or no
 allotment is made, any surplus Application Monies will be promptly refunded without
1:3: interest.
m
C:
A)? —
if 29


. Subject to ASX granting approval for quotation of the Shares, the allotment of Shares
will occur as soon as practicable after the Public Offer closes. Holding statements will
be dispatched as required by ASX. It is the responsibility of applicants to determine
their allocation prior to trading in the Shares.

Applicants who sell the Shares before they receive their holding statement will do so
at their own risk.
>I 2.8 Application Monies to be held in trust
- The Application Monies for Shares to be issued pursuant to the Public Offer will be held
- in a separate bank account on behalf of applicants until the Shares are allotted. If the
= Shares to be issued under this Prospectus are not admitted to quotation within a period
of three months from the date of this Prospectus, the Application Monies will be
. refunded in full without interest, and any Shares issued will be deemed to be void. All
interest earned on Application Monies (including those which do not result in the issue
of Shares) will be retained by the Company.
B 2.9 Escrow arrangements
.r‘
11‘ Subject to the Company's Shares being reinstated to trading on the ASX, certain
Securities in the Company will be classified by ASX as restricted securities and will be
.i required to be held in escrow for up to 24 months from the date of reinstatement.
During the period in which these Securities are prohibited from being transferred,
I trading in Shares may be less liquid which may impact on the ability of a Shareholder
— to dispose of their Shares in a timely manner.
-
El The Securities likely to be subject to escrow are the Securities issued under the
' Secondaw Offers. The Company expects that Consideration Securities issued to parties
- classified by ASX as unrelated vendors will not attract escrow. For Consideration
-— Securities issued to parties classified by ASX as related parties and/or promoters, these
5 Securities will be escrowed for 24 months from the date of quotation.
The Shares offered under the Public Offer will not be subject to any escrow
 restrictions.
I ASX makes the final determination on escrowed securities and prior to the Company's
Shares being reinstated to trading on the ASX, the Company will enter into escrow
II I agreements with the recipients of the restricted securities in accordance with Chapter
.4 9 of the Listing Rules and will announce to ASX full details (quantity and duration) of
a the Securities required to be held in escrow in accordance with standard practice.
I 2.10 CHESS and issuer sponsorship
— The Company participates in CHESS. All trading on the ASX in existing Shares is, and in
— new Shares will be, settled through CHESS. ASX Settlement, a wholly-owned subsidiary
. of the ASX, operates CHESS in accordance with the Listing Rules and the ASX Settlement
Operating Rules. On behalf of the Company, the Share Registry operates an electronic
I issuer sponsored sub-register and an electronic CHESS sub-register. The two sub-
registers together make up the Company's principal register of securities.
Under CHESS, the Company does not issue certificates to Shareholders. Rather, holding
statements (similar to bank statements) will be sent to Shareholders as soon as
practicable after allotment. Holding statements will be sent either by CHESS (for
£5 Shareholders who elect to hold Shares on the CHESS sub-register) or by the Company‘s
‘5} Share Registw (for Shareholders who elect to hold their Shares on the issuer sponsored
E‘ sub-register). The statements will set out the number of existing Shares (where
2T
'3
E 30
u


. applicable) and the number of new Shares allotted under this Prospectus and provide
details of a Shareholder's holder identification number (for Shareholders who elect to
hold Shares on the CHESS sub-register) or Shareholder reference number (for
Shareholders who elect to hold their Shares on the issuer sponsored sub-register).
Updated holding statements will also be sent to each Shareholder at the end of each
month in which there is a transaction on their holding, as required by the Listing Rules.

2.1 1 Risks
>
a As with any share investment, there are risks associated with investing in the Company.
.5. The principal risks that could affect the financial and market performance of the
- Company are detailed in Section 5 of this Prospectus. The Securities on offer under
= this Prospectus should be considered highly speculative. Accordingly, before deciding
to invest in the Company, applicants should read this Prospectus in its entirety and
a should consider all factors in light of their individual circumstances and seek
appropriate professional advice.
m 2.12 Overseas investors
r An offer made pursuant to this Prospectus is not made to persons or in places which
E would not be lawful to make the offer. No action has been taken to register the Offers
under this Prospectus or otherwise permit the Offers to be made in any jurisdiction
5 outside Australia.
I The distribution of this Prospectus in jurisdictions outside Australia may be restricted
— by law in those jurisdictions and therefore persons who come into possession of this
- Prospectus should observe any such restrictions. Failure to comply with such
E restrictions may constitute a violation of applicable securities laws.
i This Prospectus does not constitute an offer of Securities in any jurisdiction in which
n- it would be unlawful. In particular, this Prospectus may not be distributed to any
- person, and the Securities may not be offered or sold, in any country outside Australia
a except to the extent permitted below.
E (a) Hong Kong
_ WARNING: This document has not been, and will not be, registered as a
prospectus under the Companies (Winding Up and Miscellaneous Provisions)
@ Ordinance (Cap. 32) of Hong Kong, nor has it been authorised by the Securities
.4 and Futures Commission in Hong Kong pursuant to the Securities and Futures
Ordinance (Cap. 571) of the Laws of Hong Kong (SFO). No action has been
a taken in Hong Kong to authorise or register this document or to permit the
distribution of this document or any documents issued in connection with it.
I Accordingly, the Securities have not been and will not be offered or sold in
= Hong Kong other than to "professional investors“ (as defined in the SFO).
g No advertisement, invitation or document relating to the Securities has been
or will be issued, or has been or will be in the possession of any person for the
E purpose of issue, in Hong Kong or elsewhere that is directed at, or the contents
of which are likely to be accessed or read by, the public of Hong Kong (except
if permitted to do so under the securities laws of Hong Kong) other than with
respect to Securities that are or are intended to be disposed of only to persons
outside Hong Kong or only to professional investors (as defined in the SF0 and
any rules made under that ordinance). No person allotted Securities may sell,
is? or offer to sell, such securities in circumstances that amount to an offer to
‘5} the public in Hong Kong within six months following the date of issue of such
E‘ securities.
at
72‘
E 31
u


. The contents of this document have not been reviewed by any Hong Kong
regulatory authority. You are advised to exercise caution in relation to the
offer. If you are in doubt about any contents of this document, you should
obtain independent professional advice.

2.13 Privacy disclosure
Persons who apply for Securities pursuant to this Prospectus are asked to provide
> personal information to the Company, either directly or through the Share Registw.
g The Company and the Share Registry collect, hold and use that personal information
= to assess applications for Securities, to provide facilities and services to Security
! holders, and to carry out various administrative functions.
— The information may also be used from time to time and disclosed to persons inspecting
g the register, bidders for your Securities in the context of takeovers, regulatory bodies,
including the Australian Taxation Office, authorised securities brokers, print service
providers, mail houses and the Company's share registry.
m If the information requested is not supplied, the Company may not be able to process
r your application for Securities. By submitting an Application Form, you agree that the
E Company may use the information provided by you on the Application Form for the
purposes set out herein and may disclose it for those purposes to the share registry,
E the Company's related bodies corporate, agents, contractors and third party service
providers, including mailing houses and professional advisers, and to ASX and
I regulatow authorities.
—
- A Security holder has a right to gain access to, correct and update the information that
E the Company holds about that person subject to certain exemptions under law. A fee
' may be charged for access. Access requests must be made in writing to the Company's
a registered office.
.—
“ Collection, maintenance and disclosure of certain personal information is governed by
g legislation including the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (as amended), the Corporations Act and
r certain rules such as the ASX Settlement Operating Rules.
a 2.14 Taxation
_
It is the responsibility of all persons to satisfy themselves of the particular taxation
m treatment that applies to them in relation to the Offers, by consulting their own
a professional tax advisers. Neither the Company nor any of its Directors or officers
a accepts any liability or responsibility in respect of the taxation consequences of the
matters referred to above.
I 2.15 Enquiries
.—
_ This is an important document and should be read in its entirety. Investors should
a consult with their professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for Securities
under this Prospectus. Any investment in the Company under this Prospectus should be
E considered highly speculative.
Questions relating to the Offers and the completion of an Application Form can be
directed to the Company on +61 8 9486 7244.
32


. 3. Overview of the Company, Flamingo and the Merged
Group
3.1 Existing activities of the Company
The Company was incorporated on 14 November 1935 and admitted to the Official List
> of ASX on 3 July 1986.
D
a Following the Company's exit from voluntaw administration in late-October 2015, the
E: Company announced the acquisition of 100% of the issued capital of Global Agenda
- Technologies Pty Ltd (Agenda) and associated capital raising of $3,600,000. The
E acquisition of Agenda required the Company to re-comply with Chapters 1 and 2 of the
a Listing Rules.
In February 2016 the Company successfully re-complied with Chapters 1 and 2 of the
Listing Rules and its securities were reinstated to official quotation on 5 February 2016.
II I Following the acquisition of Agenda the Company became a technology company,
r operating in the technology solutions and software development sector.
I
n‘ The Company's strategy, as outlined in its previous notice of meeting and prospectus
in late 2015, was that Agenda was the first acquisition made by the Company in this
- new area of focus, and the Company planned to further expand its portfolio in
technology solutions, with a particular focus on software marketing solutions,
I application software, communication software, SaaS, online social networking
= services, and security and encwption.
El Consistent with this strategy, since successful completion of the acquisition of Agenda,
the Company has been developing the Agenda Platform, whilst also seeking to expand
- its portfolio in technology solutions.
.—

I As announced on 2 June 2016, the Company has entered into the conditional binding
.1 Acquisition Agreement with Flamingo and its major shareholders to acquire 100% of
I the issued share capital of Flamingo (Acquisition). The Acquisition will be undertaken

’ by way of a merger in accordance with the Delaware General Corporation Law. Refer
to Section 3.9 for detail regarding the merger process.
—
m 3.2 About Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc.
.4 (a) Background to Flamingo
a Flamingo was initially incorporated in Australia as Flamingo Ventures Pty Ltd
(Flamingo Ventures) in May 2013. The founder of Flamingo Ventures, Dr
Catriona Wallace, is an expert in the field of customer experience and human-
: technology interaction, which was the focus of her PhD.
.1 Dr Wallace saw an opportunity in the technology sector to create a
conversational commerce SaaS enterprise platform to enable businesses to
I guide customers through their online purchasing and service experiences.
Given Dr Wallace's background in customer experience and technology there
was the opportunity to create unique intellectual property that would be
suited to software used in essential services sectors, including, for example,
financial services, healthcare, and telecommunications.
£5 The focus of Flamingo Ventures was to help enterprises convert more sales to
g customers online, to increase customer retention and to increase efficiencies
g
2T
'43
E 33
u


. in call and contact centres. Dr Wallace's intention from day one was that
Flamingo would be a global business with a global market.
Set out below is a timeline of events and achievements since Flamingo
Ventures was incorporated in May 2013:
Date ‘ Event
> r
‘ June 2013 $200,000 Founder funding
-
i Januaw 2014 $250,000 seed funding
5 April 2014 Minimum Viable Product (MVP) launched
. August 2014 $2.1m capital raised
1 Beta trials with 4 Providers
w November 2014 US Market entw
a, Patent applications filed
December 2014 Received intention from major US insurance firm to
.5 do 3 x paid trials
I February 2015 2 x paid trials with Australian firms
-
March a US flip-up to Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc.
I: June 2015
—
- August 2015 $1.0m bridging capital raised
—
a November 2015 New York office established
r 2 x paid trials with Australian firm
I
a December 2015 Security audit, master services agreement and
statement of work for major US insurance firm
negotiation commences
1]; 4 x proposals for major US firms
.1 March 2016 1 x paid trial with US firm
May 2016 Master services agreement executed with major US
insurance firm
—
5 1 x paid trial with US firm
. June 2016 10 x proposals for major US firms
1' 1 x implementation for Australian firm
Channel negotiations commenced with US CRM firm
In mid-2014, Flamingo, in conjunction with the National Australia Bank (NAB),
m implemented a planned short term pilot of Flamingo‘s then MVP, primarily to
 test the MVP to assess product-market fit. The pilot involved Flamingo
 software being used to on-board small-to-medium business clients into NAB.

g] —
g» 34


. Following the success of this trial, Flamingo Ventures elected to proceed with
full product development and, given the size of the financial services market
in the US compared to Australia, determined it should pitch to US based
financial services companies.

A number of meetings were lined up in December 2014, culminating in a large
US based financial services entity agreeing to trial the Flamingo platform in
order to:
>
‘ (i) on-board insurance customers;
—
-
- (ii) engage with customers following a claim; and
n—
5 (iii) renew customers.
With this initial traction with a large US financial services company, the board
decided the business had significant potential to scale out of the US rather
than Australia. It was decided to ‘flip up' Flamingo Ventures to become a US
I Delaware company. This involved Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc.
r becoming the new holding company of Flamingo Ventures, with shareholders
’c in Flamingo Ventures swapping their shares in Flamingo Ventures to shares in
Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc. on a 1:1 basis in June 2015.
5 Since moving to the US Flamingo has achieved the following:
! (iv) an office was opened in New York;
-
IE (v) a number of paid trials or trial inductions of the Flamingo Platform
L have been successfully undertaken with various customers, with
i further paid trials either planned or underway;
- (vi) a partnership with The Clarion Group (Clarion), based in Connecticut,
.1 has been established. Clarion act as a channel partner and have
successfully introduced Flamingo to Fortune 500 companies;
.r‘
J] (vii) implementation of the Flamingo Platform for an Australian credit
union, who have a paid subscription through to October 2016;
I F (viii) implementation of the Flamingo Platform for an Australian wealth
management company who used the platform in full automation
N mode to conduct needs and requirements of high net worth customers
. looking to purchase investment products;
I (ix) early stage trading revenue has been generated;
= (x) a sales pipeline has been identified and is being actively pursued,
.1 including with significant enterprises in the US financial services
sector, including a number of Fortune 250 organisations;
II (xi) Flamingo has been acknowledged as:
(A) one of the CIO Review's global most promising Top 20
Customer Experience Management Solution Providers for
2015;
(B) one of Gartner‘s 'Cool Vendors' for 2015 in the CRM and
Customer Support category and appeared in Gartner's recent
2016 CRM Vendor Guide (Gartner is a leading information
35


. technology research and advisory company). Flamingo was
identified as one of five innovative vendors with applications
to deliver a superior customer experience and/or reduce
operational costs; and

(C) one of 10 great Australian start ups to see at CeBIT 2014 by
Business Insider Australia; and
> (xii) in addition, Flamingo‘s founder, Dr Catriona Wallace, recently
‘ delivered SugarCRM‘s keynote address at their global conference in
- San Francisco in June 2016 and has previously been the recipient of a
- 2015 NSW Pearcey Foundation Entrepreneur award and is a finalist in
_ the prestigious Advance Global Australia Awards. SugarCRM, is one of
the top global CRM software companies and produces the web
. application 'Sugar‘.
1 (b) Corporate structure of Flamingo
w The diagram below summarises the corporate structure of Flamingo as at the
a date of this Prospectus:
Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc.
.5 (incorporated Delaware, USA)
I 100%
-
Flamingo Ventures Pty Ltd
II (incorporated NSW, Australia)
—
E (c) Financial history since incorporation
_
.1 A table setting out the revenue and profit before tax figures of Flamingo since
incorporation is set out below. Shareholders should note that Flamingo has a
" limited operating history and has spent (and still spends) much of its focus on
ongoing platform development, while conducting paid trials when
opportunities arise. Shareholders should note that due to Flamingo's infancy
its operations are inherently uncertain and the figures below should not be
1]; used as a guide as to the future performance of Flamingo.
.3 Trading Total Profit
revenue revenue‘ before tax
I 20 May 2013 to 30 June 2014 $20,000 $156,745 -$368,126
5 12 months ending 30 June 2015 $125,469 $711,681 -$1,209,197
1 9 months ending 31 March 2016 $91,064 $486,377 -$1,357,622
" Note: Total revenue includes trading revenue, research and development grant
income and interest received.
a:
E3
")1 —
,1, 36


. (d) Sources of revenue and expenses

Flamingo generates, and is aiming to generate, revenue from the following

sources:

(i) client trials of the Flamingo Platform;

(ii) future trading revenue is expected to include monthly recurring
> subscription revenue from the use of the Flamingo Platform as well
‘ as success fees for sales made in the platform;

-

- (iii) research and development grants received from the Australian Tax

-— Office as part of the Auslndustry research and development program.

.I Flamingo‘s largest expenses are employee and contractor costs, and these are
expected to continue post-Acquisition. Other significant costs include
marketing and business development costs.

II 1 (e) Flamingo team

I” Flamingo is led by its founder, Dr Catriona Wallace, with Cathie Reid as Chair
of the board. As at the date of this Prospectus, Flamingo employs 14 people

5 across Australia and the US, including seven software engineers, a data
scientist and the chief technology officer. Flamingo‘s development team is

I based in Australia.

- As part of the Acquisition Agreement and subject to Shareholder approval at

IE the General Meeting, each of Ms Reid and Dr Wallace will join the Board of

L the Company.

—

- (1) Ms Cathie Reid (Chair)

IN“ 1 . i , .

g Ms Reid is the Co-Founder of Australia‘s Epic Healthcare Group, which

includes Epic Pharmacy, Epic Digital and the Epic Good Foundation.

I, Epic also founded Icon Cancer Care, now part of the Icon Group which

J] is Australia‘s fastest growing provider of integrated cancer care

‘ services.

_

I: Ms Reid was inducted into the Australian Businesswomen's Hall of

Fame in 2015, named one of the Top 100 Women of Influence by the

N Australian Financial Review in 2013, won a National Telstra Business

. Women's Award in 2011, and recognised by Monash University with a

I Distinguished Alumni Award for Professional Achievement in 2012.

(ii) Dr Catriona Wallace (Founder and CEO)

.1 Flamingo founder and CEO, Dr Wallace is a multi-award winning,
recognised business leader, well published author with a PhD in
Organisational Behaviour and is statistically trained. She is a member
I of the Springboard Alumni. She is founder and now major shareholder
of three successful businesses (excluding Flamingo), including the
multi-award winning customer experience design firm, Fifth
Quadrant.
9 Ms Reid and Dr Wallace are ably supported by an experienced management
E: team including:
ct
ﬁ
:5 —
E 37
i)


. (iii) Joe Waller (Chief Technology Officer)

Mr Waller is a former Technology Strategist and Chief-of-Staff of

Betfair, the world‘s biggest sports trading platform. He played a key

role in growing the company from a UK technology startup into the

world's largest internet betting exchange.

Whilst at Betfair, Mr Waller ran the product and platform teams that
> built and scaled the exchange to annual revenues of over
‘ $700 million, matching over 30,000 trades a minute.

-

- (iv) Dr Jack Elliott (Chief Data Scientist)

.—

— Dr Elliott is a published expert in and internationally academically

.1 recognised for large-scale, natural language processing and linguistics
with key contributions in a number of fields.

Dr Elliott‘s software engineering career has spanned over 15 years and
I three continents across the banking and financial sectors.

 (v) Rachel White (Chief Financial Officer)
5 Well known as a leading CFO within the technology sector, Ms White
has been instrumental in the success of innovative technology groups
I along with being a mentor to several early stage ventures.
- Ms White has over 20 years‘ commercial finance and accounting
El experience with a strong focus on the technology sector.
I
— Ms White is recognised as a mentor on topics of entrepreneurialism,
- start up finance, employee engagement and capital raising.
— i
g 3.3 Assets of Flamingo
m Flamingo has the following assets:
‘ (a) (Flamingo Platform) The Flamingo Platform is an intelligent guided selling
_ SaaS solution that enterprises use to guide customers through purchase, on-
I F boarding and retention processes. It is built as a cloud based platform as a
service currently hosted on Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure or Google
a Cloud, depending on the Provider‘s preference. Further information about the
. Flamingo Platform is in Section 3.4.
I (b) (Patent application) Flamingo has lodged a patent application for various
features of the Flamingo Platform. Further information about the patent
_ application is set out in Section 3.4(f) and the Intellectual Property Experts'
a Reports at Section 7.
I (c) (Other intellectual property) Various domain names and a trade mark for
I 'CustomerCreate‘.
(d) (Customer contracts) Flamingo is party to a master services agreement with
a large US financial services company, Nationwide Insurance. The agreement
provides the ability for the customer to acquire and license software from
Flamingo under written orders and Flamingo shall provide the software and
perform services in accordance with the orders. As at the date of this
Prospectus, a number of statements of work for large scale implementation
are in final stages of negotiation.
38


. 3.4 The Flamingo Platform
(a) Background

The Flamingo Platform is an ‘intelligent guided selling‘ solution for

organisations with complex products (Providers).

Customers often have difficulty with the complexity of financial services
> products. This makes it difficult for Providers to sell to these customers
‘ online, resulting in low conversion rates.

-
- The Flamingo Platform aims to solve this problem through providing a cloud-
: based platform that delivers an intelligent guided selling, onboarding or
retention experience between Providers and their customers. In the emerging
. categow of 'Conversational Commerce' (where customers are guided to make
purchase decisions online), the Flamingo Platform fuses web chat, guided
workflow and machine learning to guide web customers from research to
I quotation to purchase (called a ‘Journey‘). Flamingo‘s finished product, which
is ready for sale, is known as ‘Journey Assist'.
II
 JOURNEVSTEPS
The employee follows preprogrcmmed 1'. " ' z .
- Joumey stems which can be edited or -
I deleteq drcddedto IGIﬂLﬁ'ﬁ’T‘SE v r r I A
_ AUTOMATION
- Theemployeecun chooseto ,..;,,.,...    I I
automate the Journey , ' ’
Ii:  s+a o o
— THEJUURNEV  ‘ . " ‘
- The customer is oskedcsenes o‘ . 7 r r o
- questions which guides than“ to purchase :77”
 mewhm mecumhyersees 0 III m I
r UTILITY BELT ONUNE CHAT ‘77:“?
The ullllLy bell contain: all materials "the Customer nee-Q5 help at ’ ‘ ‘
_ customer (eg PDFs.videos links. (grew, Wm, we employee ' '
m disclaimers) (ondmm “puma, EMPLOVEE V'EW CUSTOMERVIEW
_‘ The Flamingo Platform guides customers from page view to purchase on both
. mobile and desktop. This reduces the overwhelming nature of the purchasing
process and is designed to make it easier to buy financial products online.
I With each completed interaction, by keeping a record of all conversations,
-— data and advice provided to customers and then using artificial intelligence,
I ' the Flamingo Platform learns more about how customers and employees of
.: Providers interact. This allows the process to be automated, meaning
employees are required less often, or not at all. Flamingo has lodged a patent
I application in respect of its customer journey intellectual property.

Development is ongoing for the Flamingo Platform to operate on a continuum

from HumanZHuman mode (employee to customer) to Autobot (no employee

interaction). Value created for a Provider as a Flamingo client includes
increased online sales conversion, improved customer experience and
increased efficiencies.

39


. In summaw, the Flamingo Platform is a light touch, low cost Artificial
Intelligence solution for financial services companies where the option of
having a virtual assistant plus human involvement with customers is
important.

(b) How it works
> _ _ _ _ _
‘ m 1. ProViders inVite customers to a Journey to buy their
= F product
!   9 Customers are invited to participate in a 'journey' through a
5 e  , simple link.
"  ' ‘ 9 The journey is a guided experience which allows the customer
V n V_ g a to co-design, within parameters set by the Provider, the product
‘ " and relationship to suit their individual needs. This experience
I can be assisted by Provider employees or fully automated (or
r: anywhere in between).
'3 l
I 2. Quote IGIm'cz: n - ‘
= The customer joins a journey with a Provider employee (or  '  e
U one of Flamingo's automated assistants). . _ W”
I 5‘27AZ
I mm ,
_ Flamingo uses human-centred design principles to concierge  l . .
- the customer through their options in order to get a quotation. In
. Customers can live chat with Provider employees or the
autobot as an integrated part of the experience.
I‘
_ ‘ l
l' I
 3. Purchase
—(  .. 9
.   After completing the quotation together, the Provider
: 1 mm . . .
mm employee (or the automated a55istant) Will guide the
I   customer to make a payment.
= 9 " ‘ After payment is made the Provider employee or autobot
 acknowledges and congratulates the customer.
E 40


I 4. Automation
With each completed journey, Flamingo intelligently learns more about how
customers and Provider employees or the autobot interact.
Every question asked and answered, every keystroke and chat message is analysed
by Flamingo‘s advanced data-mining algorithms (other than personal identifiable
> information such as credit card details).
- This allows Flamingo to automate the customer's journey, so Provider employees
- are required less or even not at all.
_
5 5. Analytics
Flamingo provides dashboards and real-time analytics related to individual and
1 aggregated customer experiences. The platform analytics provide:
'I J . Descriptive statistics
I” I . Key metrics such as
number of quotations, I", _ _ n r A
5 sales, renewals or - “mi” f ' 0'
customers retained
I . Product and experience
- configurations ‘
El 0 Customer behaviour ' l
i insights ;
= a New market discovery v. 5:, lungs.» “'3‘... .
a . Performance and
Ir effectiveness of
I]: interactions -!4
h . Customer insights &
mil engagement scores
a
.1 (c) Flamingo Platform features
' Features of the Flamingo Platform include the following:
= (i) ('Build your own journeys') Providers are able to design, edit or
a update journeys.
(ii) (Customise journeys with branding) Journeys can be customised
I with a Provider‘s own branding.
(iii) (Ease of implementation) The Flamingo Platform can be used
standalone with a URL, or integrated with a Provider‘s systems using
Flamingo's application programming interface.
 (iv) (Assisted or automated journeys) Journeys can be fully assisted by
53 a Provider's employee, fully automated, or a combination of both, as
 represented below:
A)? —
E 41


cm comm Interactions cm
1w; uqmu: 1' r. oummm and an without W
M: e r: J H y, employee can involvement from
05561 rf needed m employee
—I—
>
‘ FuLLY A55|5TEO PARTIAL AUTOMAT UN FULL AUTUMAHON
=
i (v) (Saved journeys) Where a customer's journey is interrupted, it can
= easily be continued from where it has left off at a later time.
a (vi) (Mobile interface) Customers can use desktop, tablets and mobile
devices to complete their journeys.
1 (vii) (Analytics and algorithms) Algorithms are generated that inform the
1] automation of the customer interactions, so that a Provider employee
r does not need to be involved. Flamingo‘s machine learning algorithms
1] then learn what the best interactions are and automates. Algorithms
J can be generated across multiple organisations.
5 (d) Clients and case studies
! Due to the relative newness of the Flamingo Platform, Flamingo's process for
- engaging new Provider clients includes (and will continue to include)
'6 conducting trials. Trials have been priced between US$30,000 to US$50,000
L depending on application, with current proposals being negotiated up to
— US$100,000.
: , i . . i
— A trial Will have a set of hypotheses related to commerCial metrics typically
a including sales conversion, customer retention or customer experience.
Evidence is collected during the trial to determine the value of the Flamingo
r] Platform to the business line.
‘ Once the trial has been completed, and subject to the size of the Provider (as
— discussed above, the Flamingo Platform is primarily for the sale of complex
3 financial products), Flamingo will then seek to enter into a more formal
procurement process to establish a statement of work, undergo security
N approval and execute a master services agreement. By obtaining security
a approval from Providers and executing a master services agreement, Providers
are then able to more readily engage Flamingo on a job-by-job basis, with
' separate statements of work provided for each new job.
= This prudent approach has led to Flamingo securing Nationwide Insurance as
a a foundation client, with a master services agreement executed in May 2016.
Following two separate trials for Nationwide, Flamingo is now engaged to be
1 the customer interaction portal for a Nationwide direct-to-consumer new
L product launch.
Other Flamingo clients include Prime Financial, Quay Credit Union and the
New York Daily Gazette, all of whom have had successful paid trials. Flamingo
also has a strong sales pipeline in place evidenced by over 10 proposals with
a Fortune 500 US firms (though investors should note Flamingo may not be able
E to convert these proposals to sales).
C:
A)? —
 42


. Below are case studies of the use of Flamingo's Platform in the past 12 months.
(i) Pet insurance product

A pet insurance Provider identified a problem of a 30% customer

attrition rate during the first year of its product.

Flamingo was engaged on a trial basis and implemented three
> applications for on-boarding new customers, post-claim experience
‘ and renewal.

—

=

- The use of Flamingo's platform resulted in an 85% increase in the
-— product's net promoter score (a management tool used to measure
I ' the lo alt that exists between a Provider and consumer , and a 5%
3 Y Y

. increase in retention of customers.

Flamingo is now negotiating with the Provider to implement guided

1] selling for this product to improve web acquisition metrics.

E (ii) Employee benefits product

i A Provider identified a problem of low online conversion rates for an

5 employee benefits product being offered online.

I Following the implementation of a trial of the Flamingo Platform‘s

guided online selling, there was a 33% increase in conversion of

- visitors from the website to the quotation page for the product.

E Flamingo is now negotiating conversion from paid trial to a monthly

i engagement with this Provider.

- (in) Wealth management product

a A Provider of wealth management products was looking for a platform

r to enable it to directly target high net worth customers, rather than

I]: using a broker or advisor to promote their products.

_ Flamingo implemented a fully automated application to guide high
F net worth customers through their needs and requirements, with the

I final step being conversion of the process into a call with a member

N of the Provider's wealth management team. The Flamingo Platform

. resulted in 55% of journeys being converted to sales meetings.

I Flamingo is now negotiating the next steps with the aim to convert

to a regular monthly engagement with this Provider.

_ I

a (1v) Data analytics

A banking institution wanted to better understand the needs and
I requirements of its customers, and sought Flamingo‘s assistance to

identify that information.

Flamingo developed an application to extract the required

information, then generated a report for the banking institution

,2 which has led to Flamingo working on an application to cross-sell

,5: relevant products to identified customers.

:1)

t:

8

l1

4

ll)

:5 —
Lv 43
L)


. (e) Accolades

Flamingo was named in April 2015 by Gartner Inc (a leading information
technology research and advisory company) as a 'Cool Vendor' in the CRM and
Customer Support category, identified as one of five innovative vendors with
applications to deliver a superior customer service experience and/or reduce
operational costs.

> Gartner‘s definition of a 'Cool Vendor' is a small company offering a technology

‘ or product that is:

—

-

- (i) Innovative - it enables users to do things they couldn't do before the

— technolo emer ed.

— gy g

.1 (ii) Impactful - it has (or will have) a business impact; it's not just

technology for the sake of technology.

(iii) Intriguing - it has caught Gartner analysts' and clients‘ interest or

I curiosity during the past six months.

 Flamingo was selected to be a Springboard Enterprises company in 2014, was
noted as one of 10 great Australian starts-up to see at CeBIT 2014 by Business

5 Insider Australia and was named in CIO Review as a Top 20 Most Promising
Customer Experience Management Solution Providers for 2015. Further,

I Flamingo‘s founder and CEO, Dr Catriona Wallace, is also the recipient of a

_ Pearcey Foundation Entrepreneur Award and is a finalist in the Advance Global

5 Australia Awards.

L (f) Intellectual property

—

- Flamingo has lodged a patent application for the following features of the

- Flamingo Platform: Journey Assist, Journey Avatar (aka Journey Automation),

.1 Personaliser, Analyzer, Personal Cloud and the Co-Creation model that
enables employees and customers to design experiences customers want that

n, businesses can deliver.

‘ Flamingo has also registered the trade mark 'CustomerCreate‘.

I 5 Whilst domain names of themselves provide no proprietaw rights, they are
generally recognised as extremely useful vehicles for marketing in the online

N space. As at the date of this Prospectus, Flamingo (via Dr Wallace) has

.! registered various domain names such as www.flamingo.io,
customercreate.com, consumercreate.com and customercreate.io.

I Further information concerning Flamingo‘s intellectual property is contained

_ in the Intellectual Property Experts' Reports in Section 7.

a (g) Planned Flamingo Platform development

II Flamingo‘s existing product, known as ‘Journey Assist‘, has been developed,
tested and successfully trialled. This product comprises the current Flamingo
Platform and is ready for sale to a broad market, initially focused in financial
services.
As well as a programme of continuous improvement to the existing products
and features, Flamingo has the following major product changes prioritised
for development over the next 12 to 24 month period.

44


. (i) Web Acquisition Framework: A framework for integration with
Provider owned and managed platforms/engines for services such as
quotation, assessment and transaction. This will enable automation
of the web acquisition concierge journeys that have shown improved
key performance indicators to vanilla web-forms or call-centre
concierged applications.

(ii) Chat Automation: An extension to automated journeys that can
> handle questions, answers, chat, escalation to a human manager and
g a human-led automation solution that can run without manual
I: intervention from Providers.

I
_ (iii) Sovereign Personal Cloud: Ability to give permission for Flamingo to

use known information about end-customers to sign-up for other
. products and services, either to more lines-of-business in the same

Provider or across other Flamingo clients. The product would allow

the customer to save time by not needing to repeat data entry. It
w would also benefit the enterprise by facilitating cross-sell.
r (iv) SaaS Features: Features that will enable rapid growth of the
a Flamingo Platform by allowing small-to-medium Providers to self-

sign-up, self-serve and access both self-help as well as Flamingo or
.5 partner helpdesk support.
I 3.5 Industry competition
—
i (a) Competition
L The players in Flamingo's field include:
—
I
5 Automation
l . .
a, “mum 05......e

SPlGlT
— HubSp‘bt
ﬂ); Needle o SQCTALcwesT
SAILTHRU
.5 IBM Watson
I W 
B ( .’,‘.‘;'....\\ .
I GDrIdinlevance “It”; "\ “eun-
— :I;sy{nATK @ Clara "we
  . E I.
. l ..,.gmmg0;
Customer Analytics \ I."
y r \\  5:. slack Chat

I Gamsught’ 

° _ _ up...

aﬁsmaILm
BALDEHAT (
 ORACLE m:

S3 _
.1, 45


. Flamingo‘s competitors can be grouped into three main sets: chat providers,
virtual assistants (automation) and analytics/insight companies. Flamingo's
unique difference is that it fuses these three capabilities together. As at the
date of this Prospectus, and after extensive research and analyst briefings,
Flamingo is not aware of another product available that does this.

CRM companies are not regarded as a direct competitor for Flamingo but
Flamingo is sometimes compared to them. CRM companies focus on pipeline
> and ros ect maria ement ca abilities, sales team mana ement, ke
P P g P g V
a performance indicator management and performance improvement, then
= usually hand over to other channels to work with a customer. CRM companies
- will be potential channel partners of Flamingo.
.—
gl Flamingo‘s competitive advantage includes:
(i) focus on conversion from quote to payment;
1] (ii) provide Providers with light touch step into Artificial Intelligence;
m (iii) acquire customer in-platform;
‘ (iv) range of automation options, from fully manual through to human
.j assisted through to fully automated;
I (v) customer experience algorithms; and
- (Vi) machine learning capable of insight as well as automation of
El conversations.
I
-— (b) Barriers to entry
- Barriers to entry for competitors to Flamingo include:
a (i) time, cost and expertise to develop intellectual property associated
r with conversational commerce, artificial intelligence and
A: collaborative customer interface technology;
-— (ii) high level of customer data security functionality required to be built
E into the Flamingo Platform and significant cost and time to pass
I relevant security audits of large financial institutions; and
.! (iii) Flamingo has established relationships in the industry which make it
difficult for competitors to secure trial sites for customer interfacing
I applications due to risks associated with handling customer data.
-— .
_ (c) Independent Industry Expert 5 Report
a The Company has commissioned independent market research and consulting
firm Frost & Sullivan Australia Pty Ltd to provide a report on the industry
I section in which Flamingo intends to operate. The Independent Industw
Expert's Report is set out in Section 4 of this Prospectus.
m
E:
(I)
Lt
E
a
a _
Lv 46
i)


. 3.6 Corporate structure of the Merged Group
The diagram below summarises the corporate structure of the Merged Group following
completion of the Acquisition:
Crestek Limited
> Dr Catriona Wallace (ACN 000 031 292)
‘ CEO & Executive
= Director
- 100% 100%
n—
—
g Flamingo Customer Global Agenda
Experience Inc. Technologies Pty Ltd
m (Delaware incorporated) (ACN 608 952 254)
 100%
E Flamingo Ventures
Pty Ltd
I (ACN 163 845 056)
—
Ti
L 3.7 Business model and development and commercialisation objectives
! Flamingo is the second proposed acquisition by the Company in line with the Company's
- new focus, being technology solutions and software development. The Company plans
.I to further expand its portfolio in technology solutions, with a particular focus on
software marketing solutions, application software, communication software, SaaS,
I I 1 online social networking services, and security and encryption. It is possible that future
acquisitions that may be contemplated may exceed the current or projected financial
_ resources of the Company and it is expected that these acquisitions would be funded
m by debt and/or equity issues (subject to any required regulatow approvals).
_‘ For the immediate future the Merged Group‘s focus will be on the continued
. development and commercialisation of the Flamingo Platform and Agenda Platform,
together with assessing further complementary acquisition opportunities.
I The basis for any revenue generated by consumer service offerings such as that of the
— Flamingo Platform and proposed to be offered through the Agenda Platform, is driven
5 by the acquisition, retention and engagement of its consumers and service providers.
I The Merged Group intends to derive revenue from the following possible sources:
L (a) sales revenues from Providers for:
(i) trials of the Flamingo Platform;
(ii) subscriptions by Providers using the Flamingo Platform; and
(iii) success fees per acquisition by Provider's customers; and
47


. (b) if successfully developed, via the Agenda Platform from transaction fees,
advertising, in-application purchases and software sales.
3.8 Key dependencies of the business model
The key factors that the Merged Group will depend on to meet its objectives are:
> (a) the successful completion of the Acquisition;

(b) the successful completion of the Public Offer;

(c) the successful execution of service agreements with and retention of new and

existing Providers using the Flamingo Platform;

(d) the successful development of the Agenda Platform;

(e) retaining the key personnel and consultants of Flamingo and Agenda; and

R
I (f) the ability to protect the Merged Group‘s intellectual property.
I
a 3.9 Proposed budget
“ The Company intends to use the funds raised under the Public Offer, together with the

Company's existing cash reserves post-Acquisition, and anticipated funds received from

Auslndustry research and development grants in the next 12 months following the

reinstatement of the Company's Securities to quotation on the Official List of ASX as

follows:
C
I
Allocation of funds Amount %
(5000's)
Expenses of the Acquisition (including capital raising fees)
d Agenda Platform development
R Flamingo Platform developmentZ 1,937
Sales and marketing m
General working capital, including corporate and 1,141
administrative costs3

Notes:

1. Meerkat, an entity associated with Ms Cathie Reid, has lent $280,000 to Flamingo for
working capital purposes, on commercial arms' length terms. The Company will repay the
loan plus $6,000 in interest, just prior to reinstatement of the Company's securities to ASX.
See Section 9.2(b) for further details.

2. These funds represent the estimated investment over the 12 month period. In the next

r 12 months, Flamingo expects to receive a research and development grant of
 approximately $1,000,000 under the Auslndustry program. Flamingo has a history of

11} receiving Auslndustry research and development grants.

LL

.1, 48


. 3. General working capital will be utilised by the Company to pay for the corporate and
administration costs of the Company generally, cost overruns in forecast expenditures (if
any), and in additional testing and trial expenditures.
The above table is a statement of current intentions as at the date of this Prospectus.
Shareholders should note that, as with any budget, the allocation of funds set out in
the above table may change depending on a number of factors, including the outcome
of operational and development activities, regulatory developments and market and
> general economic conditions. In light of this, the Board reserves the right to alter the
‘ way the funds are applied.
=
i The Board is satisfied that upon completion of the Offers, the Company will have
= sufficient working capital to meet its stated objectives.
a The use of further equity funding or Share placements will be considered by the Board
where it is appropriate to accelerate a specific project.
1 Flamingo is the second proposed acquisition by the Company in line with the Company's
m new focus, being technology and software development. The Company plans to further
r expand its portfolio in technology solutions, with a particular focus on software
1] marketing solutions, application software, communication software, SaaS, online
‘ social networking services, and security and encryption. It is possible that future
5 acquisitions that may be contemplated may exceed the current or projected financial
resources of the Company and it is expected that these acquisitions would be funded
I by debt and/or equity issues (subject to any required regulatow approvals).
= For the immediate future the Merged Group‘s focus will be on the continued
IE development and commercialisation of the Flamingo Platform and Agenda Platform,
L together with assessing further complementaw acquisition opportunities.
—
E 3.10 Delaware law merger
g The Acquisition is being implemented by way of a Delaware law "merger". For the
purposes of this merger process, the Company has incorporated a Delaware based
r] subsidiary named Flamingo Merger, Inc. (US Subsidiary).
‘ In order for US-based Vendors to become entitled to the equivalent of "roll over relief"
_ in the US and to effect the merger in accordance with Delaware law, the Company will
@ issue the Consideration Securities to the US Subsidiaw (as the nominee of the Vendors),
and then immediately following such issue, Flamingo and the US Subsidiaw will
’4 "merge". As a result of this, Flamingo will continue to exist (as a wholly owned
a subsidiary of the Company), the US Subsidiary will cease to exist, and the Consideration
Securities will immediately be distributed to the Vendors.
! Section 259C(1) of the Corporations Act provides that an issue of shares of a company
— to an entity it controls is void except in certain circumstances, none of which are
a presently applicable. Section 259C(2) specifically allows ASIC to exempt a company
from the operation of section 259C. As the "merger" process will require the Company
1 to issue the Consideration Securities to the US Subsidiaw (being a wholly owned
L subsidiary), the Company has received ASIC relief pursuant to section 259C(2). The US
Subsidiaw will only hold the Consideration Securities for approximately one day as part
of the merger process.
Section 606(1) of the Corporations Act prohibits a person from acquiring a relevant
53 interest in issued voted shares in a listed company if the person acquiring the securities
5 or someone else‘s voting power in the company increases to more than 20%. Section
:3. 655A allows ASIC to exempt a company from the operation of a provision of Chapter 6
g (which includes section 606(1)). As the Consideration Shares in aggregate will comprise
"2‘
E 49
l)


. over 20% of the Shares then on issue, the Company has applied for and received ASIC
relief pursuant to section 655A. It is noted that one of the Vendors, an entity associated
with Dr Wallace, will potentially hold more than 20% of the Company's Shares on issue,
and accordingly Shareholder approval for the purposes of item 7 of section 611 of the
Corporations Act is being sought at the General Meeting.

Section 671 B of the Corporations Act requires a person to give certain information to

a listed company and each relevant market operator if the person begins to have, or

ceases to have, a substantial holding in the company. Section 673(1)(a) allows ASIC to

exempt a person from the operation of a provision of Chapter 6C (which includes

section 6718). As the US Subsidiary will hold over 5% of the Shares of the Company,

the Company has applied for and received ASIC relief such that the US Subsidiary is not

required to lodge substantial holder notices.

3.1 1 Voting power of Vendors

The Vendors currently do not have any voting power in the Company.

The Vendors will have the following voting power in the Company on completion of the

Acquisition and the Offers, assuming all the Shares under the Public Offer are issued:
Vendor Initial Consideration Voting

Shares power (%)

Entities associated with Dr Catriona Wallace 115,814,391 19.45

(incoming Director)

Entities associated with Ms Cathie Reid 62,848,740 10.56

(incoming Director)

Remaining Vendors 94,064,142 15.79
Assuming no other Shares are issued (whether by new issue or to satisfy conversion of
Securities), if all of the Performance Shares were to convert to Shares, then the
maximum voting power of the Vendors will be as follows:

Vendor Shares Voting

power (%)

Entities associated with Dr Catriona Wallace 231,628,782 26.46

Entities associated with Ms Cathie Reid 125,697,480 14.36

Remaining Vendors 188,128,284 21.50

50


. Following the completion of the Acquisition, assuming all the Shares under the Public
Offer are issued and no other Shares are issued (whether by new issue or to satisfied
conversion of Securities), the substantial shareholders of the Company will be:
Substantial Shareholder ‘ Voting power (%)
Entities associated with Dr Catriona Wallace m
Entities associated with Cathie Reid m
51


. 4. Independent Industry Expert's Report


The Directors
Cre8tek Limited, 108 Outram Street
West Perth, WA 6005
Dear Directors,
INDEPENDENT MARKET REPORT
The Intelligent Digital Customer Engagement Market
Introduction
This Independent Market Report (IMR or Report) on the intelligent digital customer engagement market has been 
prepared by Frost & Sullivan Australia Pty Limited (Frost & Sullivan) at the request of the Directors of Cre8tek Limited 
(Cre8tek) for inclusion in a prospectus to be lodged with the Australian Securities and Investments Commission 
(ASIC) in connection with its acquisition of Flamingo Customer Experience Inc. (Flamingo), which is to be carried 
out in conjunction with a capital raising on the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX).
Overview of Flamingo
Flamingo provides a software-based product (the Flamingo Platform) that supports clients in undertaking guided 
selling with their customers, primarily through digital channels (such as over the internet or through smartphones). 
The Flamingo Platform is delivered as software-as-a-service (SaaS) i.e. it is hosted in the cloud and provided to 
customers on an as-needed basis. The Flamingo Platform is similar in concept to other web chat products that 
are used to support customers engaging digitally with vendors, however Frost & Sullivan understands that it is 
differentiated by virtue of incorporation of workflow principles in the product design and in its artificial intelligence 
(AI)  capability.  Through  the  use  of  this  capability,  the  Platform  learns  more  about  how  customers  and  client 
employees  interact,  allowing  the  customer  interaction  to  become  increasingly  automated  over  time,  reducing 
the need for involvement by client employees and therefore increasing the efficiency of the customer interaction 
process , as well as improving the customer experience.
Frost  &  Sullivan  has  therefore  defined  Flamingo’s  market  as  intelligent  digital  customer  engagement.  Other 
products, such as web chat platforms, currently occupy the digital customer engagement market, however the 
Flamingo Platform is differentiated through its deployment of workflow principles and AI.
The Flamingo Platform is ideally suited to supporting digital sales of relatively complex products, where customers 
may require interaction with the vendor during a transaction. In these cases, the online conversion rate (i.e. the 
percentage of customers that initiate a transaction that subsequently leads to a sale) can be low, and the Flamingo 
Platform  can  significantly  enhance  the  conversion  rate  of  digital  transactions.  The  initial  customer  focus  of
Flamingo has been on clients in the financial services industry, primarily in the USA. The relative complexity and 
low digital penetration of transactions for financial services companies provides a significant opportunity for the 
Flamingo Platform.
Frost & Sullivan considers that there are a number of factors that will stimulate the market opportunity for the 
Flamingo Platform. These include:
•
•
•
• 
• 
•
Significant growth in the use of digital channels by consumers to transact with vendors. This includes 
growth  in  the  financial  services  sector,  where  digital  penetration  of  sales  is  still  relatively  low  in 
comparison with other industry sectors;
Increasing preference for customers to engage with vendors through digital channels, as opposed to 
the use of voice channels;
The growing importance in most organisations of improving customer experience, with this becoming 
an increasingly important business differentiator;
An increasing focus among organisations on improving the efficiency of customer engagement;
Growing customer acceptance of and use of web chat platforms to interact with vendors; and
Rapidly growing interest in the use of AI in many aspects of business operations, including in customer 
engagement.
Size and Growth of e-Commerce
Introduction
As a company that supports vendors to interact with customers through digital channels, Flamingo’s business is 
significantly impacted by the growth in business-to-consumer (B2C) e-Commerce, that is the use of the internet 
or other digital channels (such as mobile apps) for consumers to interact and transact with vendors. e-Commerce 
can include both services (such as music downloads, travel or financial services), as well as tangible physical 
goods such as books or clothing. More and more vendors are now using e-Commerce to interact with consumers, 
often to complement other existing channels such as physical (“bricks and mortar”) stores. Globally, e-Commerce 
sales are therefore growing strongly.
e-Commerce Sales
Based on estimates from research company eMarketer, the total value of global B2C e-Commerce sales reached 
$1,671 billion in 2015, and is forecast to increase at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 21.8% to reach 
$3,579 billion in 2019. In 2015, e-Commerce sales represented 7.4% of total retail sales (across all channels), 
and are forecast to reach 12.8% of total global retail sales by 2019. In 2015, Asia-Pacific was the largest global 
e-Commerce market, with total sales of $878 billion, followed by North America at US$367 billion.1  The growth 
in global e-Commerce sales by region between 2014 and 2019 is illustrated in Figure 1. Despite being one of the 
more mature markets for e-Commerce, sales in North America are still forecast to increase by 12.6% over this 
period to reach $580 billion by 2019.
1  eMarketer,  Worldwide  Retail  Commerce  Sales:  eMarketer’s  Updated  Estimate  and  Forecast  Through  2019.  E-Commerce  sales  are  defined  as  products  or 
services ordered using the internet via any device, regardless of the method of payment or fulfilment; excludes travel and event tickets
2
Figure 1: e-Commerce Sales by Region, 2014 to 2019
Source: eMarketer, Worldwide Retail Commerce Sales: eMarketer’s Updated Estimate and Forecast Through 2019
Adoption of e-Commerce differs by industry sector, with penetration typically highest in categories such as music, 
books  and  fashion.  The  financial  services  industry  has  generally  lagged  these  sectors  in  consumer  adoption 
of  e-Commerce,  often  due  to  the  greater  degree  of  product  complexity  involved  as  well  as  regulations  in  the 
sale process (for example, the requirement for customers to provide identification can inhibit the use of digital 
channels for some types of transaction). However, in common with other sectors, the use of e-Commerce is also 
growing in the financial services industry.
Use of the internet to research and purchase financial services is therefore increasingly common, especially for 
relatively simple financial products such as automotive, home & contents and travel insurance. These types of 
products are increasingly being sold online by providers, as opposed to through the use of intermediaries (such as 
insurance brokers or retail banks). Conversely, use of digital channels to sell more complex insurance products, 
such as life insurance or disability insurance, is much lower. Based on a survey by Bain & Co of 70 global insurance 
companies, over 70% are now selling automotive insurance over the internet, whilst use of online channels for 
other forms of insurance is much lower (see Figure 2). 2
2 Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
3
Figure 2: Percentage of Insurance Companies that Sell through Digital Channels, by Product
Source: Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
The increased use of digital channels by consumers is reflected in the growth of e-Commerce sales in the US 
financial services industry. Between 2010 and 2014, e-Commerce revenue in the US financial services industry 
increased from $68 billion to $109 billion, a CAGR of 12.5%.3  However, by 2014 e-Commerce still only represented 
2.8%  of  total  industry  revenue,  well  behind  the  levels  of  penetration  in  other  industry  sectors  and  suggesting 
continued opportunities for further growth.
Figure 3: e-Commerce Revenue in the Financial Services Industry, US, 2010 to 2014
Source: US Census Bureau, Estimated e-Commerce Revenue for Employer Firms: 1998 Through 2014
3 US Census Bureau, Estimated E-Commerce Revenue for Employer Firms: 1998 Through 2014
4
Although penetration of digital sales in financial services is still relatively low, industry participants expect it to 
increase rapidly. For example, insurers expect the proportion of property and casualty (P&C) insurance policies 
sold online to increase from 10% in 2015 to 23% within 3-5 years, and in life insurance from 8% to 15%.4  This is 
being driven both by greater availability of digital channels by vendors, as well as increased demand for digital 
channels by consumers.
Market Drivers for e-Commerce
A number of factors are stimulating growth in the use of digital channels by consumers, both generally and in the 
financial services industry specifically.
Growing Internet Use
A principal driver for e-Commerce is the increased number of individuals that use the internet. For example, in the 
USA, the number of internet users has increased from 67% of the population in 2005 to 75% by 2015.5  This has 
been stimulated by enhanced internet availability, better internet user experience, lower costs of internet access 
and the growing adoption of mobile devices (such as smartphones and tablets) to access the internet.
Increased Convenience of Digital Channels
Digital channels offer greater convenience for customers to interact with providers for products such as insurance. 
This  is  often  leading  to  greater  fragmentation  in  customer  contact,  as  customers  increasingly  use  multiple 
channels for interaction (e.g. internet, telephone, click-to-chat, etc.).  A survey by EY on the preferences of North 
American insurance customers for interaction with their insurer indicated that most customers are happy to use 
digital channels (such as web chat, e-mail and apps) for interaction in most scenarios. Telephone contact is most 
preferred only in the scenario of making a claim (see Table 1). Typically, up to one-third of customers are willing to 
use web chat for contact, most commonly for asking questions about current policies.6
Table 1: Percentage of Customers willing to use Contact Channels, by Contact Scenario, North America, 2014
Web Chat
Email
Telephone
Researching Types of Insurance
Inquiring about new Policy
Questions about Existing Policy
Assistance with Claim
Managing Current Policy
Renewing Current Policy
Cancelling Current Policy
18%
26%
34%
27%
23%
17%
14%
35%
40%
51%
36%
49%
41%
29%
28%
33%
47%
57%
42%
36%
37%
App
18%
17%
20%
17%
20%
15%
11%
Interactive 
Support
None of 
These
19%
18%
20%
19%
22%
14%
11%
32%
30%
18%
20%
23%
30%
39%
Source: EY, Reimagining Customer Relationships, key findings from the EY Global Consumer Insurance Survey 2014
4 Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
5 International Telecommunications Union (ITU) statistics, accessed August 2016
6 EY, Reimagining Customer Relationships, key findings from the EY Global Consumer Insurance Survey 2014
5
Increased Confidence in Transacting through Digital Channels
The greater availability of digital channels and enhanced confidence in their use by consumers is driving increased 
usage.  This  increased  confidence  comes  from  a  range  of  factors,  including  faster  and  more  reliable  internet 
connectivity, and greater confidence by consumers in online security. Hence, in the USA for example, the number 
of digital buyers (defined as individuals who have made at least one online purchase over the previous 12 months) 
is forecast to increase from 63% of the population in 2014 to 71% in 2019, equating to 195 million individual digital 
buyers.7
This increased confidence in use of digital channels is reflected in financial services such as insurance. Within the 
next 3-5 years, over three-quarters of insurance customers expect to be digitally active (defined as using digital 
channels for their last insurance-related information research and for their most important interaction with their 
insurance providers in the past 12 months).8  Digital usage is anticipated to be highest in the UK and Australia, 
followed by the US (see Figure 4.)
Figure 4: Expected Share of Digitally-active Insurance Customers, 3-5 years, by Country
As customers increasingly engage with vendors through digital channels, this is driving the adoption of new ways 
to interact with customers by vendors in the financial services and other industries.
Source: Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
7 eMarketer, Worldwide Retail Commerce Sales: eMarketer’s Updated Estimate and Forecast Through 2019
8 Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
6
Trends in Customer Engagement
Customer experience is an increasingly important differentiator for organisations, with one study estimating that 
US  companies  lose  $83  billion  each  year  due  to  poor  customer  experiences.9    Traditionally,  engagement  with 
customers by vendors in industries such as financial services mainly occurred through physical channels such as 
mail or outlets, or via telephone. These channels were often both relatively inefficient for customers and expensive 
for  vendors  to  provide.  The  development  of  the  internet  has  provided  a  new  way  for  vendors  to  interact  with 
customers, allowing the use of channels such as websites, social media, email and apps. These channels can be 
categorised as digital customer engagement channels.
The  development  of  new  interaction  channels  has  broadened  the  range  of  channels  available  to  customers, 
and has often driven consumers to utilise multiple channels, even as part of a single transaction (for example, 
a customer may research a product online but then buy over the telephone, or a consumer making an online 
transaction may make a telephone call to answer specific questions). Customers using multiple channels desire 
a seamless experience (e.g. they do not have to re-enter data each time they interact), and this is driving vendors 
to offer an “omnichannel” customer experience. Delivering an omnichannel customer experience involves making 
sure that data and context from initial contact carries over to subsequent channels, ensuring consistency of data, 
context, and messaging across all channels.
Omnichannel  can  be  defined  as  a  multichannel  approach  to  sales  that  seeks  to  provide  the  customer  with  a 
seamless  shopping  experience  whether  the  customer  is  shopping  online  from  a  desktop  or  mobile  device,  by 
telephone or in a bricks and mortar store.10  The Flamingo Platform can be regarded as an integral part of an 
omnichannel offering, because it allows customers to receive support and guidance whilst transacting through 
digital  channels.  Previously,  this  support  was  either  not  easily  available  or  was  provided  by  telephone,  with 
customers needing to call a contact centre agent.
Many vendors maintain centres to interact with customers across a broad range of industries where some degree 
of customer support may be needed.  The number of contact centres and the number of agents deployed in them 
is increasing. For example, 96% of centres expect to grow over the next two years to support business growth and 
customer experience demands.11
Traditionally  these  centres  were  known  as  call  centres,  since  contact  was  undertaken  over  the  telephone. 
However, the introduction of digital engagement channels has driven a change of focus towards broader contact 
centres, which use a range of digital tools to engage with customers. Based on Dimension Data’s annual Contact 
Centre Benchmarking Report, over 50% of organisations will soon be managing a multichannel contact centre, 
featuring at least eight different forms of contact methods, with seven of these being digital.12  Currently, 35% 
of  customer  interactions  through  contact  centres  are  via  digital  channels,  and  these  are  forecast  to  overtake 
voice  communication  within  two  years.13    This  places  an  increased  importance  on  delivering  an  omnichannel
9 Stratecast (Frost & Sullivan), Customers Want Fast Answers Online, Not Waiting on a Phone Line: Virtual Assistants Are Essential, March 2015
10 http://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/omnichannel
11 Deloitte, 2015 Global Contact Center Survey
12 Dimension Data, 2015 Global Contact Centre Benchmarking Report
13 Ibid
7
experience to consumers.
Among the fastest growing contact channels is web chat, with 70% of global contact centres likely to be deploying 
web chat functionality within 12 months. This places web chat ahead of other developing digital channels such as 
SMS, social media and video chat (see Figure 5).14
Figure 5: Channels used by Contact Centres
Source: Dimension Data, 2015 Global Contact Centre Benchmarking Report
The growth in use of digital channels such as web chat is driven by a number of factors. These channels are 
generally cheaper for vendors to offer than channels such as voice, and are also more immediate for customers 
who also do not need access to a telephone and may not need to wait till their call is answered. Web chat is 
the preferred channel of communication for Gen Y customers (i.e. those born between 1981 and 1999), and as 
this cohort of consumers ages and has increased purchasing power, this will further stimulate adoption of web 
chat technologies by vendors. The preference of consumers by age cohort for different engagement channels is 
indicated in Figure 6.
14 Ibid
8
Figure 6: Percentage of Customers for whom Web Chat is Preferred Channel of Engagement, by Age Cohort
Source: Dimension Data, 2015 Global Contact Centre Benchmarking Report
Within the financial services industry, use of web chat as an engagement channel is also developing rapidly. In 
2015, about 40% of insurance companies deployed web chat technology in their contact centre, however within 
3-5 years this is forecast to increase to almost 90% (see Figure 7).15
Figure 7: Deployment of Technologies in Contact Centres, Insurance Companies
15 Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
Source: Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
9
The growing adoption of web chat technology is driving rapid growth in the web chat market, as web chat vendors 
derive increased revenues from the strong growth in deployments.
The Web Chat Market
The web chat market is occupied by vendors who provide web chat platforms that are deployed by organisations 
typically in contact centres.  These web chat vendors include suppliers of traditional web chat platforms (such as 
LivePerson16), as well as emerging suppliers of intelligent platforms such as Flamingo. These vendors typically 
derive revenues through license or usage fees for their platforms.
Based on industry research, Frost & Sullivan has estimated the total value of the global web chat market as $719 
million in 2015, and this is forecast to increase to $1,168 million in 2019, a CAGR of 12.8%.17  North America is by 
far the largest market for web chat platforms, accounting for 61% of the global market in 2015. Although other 
regions will see faster growth than North America, by 2019 North America will still represent 57% of the global 
web chat market (see Figure 8).
 
Figure 8: Global Web Chat Market, by Region, 2014 to 2019
Source: Frost & Sullivan estimates
The financial services industry is the second largest market for web chat platforms, after the retail & consumer 
goods industry (see Figure 9). In 2015, web chat revenue in the financial services industry globally was estimated 
at $103 million, 14% of the global total.18
16 US-based LivePerson is a leading provider of mobile and online messaging, enabling a meaningful connection between brands and consumers
17 Frost & Sullivan has estimated the web chat market based on interviews with web chat platform vendors, and published sales data. Market size includes 
revenue from license fees and usage fees, and excludes maintenance and professional services fees
18 Frost & Sullivan estimates
10
Figure 9: Global Web Chat Market, by Industry Vertical, 2015
Source: Frost & Sullivan estimates
Artificial Intelligence in Customer Engagement
The  Flamingo  Platform  can  be  distinguished  from  other  web  chat  products  through  its  use  of  AI.  This  use  of 
AI both helps to improve the customer experience, as well as enabling the contact centre to be more efficient, 
for example by reducing the amount of human involvement needed in customer engagement. These are both 
strategic imperatives for many contact centre operators, with customer experience the top strategic performance 
measure for contact centres, and staff costs representing 76% of the average operating costs of a contact centre. 
19
AI offers a way for organisations to enhance their competitive advantage by better understanding and acting on the 
massive increase in data collected largely as a result of digitisation of business processes. This includes improved 
analysis of the data collected through customer engagement, especially digital customer engagement. Globally, 
expenditure on AI-based tools and applications was €700 million ($781 million) in 2013, but this is estimated to 
have reached €27 billion ($30 billion) by 2015.20  The use of AI in customer experience is becoming increasingly 
important, with one study predicting that by 2016, 89% of companies expect to compete mostly on the basis of 
customer experience, versus 36% in 2012.21  Hence, technologies and applications that support businesses to 
enhance  their  customer  experience  are  becoming  increasingly  critical.  The  total  market  for  Big  Data  analytics
19 Dimension Data, 2015 Global Contact Centre Benchmarking Report
20 European Commission, Business Innovation Observatory, Big Data, Artificial Intelligence, 2013
21 http://blogs.gartner.com/jake-sorofman/gartner-surveys-confirm-customer-experience-new-battlefield/
11
technology for customer experience, marketing and sales analytics applications is estimated at $7.74 billion in 
2014.22
The growing interest in Big Data and AI is reflected in the technology investment plans of insurance companies. 
Although most insurers recognise that they are currently lacking Big Data analytics capability, 75% of life insurers 
and 65% of P&C insurers intend to invest in this capability over the next 3-5 years.23
Conclusion
The market opportunity for Flamingo is being stimulated by a number of factors, including the rapid growth in 
e-Commerce, particularly in the financial services industry on which Flamingo is initially focused; the growing 
importance of customer experience as a business differentiator; the growth in omnichannel commerce which 
requires customer engagement through multiple channels; growing acceptance of non-voice channels such as 
web chat by consumers and their consequent deployment by contact centres; and the growing interest in the use 
of AI to better deliver customer experience, as well as improving operational efficiencies of contact centres.
Global  e-Commerce  expenditure  is  forecast  to  increase  at  a  CAGR  of  21.8%  between  2014  and  2019.  Even 
relatively mature markets such as North America will see growth of 12.6% over this period.24  e-Commerce is being 
increasingly adopted in industries such as insurance, with most insurance companies now offering e-Commerce 
capability for products such as automotive, travel and home and contents insurance. The proportion of insurance 
policies  sold  over  digital  channels  is  forecast  to  increase  strongly  over  the  next  few  years.  This  will  drive  a 
requirement for increased engagement with customers to provide support during digital interactions.
Mirroring the growth of e-Commerce is the development of omnichannel commerce, as consumers increasingly 
seek to use multiple digital and even offline channels, often as part of a single transaction. This is driving greater 
use of channels such as web chat, which can be used to support a customer during an online interaction. Web 
chat is an attractive interaction channel, particularly for younger customers, and 70% of contact centres plan to 
shortly deploy it. Consequently, the global web chat market is forecast to grow at 12.8% to reach $1,168 million by 
2019.25  North America is by far the largest market for web chat applications, and the financial services industry 
is the second largest end-market.
Whilst  benefitting  from  the  strong  growth  in  the  need  for  digital  engagement  platforms  in  industries  such  as 
financial  services,  Flamingo  will  receive  an  additional  benefit  from  the  increased  focus  on  both  improving 
customer  experience  and  improving  contact  centre  efficiencies.  These  are  key  focus  areas  for  contact  centre 
operators, and will drive the adoption of applications that use AI to improve customer experience and operational 
efficiencies through analysis of the vast amounts of data generated through digital customer engagement. With 
a  majority  of  customers  intending  to  invest  in  such  technologies,  Flamingo  will  be  well-placed  to  exploit  this 
growth. Customer experience is growing in importance as a business differentiator, and by providing a solution
22 Stratecast (Frost & Sullivan), Customers Want Fast Answers Online, Not Waiting on a Phone Line: Virtual Assistants Are Essential, March 2015
23 Bain & Co, Global Digital Insurance Benchmarking Report, 2015
24 eMarketer, Worldwide Retail Commerce Sales: eMarketer’s Updated Estimate and Forecast Through 2019
25 Frost & Sullivan estimates
12
that  enables  organisations  to  enhance  and  continually  improve  their  customer  experience,  Flamingo  will  also 
benefit from this trend.
Definitions
The following definitions have been used in this report.
Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  is  simulation  of  human  intelligence  processes  by  machines,  especially  computer 
systems. AI is particularly used where large amounts of data (Big Data) are generated.
Big Data describes any voluminous amount of structured, semi-structured and unstructured data that has the 
potential to be mined for information.
Digital engagement involves the use of digital channels (the internet and mobile phone networks) to communicate 
with customers. Most customer engagement channels are now digital, with the exception of voice, mail and face-
to-face engagement in physical premises.
e-Commerce is defined by the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as the sale or 
purchase  of  goods  or  services,  conducted  over  computer  networks  by  methods  specifically  designed  for  the 
purpose of receiving or placing orders. The goods or services are ordered by those methods, but the payment and 
the ultimate delivery of the goods or services do not have to be conducted online.
Omnichannel refers to the provision of a seamless experience for customers who are interacting with vendors 
across multiple channels. Delivering an effective omnichannel experience for customers requires close integration 
of all interaction channels.
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) is is an approach to providing software in which the application is hosted by the 
vendor, and made available to customers over a network, usually the internet (the cloud). SaaS differs from the 
approach of hosting the software on the customer’s premises (on-premise software). Customers typically pay 
for the software based on usage. SaaS is becoming increasingly common as a delivery mechanism for customer 
engagement applications.
Web  chat  is  a  platform  that  allows  users  to  communicate  in  real-time  over  the  internet  using  easily  available 
interfaces. Vendors of web chat platforms generally link their platforms to other channels in use, such as web 
sites and customer relationship management (CRM) systems.
13
Disclosure
This is an independent report prepared by Frost & Sullivan. Save for the preparation of this report and services 
rendered  in  connection  with  this  report  for  which  normal  professional  fees  will  be  received,  Frost  &  Sullivan 
has no interest in Cre8tek Limited or Flamingo Customer Experience Inc. and no interest in the outcome of the 
transaction. Payment of these fees to Frost & Sullivan is not contingent on the outcome of the transaction. Frost 
& Sullivan has not and will not receive any other benefits (including any commissions) and there are no factors 
which may reasonably be assumed to have influenced the contents of this report nor which may be assumed to 
have provided bias or influence. Frost & Sullivan consents to the inclusion of this report in the Prospectus in the 
form and context in which it is included.  As at the date of this report, this consent has not been withdrawn. Frost 
& Sullivan does not hold a dealer’s license or Financial Services License. This report does not constitute advice in 
respect of the transaction.
About Frost & Sullivan
Frost & Sullivan is an independent market research and consulting group operating in 40 countries globally, of 
which Frost & Sullivan Australia Pty Ltd (Frost & Sullivan) is a member. Founded in New York in 1961, the Frost & 
Sullivan group now employs over 1,500 staff globally.
Frost & Sullivan has undertaken a number of market studies in the digital media and e-Commerce sectors on 
behalf of market participants and financial institutions, as well as producing a number of multi-client reports on 
the digital media and e-Commerce industries.
In preparing this report, Frost & Sullivan has relied on information derived from reputable publicly available sources 
and industry publications. This research was undertaken in the month of August 2016.
All effort has been made by Frost & Sullivan to ensure that information in this report is accurate and appropriate at 
the time of writing. Conclusions, and assumptions attached to those conclusions, are based on Frost & Sullivan’s 
investigations and analyses of the facts as they are known as at the date of this report and Frost & Sullivan is of 
the opinion that the conclusions and underlying assumptions are reasonable.
All references to dollars in this report are to US dollars ($). When converting from other currencies, the exchange 
rate prevailing as at August 4th 2016 has been used.26
Yours Sincerely
Mark Dougan
Managing Director, Australia & New Zealand
26
Source: Yahoo! Finance
14
. 5. Risk Factors
This Section identifies the major areas of risk associated with Flamingo, but should not
be taken as an exhaustive list of the risk factors to which the Company and its Security
holders are exposed.
5.1 Risks relating to the change in scale of activities
>
‘ (a) Dilution risk
=
i The Company currently has 234,426,409 Shares on issue. On completion of the
-_ Acquisition, the Company proposes to issue Shares and Performance Shares as
— required pursuant to the Acquisition Agreement and issue Shares as part of
g the Offers.
On issue of the consideration under the Acquisition and the subscription of
Shares under the Offers (assuming no Securities are exercised or converted),
m the existing Shareholders will retain approximately 39.37% of the issued
r capital of the Company, with entities associated with proposed directors Dr
.1] Wallace and Ms Reid holding 19.45% and 10.56% respectively, the remaining
J Vendors holding 15.79%, the Facilitators holding 2.23% and the investors under
5 the Public Offer holding 12.60%, of the issued capital of the Company.
I In the event that all Performance Shares convert, and assuming no other
_ Securities are issued or converted, then the existing Shareholders will retain
- approximately 26.78% of the issued capital of the Company, with entities
IE associated with proposed directors Dr Wallace and Ms Reid holding 26.46% and
L 14.36% respectively, the remaining Vendors holding 21.49%, the Facilitators
— holding 2.33% and the investors under the Public Offer holding 8.57%, of the
! issued capital of the Company.
III
Q There is also a risk that the interests of Shareholders will be further diluted
as a result of future capital raisings required in order to fund the future
@ development of the Company.
_ (b) Liquidity risk
E On completion of the Acquisition, the Company proposes to issue a total of
156,912,882 Initial Consideration Shares and 156,912,882 Performance Shares
_‘ to the Non-Founder Vendors, and 115,814,391 Initial Consideration Shares and
a 115,814,391 Performance Shares to the Founder. A portion of these securities
will be subject to escrow restrictions in accordance with Chapter 9 of the
I Listing Rules. This could be considered an increased liquidity risk as a portion
-_ of issued capital will not be able to be traded freely for a period of time.
5 (c) Sale of Consideration Securities
I Some of the Vendors may elect to sell those Shares received from the sale of
L their interests in Flamingo to the Company which are not subject to escrow
restrictions by ASX immediately following completion of the Acquisition. If one
or more of the Vendors elect to sell a sufficiently large number of Shares, then
this may negatively impact the price of Shares and decrease the realisable
value of existing Shareholders' investment in the Company.
.3

§
ii
i
E 53
l)


. (d) Contractual risk
Pursuant to the Acquisition Agreement the Company has agreed to acquire the
Flamingo shares subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions precedent.
The ability of the Company to achieve its stated objectives will depend on the
performance by the parties of their obligations under the Acquisition
Agreement. If any party defaults in the performance of their obligations, it
> may be necessaw for the Company to approach a court to seek a legal remedy,
‘ which can be costly.
E
- 5.2 Specific risks to the Flamingo business
—
— There are a number of specific risks involved for the Company, and consequently its
a security holders, in the acquisition of Flamingo, including risks specific to the business
and assets of Flamingo, which include the following non-exhaustive list.
m (a) Limited operating history
r Flamingo has limited operating histow and there is uncertainty in relation to
E the business of Flamingo and investors should consider Flamingo's prospects in
light of its limited financial history. In addition, there is no guarantee that
E Flamingo will be able to successfully further develop or commercialise its
products and if it is unable to do so it will not be able to realise significant
I revenues in the future.
—
- (b) Failure to attract, retain and engage clients
E The potential revenue streams for the Company depend on its ability to
i attract, retain and engage clients (Providers) to the Flamingo Platform. There
._ is a risk that the Company may be unable to attract, retain and engage
- sufficient Providers for the potential revenue streams to materialise or be
a sufficient for the continued operation of the Flamingo Platform.
r] (c) Sales and marketing success
é Following completion of the Acquisition, the Company intends to continue
with the commercialisation of the Flamingo Platform, including brand
m development and sales and marketing. By its nature, there is no guarantee
that the Company's brand development and sales and marketing campaign will
a be successful. In the event that it is not, the Company may encounter
a difficulty in creating market awareness of the brand. This would likely have
an adverse impact on the Company‘s ability to generate revenue.
! Even if the Company does successfully commercialise the Flamingo Platform,
_ there is a risk the Company will not achieve a commercial return. The
a Company may not be able to sell products and services to clients at a rate
which covers its operating and capital costs, or new technology may overtake
E the Company‘s technology.
(d) Competition and new technologies
The industry in which Flamingo is involved is subject to increasing domestic
and global competition which is fast-paced and fast-changing. While the
:3 Company will undertake all reasonable due diligence in its business decisions
3 and operations, the Company will have no influence or control over the
 activities or actions of its competitors, whose activities or actions may
g positively or negatively affect the operating and financial performance of the
E
n _
g 54
u


. Company‘s projects and business. For instance, new technologies could
overtake the advancements made by the Flamingo Platform. In that case, the
Company‘s revenues and profitability could be adversely affected.
The Company's competition may include businesses with much higher
capitalisation and substantially greater resources. These competitors may
succeed in developing products and services which are either superior or
additional to the Company‘s, resulting in the migration of existing clients and
> potential clients to a competitor's business. Competitors with increased access
a to capital could lead to the Company's business becoming uncompetitive.
i Further, the cost and time for a new competitor (including new entrants) to
I— develop competing technology or products may not be significant, and may be
— substantially less than the implied market capitalisation of the Company based
a on the issue price of $0.04 per Share. This may result in a heightened risk of
competition to the Company. If a person or entity successfully develops and
commercialises a competing product, this may have a materially adverse
m effect on the value and prospects of the Company and consequently on the
value of your investment.
I
a (e) Increased investment in product development and support
5 There is a risk that maintaining and upgrading Flamingo's existing products as
well as new product development may lead to a higher than anticipated
I investment spend on IT development.
—
- (f) Flamingo‘s intellectual property
E If the Company fails to protect the intellectual property rights of Flamingo
i adequately, competitors may gain access which would in turn harm its
._ business.
III
a Legal standards relating to the validity, enforceability and scope of protection
of intellectual property rights are uncertain. Effective patent, trade mark,
r] copyright and trade secret protection may not be available to the Company in
‘ every countw in which products may become available. Accordingly, despite
_ its efforts, the Company may not be able to prevent third parties from
T infringing upon or misappropriating its intellectual property.
m The Company may be required to incur significant expenses in monitoring and
_‘ protecting its intellectual property rights. It may initiate or otherwise be
a involved in litigation against third parties for infringement, or to establish the
validity, of its rights. Any litigation, whether or not it is successful, could
I result in significant expense to the Company and cause a distraction to
_ management.
_
a (g) Intellectual property infringement
' Flamingo relies in part on confidentiality agreements with its employees,
L consultants, contractors and other third parties to protect its intellectual
property. These agreements may not effectively prevent disclosure of
confidential information and may not provide an adequate remedy in the
event of unauthorised disclosure of confidential information.
:3 Flamingo uses a combination of open source and third party licensed software
3 to develop its own software and platforms, and relies on its ability to protect
,5); its intellectual property rights adequately.
5
E
n _
E 55
l)


. Failure to do so may result in competitors gaining access to its technology,
which would harm the business. Flamingo may be unable to obtain patent
protection in the future. If any patents are issued in the future, they may not
provide Flamingo with any competitive advantages, or may be challenged by
third parties.

There is a risk that the validity, ownership or authorised use of intellectual
property relevant to Flamingo's business will be successfully challenged by
> third parties. Any litigation, whether or not it is successful, could result in
a significant expense to the Company and divert the efforts of its personnel.
i (h) Reliance on key personnel
—
— The emergence and development of the Flamingo Platform has been in large
a part due to the talent, effort, and experience of Dr Catriona Wallace, the
Founder of Flamingo. Dr Wallace has signed a contract to join the Company as
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director on completion of the
m Acquisition.
r There is no assurance that Dr Wallace‘s contract will not be terminated. In
E addition, there is no assurance that Dr Wallace will remain healthy and able
to continue in her role. If her contract were terminated or breached, or if Dr
E Wallace were no longer to continue in her role, the Company would need to
employ alternative staff, and the Company's operations and business would be
I adversely affected.
—
- (i) Reliance on specialist staff
E Competition for qualified technical, sales and marketing staff can be intense
i and no assurance can be provided that the Company will be able to attract or
._ retain key personnel in the future.
III
a Flamingo is reliant upon employees with specialist IT skills in order to develop
and maintain its projects. Any shortage of availability of these skills in the IT
r] employment market could impair the development of Flamingo‘s products and
‘ business and the rate of such development. Such a shortage could also cause
_ wage inflation, which may impact on the Company's profitability.
m (j) Outsourcing
_‘ Flamingo outsources to consultants for expert advice and contracts
a organisations for some IT services and there is no guarantee that such experts
or organisations will be available as required or will meet expectations.
! (k) Reliance on core information technology and other systems
_
a The operation of Flamingo's business is dependent upon the performance,
reliability and availability of its information technology and security systems.
' This includes its core technologies such as computer servers and back-end
L processing systems. These systems may be adversely affected by a number of
factors including major events such as acts of terrorism or war or breakdown
in utilities such as electricity and fibre optic cabling. Events of that nature
may cause one or more of those core technologies to become unavailable.
There are also internal and external factors that may adversely affect those
:3 systems and technologies such as natural disasters, misuse by employees or
g contractors or other technical issues. The Company and Flamingo‘s disaster
 recovery plans may not cover loss or damage that the Company or Flamingo
g suffers as a result of such a system failure.
'3
E 56
l)


. Any damage to, or failure of, Flamingo's key systems can result in disruption
to Flamingo's ability to operate its business. Such disruptions have the
potential to reduce Flamingo's ability to generate revenue, impact customer
service levels and damage Flamingo's brand. This could adversely affect
Flamingo and the Company's ability to generate new business and cause it to
suffer financial loss.

> (I) Dependence on the internet
‘ Expanding subscriptions of the Flamingo Platform and other future developed
—
= products depends on the continued acceptance of the internet as a
- communications and commerce platform for individuals and enterprises. The
I— internet could become less viable as a business tool due to delays in the
— development or adoption of new standards and protocols to handle increased
a demands of internet activity, security, reliability, cost, ease-of-use,
accessibility and quality-of-service.
m The performance of the internet and its acceptance as a business tool have
been harmed by "viruses", "worms" and similar malicious programs, and the
r internet has experienced a variety of outages and other delays as a result of
E damage to portions of its infrastructure. If for any reason the internet does
not remain a widespread communications medium and commercial platform,
5 the demand for the Company's products would be significantly reduced, which
would harm its business.
! (m) Security breaches and hacker attacks
-
IE A malicious attack on Flamingo's products, systems, processes or people from
L external or internal sources could put the integrity and privacy of customers'
a data and business systems used by Flamingo at risk.
.—
“ The impact of loss or leakage of customer or business data could include costs
a for rebates, potential service disruption, litigation and brand damage,
r resulting in reduced or failing revenues.
I
a Flamingo follows best practice in relation to security policies, procedures,
_ automated and manual protection, encryption systems and staff screening to
T minimise risks.
m Flamingo relies upon the availability of its website to attract new customers.
_‘ Hackers could render the website unavailable through a disrupted denial of
a service or other disruptive attacks. Unavailability of the website could lead to
a loss of revenues for the Company. Further, it could hinder the Company‘s
I abilities to retain existing customers or attract new customers, which could
-_ have an adverse impact on the Company‘s growth.
_
a (n) Domain name risk
I Flamingo‘s business depends to some extent on customers being attracted to
L its website. Flamingo, via Dr Wallace, has registered several domain names.
Should the Company not renew or otherwise lose control of the Flamingo
domain names, it would lose all website traffic direct to that domain. This
would likely adversely affect the Company's potential to earn revenue.
51 (o) Attracting and customers websites
u
EL? The Company's revenues will be affected by the ability of Flamingo's clients
g to attract customers to their websites which utilise the Flamingo Platform.
3
5 _
E 57
l)


. Various factors can affect the level of web traffic arriving at those websites,
including:
(1) Marketing and promotions: If Flamingo clients‘ marketing and
promotion efforts are not effective this may result in fewer
‘conversions', meaning less revenue is generated for Flamingo.
(i'i) Brand damage: If the Company, Flamingo or Flamingo's clients suffer
% from reputational damage, web traffic could be affected.
= (p) Liability claims
! Flamingo may be exposed to liability claims if its products or services are
— provided in fault and/or cause harm to its customers (for example, if there
a was a data breach). As a result, Flamingo may have to expend significant
financial and managerial resources to defend against such claims. If a
successful claim is made against Flamingo, Flamingo may be fined or
m sanctioned and its reputation and brand may be negatively impacted, which
could materially and adversely affect its reputation, business prospects,
r] financial condition and results of operation.
J (q) Customer service risk
5 Clients may need to engage with Flamingo‘s personnel in certain
I circumstances, such as if they have a question about the services or if there
_ is a dispute between a client and Flamingo. Flamingo needs to recruit and
- retain staff with interpersonal skills sufficient to respond appropriately to
IE customer services requests. Poor customer service experiences may result in
L the loss of customers. If Flamingo loses key customer service personnel, fails
a to provide adequate training and resources for customer service personnel,
._ this could lead to adverse publicity, litigation, regulatory inquiries and/or a
- decrease in customers, all of which may negatively impact on Flamingo's
g revenue.
r] (r) Reputational risk
é Flamingo operates in an online and fast-changing environment. Negative
publicity can spread quickly, whether true or false. Disgruntled users posting
m negative comments about the businesses in public forums may have a
disproportionate effect on Flamingo's reputation and its ability to earn
_‘ revenues and profits. Additionally, complaints by such users can lead to
a additional regulatow scrutiny and a consequential increased compliance
burden in responding to regulatory enquiries. This could negatively impact
I upon Flamingo‘s profitability.
.—
_ (s) Acquisitions
a As part of its business strategy, the Company may make acquisitions of, or
I significant investments in, companies, products, technologies and/or products
L that are complementary to Flamingo's business. Any such future transactions
are accompanied by the risks commonly encountered in making acquisitions
of companies, products and technologies, such as integrating cultures and
systems of operation, relocation of operations, short term strain on working
capital requirements, achieving the sales and margins anticipated and
§ retaining key staff and customer and supplier relationships.
‘55
E
ii
i
E 58
l)


. 5.3 Market Risks
(a) Additional requirements for capital
The funds raised under the Offers are considered sufficient to meet the
immediate objectives of the Company. Additional funding may be required in
the event costs exceed the Company‘s estimates and to effectively implement
its business and operations plans in the future (including in relation to
ammgo to ta e a vantage 0 opportunities or acqu1sltions, jomt ventures

> Fl . ) k d f . . f . . . . .

g or other business opportunities, and to meet any unanticipated liabilities or

= expenses which the Company may incur. Further additional financing will be

- required if the Board determines to accelerate the development of the

= Company‘s technology.

.1 The Company may seek to raise further funds through equity or debt financing,
joint ventures, licensing arrangements, production sharing arrangements or
other means. Failure to obtain sufficient financing for the Company's activities

II I and future projects may result in delay and indefinite postponement of their
activities and potential research and development programmes. There can be

r no assurance that additional finance will be available when needed or, if

If]: available, the terms of the financing might not be favourable to the Company
and might involve substantial dilution to Shareholders.

a (b) Regulatory risks

_ The Company will incur ongoing costs and obligations associated with

- compliance with necessaw regulations. Any failure to comply with regulations

IE may result in additional costs for corrective measures, penalties or in

' restrictions on the Company‘s proposed business operations. In addition,

a changes in regulations could require extensive changes to the Company's

-— operations, increased compliance costs or give rise to material liabilities,

- which could have a material adverse effect on the business, results of

.: operations and financial condition of the Company.

n, The Company's ability to operate in the future will depend in part on whether

‘ it is able to effectively commercialise its potential interests in products. This

_ will depend on successful completion of product development activities,
obtaining regulatow approval and on there being commercial demand for such

II I products which cannot be guaranteed.

a (c) Reinstatement to ASX's Official List
The Company's Shares are currently suspended from trading on the ASX. In the

I event the Essential Resolutions are approved at the Meeting, it is anticipated

_ that the Company‘s Securities will remain suspended until completion of the

_ Acquisition and Offers, re-compliance by the Company with Chapters 1 and Z

. of the Listing Rules and compliance with any further conditions ASX imposes
on such reinstatement. There is a risk that the Company will not be able to

' satisfy one or more of those requirements, or that ASX policy with respect to
reinstatement may be amended and that its quoted Securities may
consequently remain suspended from quotation.

5.4 General risks
53 (a) Foreign exchange risks
,5; The Company will have costs and expenses in the US. Accordingly, the
a depreciation and/or the appreciation of the US dollar relative to the
'43
E 59
u


. Australian dollar would result in a translation loss on consolidation which is
taken directly to shareholder equity. Any depreciation of the US dollar relative
to the Australian dollar may result in lower than anticipated revenue, profit
and earning. The Company could be affected on an ongoing basis by foreign
exchange risks between the Australian dollar and the US dollar, and will have
to monitor this risk on an ongoing basis.

(b) Economic
>
‘ General economic conditions, introduction of tax reform, new legislation,
- movements In Interest and Inflation rates and currency exchange rates may
- have an adverse effect on the Company‘s business activities and potential
I— research and development programmes, as well as on their ability to fund
a those actIVItIes.
(c) Force majeure

I The Company's projects now or in the future may be adversely affected by

risks outside the control of the Company, including labour unrest, civil
r disorder, war, subversive activities or sabotage, fires, floods, explosions or

’c other catastrophes, epidemics or quarantine restrictions.

.5 (d) Insurance risks
I The Company intends to insure its operations and those of Flamingo (as
_ required) in accordance with industry practice. However, in certain
- circumstances, such insurance may not be of a nature or level to provide
IE adequate insurance cover. The occurrence of an event that is not covered or
' fully covered by insurance could have a material adverse effect on the
a business, financial condition and results of the Company affected.
.—
“ (e) Litigation risks
3' The Company is exposed to possible litigation risks including, but not limited
" to, intellectual property and patent claims. Further, the Company or Flamingo
‘ may be involved in disputes with other parties in the future which may result

in litigation. Any such claim or dispute if proven, may impact adversely on the

Companys operations, fInanCIal performance and fInancIal p05ItIon. The
 Company and Flamingo are not currently engaged in any litigation.
5 (f) Dependence on outside parties

The Company may pursue a strategy that forms strategic business relationships
I with other organisations in relation to potential products and services. There
. can be no assurance that the Company will be able to attract such prospective
_ organisations and to negotiate appropriate terms and conditions with these
.: organisations or that any potential agreements with such organisations will be

complied with.
II (g) Market conditions

Share market conditions may affect the value of the Company‘s quoted

Securities regardless of the Company‘s operating performance. Share market

conditions are affected by many factors such as:

(i) general economic outlook;

(ii) introduction of tax reform or other new legislation;

60


. (iii) interest rates and inflation rates;
(iv) changes in investor sentiment toward particular market sectors;
(v) the demand for, and supply of, capital; and
(vi) terrorism or other hostilities.
The market price of securities can fall as well as rise and may be subject to
varied and unpredictable influences on the market for equities in general and
technology stocks in particular. Neither the Company nor the Directors
warrant the future performance of the Company or any return to security
holders arising from the transactions the subject of this Prospectus or
otherwise.

61


. 6. InvestigatingAccountant's Report
I 62


H  ‘ :5. ‘ 
>   '7‘) ‘ r
   CRE8TEK LIMITED ;
' :\ 'I r".  Investigating Accounta '
I .1. r ‘ 13 September 2016 -
  'i' 4'
 . H W I. i.
n A .a‘
x" ' j; ‘
.,,\ _\ \ 97:53 _:
/"///"/ ,S‘
:2


13 September 2016
The Directors
Cre8tek Limited
108 Outram Street
West Perth, WA 6005
Dear Directors
INVESTIGATING ACCOUNTANT’S REPORT
1.
Introduction
BDO Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd (‘BDO’) has been engaged by Cre8tek Limited (‘CR8’ or ‘the 
Company’) to prepare this Investigating Accountant's Report (‘Report’) in relation to the 
historical financial information and pro forma historical financial information of CR8, for 
inclusion in the Prospectus. The Prospectus is required under Australian Securities Exchange 
(‘ASX’) listing requirements for CR8 to re-comply with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules, 
as a result of the Company executing an agreement to acquire 100% of the issued capital of 
Flamingo Customer Experience Inc. (‘Flamingo’) (‘the Acquisition’).
Broadly, the Prospectus will offer the following:
a)  an offer of 75,000,000 Shares at an issue price of $0.04 each to raise $3,000,000 before
costs, with a minimum subscription of $3,000,000 (‘Public Offer’);
b)  an offer of 272,727,273 Shares in the Company and 272,727,273 Performance Shares to
the Vendors of Flamingo for the acquisition of all shares in Flamingo by the Company 
(‘Consideration Offer’);
c)  an offer of 13,286,364 Shares and 7,150,000 Performance Shares to the Facilitator
(‘Facilitation Offer’); and
d)  an offer of 6,567,382 Options to certain employees of Flamingo (‘Employee Offer’),
(together, (‘the Offers’).
Expressions defined in the Prospectus have the same meaning in this Report. BDO Corporate 
Finance (WA) Pty Ltd (‘BDO’) holds an Australian Financial Services Licence (AFS Licence Number 
316158).
BDO Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd ABN 27 124 031 045 AFS Licence No 316158 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all 
members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are 
members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability 
limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
2
This Report has been prepared for inclusion in the Prospectus. We disclaim any assumption of 
responsibility for any reliance on this Report or on the financial information to which it relates 
for any purpose other than that for which it was prepared.
2.
Scope
You have requested BDO to perform a review engagement in relation to the historical and pro 
forma historical financial information described below and disclosed in the Prospectus.
The historical and pro forma historical financial information is presented in the Prospectus in an 
abbreviated form, insofar as it does not include all of the presentation and disclosures required 
by Australian Accounting Standards and other mandatory professional reporting requirements 
applicable to general purpose financial reports prepared in accordance with the Corporations Act 
2001.
Historical Financial Information
You have requested BDO to review the following historical financial information (together the 
‘Historical Financial Information’) included in the Prospectus:
  CR8’s reviewed historical Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 31 March 
2016 and audited historical Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 30 June 
2015 and 30 June 2014;
  CR8’s reviewed historical Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other
Comprehensive Income for the three months ended 31 March 2016 and half year ended 
31 December 2015, and audited historical Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and 
Other Comprehensive Income for the years ended 30 June 2015 and 30 June 2014;


Flamingo’s audited historical Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 31 
March 2016, 30 June 2015 and 30 June 2014; and
Flamingo’s audited historical Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income for the nine months ended 31 March 2016, and years ended 30 
June 2015 and 30 June 2014.
The Historical Financial Information has been prepared in accordance with the stated basis of 
preparation, being the recognition and measurement principles contained in Australian 
Accounting Standards and the Company’s adopted accounting policies.
The Historical Financial Information of CR8 has been extracted from Management accounts for 
the three months ended 31 March 2016, the financial report for the half year ended 31 December 
2015 and the financial report for the year ended 30 June 2015. The Management accounts for the 
three months ended 31 March 2016 were reviewed by BDO in accordance with the Australian 
Auditing Standards. The financial reports for the half year ended 31 December 2015 and year 
ended 30 June 2015, were reviewed and audited by Ernst & Young in accordance with the 
Australian Auditing Standards, respectively.
Ernst & Young issued a qualified review conclusion on the financial report for the half year ended 
31 December 2015, citing
-That the Directors of CR8 identified that they did not have oversight or control over the 
consolidated entity’s reporting system at any time prior to 28 October 2015 (the date the 
consolidated entity exited from administration).
- Ernst & Young audited the financial statements of the consolidated entity for the financial year 
ended 30 June 2015 and in their audit report dated 7 December 2015 expressed a disclaimer of 
opinion on that financial report. Since opening balances of assets and liabilities affect the
3
determination of the consolidated entity’s financial performance for the half year-ended 31 
December 2015, they were unable to determine whether adjustments to the results of operations 
for the half-year ended 31 December 2015 were necessary.
- The current Board of Cre8tek Limited has not been able to source and provide to Ernst & Young 
certain books and records of the company for the period 1 July 2015 to 28 October 2015.  
Without access to this documentation, they were unable to obtain sufficient appropriate review 
evidence for the measurement, occurrence, completeness and disclosures relating to revenues, 
expenses and cash flows of Cre8tek Limited as reflected in the financial statements for the 
period ended 31 December 2015.
- The current Board of Cre8tek Limited has not been able to source and provide to Ernst and 
Yong books and records of the company’s subsidiaries for the period 1 July 2015 to 5 October 
2015 (the date the subsidiaries were transferred to the creditors trust). Under Australian 
Accounting Standards, the financial information of the subsidiaries for the period 1 July 2015 to 5 
October 2015 is required to be consolidated.  Had the financial information of the subsidiaries 
been consolidated, the financial performance and cash flows of the consolidated entity for the 
half-year ended 31 December 2015 reflected in the financial report may have been materially 
affected.  The effects on the financial report of the failure to consolidate the subsidiaries’ 
performance for 1 July 2015 to 5 October 2015 as they impact the consolidated entity for the 
half-year ended 31 December 2015 have not been able to be determined.
For the year ended 30 June 2015 financial report, Ernst and Young were unable to obtain 
sufficient and appropriate audit evidence to provide a basis for an audit opinion and accordingly, 
did not express an audit opinion on the financial report.
Furthermore, Ernst and Young included an emphasis of matter in the audit report, which outlined 
the existence of a material uncertainty about the consolidated entity’s ability to continue as a 
going concern and therefore, being unable to realise its assets and discharge its liabilities in the 
normal course of business.
Pro Forma Historical Financial Information
You have requested BDO to review the following pro forma historical financial information (‘the 
Pro Forma Historical Financial Information’) included in the Prospectus:

the pro forma historical Statement of Financial Position of CR8 as at 31 March 2016.
The Pro Forma Historical Financial Information has been derived from the Historical Financial 
Information, after adjusting for the effects of the subsequent events described in Section 6 of 
this Report and the pro forma adjustments described in Section 7 of this Report. The stated basis 
of preparation is the recognition and measurement principles contained in Australian Accounting 
Standards applied to the Historical Financial Information and the events or transactions to which 
the pro forma adjustments relate, as described in Section 7 of this Report, as if those events or 
transactions had occurred as at the date of the Historical Financial Information. Due to its 
nature, the Pro Forma Historical Financial Information does not represent the Company’s actual 
or prospective financial position or financial performance.
The Pro Forma Historical Financial Information has been compiled by the Company to illustrate 
the impact of the events or transactions described in Section 6 and Section 7 of the Report on 
CR8’s financial position as at 31 March 2016. As part of this process, information about CR8’s 
financial position has been extracted by the Company from CR8’s financial statements for the 
nine months ended 31 March 2016.
4
3.
Directors’ responsibility
The Directors of CR8 are responsible for the preparation and presentation of the Historical 
Financial Information and Pro Forma Historical Financial Information, including the selection and 
determination of pro forma adjustments made to the Historical Financial Information and 
included in the Pro Forma Historical Financial Information. This includes responsibility for such 
internal controls as the Directors determine are necessary to enable the preparation of Historical 
Financial Information and Pro Forma Historical Financial Information are free from material 
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
4.  Our responsibility
Our responsibility is to express limited assurance conclusions on the Historical Financial 
Information and the Pro Forma Historical Financial Information. We have conducted our 
engagement in accordance with the Standard on Assurance Engagement ASAE 3450 Assurance 
Engagements involving Corporate Fundraisings and/or Prospective Financial Information.
Our review procedures consisted of making enquiries, primarily of persons responsible for 
financial and accounting matters, and applying analytical and other review procedures. A limited 
assurance engagement is substantially less in scope than an audit conducted in accordance with 
Australian Auditing Standards and consequently does not enable us to obtain reasonable 
assurance that we would become aware of all significant matters that might be identified in a 
reasonable assurance engagement. Accordingly, we do not express an audit opinion.
Our engagement did not involve updating or re-issuing any previously issued audit or limited 
assurance reports on any financial information used as a source of the financial information.
5.
Conclusion
Historical Financial Information
Based on our limited assurance engagement, which is not an audit, nothing has come to our 
attention that causes us to believe that the Historical Financial Information, as described in the 
Appendices to this Report, and comprising:
  CR8’s reviewed historical Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 31 March
2016;
  CR8’s reviewed historical Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other
Comprehensive Income for the three months ended 31 March 2016;


Flamingo’s audited historical Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 31 
March 2016, 30 June 2015 and 30 June 2014; and
Flamingo’s audited historical Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income for the nine months ended 31 March 2016, and years ended 30 
June 2015 and 30 June 2014,
is not presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the stated basis of 
preparation, as described in Section 2 of this Report.
Pro Forma Historical Financial information
Based on our review engagement, which is not an audit, nothing has come to our attention that 
causes us to believe that the Pro Forma Historical Financial Information, as described in the 
Appendices to this Report, and comprising:
5

the pro forma historical Statement of Financial Position of CR8 as at 31 March 2016,
is not presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the stated basis of 
preparation, as described in Section 2 of this Report.
6.
Subsequent Events
The pro forma statement of financial position reflects the following event that occurred 
subsequent to 31 March 2016:

Since 1 April 2016, Flamingo has received an additional $146,000 in loans from Meerkat 
31 Pty Ltd (‘Meerkat’). As at the date of our Report, the total loan amount outstanding 
is $286,000 (‘Meerkat Loans’).
Apart from the matters dealt with in this Report, and having regard to the scope of this Report 
and the information provided by the Directors, to the best of our knowledge and belief no other 
material transaction or event outside of the ordinary business of CR8 or Flamingo, not described 
above, has come to our attention that would require comment on, or adjustment to, the 
information referred to in our Report or that would cause such information to be misleading or 
deceptive.
7.
Assumptions Adopted in Compiling the Pro forma Statement 
of Financial Position
The pro forma historical Statement of Financial Position is shown in Appendix 2. This has been 
prepared based on the financial statements as at 31 March 2016, the subsequent events set out 
in Section 6, and the following transactions and events relating to the issue of Shares under this 
Prospectus:






The issue of 75,000,000 Shares at an issue price of $0.04 each to raise $3,000,000 before 
costs, with a minimum subscription of $3,000,000, pursuant to the Public Offer under the 
Prospectus;
Costs of the Public Offer are estimated to be $429,532 based on the minimum 
subscription, which are to be offset against contributed equity;
The issue of the 272,727,273 Shares and 272,727,273 Performance Shares to the Vendors 
of Flamingo for the acquisition of all shares in Flamingo under the Consideration Offer. 
Currently there are no reasonable grounds in which to assess the likelihood of the 
performance milestones being met, resulting in the conversion of the Performance 
Shares. Therefore, no adjustments have been made to the pro forma statement of 
financial position based on the issue of any Performance Shares;
Prior to reinstatement of the Company’s securities to the ASX, the Company will repay 
the Meerkat Loans of $286,000;
Transaction costs not associated with the Public Offer are estimated to be $171,567, 
which are to be expensed through accumulated losses;
The issue of 13,286,364 Shares and 7,150,000 Performance Shares to the Facilitators 
under the Facilitation Offer. The Shares issued under the Facilitation Offer have been 
valued at $0.04 each. Currently there are no reasonable grounds in which to assess the 
likelihood of the performance milestones being met, resulting in the conversion of the 
Performance Shares. Therefore, no adjustments have been made to the pro forma 
statement of financial position based on the issue of any Performance Shares;
6

The issue of 6,567,382 Options, each with an exercise price of $0.029 and an expiry date 
of five years after the date of issue, pursuant to the Employee Offer. These Options have 
been valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model.
8.
Independence
BDO is a member of BDO International Ltd. BDO does not have any interest in the outcome of the 
Offers other than in connection with the preparation of this Report and participation in due 
diligence procedures, for which professional fees will be received. BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd is the 
auditor of Flamingo and from time to time, BDO provides Flamingo with certain other 
professional services for which normal professional fees are received.
9.
Disclosures
This Report has been prepared, and included in the Prospectus, to provide investors with general 
information only and does not take into account the objectives, financial situation or needs of 
any specific investor. It is not intended to be a substitute for professional advice and potential 
investors should not make specific investment decisions in reliance on the information contained 
in this Report. Before acting or relying on any information, potential investors should consider 
whether it is appropriate for their objectives, financial situation or needs.
Without modifying our conclusions, we draw attention to Section 2 of this Report, which 
describes the purpose of the financial information, being for inclusion in the Prospectus. As a 
result, the financial information may not be suitable for use for another purpose.
BDO has consented to the inclusion of this Report in the Prospectus in the form and context in 
which it is included. At the date of this Report this consent has not been withdrawn. However, 
BDO has not authorised the issue of the Prospectus. Accordingly, BDO makes no representation 
regarding, and takes no responsibility for, any other statements or material in or omissions from 
the Prospectus.
Yours faithfully
BDO Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd
Adam Myers
Director
7
APPENDIX 1
CRE8TEK LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Cre8tek Limited
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income
Income
Other Income
Expenditure
Directors’ fees
Share register expense
Lease operating expenses
Technology expense
Legal and professional fees
Management fees
Secretarial and listing expenses
Share based payment expense
Other expenses
Profit before income tax
Income tax expense
Profit for the period
Total comprehensive income for the period
Flamingo Customer Experience Inc.
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income
Income
Revenue
Expenditure
Research and development costs
Sales and marketing costs
General and administration cost
Depreciation and amortisation expense
Other expenses
Loss before income tax
Income tax expense
Loss for the period
Total comprehensive income for the period
Reviewed for the
three months
Reviewed for the
ended
half year ended
31-Mar-16
31-Dec-15
$
3,326,732
3,326,732
(18,000)
(53,606)
(7,500)
(61,755)
(55,872)
(45,000)
(51,366)
(1,654,376)
(19,294)
(1,966,769)
1,359,963
-
1,359,963
1,359,963
$
3,319,184
3,319,184
-
(36,449)
-
-
(43,105)
-
(31,268)
(1,654,376)
(5,575)
(1,770,773)
1,548,411
-
1,548,411
1,548,411
Audited for the
nine months to
31-Mar-16
$
486,377
486,377
(451,943)
(318,778)
(932,335)
(104,002)
(36,941)
(1,843,999)
(1,357,622)
-
(1,357,622)
(1,357,622)
The above consolidated statements of profit or loss and other comprehensive income shows the 
historical financial performance of CR8 and Flamingo, and is to be read in conjunction with the 
notes to and forming part of the Historical Financial Information set out in Appendix 3 and the 
prior year financial information set out in Appendix 4. Past performance is not a guide to future 
performance.
8
APPENDIX 2
CRE8TEK LIMITED
PRO FORMA CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
CR8
Reviewed as
Flamingo
Pro forma
at
Audited as at
Subsequent
Pro forma
after Public
31-Mar-16
31-Mar-16
events
adjustments
Notes
$
$
$
$
Offer
$
5,228,375
550,675
28,206
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents#
Trade and other receivables
Prepayments
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Development assets
Property, plant and
equipment
Other assets
TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Trade and other payables
Borrowings
Provisions
Other financial liabilities
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITES
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS/(LIABILITES)
EQUITY
Share capital
Reserves
Accumulated losses
TOTAL EQUITY
2
3
4
5
6
2,833,736
42,227
28,206
135,738
508,448
-
146,000
2,112,901
-
-
-
-
2,904,169
644,186
146,000
2,112,901
5,807,256
50,000
-
-
50,000
-
33,336
499,023
532,359
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50,000
33,336
499,023
582,359
2,954,169
1,176,545
146,000
2,112,901
6,389,615
48,321
-
-
19,600
67,921
67,921
2,886,248
220,279,667
3,790,892
278,217
140,000
34,366
-
452,583
452,583
723,962
3,594,442
64,465
(221,184,311)
(2,934,945)
2,886,248
723,962
-
-
146,000
(286,000)
-
-
-
-
146,000
146,000
(286,000)
(286,000)
326,538
-
34,366
19,600
380,504
380,504
-
-
-
-
-
2,398,901
6,009,111
(208,332,143)
15,541,966
(3,790,892)
64,465
214,521,936
(9,597,320)
2,398,901
6,009,111
#The cash and cash equivalents balance above does not account for working capital spent during the period
from 1 April 2016 until completion of the Acquisition. From 1 April 2016 to completion, the Company and
Flamingo have estimated combined working capital requirements of approximately $1,050,731, which
excludes transaction costs and costs of the Public Offer already included in the pro forma adjustments.
The above pro forma consolidated statement of financial position after the Offers is as per the 
consolidated statement of financial position before the Offers, adjusted for any subsequent events 
and the transactions relating to the issue of shares pursuant to this Prospectus. The consolidated 
statement of financial position is to be read in conjunction with the notes to and forming part of 
the Historical Financial Information set out in Appendix 3 and the prior year financial information 
set out in Appendix 4.
9
APPENDIX 3
CRE8TEK LIMITED
NOTES TO AND FORMING PART OF THE HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
1.          STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The significant accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the historical financial 
information included in this Report have been set out below.
Basis of preparation of historical financial information
The historical financial information has been prepared in accordance with the recognition and 
measurement, but not all the disclosure requirements of the Australian equivalents to 
International Financial Reporting Standards (‘AIFRS’), other authoritative pronouncements of the 
Australian Accounting Standards Board, Australian Accounting Interpretations and the 
Corporations Act 2001.
Statement of Compliance
The historical financial information has been prepared in accordance with Australian Accounting 
Standards (‘AASBs’) (including Australian interpretations) adopted by the Australian Accounting 
Standard Board (‘AASB’) and the Corporations Act 2001 where possible (refer to Incomplete 
records note (ii)).  The financial statements have been prepared on an accruals basis and are 
based on historical costs.
Incomplete records
i.
ii.
The historical financial reports for the year ended 30 June 2015 and the interim report 
for the period ending 31 December 2015 were prepared by Directors who were appointed 
on or after 28 October 2015. As such, the Directors did not have control of the company 
until the effectuation of the deed of company arrangement on 28 October 2015.
Prior to 28 October 2015, the current Directors did not have oversight or control over the 
Company’s financial reporting systems including but not limited to being able to obtain 
access to complete accounting records of the Company. To prepare the historical 
financial reports for the year ended 30 June 2015 and the interim report for the period 
ending 31 December 2015 the Directors have reconstructed the financial records of the 
company for the period 1 July 2014 to 28 October 2015 using data extracted from the 
Company’s accounting system. However, there may have been information that the 
current Directors were not been able to obtain, the impact of which may or may not 
have been material on the financial performance for the period ended 31 March 2016.
iii.
The current Directors have not been able to source books and records of the Company’s 
subsidiaries up to 5 October 2015 when the ownership of the subsidiaries was transferred 
to the creditors’ trust. The financial information of the Company’s subsidiaries had been 
deconsolidated in the year ended 30 June 2014.
Consequently, although the Directors have prepared the historical financial reports for the half 
year ended 31 December 2015 and 30 June 2015 to the best of their knowledge based on the 
information made available to them, they were of the opinion that it was not possible to state 
that these financial reports have been prepared in accordance with Australian Accounting 
Standards including Australian interpretations, other authoritative pronouncements of the 
Australian Accounting Standard Board and the Corporations Act 2001, nor was it possible to state
10
these historical financial reports gave a true and fair view of the Group’s financial performance 
for the half-year ended 31 December 2015 or the year ended 30 June 2015.
Going Concern
The historical financial information has been prepared on a going concern basis, which 
contemplates the continuity of normal business activity and the realisation of assets and the 
settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business.
Should the Acquisition proceed, the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is 
dependent on the success of the fundraising under the Prospectus. If the fundraising is 
unsuccessful, the Acquisition will not proceed and the Directors believe that the Company will 
continue as a going concern. As a result the financial information has been prepared on a going 
concern basis. No adjustments have been made relating to the recoverability and classification 
of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company not continue as a going concern.
Reporting Basis and Conventions
The report is also prepared on an accrual basis and is based on historic costs and does not take 
into account changing money values or, except where specifically stated, current valuations of 
non-current assets.
The following is a summary of the material accounting policies adopted by the Company in the 
preparation of the financial report. The accounting policies have been consistently applied, 
unless otherwise stated.
a)
Principles of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements incorporate all of the assets, liabilities and results of the 
Parent Flamingo Customer Experience Inc. and all of the subsidiaries (including any structured 
entities). Subsidiaries are entities the Parent controls. The Parent controls an entity when it is 
exposed to, or has rights to, variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the 
ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
The assets, liabilities and results of all subsidiaries are fully consolidated into the financial 
statements of the Group from the date on which control is obtained by the Group. The 
consolidation of a subsidiary is discontinued from the date that control ceases. Inter-company 
transactions, balances and unrealised gains or losses on transactions between Group entities are 
fully eliminated on consolidation. Accounting policies of subsidiaries have been changed and 
adjustments made where necessary to ensure uniformity of the accounting policies adopted by 
the Group.
Equity interests in a subsidiary not attributable, directly or indirectly, to the Group are 
presented as ‘Non-controlling Interests’. The Group initially recognises non-controlling interests 
that are present ownership interests in subsidiaries and are entitled to a proportionate share of 
the subsidiary’s net assets on liquidation at either fair value or at the non-controlling interests’ 
proportionate share of the subsidiary’s net assets. Subsequent to initial recognition, non-
controlling interests are attributed their share of profit or loss and each component of other 
comprehensive income. Non-controlling interests are shown separately within the equity section 
of the statement of financial position and statement of comprehensive income.
b)   Income Tax
The income tax expense (income) for the period comprises current income tax expense (income) 
and deferred tax expense (income).
11
Current income tax expense charged to the profit or loss is the tax payable on taxable income. 
Current tax liabilities (assets) are measured at the amounts expected to be paid to (recovered 
from) the relevant taxation authority.
Deferred income tax expense reflects movements in deferred tax asset and deferred tax liability 
balances during the period as well as unused tax losses.
Current and deferred income tax expense (income) is charged or credited outside the profit and 
loss when the tax relates to items that are recognised outside the profit and loss.
Except for business combinations, no deferred income tax is recognised from the initial 
recognition of an asset or liability, excluding a business combination, where there is no effect on 
accounting or taxable profit or loss.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply to 
the period when the asset is realised or the liability is settled and their measurement also 
reflects the manner in which management expects to recover or settle the carrying amount of 
the related asset or liability. With respect to non-depreciable items of property, plant and 
equipment measured at fair value and items of investment property measured at fair value, the 
related deferred tax liability or deferred tax asset is measured on the basis that the carrying 
amount of the asset will be recovered entirely through sale. When an investment property that is 
depreciable is held by the entity in a business model whose objective is to consume substantially 
all of the economic benefits embodied in the property through use over time (rather than 
through sale), the related deferred tax liability or deferred tax asset is measured on the basis 
that the carrying amount of such property will be recovered entirely through use.
Deferred tax assets relating to temporary differences and unused tax losses are recognised only 
to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the 
benefits of the deferred tax asset can be utilised.
Where temporary differences exist in relation to investments in subsidiaries, branches, 
associates, and joint ventures, deferred tax assets and liabilities are not recognised where the 
timing of the reversal of the temporary difference can be controlled and it is not probable that 
the reversal will occur in the foreseeable future.
Current tax assets and liabilities are offset where a legally enforceable right of set-off exists and 
it is intended that net settlement or simultaneous realisation and settlement of the respective 
asset and liability will occur. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where: (a) a legally 
enforceable right of set-off exists; and (b) the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to income 
taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different 
taxable entities, where it is intended that net settlement or simultaneous realisation and 
settlement of the respective asset and liability will occur in future periods in which significant 
amounts of deferred tax assets or liabilities are expected to be recovered or settled.
c)  Property, Plant and Equipment
Each class of property, plant and equipment is carried at cost or fair value as indicated less, 
where applicable, any accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Plant and equipment
Plant and equipment are measured on the cost basis and are therefore carried at cost less 
accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses. In the event the carrying 
amount of plant and equipment is greater than its estimated recoverable amount, the carrying 
amount is written down immediately to its estimated recoverable amount and impairment losses 
recognised either in profit or loss or as a revaluation decrease if the impairment losses relate to
12
a revalued asset. A formal assessment of recoverable amount is made when impairment 
indicators are present (refer to Note 1(j) for details of impairment).
The cost of fixed assets constructed within the consolidated group includes the cost of materials, 
direct labour, borrowing costs and an appropriate proportion of fixed and variable overheads.
Subsequent costs are included in the asset’s carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset, 
as appropriate, only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item 
will flow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably. All other repairs and 
maintenance are recognised as expenses in profit or loss in the financial period in which they are 
incurred.
Depreciation
The depreciable amount of all fixed assets including buildings and capitalised lease assets, but 
excluding freehold land, is depreciated on a straight line basis over the asset's useful life to the 
consolidated group commencing from the time the asset is held ready for use. Leasehold 
improvements are depreciated over the shorter of either the unexpired period of the lease or 
the estimated useful lives of the improvements.
The depreciation rates used for each class of depreciable assets are:
Class of Fixed Assets
Plant and equipment
Depreciation Rate
Between 25% & 33.33%
The assets’ residual values and useful lives are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, at the end 
of each reporting period.
An asset’s carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the asset’s 
carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing proceeds with the carrying amount. 
These gains or losses are recognised in profit or loss when the item is derecognised. When 
revalued assets are sold, amounts included in the revaluation surplus relating to that asset are 
transferred to retained earnings.
d)
Intangible Assets
Internally developed software
Research costs are expensed as incurred. Development expenditures on an individual project are 
recognised as an intangible asset when the Group can demonstrate:
  The technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that the asset will be
available for use or sale

Its intention to complete and its ability to use or sell the asset
  How the asset will generate future economic benefits
  The availability of resources to complete the asset
  The ability to measure reliably the expenditure during development
  The ability to use the intangible asset generated
Costs that are directly attributable include employee costs incurred on software development.
Following initial recognition of the development expenditure as an asset, the asset is carried at 
cost less any accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses. Amortisation of the 
asset begins when development is complete and the asset is available for use. It is amortised
13
over the period of expected future benefit. As at 31 March 2016, no intangible assets were 
considered to be available for use.
When an intangible asset is disposed of, the gain or loss on disposal is determined as the 
difference between the proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset, and is recognised in the 
profit or loss with other income or other expenses.
e)  Employee Benefits
Short-term employee benefits
Provision is made for the Group’s obligation for short-term employee benefits. Short-term 
employee benefits are benefits (other than termination benefits) that are expected to be settled 
wholly before 12 months after the end of the annual reporting period in which the employees 
render the related service, including wages, salaries and sick leave. Short-term employee 
benefits are measured at the (undiscounted) amounts expected to be paid when the obligation is 
settled.
The Group’s obligations for short-term employee benefits such as wages, salaries and sick leave 
are recognised as part of current trade and other payables in the statement of financial position.
Other long-term employee benefits
Provision is made for employees’ long service leave and annual leave entitlements not expected 
to be settled wholly within 12 months after the end of the annual reporting period in which the 
employees render the related service. Other long-term employee benefits are measured at the 
present value of the expected future payments to be made to employees. Expected future 
payments incorporate anticipated future wage and salary levels, durations of service and 
employee departures and are discounted at rates determined by reference to market yields at 
the end of the reporting period on government bonds that have maturity dates that approximate 
the terms of the obligations. Upon the remeasurement of obligations for other long-term 
employee benefits, the net change in the obligation is recognised in profit or loss as part of 
employee benefits expense.
The Group’s obligations for long-term employee benefits are presented as non-current provisions 
in its statement of financial position, except where the Group does not have an unconditional 
right to defer settlement for at least 12 months after the end of the reporting period, in which 
case the obligations are presented as current provisions.
f)  Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand, deposits held at call with banks, other short-
term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less, and bank 
overdrafts. Bank overdrafts are shown within borrowings in current liabilities on the statement of 
financial position.
g)  Revenue and Other Income
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable after taking 
into account any trade discounts and volume rebates allowed. Any consideration deferred is 
treated as the provision of finance and is discounted at a rate of interest that is generally 
accepted in the market for similar arrangements. The difference between the amount initially 
recognised and the amount ultimately received is interest revenue.
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised at the point of delivery as this corresponds to the 
transfer of significant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods and the cessation of all 
involvement in those goods.
14
Interest revenue is recognised using the effective interest method, which for floating rate 
financial assets is the rate inherent in the instrument. Dividend revenue is recognised when the 
right to receive a dividend has been established.
Revenue relating to government grants is recorded on an accrual basis. It is accrued in the period 
relating to which the relevant authority has a definite legal obligation to provide the grant. All 
grants presented have actually been received as cash as of the date of this report.
Revenue recognition relating to the provision of services is determined with reference to the 
stage of completion of the transaction at the end of the reporting period and where outcome of 
the contract can be estimated reliably. Stage of completion is determined with reference to the 
services performed to date as a percentage of total anticipated services to be performed. Where 
the outcome cannot be estimated reliably, revenue is recognised only to the extent that related 
expenditure is recoverable.
All revenue is stated net of the amount of goods and services tax.
h)  Trade and other receivables
Trade and other receivables include amounts due from customers for goods sold and services 
performed in the ordinary course of business. Receivables expected to be collected within 12 
months of the end of the reporting period are classified as current assets. All other receivables 
are classified as non-current assets.
Trade and other receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at 
amortised cost using the effective interest method, less any provision for impairment.
i)  Trade and Other Payables
Trade and other payables represent the liabilities for goods and services received by the Group 
that remain unpaid at the end of the reporting period. The balance is recognised as a current 
liability with the amounts normally paid within 30 days of recognition of the liability.
j)  Goods and Services Tax (‘GST’)
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of GST, except where the 
amount of GST incurred is not recoverable from the Australian Taxation Office (‘ATO’).
Receivables and payables are stated inclusive of the amount of GST receivable or payable. The 
net amount of GST recoverable from, or payable to, the ATO is included with other receivables 
or payables in the statement of financial position.
Cash flows are presented on a gross basis. The GST components of cash flows arising from 
investing or financing activities, which are recoverable from or payable to the ATO, are 
presented as operating cash flows included in receipts from customers or payments to suppliers.
k)  Share based payments
Employees (including senior executives) of the Group receive remuneration in the form of share-
based payments, whereby employees render services as consideration for equity instruments 
(equity-settled transactions).
Equity-settled transactions
The cost of equity-settled transactions is determined by the fair value at the date when the 
grant is made using an appropriate valuation model, further details of which are given in Note 
16.
The Company operates a share ownership plan. Share based-payments to employees are 
measured at the fair value of the instruments issued and amortised over the vesting periods.
15
That cost is recognised as a shared based payment expense on the face of the profit and loss, 
together with a corresponding increase in equity (other capital reserves), over the period in 
which the service conditions are fulfilled (the vesting period). The cumulative expense 
recognised for equity-settled transactions at each reporting date until the vesting date reflects 
the extent to which the vesting period has expired and the Group’s best estimate of the number 
of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
NOTE 2. CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Cash and cash equivalents
Reviewed balance of CR8 at 31 March 2016
Audited accounts of Flamingo at 31 March 2016
Subsequent events:
Drawdown on Meerkat Loans
Pro forma adjustments:
Proceeds from shares issued under the Public Offer
Costs of the Public Offer
Transaction costs
Repayment of Meerkat Loans
Pro forma Balance
Reviewed as at
Pro forma after
31-Mar-16
Public Offer
$
$
2,833,736
5,228,375
2,833,736
135,738
146,000
146,000
3,000,000
(429,532)
(171,567)
(286,000)
2,112,901
5,228,375
#The cash and cash equivalents balance above does not account for working capital spent during the period
from 1 April 2016 until completion of the Acquisition. From 1 April 2016 to completion, the Company and
Flamingo have estimated combined working capital requirements of approximately $1,050,731, which
excludes transaction costs and costs of the Public Offer already included in the pro forma adjustments.
Reviewed as at
Pro forma after
31-Mar-16
Public Offer
NOTE 3. BORROWINGS
Cash and cash equivalents
Reviewed balance of CR8 at 31 March 2016
Audited accounts of Flamingo at 31 March 2016
Subsequent events:
Drawdown on Meerkat Loans
Pro forma adjustments:
Repayment of Meerkat Loans
Pro forma Balance
$
-
$
-
-
140,000
146,000
146,000
(286,000)
(286,000)
-
16
NOTE 4. SHARE CAPITAL
Share capital
Fully paid ordinary share capital of CR8 at 31 March 2016
Fully paid ordinary share capital of Flamingo at 31 March 2016
Pro forma adjustments:
Proceeds from shares issued under this Prospectus
Costs of the Public Offer
Issue of Shares under the Consideration Offer
Issue of Shares under the Facilitation Offer
Issue of Shares under the Facilitation Offer deemed cost of the Offer
Elimination of CR8's share capital upon Acquisition
Pro forma Balance
Reviewed as at
Pro forma after
31-Mar-16
Public Offer
$
$
220,279,667
15,541,966
Number of
shares
$
234,426,409
220,279,667
-
3,594,442
234,426,409
223,874,109
75,000,000
-
272,727,273
13,286,364
-
-
3,000,000
(429,532)
9,377,056
531,455
(531,455)
(220,279,667)
361,013,637
(208,332,143)
595,440,046
15,541,966
Following the Offers, the Company will also have the following contingent share rights on issue:
Contingent share rights on issue following the Offers
Performance Shares
Performance Shares on issue prior to the Offers
Performance Shares issued pursuant to the Offers
Class A
Class B
Class C
Total Performance Shares on issue following the Offers
Performance Rights
Performance Rights on issue prior to the Offers
Total Performance Rights on issue following the Offers
Options
Options on issue prior to the Offers
Employee Options to be issued under the Employee Offer
Total Options on issue following the Offers
Notes
Vesting
Number
conditions
nil
93,292,425
93,292,424
93,292,424
279,877,273
30,000,000
30,000,000
75,475,453
6,567,382
82,134,568
Note a)
Note b)
Note c)
Note d)
Note e)
Note f)
a)  Class A Performance Shares will convert into Shares on a 1:1 basis if Flamingo executes a legally binding master
services agreement (‘MSA’) and completes a security audit with a Substantial US Corporation and either:
i.
ii.
The MSA remains valid, binding and enforceable for at least 12 months after its execution; or
The Flamingo Platform technology is applied in another business vertical of the Substantial US
Corporation outside any business unit where the technology is being trialled.
b)  Class B Performance Shares will convert into Shares on a 1:1 basis if Flamingo achieves $13,000,000 in revenue
in any 12 month period within 36 months of completion of the Acquisition.
c)  Class C Performance Shares will convert into Shares on a 1:1 basis if Flamingo achieves $28,000,000 in revenue
in any 12 month period within 36 months of completion of the Acquisition.
d)  Comprised three tranches of Performance Rights which vest over three equal portions on achievement of a 10
day volume weighted average price (‘VWAP’) share price of $0.03, $0.04 and $0.05 respectively. Held by
existing Directors Messrs Hardcastle, Ismail and Bahen in equal portions. Escrowed until 5 February 2018.
17
e)  Comprised the following unquoted Options:
i.
25,000,000 Options exercisable at $0.02 each and expiring 4 November 2019 (escrowed until 5
February 2018);
ii.
50,000,000 Options exercisable at $0.03 each and expiring 5 February 2019 (escrowed until 5
February 2018); and
iii.
Legacy Options on issue prior to the Company’s release from voluntary administration on 28 October
2015, comprising the following:
-  98,000 Options exercisable at $6.00 each and expiring 18 September 2016;
-  88,705 Options exercisable at $5.00 each and expiring 22 December 2016;
-  221,056 Options exercisable at $3.00 each and expiring 5  February 2018; and
-  67,692 Options exercisable at $6.00 each and expiring 5 February 2018.
f)  Unquoted Employee Options exercisable at $0.029 each and expiring five years from the date of issue. The
holder must remain an employee of the Company (or subsidiary of the Company), up to and including the one
year anniversary of the date that the existing Flamingo options were granted (‘Initial Vesting Date’), and then
on relevant subsequent vesting dates as set out below:
Vesting dates
At the Initial Vesting Date
Number of Options that will vest
1/3 of the total Options held by the holder
Each full month after the Initial Vesting Date until all
1/36 of the total Options held by the holder
Options have been vested
NOTE 5. RESERVES
Reserves
Reviewed balance of CR8 at 31 March 2016
Audited accounts of Flamingo at 31 March 2016
Pro forma adjustments:
Elimination of CR8's reserves upon Acquisition
Pro forma Balance
NOTE 6. ACCUMULATED LOSSES
Accumulated losses
Reviewed balance of CR8 at 31 March 2016
Audited accounts of Flamingo at 31 March 2016
Pro forma adjustments:
Transaction costs
Amount recognised as ASX listing expense upon Acquisition
Elimination of CR8's accumulated losses upon Acquisition
Pro forma Balance
Reviewed as at
Pro forma after
31-Mar-16
Public Offer
$
3,790,892
$
64,465
3,790,892
64,465
(3,790,892)
(3,790,892)
64,465
Reviewed as at
Pro forma after
31-Mar-16
Public Offer
$
$
(221,184,311)
(9,597,320)
(221,184,311)
(2,934,945)
(171,567)
(6,490,808)
221,184,311
214,521,936
(9,597,320)
18
NOTE 7.
ACQUISITION ACCOUNTING
Provisional accounting for the Acquisition
A summary of the details pertaining to the proposed Acquisition as included in our Report is set 
out below. These details have been determined for the purposes of the pro forma adjustments as 
at 31 March 2016 and will require re-determination as at the successful acquisition date, which 
may result in changes to the values set out below.
Under the Acquisition, CR8 will acquire 100% of the issued capital in Flamingo by issuing a total 
of 272,727,273 ordinary shares to the Flamingo shareholders in proportion with their existing 
holdings in Flamingo.
Flamingo shareholders will obtain a controlling interest in CR8, equating to a controlling interest 
in the combined entity following the Acquisition. Flamingo has thus been deemed the acquirer 
for accounting purposes as its shareholders will own approximately 53.78% 
(272,727,273/507,153,682) of the consolidated entity (prior to the shares issued in relation to 
the Public Offer). The Acquisition of Flamingo by CR8 is not deemed to be a business 
combination as CR8 is not considered to be a business under AASB 3 Business Combinations.
As such the consolidation of these two companies is on the basis of the continuation of Flamingo, 
with no fair value adjustments, whereby Flamingo is deemed to be the accounting parent. 
Therefore the most appropriate treatment for the transaction is to account for it under AASB 2 
Share Based Payments, whereby Flamingo is deemed to have issued shares to CR8 shareholders in 
exchange for the net assets held by CR8.
In this instance, the value of the CR8 Shares provided has been determined as the notional 
number of equity instruments that the shareholders of Flamingo would have to issue to CR8 in 
order to give the owners of CR8 the same percentage ownership in the combined entity. We have 
calculated this to be $9,377,056.
The pre-Acquisition equity balance of CR8 are eliminated against this increase in share capital 
upon consolidation and the balance is deemed to be the amount paid for the ASX listing status of 
CR8, being $6,490,808 and treated as a share based payment.
The net assets acquired and amount recognised as an ASX listing expense are as follows:
NOTE 7. PROVISIONAL ACCOUNTING FOR THE ACQUISITION
Net assets acquired:
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables
Prepayments
Development assets
Trade and other payables
Other financial liabilities
Net assets of CR8 at 31 March 2016
Fair value of CR8's consideration
Total net assets acquired on Acquisition
Amount recognised as ASX listing expense upon Acquisition
Acquiree's carrying
amount pre-Acquisition
$
2,833,736
42,227
28,206
50,000
(48,321)
(19,600)
2,886,248
9,377,056
2,886,248
6,490,808
19
NOTE 8.
RELATED PARTY DISCLOSURES
Transactions with Related Parties and Directors Interests are disclosed in the Prospectus.
NOTE 9.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
At the date of the report no material commitments or contingent liabilities exist that we are 
aware of, other than those disclosed in the Prospectus.
20
APPENDIX 4
CRE8TEK LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Cre8tek Limited
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive
Audited for the year
Audited for the year
ended  
30-Jun-151
ended  
30-Jun-14 2
Income
Income
Revenue
Expenditure
Administration expense
Salaries and employee benefits expense
Lease operating expenses
Impairment expense
Loss on deconsolidation of subsidiaries
Legal and professional fees
Depreciation and amortisation expense
Increase in royalty payable resulting from measurement on a
realisation basis
Secretarial and listing expenses
Finance costs
Share based payment expense
Other expenses
Loss before income tax
Income tax expense
Loss for the period
Other comprehensive income
Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss
Exchange differences on translating foreign operations
Other comprehensive loss for the year, net of tax
Total comprehensive loss for the year
$
457
457
(45,985)
(79,167)
-
-
(138,959,347)
(425,020)
-
-
(103,800)
(146,356)
(1,658,942)
(51,757)
(141,470,374)
(141,469,917)
-
$
101,275
101,275
-
(1,248,938)
(1,723,522)
(2,546)
-
(1,857,192)
(30,894)
(5,847,984)
(397)
(7,424,229)
-
(579,225)
(18,714,927)
(18,613,652)
(141,469,917)
(18,613,652)
18,473,866
18,473,866
(3,106,627)
(3,106,627)
(122,996,051)
(21,720,279)
1 Refer to Note 1 Statement of Compliance in Appendix 3.  For the year ended 30 June 2015 Ernst & Young issued a
disclaimer of opinion.
2  For the year ended 30 June 2014 Grant Thornton issued a disclaimer of opinion.
2
21
APPENDIX 4 (CONTINUED)
CRE8TEK LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Cre8tek Limited
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables
Plant and equipment
Oil and gas properties
Prepayments
Other current assets
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Development assets
TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Trade and other payables
Borrowings
Provisions
Other financial liabilities
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITES
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Issued capital
Reserves
Accumulated losses
TOTAL EQUITY
Audited as at  
30-Jun-151
Audited as at  
30-Jun-142
$
53,208
-
-
-
-
-
53,208
-
-
$
232,404
251,224
69,285
167,728,769
-
1,126,584
169,408,266
-
-
53,208
169,408,266
966,716
2,744,844
-
-
3,711,560
3,711,560
(3,658,352)
216,497,117
20,287,708
(240,443,177)
(3,658,352)
20,231,144
34,978,172
662,933
-
55,872,249
55,872,249
113,536,017
213,084,239
(574,961)
(98,973,260)
113,536,018
1 Refer to Note 1 Statement of Compliance in Appendix 3.  For the year ended 30 June 2015 Ernst & Young issued a
disclaimer of opinion.
2  For the year ended 30 June 2014 Grant Thornton issued a disclaimer of opinion.
22
APPENDIX 4 (CONTINUED)
CRE8TEK LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Audited for the year
Audited for the year
Flamingo Customer Experience Inc.
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive
Income
Income
Revenue
Expenditure
Research and development costs
Sales and marketing costs
General and administration cost
Depreciation and amortisation expense
Other expenses
Loss before income tax
Income tax expense
Loss for the year
Total comprehensive income for the year
Flamingo Customer Experience Inc.
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Property, plant and equipment
Other assets
TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Trade and other payables
Borrowings
Provisions
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITES
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Issued capital
Share options reserve
Foreign currency translation reserve
Retained earnings
TOTAL EQUITY
ended
30-Jun-15
$
711,681
711,681
(1,116,437)
(167,695)
(618,221)
(1,646)
(16,879)
(1,920,878)
(1,209,197)
-
(1,209,197)
(1,209,197)
ended
30-Jun-14
$
156,745
156,745
(378,162)
(69,700)
(75,690)
(1,029)
(290)
(524,871)
(368,126)
-
(368,126)
(368,126)
Audited as at
30-Jun-15
Audited as at
30-Jun-14
$
586,632
698,508
1,285,140
33,828
-
33,828
$
30,609
143,400
174,009
-
-
-
1,318,968
174,009
200,794
-
23,733
224,527
224,527
1,094,441
2,669,442
-
2,322
(1,577,323)
1,094,441
47,693
-
-
47,693
47,693
126,316
494,442
-
-
(368,126)
126,316
23
APPENDIX 4 (CONTINUED)
CRE8TEK LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Cre8tek Limited Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Receipts from customers
Payments to suppliers and employees
Interest Received
Interest and other costs of finance paid
Net cash used in operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Expenditure on oil and gas projects
Expenditure on plant and equipment
Deposit guarantees (acquired)/realised
Net cash from investing activities
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Proceeds from issue of equity instruments
Capital raising costs
Proceeds from borrowings
Repayment of borrowings
Net cash from financing activities
Net (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Reviewed for
Audited for
Audited for
the 3 months
the year
the year
ended
31-Mar-16
ended  
30-Jun-151
ended  
30-Jun-142
$
-
$
-
$
95,062
(294,996)
(622,870)
(4,455,288)
7,548
-
457
-
6,213
(61,650)
(287,448)
(622,413)
(4,415,663)
-
-
-
-
271,000
(285,944)
-
-
-
-
-
-
(3,903,582)
(65,058)
10,611
(3,958,029)
438,434
-
-
1,392,399
250,000
(203,400)
(949,182)
(438,434)
(218,344)
443,217
250,000
(505,792)
(179,196)
(8,123,692)
Exchange rate changes on the balance held in foreign currencies
-
-
(247,275)
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the financial period
3,339,528
232,404
8,603,372
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the financial period
2,833,736
53,208
232,404
1 Refer to Note 1 Statement of Compliance in Appendix 3.  For the year ended 30 June 2015 Ernst & Young issued a
disclaimer of opinion.
2  For the year ended 30 June 2014 Grant Thornton issued a disclaimer of opinion.
Flamingo Customer Experience Inc.
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Receipts from customers
Payments to suppliers and employees
Audited for
Audited for
Audited for
the nine
the year
the year
months to
ended
ended
31-Mar-16
30-Jun-15
30-Jun-14
$
$
$
673,811
184,613
22,000
(1,587,172)
(1,766,504)
(488,853)
Net cash provided by/(used in) operating activities
(913,361)
(1,581,891)
(466,853)
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Purchase of property, plant and equipment
Investment in intangible property
(19,642)
(582,891)
(35,474)
-
Net cash Provided by/(used in) investing activities
(602,533)
(35,474)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
-
-
-
Proceeds from issue of shares
Proceeds from borrowings
Repayment of borrowings
925,000
2,175,000
494,442
140,000
-
-
(1,612)
3,020
-
Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities
1,065,000
2,173,388
497,462
Net increase/(decrease) in cash held
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of financial period
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of financial period
(450,894)
586,632
135,738
556,023
30,609
586,632
30,609
-
30,609
24
. 7. Intellectual Property Experts‘ Reports


13 September 2016 
 
 
The Directors 
Cre8tek Limited 
108 Outram Street 
WEST PERTH WA 6005 
 
 
Dear Directors 
 
Intellectual Property Due Diligence for Cre8tek Limited for acquisition of Flamingo 
Customer Experience Inc 
 
Introduction
1.
We have been instructed by Bellanhouse Legal acting for and on behalf of Cre8tek 
Limited  to  provide  an  intellectual  property  due  diligence  report  in  the  acquisition  of 
the  issued  capital  of  Flamingo  Customer  Experience  Inc  (Flamingo).  We  are 
advised that Flamingo’s wholly owned Australian subsidiary, Flamingo Ventures Pty 
Ltd (FVPL), holds the intellectual property for the consolidated entity.
2.
This report identifies:
2.1
material intellectual property rights; and
2.2
various intellectual property rights under development.
3.
Our usual disclaimers are set out at paragraph 27, below.
Trade Marks
4.
5.
Trade  marks  are,  in  essence,  statutory  monopoly  rights  in  a  brand  bestowed  by 
trade  mark  registrars  in  various  jurisdictions.  Trade  marks  are  important  for  a 
number  of  legal  reasons,  primarily  because  trade  marks  serve  to  protect  the 
goodwill and reputation in a brand within a specific legal marketplace.
We  have  reviewed  the  documents  provided  and  have  also  conducted  a  search  of 
the  Australian  trade  mark  registry.  Our  investigations  confirm  that  there  are  four 
trade marks in the name of FVPL, as set out in the table below.
Trade Mark
FLAMINGO
TM No.
Classes
Status.
Proprietor
1568851
9, 35 and 42
Registered
CUSTOMERCREATE
1671531
9, 35 and 42
Registered
JOURNEY ASSIST
1672131
9, 35 and 42
Under examination
FLAMINGO CUSTOMER 
EXPERIENCE
1678705
9, 35 and 42
Under examination
FVPL
The  trade  mark  applications  for  JOURNEY  ASSIST  and  FLAMINGO  CUSTOMER 
EXPERIENCE  have  both  been  provisionally  refused.  We  have  not  been  provided
6.
FVPL
FVPL
FVPL
Cre8tek Limited
13 September 2016
with copies of the official examination reports and are therefore not in a position to 
comment  on  the  objections  which  could  have  been  raised  and  which  need  to  be 
overcome. However, in respect of trade mark applications encountering substantive 
objections  from  the  Trade  Marks  Registrar,  various  options  are  available  to 
overcome the objections or, in a worst case scenario, a reduced scope of protection 
can be achieved by refiling the trade mark applications but incorporating a distinctive 
logo.
7.
A  review  of  the  website  http://flamingo.io/  (Flamingo  Website)  shows  use  of  a 
stylized  version  of  the  word  FLAMINGO,  as  set  out  below,  which  is  not  registered 
but, in our view, would be protected be FVPL’s trade mark number 1568851.
Domain Names
8.
9.
While  the  records  provided  to  us  list  ‘Flamingo’  as  the  owner  of  the  domain  name 
www.flamingo.io,  as  this  is  not  a  legal  entity  (i.e.,  it  is  not  registered  to  Flamingo 
Customer Experience Inc or Flamingo Ventures Pty Ltd) Catriona Wallace, founder 
and  CEO  of  Flamingo,  is  the  owner  of  the  domain  in  trust  for  either  Flamingo  or 
FVPL.
We are instructed that the domain name will be legally  assigned to Flamingo or to 
FVPL by Dr Wallace prior to any acquisition.
Patents
10.
11.
12.
We  have  reviewed  the  documents  provided  which  show  that  a  patent  appears  to 
have  been  filed  through  the  Patent  Cooperation  Treaty  (PCT).  We  have  also 
conducted patent searches in Australia.
Our  investigations  show  that  a  PCT  application  was  filed  under  WO2016065417 
entitled 
“CUSTOMER  EXPERIENCE  PERSONALISATION  MANAGEMENT 
PLATFORM” (Platform) in the name of FVPL on 27 October 2015 claiming priority 
from  a  provisional  US  patent  filed  on  27  April  2014.  The  Australian  office  was  the 
receiving office.
At this point in time, FVPL has no patent applications or registrations in Australia but 
it has until 27 April 2017 to choose the jurisdictions for national phase filings which, 
includes Australia. A national phase filing will protect the subject matter of the patent 
in Australia once processed by the Australian Patent Office. If the patent application 
is successful in the United States, then it is very likely to be successful in Australia 
and elsewhere.
13.
A detailed report with respect to the US patent has been commissioned and will be 
included as a separate report from US firm Flynn, Thiel, Boutell & Tanis, P.C.
Copyright
14.
Section  10  of  the  Copyright  Act  1968  (Cth)  (CA)  defines  as  “literary  work”  in  the 
following way:
Page 2
Cre8tek Limited
13 September 2016
literary work includes:
(a)
a table, or compilation, expressed in words, figures or symbols; and
(b)
a computer program or compilation of computer programs.
15.
Section 10 of the CA defines “computer program” as
a set of statements or instructions to be used directly or indirectly in a computer 
in order to bring about a certain result.
16.
Having regard to these definitions, the Platform is protected by copyright.
17.
In creating the Platform, Flamingo has used open source software.
18.
19.
20.
Open  source  code  used  in  the  Platform,  whether  source  or  object  code,  will  be 
subject to the terms of that particular code’s licensing agreement.
Flamingo  has  used  14  different  types  of  open  source  code  in  the  creation  of  the 
Platform. As such, in providing the Platform to consumers, Flamingo will be required 
to adhere to the requirements of 14 licensing agreements.
The majority of the licensing requirements centre around providing consumers with 
a copy of the open source licence  which attaches to the particular software, which 
includes:
20.1
retaining the copyright notice of the software contributors;
20.2
retaining the disclaimer that the software is provided in an ‘as is’ state and 
is not subject to any warranties or liability;
20.3
retaining any original legal notices within the software; and
20.4
where  the  software  has  been  modified,  including  notices  setting  out  what 
has been modified.
21.
This is, in our experience, typical of such licensing agreements.
22.
23.
24.
We are instructed that the notice has been embedded in the relevant software code 
as  required  by  the  respective  licences.  We  are  instructed  that,  where  required, 
others will be dealt with in the end user licence agreement (EULA) Flamingo intends 
to provide to end user consumers.
We are instructed that Flamingo’s EULA follows industry practice and adheres to the 
open source licence requirements.
Copyright is not capable of registration in Australia. However, we are instructed that 
Flamingo  or  FVPL  will  apply  to  register  copyright  ownership  in  the  United  States, 
Taiwan  and  other  target  markets  which  permit  copyright  registration,  at  a  future 
date.
25.
We  are  instructed  that  all  key  personnel  in  Australia  have  signed  an  Intellectual 
Property agreement with FVPL.
Page 3
Cre8tek Limited   
 
 
Credentials
13 September 2016
26.
The author of this report is an Australian intellectual property lawyer who has:
26.1
26.2
been  in  practice  for  22  years,  of  which  the  last  15  years  have  been 
exclusively in the field of intellectual property law; and
is  experienced  in  the  provision  of  intellectual  property  advice  and  has 
previously  provided  intellectual  property  due  diligence  reports  in  Australia 
and Hong Kong.
Disclaimer
27.
This report is:
27.1
not  based  on  any  strategic  audit,  which  would  propose  a  strategy  for  the 
intellectual  property  rights  that  is  in  line  with  the  company’s  5-year  global 
strategy; to analyse the existing portfolio of intellectual property rights and 
identify discrepancies between the actual and the desired situation; to draw 
up a report with recommendation for actions (additional filings, withdrawals, 
changing  of  owner,  central  management, 
licensing  systems,  user 
guidelines for licensees, renewals, geographic expansions, and so forth);
27.2
not  an  analysis  of  any  part  of  the  patent  landscape  relating  to  the 
technology forming part of the assets of Flamingo’s, or FVPL’s, business;
27.3
to be considered solely in the context of the related prospectus.
28.
This report has been prepared solely with reference to:
28.1
books  and  records  made  available  to  us  by  Bellanhouse  Legal  and  which 
we are instructed are accurate and complete;
28.2
the Australian trade marks registry;
28.3
domain name registry resources; and
28.4
the Flamingo Website.
Yours sincerely 
 
 
 
______________________ 
 
David Stewart
Page 4
Terryence F. Chapman 
Liane L. Churney 
Eugene J. Rath III 
Marcus P. Dolce
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C.
Intellectual Property Law
2026 Rambling Road
Kalamazoo, MI 49008-1631 
Telephone:  269-381-1156 
Facsimile:    269-381-5465 
E-Mail:  mail@flynnthiel.com
August 29, 2016
David G. Boutell 
Sidney B. Williams, Jr. 
of Counsel
VIA E-MAIL 
NO CONFIRMATION COPY
PERSONALISATION MANAGEMENT PLATFORM  
Your Ref: 29783 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US
RE:    FREEDOM  TO  OPERATE  OPINION  ON  CUSTOMER  EXPERIENCE
Mr. David Stewart 
Williams + Hughes  
Ground Floor 
25 Richardson Street 
WEST PERTH  WA  6005 
AUSTRALIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dear David: 
 
Pursuant to your request of July 22, 2016, we have conducted a 
freedom to operate search on the invention described in the 
patent application entitled CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE PERSONALISATION 
MANAGEMENT PLATFORM in the name of Flamingo Ventures Pty Ltd. 
 
In short, the unexpired U.S. patents uncovered during our search 
are not believed to present an infringement problem with respect 
to the proposed customer experience personalisation management 
platform.  Our detailed discussion of the unexpired U.S. patents 
is provided below.
{00327214.docx}
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US
August 29, 2016 
  Page 2
SUBJECT MATTER REVIEWED
The commercial embodiment of the proposed customer experience 
personalisation management platform is discussed in the patent 
application entitled CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE PERSONALISATION 
MANAGEMENT PLATFORM.  Because a full description of the 
commercial embodiment of the proposed customer experience 
personalisation management platform is discussed in that patent 
application, we do not include a detailed discussion herein.  
However, we do note that we were informed that the proposed 
customer experience personalisation management platform will not 
include a feature wherein a customer can route their call past a 
speech recognition system to speak with a live attendant if the 
customer has co-created a desire to not use the speech 
recognition system (as outlined in paragraph [100] of the patent 
application.
THE LAW OF PATENT INFRINGEMENT AND VALIDITY
The scope of protection afforded a patent is determined by its 
claims.  A claim comprises a list of steps or elements sometimes 
referred to as “limitations,” which define the invention being 
claimed.  A patent has at least one independent claim, and 
usually several dependent claims which refer back to one or more 
claims and incorporate every limitation of the claim(s) from 
which it depends.  The general rule is that a dependent claim 
cannot be infringed when the independent claim from which it 
depends is not infringed. 
 
A patent is infringed if at least one claim of the patent is 
infringed.  A determination of whether or not a particular claim 
is infringed involves the following steps. 
 
First, the claims must be construed, i.e., the meaning of the 
claim terms used must be determined.1  Claim terms are generally 
given their ordinary and customary meaning.2  In construing a 
claim, one should first look to the intrinsic evidence of 
record, i.e., the patent itself, including the claims, the
1 Bell Atlantic Network Serv. Inc. v. Corad Commc’s Group, 262 F.3d 1258, 1267 
(Fed. Cir. 2001); Mas-Hamilton Group v. LaGard, Inc., 156 F.3d 1206, 1211 
(Fed. Cir. 1998); Markman v. Westview Instr., Inc., 52 F.3d 967, 976 (Fed. 
Cir. 1995). 
2 Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
{00327214.docx}
August 29, 2016 
  Page 3
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US 
 
specification, and the prosecution history.3  The general rule is 
that the words of a claim are given their ordinary meaning in 
the usage of the field of the invention unless the text of the 
patent makes it clear that a word has a special meaning.4   “In 
some cases, the ordinary meaning of claim language as understood 
by a person of skill in the art may be readily apparent even to 
lay judges, and claim construction in such cases involves little 
more than the application of the widely accepted meaning of 
commonly understood words.... In such circumstances, general 
purpose dictionaries may be helpful.  In many cases that give 
rise to litigation, however, determining the ordinary and 
customary meaning of the claim requires examination of terms 
that have a particular meaning in a field of art.  Because the 
meaning of a claim term as understood by persons of skill in the 
art is often not immediately apparent, and because patentees 
frequently use terms idiosyncratically, the court looks to 
‘those sources available to the public that show what a person 
of skill in the art would have understood disputed claim 
language to mean.’  Those sources include ‘the words of the 
claims themselves, the remainder of the specification, the 
prosecution history, and extrinsic evidence concerning relevant 
scientific principles, the meaning of technical terms, and the 
state of the art.’”5  The specification is of special importance 
in claim construction.6 
 
Although the importance of intrinsic evidence in claim 
construction has been emphasized, courts are also authorized to 
rely on extrinsic evidence, which “‘consists of all evidence 
external to the patent and prosecution history, including expert 
and inventor testimony, dictionaries, and learned treatises.’...  
However, while extrinsic evidence ‘can shed useful light on the 
relevant art,’ ... ‘it is less significant than the intrinsic 
record in determining “the legally operative meaning of claim 
language.”7
3 Bell Atlantic Network, 262 F.3d at 1267; Desper Prods., Inc. v. Qsound Labs, 
Inc., 157 F.3d 1325, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Phillips Petroleum Co. v. 
Huntsman Polymers Corp., 157 F.3d 866, 870 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Digital 
Biometrics, Inc. v. Identix, Inc., 149 F.3d 1335, 1343 (Fed. Cir. 1998); 
Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic, Inc., 90 F.3d 1576, 1582 (Fed. Cir. 1996). 
4 See generally Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 2005) 
(en banc); Toro Co. v. White Consol. Indus. Inc., 199 F.3d 1295, 1299 (Fed. 
Cir. 1999). 
5 Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1314 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc). 
6 Id. at 1315-16. 
7 Id. at 1317.
{00327214.docx}
August 29, 2016 
  Page 4
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US 
 
 
In construing a claim, a limitation should not be imported from 
the specification absent a clear disclaimer of claim scope.8  
Such a disclaimer of claim scope must be a clear and 
unmistakable statement of disavowal.9 
 
Second, a determination is made as to whether or not there is 
literal infringement of the construed claim.  If each limitation 
set forth in a claim is not literally found in the accused 
product or process, the claim is not literally infringed.10  If 
one or more limitations of a claim are not literally found in 
the accused product or process, a patentee may still be able to 
carry the burden of proving infringement if it can be 
demonstrated that the accused device or process includes an 
element or step which is equivalent to the missing limitation.11  
Equivalence is a question of fact, reviewable under the clearly 
erroneous standard.12  An insubstantial change will lead to 
invocation of the doctrine of equivalents, while a substantial 
change will make the doctrine of equivalents inapplicable.13  The 
test of whether differences are substantial or insubstantial 
rests on objective evidence demonstrating that the substitution 
represents a change that an ordinary artisan would have 
considered insubstantial at the time of infringement.14  The 
application of the doctrine of equivalents is the exception, not
8 Gillette Co. v. Energizer Holdings, Inc., 405 F.3d 1367, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 
2005). 
9 Cordis Corp. v. Medtronic AVE, Inc., 339 F.3d 1352, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2003). 
10 Signtech USA Ltd. v. Vutek Inc., 174 F.3d 1352, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Mas-
Hamilton Group, 156 F.3d at 1211; Mannesmann Demag Corp. v. Engineered Metal 
Prods. Co., Inc., 793 F.2d 1279, 1282 (Fed. Cir. 1986); Stewart-Warner Corp. 
v. City of Pontiac, Michigan, 767 F.2d 1563, 1570 (Fed. Cir. 1985). 
11 Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chem. Co., 520 U.S. 17, 21 (1997); EMI 
Group North American, Inc. v. Intel Corp., 157 F.3d 887, 896 (Fed. Cir. 
1998). 
12 Stryker Corp. v. Davol Inc. 234 F.3d 1252, 1258 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Hilton 
Davis Chemical Co. v. Warner-Jenkinson Co., 62 F.3d 1512, 1520-21 (Fed. Cir. 
1995) (en banc), rev’d on other grounds, 520 U.S. 17 (1997). 
13 Abbott Labs. v. Novopharm Ltd., 323 F.3d 1324, 1329 (Fed. Cir. 2003); 
Graver Tank & Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Linde Air Prod. Co., 339 U.S. 605, 607-08 
(1950); Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 17; EMI Group North American, 157 F.3d 
at 896; Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc. v. United States Surgical Corp., 149 F.3d 
1309, 1315 (Fed. Cir. 1998). 
14 BoehringerIngelheim Vetmedics Inc. v. Schering-Plough Corp., 320 F.3d 1339, 
1351 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Graver Tank, 339 U.S. at 609; Warner-Jenkinson, 520 
U.S. at 1052-53; Hilton Davis Chem., 62 F.3d at 1519.
{00327214.docx}
August 29, 2016 
  Page 5
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US 
 
the rule.15  One way of establishing substantial similarity is to 
establish that the accused element performs substantially the 
same function, in substantially the same way, to achieve 
substantially the same result.  However, mere conclusory, 
unsupported testimony that an accused device performs 
substantially the same function in substantially the same way to 
achieve substantially the same result will not suffice.16  An 
equivalent of all of the claim elements which are not literally 
present in the accused device or method must be present in order 
for infringement to be found.  Equivalence cannot be based on 
overall similarity between the claimed and accused structure if 
one or more claim elements are missing from the accused 
structure.17 
 
The extent to which a claim limitation can be expanded by 
application of the doctrine of equivalents is strictly limited 
by any one or any combination of the following:
(1)  admissions, concessions and arguments made during the
prosecution history to comply with requirements of the 
patent law, generally referred to as prosecution 
history estoppel;18
15 Schoell v. Regal Marine Industries, Inc., 247 F.3d 1202, 1210 (Fed. Cir. 
2001); Charles Greiner & Co., Inc. v. Mari-Med Mfg., Inc., 962 F.2d 1031, 
1036 (Fed. Cir. 1992); London v. Carson Pirie Scott & Co., 946 F.2d 1534, 
1538 (Fed. Cir. 1991); Semmler v. American Honda Motor Co., Inc., 990 F. 
Supp. 967, 975 (S.D. Ohio 1997). 
16 Schoell, 247 F.3d at 1209-10; Comark Commc’n, Inc. v. Harris Group., 156 
F.3d 1182, 1188 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Texas Instruments, Inc. v. Cypress 
Semiconductor Corp., 90 F.3d 1558, 1567 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (“Generalized 
testimony as to the overall similarity between the claims and the accused 
infringer’s product or process will not suffice [to show infringement under 
the doctrine of equivalents].”); Malta v. Schulmerich Carillons, Inc., 952 
F.2d 1320, 1326-27 (Fed. Cir. 1991). 
17 Electro Scientific Indus. Inc. v. Dynamic Details Inc., 307 F.3d 1343, 1350 
(Fed. Cir. 2002); Mas-Hamilton Group, 156 F.3d at 1212; London, 946 F.2d at 
1538-39; Laitram Corp. v. Cambridge Wire Cloth Co., 863 F.2d 855, 856-57 
(Fed. Cir. 1988); Pennwalt Corp. v. Durand-Wayland, Inc., 833 F.2d 931, 935 
(Fed. Cir. 1987). 
18 Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722, 733-34 
(2002); Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 33-34; Townsend Eng’g Co. v. HiTec Co., 
Ltd, 829 F.2d 1086, 1090 (Fed. Cir. 1987); Mannesmann Demag, 793 F.2d at 
1284; Loctite Corp. v. Ultraseal Ltd., 781 F.2d 861, 870 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
{00327214.docx}
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US
August 29, 2016 
  Page 6
(2)  statements in the patent itself as to the critical
importance of a limitation;19
(3)  the scope and content of the prior art, in that the
claims cannot be read so broadly as to cover devices 
in the prior art;20 and
(4)  subject matter disclosed, but not claimed in a patent 
application is dedicated to the public, and cannot be 
found to be an equivalent.21
Prosecution history estoppel is an issue of law.22  The legal 
standard for determining what subject matter was relinquished is 
an objective one, measured from the vantage point of what a 
competitor is reasonably entitled to conclude, from the 
prosecution history, that the applicant gave up to procure 
issuance of the patent.23  Where no reason for a claim amendment 
is given, prosecution history estoppel will be presumed.24  
Prosecution history estoppel does not bar a finding of 
equivalence where an amendment cannot reasonably be viewed as 
surrendering a particular equivalent.  In such cases, the burden 
is on the patentee to show that at the time of the amendment,
19 J&M Corp. v. Harley-Davidson, Inc., 269 F.3d 1360, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2001) 
(statements in the patent that disclaim coverage of certain subject matters); 
Darwin & Milner, Inc. v. Kinite Corp., 72 F.2d 437, 439 (7th Cir. 1934); 
Pittsburgh Iron & Steel Foundries Co. v. Seaman-Sleeth Co., 248 F. 705, 717 
(3d Cir. 1917). 
20 Wilson Sporting Goods Co. v. David Geoffrey & Assoc., 904 F.2d 677, 683 
(Fed. Cir. 1990); RYCO, Inc. v. AG-BAG Corp., 857 F.2d 1418, 1426 (Fed. Cir. 
1988); Loctite Corp., 781 F.2d at 870; Aluminum Co. of America v. Thompson 
Prods., Inc., 122 F.2d 796, 799-800 (6th Cir. 1941); Darwin & Milner, 72 F.2d 
at 438; U.S. Philips Corp. v. National Micronetics Inc., 410 F. Supp. 449, 
454 (S.D.N.Y. 1976), aff’d, 550 F.2d 716 (2d Cir. 1977). 
21 Miller v. Bridgeport Brass, 104 U.S. 350, 352 (1881); Johnson & Johnson 
Assoc. v. R.E. Service Co., Inc., 285 F.3d 1046, 1054 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Sage 
Prods., Inc. v. Devon Indus., Inc., 126 F.3d 1420, 1425 (Fed. Cir. 1997); 
Maxwell v. J. Baker, Inc., 86 F.3d 1098, 1106-07 (Fed. Cir. 1996); Unique 
Concepts, Inc. v. Brown, 939 F.2d 1558, 1562-63 (Fed. Cir. 1991). 
22 Loctite Corp., 781 F.2d at 870. 
23 Desper Prods., Inc., 157 F.3d at 1338; Mark I. Mkt’g Corp. v. R.R. 
Donnelley & Sons, 66 F.3d 285, 291 (Fed. Cir. 1995); Southwall Techs., Inc. 
v. Cardinal IG Co., 54 F.3d 1570, 1580 (Fed. Cir. 1995); Haynes Int’l, Inc. 
v. Jessop Steel Co., 8 F.3d 1573, 1578 (Fed. Cir. 1993). 
24 Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 40-41; Festo Corp., 535 U.S. at 739-40; 
British Telecomm. PLC v. Prodigy Commc’n Corp., 217 F. Supp. 2d 399, 404 
(S.D.N.Y. 2002).
{00327214.docx}
August 29, 2016 
  Page 7
(3)  there was “some other reason” suggesting that the
(1)  the alleged equivalent would have been unforeseeable
(2)  the rationale underlying the narrowing amendment bore
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US 
 
one skilled in the art could not reasonably be expected to have 
drafted a claim that would have literally encompassed the 
alleged equivalent.  A patentee may overcome the presumption of 
surrender of all subject matter between an original claim 
limitation and the amended claim limitation by demonstrating 
that: 
 
 
at the time of the narrowing of the amendment; 
 
 
no more than a tangential relation to the equivalent in 
question; or 
 
 
patentee could not reasonably have been expected to have 
described the alleged equivalent.25 
 
The “unforeseeability” criterion requires an analysis of whether 
the alleged equivalent would have been unforeseeable to one of 
ordinary skill in the art at the time of the amendment.  
Usually, if the alleged equivalent represents later-developed 
technology or technology that was not known in the relevant art, 
then it would not have been foreseeable.  The objective inquiry 
of unforeseeability depends on underlying factual issues 
relating to, for example, the state of the art and the 
understanding of a hypothetical person of ordinary skill in the 
art at the time of the amendment.  As such, expert testimony and 
other extensive evidence relating to the factual issues may be 
relevant to the court’s determination of unforeseeability.26 
 
In order for a patentee to demonstrate that “the rationale 
underlying the narrowing amendment bore no more than a 
tangential relationship to the alleged equivalent”, the patentee 
must show that the reason for the narrowing amendment was not 
directly relevant to the alleged equivalent.  An amendment to 
avoid prior art that contains the equivalent in question is 
central to the allowance of the claim, and is not tangential.  A 
patentee must base his arguments on the public record of the 
patent prosecution history record without the introduction of 
additional evidence, except, when necessary, expert testimony on
25 Festo, 535 U.S. at 740-41. 
26 Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 344 F.3d 1359, 1369 
(Fed. Cir. 2003).
{00327214.docx}
August 29, 2016 
  Page 8
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US 
 
the interpretation of that record, of surrender of subject 
matter under the “tangential relation” criterion.27 
 
The third criterion of “some other reason suggesting that the 
patentee could not reasonably be expected to have described the 
insubstantial substitute in question” is available in order not 
to totally foreclose a patentee from relying on reasons other 
than unforeseeability and tangentialness, to show that it did 
not surrender the alleged equivalent.  Shortcomings of language 
may be one reason why a patentee was prevented from describing 
the alleged equivalent when the claim was narrowed.  When at all 
possible, the determination should be based only on the 
prosecution history record.28 
 
Patents are presumed to be valid.29  Thus, the party challenging 
validity of the patent has the burden of persuasion.30  This 
burden of persuasion is that invalidity of a patent must be 
shown by clear and convincing evidence.31   
 
To be valid, a patent must meet a number of requirements, 
including that its claimed subject matter be novel and non-
obvious.  In addition to novelty and non-obviousness, 35 U.S.C. 
§101 of the United States Code requires that all inventions must 
be directed to one of the four patent-eligible subject matter 
categories: “process, machine, manufacture, or composition of 
matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof.”  Examples of 
claims that are not directed to one of the statutory categories 
include a computer program per se.32  In addition to being 
directed to one of the patent-eligible subject matter 
categories, the claimed invention must not be wholly directed to 
subject matter encompassing a judicially recognized exception, 
which includes laws of nature, natural phenomena, and abstract 
ideas.33 Examples of judicially recognized exceptions of subject
27 Id. 
28 Id. at 1370. 
29 35 U.S.C. §282. 
30 Smithkline Diagnostics, Inc. v. Helena Labs Corp., 859 F.2d 878 (Fed. Cir. 
1988). 
31 Carella v. Starlight Archery and ProLine Company, 804 F.2d 135 (Fed. Cir. 
1986). 
32 Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U.S. 63, 72, 175 USPQ 673, 676-77 (1972). 
33 Alice Corp. Pty. Ltd. v. CLS Bank Int'l, 573 U.S. _, 134 S. Ct. 2347, 2354, 
110 USPQ2d 1976, 1980 (2014) (citing Association for Molecular Pathology v. 
Myriad Genetics, Inc. 569 U.S. _, 133 S. Ct. 2107, 2116, 106 USPQ2d 1972, 
1979 (2013)).
{00327214.docx}
August 29, 2016 
  Page 9
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US 
 
matter that is not patentable include a computer-aided 
limitation to a claim covering an abstract concept, without 
more,34 and familiar mental steps performed by or with a 
computer.35
PATENT FAMILIES REVIEWED
•  U.S. Patent No. 6 377 944 
•  U.S. Patent Nos. 7 110 522, 7 412 046 and 7 646 861  
•  U.S. Patent No. 7 590 550, 7 835 928, 7 865 377 and 8 738
727 and Application Nos. 12/270 224, 12/348 642, 13/465 
528, 13/644 566, 13/650 230, 13/792 492, 13/792 503, 13/792 
551, 14/015 580, 14/269 977, and 14/515 189
•  U.S. Patent No. 7 653 558  
•  U.S. Patent No. 7 765 165  
•  U.S. Patent Nos. 7 818 183 and 8 510 128  
•  U.S. Patent Nos. 7 848 937 and 8 249 898  
•  U.S. Patent Nos. 7 899 689 and 8 494 881  
•  U.S. Patent Nos. 7 933 783 and 8 515 776  
•  U.S. Patent No. 8 370 166  
•  U.S. Patent No. 8 731 952 and Application No. 14/281 096 
•  U.S. Patent No. 8 819 169 and Application No. 14/466 595
PATENTS WITH INVALID CLAIMS
It is our opinion that the claims of the patents listed below 
are clearly invalid as being drawn to a judicially recognized 
exception of statutory subject matter.  Specifically, the claims 
of the patents listed below are drawn to mental steps performed 
with a computer.  Taking the additional elements individually 
and in combination, the computer components at each step of the 
method perform purely generic computer functions.  As such, 
there is no inventive concept sufficient to transform the 
claimed subject matter into a patent-eligible claim.  The claims 
of the patents listed below do not amount to significantly more 
than the abstract idea itself and are therefore invalid.  Note 
that all of the patents listed below, except for the ‘169 
patent, issued before the decision in Alice Corp. Pty. Ltd. v. 
CLS Bank Int'l discussed above.  If the applications that would
34 Dealertrack Inc. v. Huber, 674 F.3d 1315 (Fed. Cir. 2012). 
35 SmartGene, Inc. v. Adv. Biological Labs., 852 F. Supp.2d 42, recons. 
denied, 915 F.Supp.2d 69 (D.D.C. 2013).
{00327214.docx}
Page 10
August 29, 2016
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US 
 
become these patents were examined after the decision in Alice, 
it is our opinion that the patents would not have issued.  
Notably, although subject to appeal, a court in the United 
States has recently found the ‘550 patent to be invalid as being 
drawn to a judicially recognized exception of statutory subject 
matter.  Am. Well Corp. v. Teladoc, Inc., No. 15-CV-12274-IT, 
2016 WL 3255011, at *1 (D. Mass. June 13, 2016).  Moreover, the 
‘169 patent issued on August 26, 2014, or a little over one 
month after the decision in Alice, such that the patent was 
already examined by the time of the decision in Alice.  
Accordingly, it is our belief that the ‘169 patent would not 
have issued if examined after the decision in Alice.  The claims 
believed to be invalid are as follows:
•  Claims 1-36 and 38-65 of the ‘944 Patent 
•  Claims 1-30 of the ‘550 Patent 
•  Claims 1-42 of the ‘928 Patent 
•  Claims 1-15 of the ‘377 Patent 
•  Claims 1-15 of the ‘727 Patent 
•  Claims 1-30 of the ‘558 Patent 
•  Claims 1-15 of the ‘165 Patent 
•  Claims 1-27 of the ‘183 Patent 
•  Claims 1-28 of the ‘128 Patent 
•  Claims 1-25 of the ‘937 Patent 
•  Claims 1-17 of the ‘898 Patent 
•  Claims 1-12 of the ‘689 Patent 
•  Claims 1-15 of the ‘881 Patent 
•  Claims 1-23 of the ‘783 Patent 
•  Claims 1-20 of the ‘776 Patent 
•  Claims 1-20 of the ‘166 Patent 
•  Claims 1-32 of the ‘952 Patent 
•  Claims 1-18 of the ‘169 Patent
While we believe that there are arguments that the claims of the 
above-noted patents are not infringed, we do not address this 
issue in regard to these claims since it is clear that these 
claims are invalid (except for the claims of the ‘377 patent, 
the ‘558 patent and the ‘165 patent as outlined below).
{00327214.docx}
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US
August 29, 2016
Page 11
APPLICATIONS THAT SHOULD NOT ISSUE AS PATENTS
The following applications have not issued as patents such that 
we cannot make any final determination as to infringement or 
validity.  However, it is our opinion that the ‘applications 
will not and should not issue as patents as the claims thereof 
are clearly unpatentable as being drawn to a judicially 
recognized exception of statutory subject matter. The 
applications that should not issue as patents are as follows:
•  The ‘528 Application 
•  The ‘230 Application 
•  The ‘503 Application 
•  The ‘551 Application 
•  The ‘580 Application 
•  The ‘977 Application 
•  The ‘096 Application 
•  The ‘595 Application
While we believe that there are arguments that the claims 
pending in these applications would not be infringed if they 
issued in a patent, we do not address these issues in regard to 
these claims since it is clear that the applications should not 
issue as patents.
{00327214.docx}
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US
August 29, 2016
Page 12
CLAIMS IN PATENTS THAT ARE NOT INFRINGED
It is our opinion that the following claims are not infringed as 
the proposed customer experience personalisation management 
platform does not include all of the features of these claims 
such there is believed to be no literal infringement of these 
claims, and no equivalent infringement since there are elements 
of the claims that are completely missing from the proposed 
customer experience personalisation management platform.  In our 
opinion, the claims in the following patents are clearly not 
infringed:
•  Claim 37 of the ‘944 Patent 
•  Claims 1-20 of the ‘522 Patent 
•  Claims 1-20 of the ‘046 Patent 
•  Claims 1-20 of the ‘861 Patent 
•  Claims 1-15 of the ‘377 Patent 
•  Claims 1-30 of the ‘558 Patent 
•  Claims 1-15 of the ‘165 Patent
CLAIMS IN APPLICATIONS THAT, IF ISSUED, WOULD NOT BE INFRINGED
The applications listed below have not issued as patents such 
that we cannot make any final determination as to infringement.  
However, based on the disclosures of these applications and the 
present content of the claims, these applications are not 
believed to present a significant infringement risk, since the 
proposed customer experience personalisation management platform 
does not include all of the features of the present claims.  The 
claims that would not be infringed are as follows:
•  The claims of the ‘528 Application 
•  The claims of the ‘503 Application 
•  The claims of the ‘595 Application
{00327214.docx}
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C. 
 
Mr. David Stewart 
Our Ref: 5695.M0002US
CONCLUSIONS
August 29, 2016
Page 13
In conclusion, the unexpired U.S. patents uncovered during our 
search are not believed to present an infringement problem with 
respect to the proposed customer experience personalisation 
management platform.   
 
This concludes our report to you relative to this matter.
FLYNN, THIEL, BOUTELL & TANIS, P.C.
Yours very truly,
Marcus P. Dolce
MPD/jla
{00327214.docx}
. 8. Directors, Key Management and Corporate Governance
8.1 Board of Directors
As at the date of this Prospectus, the Board comprises:
(a) Mr Bryn Hardcastle e Non-Executive Chairman;
>>
‘ (b) Mr Faldi Ismail a Non-Executive Director; and
-
i (c) Mr Tom Bahen a Non-Executive Director.
.—
— While Messrs Hardcastle and Ismail shall remain as Directors (notwithstanding Mr
. Hardcastle stepping down as Chairman), it is intended that Mr Bahen will resign at
completion of the Offers and Acquisition Agreement.
In accordance with the terms of the Acquisition Agreement, with effect from
II I completion of the Acquisition and subject to Shareholder approval, the Company will
r appoint the following Proposed Directors:
a (d) Ms Cathie Reid 7 Non-Executive Chair; and
E (e) Dr Catriona Wallace 7 Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director.
I 8.2 Director profiles of existing Board
-
E Details of the Directors comprising the Board until completion of the Acquisition are
ll set out below.
—
- (a) Mr Bryn Hardcastle - Non-Executive Chairman
a BA, LLB
r Mr Hardcastle is an experienced corporate lawyer specialising in corporate,
’ commercial and securities law. He is the principal of Bellanhouse Legal which
predominantly advises on equity capital markets, re-compliance transactions
— and takeovers across a variety of industries. Mr Hardcastle has extensive
I: international legal experience and has advised on numerous cross border
II J transactions working in the United Kingdom, Middle East and North America.
a He also has experience acting as a non-executive director of ASX listed
.! companies.
Mr Hardcastle is also a non-executive director of Attila Resources Limited
(ASX: AYA).
.—
g (b) Mr Faldl Ismail - Non-Executive Director
I BBus
L Mr Ismail has significant experience working as a corporate advisor specialising
in the restructure and recapitalisation of a wide range of ASX-listed companies
having many years of investment banking experience covering a wide range of
sectors. He has significant cross-border experience, having advised on
numerous overseas transactions including capital raisings, structuring of
acquisitions and joint ventures in numerous countries.
64


. Mr Ismail is also a Director of dual listed Asiamet Limited (previously
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited) (TSXV/AIM listed 7 Ticker Code “ARS“)
and in addition is also the founder and operator of Otsana Capital, a boutique
advisow firm specialising in mergers and acquisitions, reverse takeovers,
capital raising: and initial public offerings. Mr Ismail is currently on the board
of the following ASX-listed companies: TVZU International Ltd (non-executive
director), WHL Energy Limited (non-executive director) and Ookami Limited
(non-executive chairman).

% . .
_ (c) Mr Tom Bahen - Non-Executive Director
=
BComm
E
Mr Bahen is currently a director of Private Clients and Institutional Sales at
.1 national stock broking firm Patersons Securities Limited. He has significant
experience in capital raisings and corporate advisory for ASX listed companies.
He has previously worked in assurance for global accounting firm Deloitte.
m 8.3 Director profiles of proposed Board
Ir
 Details of the Directors who will comprise the Board upon completion of the Acquisition
are set out below.
5 (a) Mr Bryn Hardcastle - Non-Executive Director
! Please refer to Section 8.2(a) above for Mr Hardcastle‘s profile.
-
El (b) Mr Faldi Ismail - Non-Executive Director
I
— Please refer to Section 8.2(b) above for Mr Ismail‘s profile.
E
- (c) Ms Cathie Reid - Non-Executive Chair
g Please refer to Section 3.2(e)(i) above for Ms Reid‘s profile.
.r‘
n‘ (d) Dr Catriona Wallace - Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director
.1 Please refer to Section 3.2(e)(ii) above for Dr Wallace's profile.
m 8.4 Key personnel
I-1
. (a) Joe Waller - Chief Technology Officer
I Please refer to Section 3.2(e)(iii) above for Mr Waller‘s profile.
= (b) Dr Jack Elliott - Chief Data Scientist
a Please refer to Section 3.2(e)(iv) above for Dr Elliott‘s profile.
II (c) Rachel White - Chief Financial Officer
Please refer to Section 3.2(e)(v) above for Ms White's profile.
8. 5 Directors' interests
 Other than as disclosed in this Prospectus, no Director holds at the date of this
a Prospectus or held at any time during the last 2 years, any interest in:
C:
:5 —
E 65
I)


. (a) the formation or promotion of the Company;
(b) property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in connection
with its formation or promotion, or the Offers; and
(c) the Offers.
Further, other than as disclosed in this Prospectus, the Company has not paid any
amount or provided any benefit, or agreed to do so, to any Director, either to induce
that Director to become, or to qualify them as a Director, or otherwise, for services
rendered by them in connection with the formation or promotion of the Company or
the Offers.
8.6 Directors' security holdings
Directors are not required to hold any Shares under the Constitution of the Company.
Set out in the table below are details of the anticipated relevant interests of the
Existing Directors and Proposed Directors in the Shares of the Company upon
completion of the Offers and the Acquisition:
Director Existing % interest - Shares at % interest at
Shares1 existing completion completion2
Mr Faldi Ismail 4,750,000 4,750,000
0000000000 2,000,000 2,500,000
Ms Cathie Reid3  62,848,740 10.50
Dr Catriona Wallace"  115,814,391 19.45
Notes:
10 Assumes that no existing Options are exercised prior to completion of the Offers and the
Acquisition and that no Performance Rights or Performance Shares have converted into
Shares.
20 Assumes that the Public Offer is fully subscribed and that there are 595,440,046 Shares
on issue at completion of the Offers and the Acquisition.
30 Ms Reid, through her associates Badger 31 Pty Ltd and Flamingo 31 Pty Ltd, is a
shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total of 62,848,740 Initial
Consideration Shares as part of the Consideration Securities to be issued upon completion
of the Acquisition under the Consideration Offer.
40 Dr Wallace, as founder of Flamingo and through her associate Phoenixavier Pty Ltd, is a
shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total of 115,814,391
Initial Consideration Shares as part of the Consideration Securities to be issued upon
completion of the Acquisition under the Consideration Offer.
E;
Lg
51 —
l 66


. Set out in the table below are details of the anticipated relevant interests of the
Existing Directors and Proposed Directors in other Securities of the Company upon
completion of the Offers and the Acquisition:

Director Performance Performance Options
Rights Shares
= Mr Faldi Ismaill 10,000,000 10,000,000
—
ﬂ.) Notes:
:7 ‘
1. Mr Hardcastle indirectly holds 3,333,333 Class A Performance Rights, 3,333,333 Class B
Performance Rights and 3,333,334 Class C Performance Rights.
5 2. Mr Ismail indirectly holds 3,333,333 Class A Performance Rights, 3,333,333 Class B
Performance Rights, 3,333,334 Class C Performance Rights and 10,000,000 unquoted
Options exercisable at $0.03 each and expiring 5 February 2019 (escrowed until
—
- 5 February 2018).
E: 3. Mr Bahen indirectly holds 3,333,333 Class A Performance Rights, 3,333,333 Class B
Performance Rights and 3,333,334 Class C Performance Rights.
! 4. Ms Reid, through her associates Badger 31 Pty Ltd and Flamingo 31 Pty Ltd, is a
_ shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total of 20,949,580 Class
.1 A Performance Shares, 20,949,580 Class B Performance Shares and 20,949,580 Class C
Performance Shares as part of the Consideration Securities to be issued upon completion
r of the Acquisition under the Consideration Offer.
a 5. Dr Wallace, as founder of Flamingo and through her associate Phoenixavier Pty Ltd, is a
— shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total of 38,604,797 Class
A Performance Shares, 38,604,797 Class B Performance Shares and 38,604,797 Class C
m Performance Shares as part of the Consideration Securities to be issued upon completion
of the Acquisition under the Consideration Offer.
a 8.7 Directors' remuneration
I The Constitution provides that each Director is entitled to such remuneration from the
— Company as the Directors decide, but the total amount provided to all non-executive
Directors must not exceed in aggregate the amount fixed by the Company in a general
. meeting. The current maximum amount of remuneration that may be paid to all non-
executive Directors (set by the previous board pre-deed of company arrangement) has
I been set at $500,000 per annum.
The remuneration of the executive Directors will be determined by the Board. A
summary of Dr Catriona Wallace's employment agreement is set out in Section 9.3(d).
Dr Wallace is currently the only proposed executive Director.
m
1.3%
Ci
,1, 57


. The Directors received the following remuneration for the financial years ended
30 June 2015 and 30 June 2016:
Director ‘ FY2015 Remuneration ‘ FY2016 Remuneration
I
_ Notes:
—
.1 1. Mr Hardcastle was appointed as a director on 5 November 2015.
2. Mr Ismail was appointed as a director on 28 October 2015. Shareholder approval is being
m sought at the General Meeting for the re-election of Mr Ismail as a Director.
r 3. Mr Bahen was appointed as a director on 5 November 2015.
l
11‘ 8.8 Related party transactions
.5 The Company has entered into the following related party transactions on arms' length
I terms:
— (a) a lead manager/corporate advisor mandate with 0tsana Capital. Mr Faldi
Ismail, a Director, is a director and controlling shareholder of 0tsana Capital
.I (refer Section 9.3(c) for details);
- (b) letters of appomtment and/or serVices agreements With each of the eXIsting
= and proposed Directors on standard terms (refer Sections 9.3(d) and 9.3(e) for
a details); and
I (c) deeds of indemnity, insurance and access with each of its Directors on
" standard terms (refer Section 9.3(f) for details).
— In addition, the Company notes that there is an existing loan with an entity associated
with Proposed Director, Ms Cathie Reid, which will be re-paid just prior to
'I I reinstatement of the Company's securities to ASX (refer Section 9.2(b)).
-‘
 8.9 Corporate Governance
The Board is responsible for establishing the Company‘s corporate governance
framework, the key features of which are set out in this Section 8.9. In establishing its
= corporate governance framework, the Board has referred to the 3rd edition of the ASX
Corporate Governance Councils' Corporate Governance Principles and
. Recommendations (Recommendations). To the extent applicable, commensurate with
1 the Company's size and nature, the Company has adopted the Recommendations.
L The Board seeks, where appropriate, to provide accountability levels that meet or
exceed the Recommendations.
The Company‘s main corporate governance policies and practices as at the date of this
m Prospectus are outlined below and further details on the Company‘s corporate
 governance procedures, policies and practices can be obtained from the Company
{UL website at http://www.cre8tek.com.au.

03 —
E 68


. (a) Board of Directors
The Board is responsible for corporate governance of the Company. The Board
develops strategies for the Company, reviews strategic objectives and
monitors performance against those objectives. The goals of the corporate
governance processes are to:
>: (i) maintain and increase Shareholder value;
‘ (ii) ensure a prudential and ethical basis for the Company's conduct and
- activities; and
I
-— (iii) ensure compliance with the Company‘s legal and regulatory
5 objectives.
Consistent with these goals, the Board assumes the following responsibilities:
1] (i) developing initiatives for profit and asset growth;
I (ii) reviewing the corporate, commercial and financial performance of
I: the Company on a regular basis;
5 (iii) acting on behalf of, and being accountable to, the Shareholders; and
I (iv) identifying business risks and implementing actions to manage those
risks and corporate systems to assure quality.
-
U The Company is committed to the circulation of relevant materials to
II Directors in a timely manner to facilitate Directors‘ participation in the Board
i discussions on a fully-informed basis.
- In light of the Company‘s size and nature, the Board considers that the
.1 proposed board is a cost effective and practical method of directing and
managing the Company. If the Company‘s activities develop in size, nature and
r scope, the size of the Board and the implementation of additional corporate
n‘ governance policies and structures will be reviewed.
_ (b) Composition of the Board
 Election of Board members is substantially the province of the Shareholders
N in general meeting. However, subject thereto, the Company is committed to
.! the following principles:
(i) the Board is to comprise Directors with a blend of skills, experience
and attributes appropriate for the Company and its business; and
. (ii) the principal criterion for the appointment of new Directors is their
ability to add value to the Company and its business.
II The Board currently consists of 3 members. Following completion of the Offers
and the Acquisition, the Board will consist of 4 members. The Company has
adopted a Nominations Committee Charter, but has not formally adopted a
Nominations and Remuneration Committee. The Directors consider that the
Company is currently not of a size, nor are its affairs of such complexity, to
justify the formation of a Nomination and Remuneration Committee. The
responsibilities of a Nomination and Remuneration Committee are currently
carried out by the Board.
69


. Where a casual vacancy arises during the year, the Board has procedures to
select the most suitable candidate with the appropriate experience and
expertise to ensure a balanced and effective Board. Any Director appointed
during the year to fill a casual vacancy or as an addition to the current Board,
holds office until the next general meeting and is then eligible for re-election
by the Shareholders.

> (c) Identification and management of risk
‘ The Board has not established a risk management committee and the full
- Board is responsible for overseeing the risk management function. The Board
- is responsible for ensuring the risks and opportunities are identified on a
I— t‘ l b ‘ .
— Imey asls
.1 (d) Ethical standards
The Board is committed to the establishment and maintenance of appropriate
1] ethical standards.
m (e) Independent professional advice
‘ Subject to the Chairman‘s approval (not to be unreasonably withheld), the
5 Directors, at the Company's expense, may obtain independent professional
advice on issues arising in the course of their duties.
! (f) Remuneration arrangements
-
IE The total maximum remuneration of Non-executive Directors is initially set by
I the Constitution and subsequent variation is by ordinary resolution of
— Shareholders in general meeting in accordance with the Constitution, the
- Corporations Act and the Listing Rules, as applicable. The determination of
- Non-executive Directors‘ remuneration within that maximum will be made by
.l the Board having regard to the inputs and value to the Company of the
r respective contributions by each Non-executive Director.
I
J] Directors are also entitled to be paid reasonable travelling, hotel and other
expenses incurred by them respectively in or about the performance of their
i duties as Directors.
1] The Board reviews and approves the remuneration policy to enable the
N Company to attract and retain Directors who will create value for Shareholders
.! having consideration to the amount considered to be commensurate for a
company of its size and level of activity as well as the relevant Directors' time,
I commitment and responsibility.
.—
_ (g) Trading policy
a The Board has adopted a policy that sets out the guidelines on the sale and
I purchase of securities in the Company by its key management personnel (i.e.
I Directors and, if applicable, any employees reporting directly to the managing
director). The policy generally provides that written notification to the
Chairman (or in the case of the Chairman, the managing director) must be
satisfied prior to trading.
7O


. (h) External audit
The Company in general meetings is responsible for the appointment of the
external auditors of the Company, and the Board from time to time will review
the scope, performance and fees of those external auditors.
(i) Audit committee
> The Company does not have an audit committee. The full Board fulfils the
‘ Company‘s corporate governance and monitoring responsibilities in relation to
- the Company‘s risks associated with the integrity of the financial reporting,
- internal control systems and the independence of the external audit function.
_
5' (j) Diversity Policy
The Board has adopted a diversity policy which provides a framework for the
Company to achieve, amongst other things, a diverse and skilled workforce, a
workplace culture characterised by inclusive practices and behaviours for the
I benefit of all staff, improved employment and career development
r opportunities for women and a work environment that values and utilises the
a contributions of employees with diverse backgrounds, experiences and
perspectives.
E (k) Departures from Recommendations
! Following re-admission to the Official List of ASX, the Company will be
- required to report any departures from the Recommendations in its annual
IE: financial report.
I
—
I
3
ﬂ
5
a:

S3 —
,1, 71


. 9. Material Contracts
9.1 Introduction
The Directors consider that certain contracts entered into by the Company are material
to the Company or are of such a nature that an investor may wish to have particulars
of them when making an assessment of whether to apply for Securities under the
> Offers. The provisions of such material contracts are summarised in this Section.
_- 9.2 Flamingo Agreements
I
n- (a) Nationwide Master Services Agreement
.I In May 2016, Flamingo entered into a non-exclusive master SaaS agreement
(Master Services Agreement) with Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company
(Nationwide), an Ohio corporation, pursuant to which Flamingo will license
software and provide system and consulting services to Nationwide and its
I related affiliates in accordance with written orders (Orders).
 Nationwide agrees to pay Flamingo for the services and deliverables provided
by Flamingo as specified in each applicable Order and any reimbursement of
E expenses shall be subject to Nationwide's consent and policies.
I An Order may be terminated:
- (i) by either party upon written notice, following a material breach of
IE the Master Services Agreement by the other party which remains
L unremedied for 30 days after notification; or
—
- (ii) by Nationwide upon 30 days‘ written notice or immediately upon
- Flamingo's breach of its compliance obligations under the Master
.1 Services Agreement.
r Upon termination of any Order, Flamingo shall not undertake any new work
1] unless authorised by Nationwide and each party shall assist in the orderly
termination of the Master Services Agreement.
_
I F Except with respect to Flamingo's pre-existing intellectual property, systems
and methods, all rights in "deliverables", including inventions, software,
a documentation and work products developed, prepared or designed in
. connection with the services as expressly identified in an Order, will be
assigned to Nationwide. Subject to payment, Nationwide owns all rights to
I improvements made to the services at Nationwide‘s request.
_ The Master Services Agreement contains additional provisions, including
.1 warranties and indemnities, which are considered standard for agreements of
this kind.
II (b) Meerkat Loan Agreement
In March 2016, Flamingo Ventures (as borrower) entered into a loan agreement
with Meerkat 31 Pty Ltd ACN 600 209 550 as trustee for Meerkat Investment
Trust, an entity associated with Proposed Director Ms Cathie Reid (Lender).
m
,3, Pursuant to the terms of the loan agreement the Lender lent the Company
‘Ejg $280,000 for working capital purposes, on commercial arms' length terms. The
a
E
'43
E 72
A)


. Company will repay the loan plus $6,000 in interest just prior to reinstatement
of the Company's securities to ASX.
Upon the occurrence of an event of default, the Lender may, for so long as
the event of default is continuing, declare outstanding monies to be
immediately due and payable to the Lender without the need for any further
demand or notice to be given. Events of default include Flamingo Ventures
failing to repay an amount by the due date, Flamingo Ventures becoming
>l insolvent, or any part of the agreement becoming void or unenforceable.
— ,
- (c) Clarion Customer Referral Agreement
— Flamingo has entered into a non-exclusive customer referral agreement with
I The Clarion Group, Ltd. (Clarion), a Connecticut S corporation, pursuant to
.1 which Clarion agreed to facilitate sales of Flamingo's products by referring
prospective Providers directly to Flamingo (Clarion Referral Agreement).
I Under the agreement, Flamingo agrees to pay Clarion referral fees based on
transactions with referred clients that are accepted by Flamingo (Qualified
r Referral). The fees payable are based on the following percentages of the
’c licensee revenue received by Flamingo for the duration of each transaction,
whether or not the Clarion Referral Agreement is terminated:
E (i) for the first 5 transactions with Qualified Referrals, Flamingo will pay
I Clarion 10% of revenues generated from the referral up to a maximum
_ of US$75,000 per Qualified Referral; and
-
IE (ii) for the subsequent transactions with Qualified Referrals, Flamingo
' will pay Clarion 7.5% of revenues generated from the referral up to a
a maximum of US$60,000 per Qualified Referral.
.—
“ Clarion, Flamingo and the Company have also agreed that following
.I completion of the Acquisition, the parties will enter into formal
r documentation to replace the Clarion Referral Agreement to:
u
I]: (i) include the Company as a party; and
_ (ii) include a provision which provides that the Company issue Clarion
I B 470,270 Shares for each Qualified Referral up to a maximum of
10 Qualified Referrals (i.e. maximum of 4,702,700 Shares). These
5 Qualified Referral Shares will only be issued upon either:
(A) a Qualified Referral generating at least US$50,000 in
I recurring revenue billings; or
_ (B) entry into an agreement With a Qualified Referral that
.1 guarantees at least US$50,000 in revenue.
I The parties have agreed that if at the time of executing formal documentation
I for a new customer referral agreement there are any Qualified Referrals that
have already met the above criteria, then Clarion will be entitled to the
Qualified Referral Shares.
Either party may terminate the Clarion Referral Agreement by 30 days‘ written
5: notice.
% Flamingo makes no warranties to Clarion under the Clarion Referral
g Agreement and Flamingo‘s liability is limited to the total amount paid by
g
E 73
l)


. Flamingo under the agreement in the 12 month period prior to the event first
giving rise to the claim. Neither party is liable for any indirect or consequential
damages.

(d) Key personnel agreements
(i) Mr Joe Waller a Chief Technology Officer
> Flamingo Ventures has entered into an employment agreement with
a Mr Joe Waller (Waller Agreement), pursuant to which Mr Waller is
= engaged by Flamingo Ventures as Chief Technology Officer on a full
- time basis.
.—
— The total annual remuneration payable to Mr Waller under the Waller
g Agreement is a salaw of $180,000 per annum before tax plus
superannuation. Mr Waller may be entitled to other incentives such
as bonus schemes and employee share option plans and may be
1] reimbursed for actual and reasonable business expenses.
r Mr Waller has been issued with options in Flamingo under an
a employee share option plan which will be cancelled in consideration
for Mr Waller subscribing for 2,727,312 Options under the Employee
5 Offer.
I The Waller Agreement has no fixed term and contains standard
_ termination provisions.
-
E In accordance with Flamingo Ventures‘ standard Employee IP
L Agreement (summarised at Section 9.2(e) below), Intellectual
— Property created by Mr Waller during his employment with Flamingo
! Ventures as part of his duties will be the property of Flamingo
- Ventures.
a Mr Waller is also subject to restrictions in relation to the use of
r confidential information during and after his employment with
g Flamingo Ventures ceases and being directly or indirectly involved in
_ a competing business during the continuance of his employment with
Flamingo Ventures and for a period of 3 months after his employment
@ with Flamingo Ventures ceases, on terms which are otherwise
a considered standard for agreements of this nature.
a The Waller Agreement contains additional provisions considered
standard for agreements of this nature.
! (ii) Dr Jack Elliott a Chief Data Scientist
_
a Flamingo Ventures has entered into an employment agreement with
Dr Jack Elliott (Elliott Agreement), pursuant to which Dr Elliott is
I engaged by Flamingo Ventures as Chief Data Scientist on a part time
L basis for 3 days per week.
The total annual remuneration payable to Dr Elliott under the Elliott
Agreement is a salaw of $118,000 per annum before tax plus
superannuation. Dr Elliott may be entitled to other incentives such as
bonus schemes and employee share option plans and may be
reimbursed for actual and reasonable business expenses.
74


. In addition, the Company intends to issue Dr Elliott 681,818 Options
in the Company on the same terms as the Options to be issued under
the Employee Offer following completion of the Acquisition.

The Elliott Agreement has no fixed term and contains standard

termination provisions.

In accordance with Flamingo Ventures‘ standard Employee IP
> Agreement (summarised at Section 9.2(e) below), Intellectual
a Property created by Dr Elliott during his employment with Flamingo
= Ventures as part of his duties will be the property of Flamingo
- Ventures.

.—
— Dr Elliott is also subject to restrictions in relation to the use of
a confidential information during and after his employment with

Flamingo Ventures ceases and being directly or indirectly involved in

a competing business during the continuance of his employment with
1] Flamingo Ventures and for a period of 3 months after his employment

with Flamingo Ventures ceases, on terms which are otherwise
m considered standard for agreements of this nature.

‘ The Elliott Agreement contains additional provisions considered

5 standard for agreements of this nature.

I (e) Employee IP Agreements

—

- Each of Flamingo Ventures' staff, contractors and consultants (Employees) are

IE required to enter into a standard employee intellectual property agreement

L with Flamingo Ventures which forms part of the contract of employment or

i engagement (Employee IP Agreement).

.—

“ Pursuant to the Employee IP Agreement:

a (i) any and all Intellectual Property created by Employees during

r employment with Flamingo Ventures as part of their duties vests in

g Flamingo Ventures immediately upon creation;

_ (ii) any and all inventions, innovations and Intellectual Property

ﬂ developed by Employees within 3 months from the date of
termination of their employment must be disclosed to Flamingo

N Ventures (Future Innovation), which will then determine whether or

a not to treat those Future Innovations as the property of Flamingo

Ventures;

! (iii) Employees must take appropriate measures to secure and protect
_ Flamingo Ventures‘ intellectual property rights;
a (iv) Employees will not enforce any 'moral rights' (as defined under Part IX
E of the Copyright Act 1968 (cm);

(v) Employees will not challenge any application made by Flamingo

Ventures to obtain registered rights in an innovation or Intellectual

Property or remove any registered right in an innovation or

Intellectual Property created during Employees‘ employment with

Flamingo Ventures or forming part of a Future Innovation which

Flamingo Ventures deems to be the property of Flamingo Ventures;

and

75


. (vi) Employees warrant that any and all Intellectual Property created by
Employees in the course of performing their duties to Flaming
Ventures are original creations and don't infringe on the rights of any
third parties.
The obligations in the Employee IP Agreement survive Employees' termination
of employment with Flamingo Ventures.
>I 9.3 Company Agreements
— . . .
= (a) Acquismon Agreement
I— On 2 June 2016, the Company announced to ASX that it had entered into a
l conditional binding share sale agreement with Flamingo and the Signing
.1 Sellers, Flamingo's majority shareholders, to acquire 100% of the issued capital
of Flamingo (Acquisition Agreement). The key terms of the Acquisition
Agreement are as follows:
1] (i) Acquisition
Ir
’c The Company has agreed to acquire the Flamingo Shares held by the
Vendor for the consideration set out in Section 9.3(a)(iii) below.
5 (ii) Conditions Precedent
! Completion of the Acquisition is subject to the satisfaction or waiver
- by the parties of the following conditions:
E (A) each of the minority shareholders of Flamingo signing a Short
— Form Acquisition Agreement (see Section 9.3(b) below) (this
! condition has been satisfied);
-
.1 (B) the Company incorporating the Merger Subsidiaw for the
purposes of undertaking the Merger (this condition has been
n, satisfied);
‘ (C) Flamingo preparing and delivering to the Company audited
-_ accounts under relevant Australian Accounting Standards for
m; the:
N (1) 2013/14 and 2014/15 financial years, with respect
. to Flamingo Ventures; and
I (2) period from 1 July 2015 to 31 March 2016, with
respect to Flamingo,
= . i , i .
a (this condition has been satisfied);
(D) the Company obtaining all necessary regulatow approvals or
I waivers pursuant to the Listing Rules, Corporations Act or
any other law required to allow the parties to lawfully
complete the matters set out in the Acquisition Agreement,
including but not limited to:
g (1) obtaining a waiver to permit the Company to issue
E: the Capital Raising Shares at not less than $0.04
‘7ng each (this condition has been satisfied); and
El
63 —
E 76
i)


. (2) conditional approval to reinstate the Company to
the Official List;
(E) the Company completing a capital raising of not less than
$2,000,000 via the issue of Shares at not less than $0.04 each
(noting that the parties have determined to raise $3,000,000
under the Public Offer);
> (F) to the extent required by the ASX or the Listing Rules, the
‘ Vendors entering into restriction agreements with the
- Company in relation to the Consideration Securities;
! (G) the Company obtaining all necessary shareholder approvals,
El including:
(1) approval for the issue of the Consideration
Securities, Capital Raising Shares, Facilitator
1] Securities and Employee Options;
r] (2) obtaining an independent expert's report;
J (3) approval to appoint the Proposed Directors as
5 Directors; and
I (4) approval to establish an employee incentive
_ scheme;
-
E (H) the Company entering into employment and/or service
L agreements (in a form satisfactory to the Company, acting
a reasonably) with:
— (1) Ms Cathie Reid, In relation to her appomtment as
.1 Chair of the Company; and
I, (2) Dr Catriona Wallace, in relation to her appointment
,1] as Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director of
the Company,
—
m: (this condition has been satisfied); and
N (I) Flamingo confirming that any options and warrants issued or
. outstanding have been cancelled (this condition has been
satisfied).
' If the conditions are not satisfied (or waived) on or before 5:00pm
_ (WST) on 31 October 2016 or such other date as the Company and the
.1 Vendors' representative approve in writing, then the Company,
Flamingo or the Signing Sellers may terminate the Acquisition
1' Agreement by the provision of written notice to the other parties.
(iii) Consideration
The consideration payable by the Company to the Vendors under the
Acquisition Agreement is comprised of the Consideration Securities to
g be issued under the Consideration Offer, pro-rata according to each
E: Vendor's Flamingo shareholding.
(l)
C:
El
53' —
L1; 77


. Of the Consideration Securities, 115,814,391 Initial Consideration
Shares and 115,814,391 Performance Shares will be issued to
Flamingo's founder and incoming Company director, Dr Catriona
Wallace.
Approval for the issue of the Consideration Securities to the Founder
and the Non-Founder Vendors is the subject of Resolutions 5 and 6 of
the General Meeting.
>
‘ (iv) Completion
-
- At completion of the Acquisition Agreement, the Company has agreed
I— to issue:
—
.1 (A) the Consideration Securities to the Vendors under the
Consideration Offer;
(B) the Facilitator Securities to the Facilitators under the
I Facilitation Offer; and
 (C) the Employee Options to Flamingo employees under the
Employee Offer to replace existing Flamingo options.
5 Following the appointment of the Proposed Directors to the Board, it
I is proposed that Mr Tom Bahen will resign as Director. Approval for
_ the appointment of the Proposed Directors is the subject of
- Resolutions 11 and 12 of the General Meeting.
E (v) Loan facility
—
- The Company has also agreed to provide an unsecured loan facility of
- up to $300,000 to Flamingo for transaction costs and business costs
.1 for the period up to completion (Loan). As at the date of this
Prospectus, the Company has extended the facility by a further
n, $200,000 and the Loan has been fully drawn down.
‘ In the event that completion of the Acquisition does not occur for any
_ reason, the Loan will convert into common stock in the capital of
I F Flamingo at the same price per each common stock at which the
Company undertook its last capital raising of at least $500,000.
. (vi) Warranties and indemnities
I The Acquisition Agreement contains additional provisions, including
warranties and indemnities in respect of the status of Flamingo and
_ the Company, which are considered standard for agreements of this
.1 kind.
II (b) Short Form Acquisition Agreements
The Company and each of the Flamingo shareholders that are not Signing
Sellers (Minority Flamingo Shareholders) have executed Short Form
Acquisition Agreements.
12 The Short Form Acquisition Agreements provide that subject to completion
E: occurring under the Acquisition Agreement, the Company will purchase 100%
‘2; of the ordinary shares in Flamingo held by the Minority Flamingo Shareholders.
E
$
:5 —
,3 78
1,)


. The consideration payable by the Company under the Acquisition Agreement
and the Short Form Acquisition Agreements is comprised of the Consideration
Securities to be issued under the Consideration Offer.
(c) Lead Manager / Corporate Advisor Mandate
On 13 July 2016, the Company entered into a lead manager and corporate
advisow mandate with Otsana Capital. A summaw of the key terms set out
>| below.
- (i) Term and termination
I
n- The Company will engage Otsana as Lead Manager for a period of
— 12 months (effective from mandate being executed), with access to
.1 its corporate team as required. The appointment is an exclusive
appointment during the term, but either party may terminate the
appointment on 30 days‘ written notice or immediately upon an
1] unremedied breach of the mandate.
E (ii) Capital raising fee
‘ With respect to the Offer, Otsana, acting in its capacity as Lead
5 Manager, will be entitled to a 2% advisory fee on total monies raised.
Monies raised in this context will exclude any monies raised or
I contributed directly by anyone that Flamingo have solicited
_ themselves during the course of the transaction.
-
E In addition, the Company will pay up to an additional 4% on any
' capital raised by Otsana or any Australian Financial Services Licence
i holders that Otsana introduces.
.—
“ (iii) Monthly retainer and reimbursable expenses
g The Company will pay Otsana a corporate advisow fee of $5,000 (plus
n, GST) per month for advisow services.
‘ Otsana will also be reimbursed for all reasonable out of pocket
_ expenses incurred, provided that the Company's prior consent is
I 5 obtained prior to the incurrence of any single expense greater than
$500 and if total aggregate expenses are expected to exceed $5,000.
. (d) Executive Services Agreement - Dr Catriona Wallace
I The Company has entered into an executive services agreement with Dr
Catriona Wallace (Wallace Agreement).
_
a Under the Wallace Agreement, Dr Wallace is engaged by the Company to
provide executive services to the Company as Chief Executive Officer and
Executive Director on a full time basis, commencing from completion of the
I Acquisition. The Company will remunerate Dr Wallace for her services with an
executive remuneration package comprising the following:
(i) a base salaw (inclusive of superannuation) comprised of:
(A) a regular salary component of $275,000 per annum; and
(B) a living away from home component of $24,000 per annum;
and
79


. (ii) a director‘s fee of $36,000 per annum (exclusive of statutory
superannuation).

The Company will also reimburse Dr Wallace for reasonable expenses

necessarily incurred by her in the performance of her services as Chief

Executive Officer and Executive Director.

The Board may, in its absolute discretion, invite Dr Wallace to participate in
> bonus and/or other incentive schemes that the Company may implement from
‘ time to time, subject to Shareholder approval.
=
a Dr Wallace as founder of Flamingo and through her associate Phoenixavier Pty
— Ltd, is a shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total
— of 115,814,391 Initial Consideration Shares and 115,814,391 Performance
g Shares (Founder Consideration Securities) as part of the Consideration

Securities to be issued upon completion of the Acquisition. Approval for the

issue of the Founder Consideration Securities is the subject of Resolution 5 of
m the General Meeting.

r In the event of a change of control, Dr Wallace will receive a bonus payment

E equal to 3 months' base salary.

E The Wallace Agreement is for an indefinite term, and will continue until

terminated by either the Company by the giving of 3 months‘ written notice

I or Dr Wallace by the giving of 3 months‘ written notice of termination (or

_ shorter period in limited circumstances).

-

E As Executive Director, Dr Wallace shall (amongst other things):

I

— (iii) be engaged as a full-time employee of the Company and during usual

! business hours and such other hours as the exigencies of business may

- from time to time require, shall devote the whole of her time,

a attention and skill to the duties of her position and to the business of
the Company, and such related corporations of the Company as the

r] Company may from time to time direct; and

i (iv) obey all directions given to her by or under the authority of the Board,
and use her best endeavours to promote the interests of the Company

m and of such related corporations of the Company as the Company may
from time to time direct.

I-1

a Any inventions or Intellectual Property made, discovered or suggested by Dr

Wallace in connection with her employment by the Company will be the

I property of the Company.

.—

_ Dr Wallace is also subject to restrictions in relation to the use of confidential

a information during and after her employment with the Company ceases and
being directly or indirectly involved in a competing business during the

I continuance of her employment with the Company and for a period of

L 6 months after her employment with the Company ceases, on terms which are
otherwise considered standard for agreements of this nature.

The Wallace Agreement contains additional provisions considered standard for

agreements of this nature.

80


. (e) Non-executive letters of appointment
The Company has entered into letters of appointment with each of its non-
executive directors, with each entitled to a fee of $3,000 per month and
otherwise on standard terms for agreements of this nature.
The Company has also entered into a letter of appointment with proposed
non-executive Director, Ms Cathie Reid, commencing from the completion of
> the Acquisition. Ms Reid will be paid a fee of $3,000 per month, plus statutory
g superannuation for her services as Non-Executive Chair, including but not
= limited to attending and participating in Board meetings and discussions, the
- Company‘s annual general meeting, and otherwise performing services and
I— duties expected of a non-executive director as requested by the Board and in
— accordance with the Company's Constitution, the Corporations Act and the
a Listing Rules.
The appointment of Ms Reid as non-executive Director is otherwise on terms
1] that are standard for an appointment of this nature.
r Ms Reid, through her associates Badger 31 Pty Ltd and Flamingo 31 Pty Ltd, is
a a shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total of
62,848,740 Initial Consideration Shares and 62,848,740 Performance Shares as
5 part of the Consideration Securities to be issued upon completion of the
Acquisition.
! (f) Deeds of indemnity, insurance and access
-
IE The Company has entered into deeds of indemnity, insurance and access with
L each of its Directors and the company secretary. The Company has also
i entered into deeds of indemnity, insurance and access with the Proposed
._ Directors.
-
g Under these deeds, the Company agrees to indemnify each officer to the
extent permitted by the Corporations Act against any liability arising as a
r] result of the officer acting as an officer of the Company or a related body
‘ corporate (subject to customary exceptions). The Company is also required to
._ maintain insurance policies for the benefit of the relevant officer and must
also allow the officers to inspect board papers and other documents provided
E to the Board in certain circumstances.
5
!
5
2
ii
C:
a _
E 81
l)


. 10. Additional Information
10.1 Rights and liabilities attaching to Shares
The following is a general description of the more significant rights and liabilities
attaching to the Shares. This summary is not exhaustive. Full details of provisions
relating to rights attaching to the Shares are contained in the Corporations Act, Listing
> Rules and the Company‘s Constitution, a copy of which is available for inspection at
‘ the Company's registered office during normal business hours.
-
i The summary below is based on the proposed new Constitution being considered by
_ Shareholders at the General Meeting.
—
. (a) (Ranking of Shares): At the date of this Prospectus, all Shares are of the same
class and rank equally in all respects. Specifically, the Shares issued pursuant
1 to this Prospectus will rank equally with existing Shares.
II J (b) (Voting rights): Subject to any rights or restrictions, at general meetings:
I” (i) evew Shareholder present and entitled to vote may vote in person or
by attorney, proxy or representative;
5 (ii) has one vote on a show of hands; and
I (iii) has one vote for every Share held, upon a poll.
U (c) (Dividend rights): Shareholders will be entitled to dividends, distributed
ll among members in proportion to the capital paid up, from the date of
— payment. No dividend carries interest against the Company and the
- declaration of Directors as to the amount to be distributed is conclusive.
III
.1 Shareholders may be paid interim dividends or bonuses at the discretion of
the Directors. The Company must not pay a dividend unless the Company‘s
r assets exceed its liabilities immediately before the dividend is declared and
I]: the excess is sufficient for the payment of the dividend.
_ (d) (Variation of rights): The rights attaching to the Shares may only be varied by
F the consent in writing of the holders of three-quarters of the Shares, or with
I the sanction of a special resolution passed at a general meeting.
.! (e) (Transfer of Shares): Shares can be transferred upon delivery of a proper
instrument of transfer to the Company or by a transfer in accordance with the
I ASX Settlement Operating Rules. The instrument of transfer must be in
writing, in the approved form, and signed by the transferor and the
_-_ transferee. Until the transferee has been registered, the transferor is deemed
a to remain the holder, even after signing the instrument of transfer.
In some circumstances, the Directors may refuse to register a transfer if upon
I registration the transferee will hold less than a marketable parcel. The Board
may refuse to register a transfer of Shares upon which the Company has a lien.
(f) (General meetings): Shareholders are entitled to be present in person, or by
proxy, attorney or representative to attend and vote at general meetings of
Q the Company.
3
LL
‘69
E
(‘3
E 82
l)


. The Directors may convene a general meeting at their discretion. General
meetings shall also be convened on requisition as provided for by the
Corporations Act.

(g) (Unmarketable parcels): The Company's Constitution provides for the sale of
unmarketable parcels subject to any applicable laws and provided a notice is
given to the minority Shareholders stating that the Company intends to sell
their relevant Shares unless an exemption notice is received by a specified

=> date.
- (h) (Rights on winding up): If the Company is wound up, the liquidator may with
- the sanction of special resolution, divide the assets of the Company amongst
I: members as the liquidator sees fit. If the assets are insufficient to repay the
whole of the paid up capital of members, they will be distributed in such a
. way that the losses borne by members are in proportion to the capital paid
up.
 10.2 Terms and conditions of Performance Shares
r (a) (Definitions): Words with a capitalised letter in this Section 10.2 have the
 meaning given below, or otherwise as set out in this Prospectus:
.5 Conversion Event means
I (i) the achievement of a Performance Hurdle and completion of the
_ Vesting Period set out in paragraph 10.2(d); or
-
El (ii) the happening of any of the event/s set out in paragraph 10.2(d)(v).
I
a Deal means to sell, transfer, assign, novate, vary, mortgage, encumber,
._ create any equitable interest, share any rights, or otherwise deal with any
- right, title or interest, or agreement to do any of these actions.
a Expiry Date means the date that is 3.5 years from the date of issue of the
n, Performance Shares.
‘ Holder means a holder of Performance Shares.
_
I F Performance Hurdle means a performance hurdle set out in
paragraph 10.2(d) and each of Class A Performance Hurdle, Class B
a Performance Hurdle and Class C Performance Hurdle have a corresponding
.! meaning in relation to the relevant Performance Shares.
I Performance Share means a performance share convertible into a Share upon
I achievement of the relevant Performance Hurdle, issued on the terms and
_ conditions set out in this Section 10.2, and each of Class A Performance
.1 Share, Class B Performance Share and Class C Performance Share have a
corresponding meaning in relation to the relevant Performance Hurdle
II applicable to each class.
Revenue means revenue as reported by Flamingo in accordance with IFRS,
excluding interest income and grant income.
Substantial US Corporation means a key strategic US client of Flamingo, from
a confidential list of clients to be agreed with the Company (acting
reasonably).
T


. Vesting Period means the period of 2 years from the date of issue of the
Performance Shares.
(b) (Interpretation): Grammatical variations of any words or phrases defined in
Section 10.2(a) have a corresponding meaning.
(c) (Performance Shares): The Performance Shares are issued with the rights and
> on the terms set out in this Section 10.2.
‘ (i) The terms of this Section 10.2 prevail to the extent of any
- inconsistency With the constitution of the Company.
! (ii) Prior to issue of the Performance Shares, and subject to prior ASX
— approval, the terms of this Section 10.2 may be amended by
.1 agreement between the Purchaser and the Company having regard to
any professional advice received or if required by ASX. The Company
has received ASX confirmation that the terms of the Performance
1] Shares are appropriate and equitable.
m (d) (Conversion):
‘ (i) Subject to Sections 10.2(d)(iv) and 10.2(d)(v) and the end of the
E Vesting Period:
I (A) Class A Performance Shares will convert into Shares on a 1:1
_ basis if Flamingo executes a legally binding master services
- agreement (MSA) and completes a security audit with a
El Substantial US Corporation and either:
I
— (1) the MSA remains valid, binding and enforceable for
- at least 12 months after its execution; or
-
.1 (2) the Flamingo Platform technology is applied in
another business vertical of the Substantial US
I, Corporation outside any business unit where the
‘ technology is being trialled;
'_ (B) Class B Performance Shares will convert into Shares on a 1:1
I 5 basis if Flamingo achieves $13,000,000 in Revenue in any 12
month period within 36 months of completion of the
5 Acquisition; and
(C) Class C Performance Shares will convert into Shares on a 1:1
I basis if Flamingo achieves $28,000,000 in Revenue in any 12
month period within 36 months of completion of the
_ Acquisition.
E (ii) 0n the occurrence of a Conversion Event, the allocation of Shares
II issued will be on a pro rata basis to all Holders.
(iii) The Performance Hurdles must be met on or before the relevant
Expiry Date.
(iv) If a Performance Hurdle is not met by the relevant Expiw Date, the
g relevant Performance Shares held by each Holder will automatically
E: consolidate into one Performance Share and will then convert into
it; one Share for each Holder.
:5 —
Lv 84
1,)


. (v) All Performance Shares on issue shall automatically convert into
Shares on a one-for-one basis up to a maximum number that is equal
to 10% of the Company's issued capital (as at the date of any of the
following events) upon the happening of any of the following events:
(A) the occurrence of the offeror under a takeover offer in

respect of all Shares announcing that it has achieved
acceptances in respect of more than 50.1% of Shares and that
>I takeover bid has become unconditional; or
- (B) the announcement by the Company that the Shareholders
- have at a Court-convened meeting of Shareholders voted in
I: favour, by the necessary majority, of a proposed scheme of
g arrangement under which all Securities are to be either:
(1) cancelled; or
1] (2) transferred to a third party; and
r (3) the Court, by order, approves the proposed scheme
’c of arrangement.
5 (vi) The Company will ensure the allocation of Shares issued under
Section 10.2(d)(v) is on a pro rata basis to all Holders in respect of
I their respective holdings of Performance Shares and all remaining
_ Performance Shares held by each Holder will automatically
- consolidate into one Performance Share and will then convert into
El one Share.
I
— (e) (Voting rights): Each Holder shall have the right to receive notice of and
! attend but not to vote at any meeting of Shareholders.
-
.l (f) (Dividends): The Performance Shares shall not have any right to receive
dividends (whether cash or non-cash) from the profits of the Company at any
n, time.
‘ (g) (Dealings): A Holder must not Deal with the Performance Shares.
I E (h) (Access to documents and information): A Holder has the right to receive
notices of general meetings and financial reports and accounts of the Company
N that are circulated to Shareholders, and a right to attend a meeting of
.! Shareholders.
I (i) (Other terms and conditions):
_ (i) A Holder will not be entitled to a return on capital, whether in a
.1 winding up, upon reduction of capital or otherwise.
(ii) A Holder will not be entitled to participate in the surplus profit or
I assets of the Company upon a winding up.
(iii) There are no participating rights or entitlements inherent in the
Performance Shares and Holders will not be entitled to participate in
new issues (such as bonus issues) or pro-rata issues of capital to
g Shareholders.
E
E
ct
ﬁ
:5 —
E 85
l)


. (iv) The Company will issue each Holder with a new holding statement for
Shares issued upon conversion of Performance Shares as soon as
practicable following the conversion of Performance Shares.

(v) The Performance Shares will be unquoted.
(vi) All Shares issued upon conversion will rank equally in all respects with
then-issued Shares. The Company must, within the time period
> required by the Listing Rules, apply to ASX for quotation of the Shares
‘ on ASX.
=
i (vii) A Performance Share does not give the Holder any other rights other
— than those expressly provided by this Section 10.2 and those provided
5 at law where such rights cannot be excluded.
(viii) The terms of the Performance Shares may be amended as necessary
by the directors of the Company in order to comply with the Listing
m Rules or any directions of ASX regarding the terms in this
Section 10.2.
I
a 10.3 Summary of the Company's Performance Rights Plan
5 The Cre8tek Limited Performance Rights Plan (Plan) was approved by Shareholders at
the Company‘s general meeting held on 23 December 2015. An overview of the terms
I and conditions of the Plan is below:
—
- (a) (Eligible Participants): A Director, full time, part time or casual employee of
IE the Company and certain contractors (current or prospective) who is declared
L by the Board to be eligible to receive grants of Performance Rights under the
a Performance Rights Plan (Eligible Participant).
.—
“ (b) (Offers): The Board may, from time to time, at its absolute discretion, make
a an offer to an Eligible Participant under the Performance Rights Plan to apply
for up to a specified number of Performance Rights, upon the terms of the
r] Performance Rights Plan and on such additional terms and conditions as the
‘ Board determines (Offer).
_ (c) (Performance Rights): Each Performance Right, once vested, entitles the
m holder, on exercise, to the issue of one Share.
a (d) (Limit on Offers): The Company must have reasonable grounds to believe,
a when making an Offer, that the number of Shares to be received on exercise
of Performance Rights offered under an Offer, when aggregated with the
I number of Shares issued or that may be issued as a result of offers made in
-_ reliance on Class Order 14/1000 (Class Order) at any time during the previous
_ 3 year period under an employee incentive scheme covered by the Class Order
a or an ASIC exempt arrangement of a similar kind to an employee incentive
scheme, will not exceed 5% of the total number of Shares on issue at the date
E of the Offer.

(e) (Not transferrable): Performance Rights are only transferrable in special
circumstances with the prior written consent of the Board (which may be
withheld in its absolute discretion) or by force of law upon death to the
participant‘s legal personal representative or upon bankruptcy to the

§ participant‘s trustee in bankruptcy.

§
11
E
E 86
l)


. (f) (Vesting Conditions): A Performance Right may be made subject to vesting
conditions as determined by the Board in its discretion and as specified in the
offer for the Performance Right (Vesting Conditions).

(g) (Vesting): A Performance Right will vest where Vesting Conditions are
satisfied or where, despite Vesting Conditions not being satisfied, the Board
(in its absolute discretion) resolves that unvested Performance Rights have
vested as a result of:

>

‘ (i) a relevant person ceasing to be an Eligible Participant due to special

- circumstances;

I

I: (ii) a relevant person suffering severe financial hardship;

.1 (iii) a change of control occurring or the Company passing a resolution for
voluntaw winding up, or an order is made for the compulsow winding
up of the Company.

m (h) (Exercise of vested Performance Right): A Participant may, subject to the

r terms of any offer, exercise any vested Performance Right at any time after

’B the Board notifies that the Performance Right has vested and before it lapses.

E (i) (Issue of Shares): Subject to the Corporations Act, the Listing Rules, the Plan

and the terms of any offer under the Plan, within 10 days of receipt of a valid

I notice of exercise for Performance Rights, the Board must issue or transfer

_ one (1) Share, free of encumbrances, to the Participant or his or her personal

5 representative for each Performance Right exercised.

L (j) (Lapse of a Performance Right): A Performance Right will lapse upon the

i earlier to occur of:

n—

“ (i) an unauthorised dealing in, or hedging of, the Performance Right;

E (ii) a Vesting Condition in relation to the Performance Right is not

I, satisfied by its due date, or becomes incapable of satisfaction, unless
the Board exercises its discretion to vest the Performance Right under
a good leaver exception (e.g. due to death, total and permanent

_ disability, retirement or redundancy or financial hardship) or change

m; of control event;

_‘ (iii) in respect of unvested Performance Rights only, where a relevant

.! person ceases to be an Eligible Participant, unless the Board exercises
its discretion to vest the Performance Right under a good leaver

I exception or change of control event or resolves to allow the

. unvested Performance Right to remain unvested after the relevant

_ person ceases to be an Eligible Participant;

a (iv) in respect of a vested Performance Right only, where a relevant

I person ceases to be an Eligible Participant and the Performance Right

I granted is not exercised within one (1) month of the date the relevant
person ceases to be an Eligible Participant;

(v) the Board deems that a Performance Right lapses due to fraud,
dishonesty or other improper behaviour of the holder/ Eligible
Participant;

V


. (vi) the Company undergoes a change in control or winding up, and the
Board does not exercise its discretion to vest the Performance Right;
and

(vii) the expiw date of the Performance Right.
(k) (Shares): All shares issued under the Performance Rights Plan will rank equally
in all respects with the Shares of the same class for the time being on issue
> except as regards any rights attaching to such Shares by reference to a record
‘ date prior to the date of their issue.
=
i (l) (Quotation of Shares): |f Shares of the same class as those allotted under the
— Plan are quoted on the ASX, the Company will, subject to the Listing Rules,
— apply to the ASX for those Shares to be quoted on ASX within 10 business days
a of the later of the date the Shares are issued and the date any restriction
period applying to the disposal of Shares ends.
5 (m) (Share sale restrictions): The Board may, in its discretion, determine at any
time up until exercise of Performance Rights, that a restriction period will
r apply to some or all of the Shares issued to a Participant on exercise of those
ﬂ Performance Rights (Restricted Shares), up to a maximum of seven (7) years
from the date the Performance Rights are granted (Restriction Period). Other
5 than any Restriction Period, there will be no transfer restrictions on Shares
issued or transferred under the Plan unless the sale, transfer or disposal would
I require the preparation of a disclosure document.
—
- The Company will issue, where required to enable Shares issued or transferred
IE on exercise of Performance Rights to be freely tradeable on the ASX, a
L cleansing statement at the time the shares are issued.
—
s (n) (No participation rights): There are no participating rights or entitlements
- inherent in the Performance Rights and participants will not be entitled to
g participate in new issues of capital offered to Shareholders during the
r currency of the Performance Rights.
I
a (o) (No change): A Performance Right does not confer the right to a change in
_ the number of underlying Shares over which the Performance Right can be
1 exercised.
m (p) (Reorganisation): If, at any time, the issued capital of the Company is
_‘ reorganised (including consolidation, subdivision, reduction or return), all
a rights of a participant are to be changed in a manner consistent with the
I Corporations Act and the Listing Rules at the time of the reorganisation.
_ (q) (Deferred taxation): Subdivision 83A-C of the Income Tax Assessment Act
_ 1997 applies to Performance Rights granted under the Plan except to the
a extent an offer provides otherwise.
' (r) (Amendments): Subject to express restrictions set out in the Plan and
L complying with the Corporations Act, Listing Rules and any other applicable
law, the Board may at any time by resolution amend or add to all or any of
the provisions of the Plan, or the terms or conditions of any Performance Right
granted under the Plan including giving any amendment retrospective effect.
:3 (s) (Restrictions on amendments): Without the consent of the Participant, no
3 amendment may be made to the terms of any granted Performance Right
 which reduced the rights of the Participant in respect of that Performance
g Right, other than an amendment introduced primarily:
E
E 88
l)


. (i) for the purpose of complying with or conforming to present or future
State or Commonwealth legislation governing or regulating the
maintenance or operation of the Plan or like plans;

(ii) to correct any manifest error or mistake;
(iii) to enable a member of the Company to comply with the Corporations
Act, the Listing Rules, applicable foreign law, or a requirement,
> policy or practice of the ASIC or other foreign or Australian regulatow
‘ body; or
=
i (iv) to take into consideration possible adverse tax implications in respect
I— of the Plan arising from, amongst others, adverse rulings from the
— Commissioner of Taxation, changes to tax legislation (including an
a official announcement by the Commonwealth of Australia) and/or
changes in the interpretation of tax legislation by a court of
1 competent jurisdiction.
m 10.4 Summary of the Company's Employee Share Option Plan (Transitioning
r] Flamingo Employees)
J The Cre8tek Limited Employee Share Option Plan (Transitioning Flamingo Employees)
5 (ESOP) was adopted by the Board in August 2016. The full terms of the ESOP may be
inspected at the registered office of the Company during normal business hours. A
I summary of the terms of the ESOP is set out below:
—
- (a) (Eligible participants): Directors, employees and contractors of the Company
E or an entity controlled by or which controls the Company are “Eligible Persons"
' under the ESOP. The Board may from time to time make offers in writing to
i Eligible Persons inviting them to take up Options under the ESOP. Options may
-— not be offered to a Director or his or her associates except where approval is
- given by the Shareholders in general meeting in accordance with the
g requirements of the Listing Rules.
r] (b) (Limit to number of Options offered under the ESOP): Offers without
‘ disclosure may only be made under the ESOP if the Board has reasonable
_ grounds to believe that the total number of Shares that may be acquired on
exercise of the Options offered under that Offer, when aggregated with the
m number of Shares issued or that may be issued as a result of offers made at
a any time during the previous 3 year period under:
a (i) the ESOP or any other employee incentive scheme; or
I (ii) an ASIC exempt arrangement of a similar kind to an employee
— incentive scheme,
_
a but disregarding any offer made, Option acquired or Shares issued by way of
I or as a result of:
L (iii) an offer to a person situated at the time of receipt of the offer
outside Australia;
(iv) an offer that did not need disclosure to investors because of
section 708 of the Corporations Act. Section 708 exempts the
*3 requirement of a disclosure document for the issue of securities in
(3‘ certain circumstances to investors who are deemed to have sufficient
 investment knowledge to make informed decisions, including
E
E
E 89
l)


. professional investors, sophisticated investors and senior managers of
the Company; or
(v) an offer made under a disclosure document,
would exceed 5% (or such other maximum permitted under any ASIC class
order providing relief from the disclosure regime of the Corporations Act) of
the total number of issued Shares in the Company as at the time of making
>| the offer.
- (c) (Award of Options): The Directors will administer the ESOP awarding Options
- to acquire Shares in the Company to Eligible Persons. The selection of persons
— to whom the Shares will be offered under the ESOP, the number of Shares
I which may be offered to those persons, and any performance criteria that may
.1 apply before the Options may be exercised will be determined wholly by the
Directors in their absolute discretion and in compliance with the Listing Rules.
I (d) (Expiration of Options): A vested Option will lapse on its expiw date. An
unvested Option will lapse upon the earlier of its expiw date, voluntary
r resignation of the employee or voluntary termination of the consultancy
’c contract, or the holder acting fraudulently or dishonestly in relation to the
Company (unless the Board resolves otherwise within 30 days of any such
.5 event occurring).
I (e) (Death or permanent disability of participant): An Option will lapse after
_ one year of a participant's death, permanent disability, redundancy or other
- reason which the Board considers fair and reasonable to warrant the
El participant maintaining his or her right to the Options.
I
i (f) (Transfer of Options): Subject to the Listing Rules and except on death of a
._ participant, Options may not be transferred, assigned or novated without the
- prior approval of the Board.
a (g) (Administration of the ESOP): The ESOP will be administered by the Board
n, which has the power to:
‘ (i) determine appropriate procedures for the administration of the ESOP
_ : .
T consrstent With the Rules;
m (ii) delegate such functions and powers as it may determine consider
5 appropriate for the exercise of the ESOP to a person or persons;
(iii) resolve conclusively all questions of fact, interpretation or
I application in connection with the ESOP and the Offer; and
.—
_ (iv) act or refrain from acting under or in connection with the ESOP or
.1 any Options and in the exercise of any power or discretion granted to
it by the ESOP, except as otherwise expressly provided in the ESOP.
II (h) (Amendment of the ESOP): The Board may amend the ESOP if the amendment
is of a formal, minor or technical nature or is made to correct a manifest
error. Other amendments require shareholder approval.

(i) (Termination or suspension of the ESOP): The ESOP may be terminated or
suspended at any time by resolution of the Board and notification thereof to
the ASX, if required.

90


. 10.5 Terms and conditions of Employee Options

The following terms and conditions apply to the Employee Options:

(a) (Entitlement): Each Option entitles the holder to subscribe for one Share upon

exercise of the Option.

(b) (Scheme): The Options are to be issued under the ESOP. In the event of any
> inconsistency between the ESOP and these terms and conditions, these terms
‘ and conditions Will apply to the extent of the inconsistency.

- (c) (Exercise Price and Expiry Date): Subject to the receipt of any necessary
— waivers or approvals from ASX, the Options have an exercise price of $0.029
l per Option (Exercise Price) and an expiry date of 5:00pm (WST) on the date
 that is 5 years after the date of issue (Expiry Date). An Option not exercised
before the Expiry Date will automatically lapse on the Expiw Date.
1] (d) (Vesting and Vesting Dates):
r (i) The Options will vest upon the holder meeting the Vesting Condition
’c (as described below).
.3 (ii) The Vesting Condition is that the holder of the Options must remain
an employee of the Company (or a subsidiary of the Company), up to
I an including the Initial Vesting Date and then on the relevant
_ subsequent vesting dates as set out below:
-
El Vesting dates ‘ Number of Options that will vest
—
- At the Initial Vesting Date 1/3 of the total Options held by
— the holder
I!
a Each full month after the Initial 1/36 of the total Options held by
r Vesting Date until all Options have the holder
" been vested
(where Initial Vesting Date means the one year anniversary of the
 date the existing Flamingo options were granted).
‘ (iii) Where the holder of the Options ceases to be an employee of the
.1 Company (or a subsidiaw of the Company) before the Initial Vesting
Date or the subsequent vesting dates (as applicable), see
I Section 10.5(r) below.
_
_ (e) (Exercise Period): The Options are exercisable at any time after the Vesting
.I Date and before the Expiry Date.
'I (f) (Quotation of the Options): The Options will be unquoted.

(g) (Transferability): The Options are not transferable, except with the prior

written approval of the Board.

(h) (Notice of Exercise): The Options may be exercised by notice in writing to
 the Company in the manner specified on the Option certificate (Notice of
E3 Exercise) and payment of the Exercise Price for each Option being exercised
 in Australian currency by electronic funds transfer or other means of payment
ill
33' —
 91


. acceptable to the Company, including cashless exercise as described in
paragraph 10.5(j).
Any Notice of Exercise of an Option received by the Company will be deemed
to be a notice of the exercise of that Option as at the date of receipt.

(i) (Lodgement instructions): Cheques shall be in Australian currency made
payable to the Company and crossed "Not Negotiable". The application for

> Shares on exercise of the Options with the appropriate remittance should be
‘ lodged at the Company's share registry.
-
- (j) (Cashless exercise of Options): A holder of Options may elect not to be
I— required to provide payment of the Exercise Price for the number of Options
I specified in a Notice of Exercise but that on exercise of those Options the
.1 Company will transfer or allot to the holder that number of Shares equal in
value to the positive difference between the then Market Value of the Shares
at the time of exercise and the Exercise Price that would otherwise be payable
I to exercise those Options (with the number of Shares rounded down to the
nearest whole Share).
Ir
’c Where Market Value means, at any given date, the volume weighted average
price per Share traded on the ASX over the five (5) trading days immediately
.5 preceding that given date.
I (k) (Shares issued on exercise): Shares issued on exercise of the Options rank
_ equally with the then Shares of the Company.
-
IE (I) (Quotation of Shares on exercise): Application will be made by the Company
' to ASX, on the business day the Shares are issued, for quotation of the Shares
i issued upon the exercise of the Options.
.—
“ (m) (Timing of issue of Shares): Within 15 business days after the later of the
.I following:
r (i) receipt of a Notice of Exercise given in accordance with these terms
‘ and conditions and payment of the Exercise Price for each Option
being exercised; and
_
I F (ii) when excluded information in respect to the Company (as defined in
section 708A(7) of the Corporations Act) (if any) ceases to be
5 excluded information,
the Company will:
I (iii) issue the Shares pursuant to the exercise of the Options;
_
.1 (iv) give ASX a notice that complies with section 708A(5)(e) of the
Corporations Act; and
II (v) apply for official quotation on ASX of Shares issued pursuant to the
exercise of the Options.

(n) (Participation in new issues): There are no participation rights or
entitlements inherent in the Options and holders will not be entitled to
participate in new issues of capital offered to Shareholders during the
currency of the Options. However, the Company will ensure that for the
purposes of determining entitlements to any such issue, the record date will
be at least 4 business days after the issue is announced. This will give the

92


. holders of Options the opportunity to exercise their Options prior to the date
for determining entitlements to participate in any such issue.

(0) (Adjustment for bonus issues of Shares): If the Company makes a bonus issue
of Shares or other securities to existing shareholders (other than an issue in
lieu or in satisfaction of dividends or by way of dividend reinvestment):

(i) the number of Shares which must be issued on the exercise of an
> Option will be increased by the number of Shares which the Option
‘ holder would have received if the Option holder had exercised the
- Option before the record date for the bonus issue; and
! ii no chan e will be made to the Exercise Price.

_ ( > g
.1 (p) (Adjustment for entitlements issue): If the Company makes an issue of Shares
pro rata to existing shareholders (other than as a bonus issue, to which
paragraph 10.5(o) will apply) there will be no adjustment of the Exercise Price
m of an Option or the number of Shares over which the Options are exercisable.
r (q) (Adjustments for reorganisation): If there is any reorganisation of the issued
’c share capital of the Company, the rights of the Option holders will be varied
in accordance with the Listing Rules.
5 (r) (Leavers): A holder of Options will become a “Leaver” when they cease
I employment or office with the Company or any of its subsidiaries. Where a
_ holder of Options becomes a Leaver, all unvested Options will automatically
- be forfeited by the holder, unless the Board otherwise determines in its
El discretion to permit some or all of the Options to vest.
I
i 10.6 Summary of the Company's Employee Incentive Scheme
.—
“ The Cre8tek Limited Employee Incentive Scheme (Scheme) is being considered for
. approval by Shareholders at the General Meeting. The full terms of the Scheme may
be inspected at the registered office of the Company during normal business hours. A
n, summary of the terms of the Scheme is set out below:
‘ (a) (Eligible Participant): Eligible Participant means a person that:
m; (i) is an "eligible participant" (as that term is defined in ASIC Class
Order 14/1000) in relation to the Company or an Associated Body
5 Corporate (as that term is defined in ASIC Class Order 14/1000); and

(ii) has been determined by the Board to be eligible to participate in the

I Scheme from time to time.

-— .

_ (b) (Purpose): The purpose of the Scheme Is to:

a (i) assist in the reward, retention and motivation of Eligible Participants;

II (ii) link the reward of Eligible Participants to Shareholder value creation;
and

(iii) align the interests of Eligible Participants with shareholders of the

Group (being the Company and each of its Associated Bodies
g Corporate), by providing an opportunity to Eligible Participants to
g receive an equity interest in the Company in the form of Securities.

E
(‘3
E 93
l)


. (c) (Scheme administration): The Scheme will be administered by the Board. The
Board may exercise any power or discretion conferred on it by the Scheme
rules in its sole and absolute discretion. The Board may delegate its powers
and discretion.

(d) (Eligibility, invitation and application): The Board may from time to time
determine that an Eligible Participant may participate in the Scheme and
make an invitation to that Eligible Participant to apply for Securities on such

% terms and conditions as the Board decides.
E On receipt of an Invitation, an Eligible Participant may apply for the Securities
- the subject of the invitation by sending a completed application form to the
— Company. The Board may accept an application from an Eligible Participant
5 in whole or in part.
If an Eligible Participant is permitted in the invitation, the Eligible Participant
may, by notice in writing to the Board, nominate a party in whose favour the
m Eligible Participant wishes to renounce the invitation.
r (e) (Grant of Securities): The Company will, to the extent that it has accepted a
£1 duly completed application, grant the Participant the relevant number of
Securities, subject to the terms and conditions set out in the invitation, the
5 Scheme rules and any ancillary documentation required.
I (f) (Terms of Convertible Securities): Each ‘Convertible Security‘ represents a
_ right to acquire one or more Shares (for example, under an option or
- performance right), subject to the terms and conditions of the Scheme.
E Prior to a Convertible Security being exercised a Participant does not have any
i interest (legal, equitable or otherwise) in any Share the subject of the
._ Convertible Security by virtue of holding the Convertible Security. A
- Participant may not sell, assign, transfer, grant a security interest over or
3 otherwise deal with a Convertible Security that has been granted to them. A
Participant must not enter into any arrangement for the purpose of hedging
r] their economic exposure to a Convertible Security that has been granted to
‘ them.
(g) (Vesting of Convertible Securities): Any vesting conditions applicable to the
@ grant of Convertible Securities will be described in the invitation. If all the
.4 vesting conditions are satisfied and/or otherwise waived by the Board, a
vesting notice will be sent to the Participant by the Company informing them
a that the relevant Convertible Securities have vested. Unless and until the
vesting notice is issued by the Company, the Convertible Securities will not be
I considered to have vested. For the avoidance of doubt, if the vesting
_ conditions relevant to a Convertible Security are not satisfied and/or
— otherwise waived by the Board, that Convertible Security will lapse.
g (h) (Exercise of Convertible Securities and cashless exercise): To exercise an
1 Convertible Security, the Participant must deliver a signed notice of exercise
L and, subject to a cashless exercise of Convertible Securities (see below), pay
the exercise price (if any) to or as directed by the Company, at any time prior
to the earlier of any date specified in the vesting notice and the expiry date
as set out in the invitation.
£3 An invitation may specify that at the time of exercise of the Convertible
(3‘ Securities, the Participant may elect not to be required to provide payment
3‘ of the exercise price for the number of Convertible Securities specified in a
g notice of exercise, but that on exercise of those Convertible Securities the
72‘
E 94
u


. Company will transfer or issue to the Participant that number of Shares equal
in value to the positive difference between the Market Value of the Shares at
the time of exercise and the exercise price that would otherwise be payable
to exercise those Convertible Securities.

Market Value means, at any given date, the volume weighted average price
per Share traded on the ASX over the 5 trading days immediately preceding
> that given date, unless otherwise specified in an invitation.
g A Convertible Security may not be exercised unless and until that Convertible
= Security has vested in accordance with the Scheme rules, or such earlier date
- as set out in the Scheme rules.
—
— (i) (Delivery of Shares on exercise of Convertible Securities): As soon as
a practicable after the valid exercise of a Convertible Security by a Participant,
the Company will issue or cause to be transferred to that Participant the
number of Shares to which the Participant is entitled under the Scheme rules
m and issue a substitute certificate for any remaining unexercised Convertible
Securities held by that Participant.
I
a (j) (Forfeiture of Convertible Securities): Where a Participant who holds
Convertible Securities ceases to be an Eligible Participant or becomes
5 insolvent, all unvested Convertible Securities will automatically be forfeited
by the Participant, unless the Board otherwise determines in its discretion to
I permit some or all of the Convertible Securities to vest.
—
- Where the Board determines that a Participant has acted fraudulently or
IE dishonestly, or wilfully breached his or her duties to the Group, the Board may
L in its discretion deem all unvested Convertible Securities held by that
a Participant to have been forfeited.
.—
“ Unless the Board otherwise determines, or as otherwise set out in the Scheme
g rules:
r] (i) any Convertible Securities which have not yet vested will be forfeited
‘ immediately on the date that the Board determines (acting
_ reasonably and in good faith) that any applicable vesting conditions
1 have not been met or cannot be met by the relevant date; and
E (ii) any Convertible Securities which have not yet vested will be
5 automatically forfeited on the expiw date specified in the invitation.
(k) (Change of control): If a change of control event occurs in relation to the
I Company, or the Board determines that such an event is likely to occur, the
_ Board may in its discretion determine the manner in which any or all of the
_ Participant‘s Convertible Securities will be dealt with, including, without
a limitation, in a manner that allows the Participant to participate in and/or
benefit from any transaction arising from or in connection with the change of
E control event.
(I) (Rights attaching to Scheme Shares): All Shares issued under the Scheme, or
issued or transferred to a Participant upon the valid exercise of a Convertible
Security, (Scheme Shares) will rank pari passu in all respects with the Shares
of the same class. A Participant will be entitled to any dividends declared and
L3 distributed by the Company on the Scheme Shares and may participate in any
(3 dividend reinvestment plan operated by the Company in respect of Scheme
 Shares. A Participant may exercise any voting rights attaching to Scheme
g Shares.
'3
E 95
l)


. (rn) (Disposal restrictions on Scheme Shares): If the invitation provides that any
Scheme Shares are subject to any restrictions as to the disposal or other
dealing by a Participant for a period, the Board may implement any procedure
it deems appropriate to ensure the compliance by the Participant with this
restriction.

For so long as a Scheme Share is subject to any disposal restrictions under the
Scheme, the Participant will not:
>
g (i) transfer, encumber or otherwise dispose of, or have a security
= interest granted over that Scheme Share; or
E (ii) take any action or permit another person to take any action to
— remove or circumvent the disposal restrictions without the express
a written consent of the Company.
(n) (Adjustment of Convertible Securities): If there is a reorganisation of the
m issued share capital of the Company (including any subdivision, consolidation,
reduction, return or cancellation of such issued capital of the Company), the
r rights of each Participant holding Convertible Securities will be changed to
E the extent necessaw to comply with the Listing Rules applicable to a
reorganisation of capital at the time of the reorganisation.
E If Shares are issued by the Company by way of bonus issue (other than an issue
I in lieu of dividends or by way of dividend reinvestment), the holder of
_ Convertible Securities is entitled, upon exercise of the Convertible Securities,
- to receive an allotment of as many additional Shares as would have been
IE issued to the holder if the holder held Shares equal in number to the Shares
L in respect of which the Convertible Securities are exercised.
—
! Unless otherwise determined by the Board, a holder of Convertible Securities
- does not have the right to participate in a pro rata issue of Shares made by
g the Company or sell renounceable rights.
r] (0) (Participation in new issues): There are no participation rights or
‘ entitlements inherent in the Convertible Securities and holders are not
_ entitled to participate in any new issue of Shares of the Company during the
currency of the Convertible Securities without exercising the Convertible
m Securities.
_‘ (p) (Amendment of Scheme): Subject to the following paragraph, the Board may
a at any time amend any provisions of the Scheme rules, including (without
limitation) the terms and conditions upon which any Securities have been
I granted under the Scheme and determine that any amendments to the Scheme
_ rules be given retrospective effect, immediate effect or future effect.
_
a No amendment to any provision of the Scheme rules may be made if the
amendment materially reduces the rights of any Participant as they existed
' before the date of the amendment, other than an amendment introduced
L primarily for the purpose of complying with legislation or to correct manifest
error or mistake, amongst other things, or is agreed to in writing by all
Participants.
(q) (Scheme duration): The Scheme continues in operation until the Board
:3 decides to end it. The Board may from time to time suspend the operation of
(3 the Scheme for a fixed period or indefinitely, and may end any suspension. If
 the Scheme is terminated or suspended for any reason, that termination or
g suspension must not prejudice the accrued rights of the Participants.
'3
E 96
u


. If a Participant and the Company (acting by the Board) agree in writing that
some or all of the Securities granted to that Participant are to be cancelled
on a specified date or on the occurrence of a particular event, then those
Securities may be cancelled in the manner agreed between the Company and
the Participant.

10.7 Substantial Shareholders
As at the date of this Prospectus, the following Shareholders (and their associates) hold
5% or more of the total number of Shares on issue in the Company (assuming that no
convertible Securities (e.g. Options and Performance Rights) are converted into
Shares):
Shareholder/Associates ‘ Existing Shares ‘ Existing %
Suburban Holdings Pty Limited <Suburban 14,653,569 6.25
Super Fund AlC>
On completion of the Offers and the Acquisition, the following Shareholders (and their
associates) are expected to hold 5% or more of the total number of Shares on issue:
Shareholder/Associates Shares Post- % Post-
Acquisition Acquisition
Entities associated with Dr Catriona Wallace‘ 115,814,391 19.45
Entities associated with Ms Cathie ReidZ 62,848,740 m
Notes:
1‘ Dr Wallace, as founder of Flamingo and through her associate Phoenixavier Pty Ltd, is a
shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total of 115,814,391
Initial Consideration Shares as part of the Consideration Securities to be issued upon
completion of the Acquisition under the Consideration Offer.
2‘ Ms Reid, through her associates Badger 31 Pty Ltd and Flamingo 31 Pty Ltd, is a
shareholder of Flamingo and she or her associates will receive a total of 62,848,740 Initial
Consideration Shares as part of the Consideration Securities to be issued upon completion
of the Acquisition under the Consideration Offer.
10.8 Interests of experts and advisers
(a) No interest except as disclosed
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus, no persons or
entity named in this Prospectus as performing a function in a professional,
advisow or other capacity in connection with the preparation or distribution
of this Prospectus holds at the date of this Prospectus, or held at any time
during the last 2 years, any interest in:
(i) the formation or promotion of the Company;
H, (ii) property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in
i connection with its formation or promotion, or the Offers; or
i,
=1,
 (iii) the Offers,
3'
l 97


. and the Company has not paid any amount or provided any benefit, or agreed
to do so, to any of those persons for services rendered by them in connection
with the formation or promotion of the Company or the Offers.

(b) Share Registry
Automic Registw Services has been appointed to conduct the Company‘s share
registw functions and to provide administrative services in respect to the
> processing of Applications received pursuant to this Prospectus, and will be
_ paid for these serVices on standard Industry terms and conditions.
-
— c Auditor to the Com an
s ( ) P Y
— Ernst & Young has been appointed as auditor of the Company. The Company
a estimates it will pay Ernst Et Young a total of $17,500 (excluding GST) for these
services. The Company has paid Ernst Et Young fees of $22,205 (excluding GST)
1 during the 24 months preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC.
m (d) Legal Advisers
@ Bellanhouse Legal has acted as the solicitors to the Company in relation to the
Offers, the Acquisition, the General Meeting and various other matters. The
E Company estimates it will pay Bellanhouse Legal $120,000 (excluding GST) for
these services. Subsequently, fees will be charged in accordance with normal
I charge out rates. In addition, Bellanhouse Legal has performed other legal
_ work for the Company. The Company has paid Bellanhouse Legal fees of
- $126,720 (excluding GST) during the 24 months preceding lodgement of this
IE Prospectus with ASIC (including fees paid to date in connection with the
L Offers, the Acquisition and the General Meeting).
—
E (e) Investigating Accountants
III
a BBQ Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd has acted as Investigating Accountant
and has prepared the Investigating Accountant's Report which is included in
r Section 6 of this Prospectus. The Company estimates it will pay BDO Corporate
a Finance (WA) Pty Ltd a total of $14,000 (excluding GST) for these services.
_ The Company has paid BDO Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd fees of $9,400
(excluding GST) during the 24 months preceding lodgement of this Prospectus
m with ASIC.
5 (f) Intellectual Property Expert (USA)
Flynn, Thiel, Boutell & Tani's, P.C. has prepared the Intellectual Property
I Experts' Report (USA) which is included at Section 7. The Company estimates
-_ it will pay Flynn, Thiel, Boutell & Tanis, P.C. a total of approximately $14,332
_ (excluding GST) for work done in relation to this Prospectus. During the
a 24 months preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, Flynn, Thiel,
Boutell & Tanis, P.C. has not received any other fees from the Company.
E (g) Intellectual Property Expert (Australia)
Williams + Hughes Pty Ltd has prepared the Intellectual Property Experts'
Report (Australia) which is included at Section 7. The Company estimates it
will pay Williams + Hughes Pty Ltd a total of approximately $16,000 (excluding
:2 GST) for work done in relation to this Prospectus. The Company has paid
3 Williams + Hughes Pty Ltd fees of $9,049 (excluding GST) during the 24 months
 preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC.
o
E
E
E 98
l)


. (h) Independent Industry Expert
Frost & Sullivan Australia Pty Ltd has prepared the Independent Industry
Expert's Report which is included at Section 4. The Company estimates it will
pay Frost & Sullivan Australia Pty Ltd a total of approximately $13,500
(excluding GST) for work done in relation to this Prospectus. During the
24 months preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, Frost Et Sullivan
> Australia Pty Ltd has not received any other fees from the Company.
‘ (i) Lead Manager and Corporate Advisor
-
- Otsana Capital is acting as the lead manager to the Public Offer and as
— corporate advisor to the Company and for this is entitled to be paid fees in
I accordance with the Lead Manager and Corporate Advisor Mandate
.1 summarised at Section 9.3(c). The Company has paid Otsana Capital fees of
$266,023 (excluding GST) during the 24 months preceding lodgement of this
Prospectus with ASIC.
m 10.9 Consents
Ir
£1 (a) General
.5 Chapter 6D of the Corporations Act imposes a liability regime on the Company
(as the offeror of Shares under this Prospectus), the Directors, any persons
I named in the Prospectus with their consent having made a statement in the
_ Prospectus and persons involved in a contravention in relation to the
- Prospectus, with regard to misleading and deceptive statements made in the
IE Prospectus. Although the Company bears primaw responsibility for the
' Prospectus, the other parties involved in the preparation of the Prospectus
i can also be responsible for certain statements made in it.
n—
5 In light of the above, each of the parties referred to below:
(i) does not make the Offer;
.r‘
11‘ (ii) does not make, or purport to make, any statement that is included in
this Prospectus, or a statement on which a statement made in this
Prospectus is based, other than as specified below or elsewhere in
 this Prospectus;
_‘ (iii) only to the maximum extent permitted by law, expressly disclaims
.! and takes no responsibility for any part of this Prospectus other than
a reference to its name and a statement contained in this Prospectus
I with the consent of that party as specified below; and
.—
_ (iv) has given and has not, prior to the lodgement of this Prospectus with
.1 ASIC, withdrawn its consent to the inclusion of the statements in this
Prospectus that are specified below in the form and context in which
II the statements appear.
(b) Share Registry
Automic Registry Services has given, and has not withdrawn prior to the
lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to being named in
this Prospectus as share registry to the Company in the form and context in
which it is named. Automic Registry Services has had no involvement in the
preparation of any part of this Prospectus other than being named as Share
Registry.
T


. (c) Auditor to the Company
Ernst Et Young has given, and has not withdrawn prior to the lodgement of this
Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to being named in this Prospectus as
auditor of the Company in the form and context in which it is named.
(d) Flamingo audited financial statements
> BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd was engaged by Flamingo to audit Flamingo‘s financial
‘ statements and has given, and has not withdrawn prior to the lodgement of
- this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to the inclusion of references to
- those audited financial statements in this Prospectus.
.—
5 (e) Legal Advisers
Bellanhouse Legal has given, and has not withdrawn prior to the lodgement of
this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to being named in this
Prospectus as legal adviser to the Company in the form and context in which
I it is named.
 (f) Investigating Accountant
5 BBQ Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd has given, and has not withdrawn prior
to the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to being
I named in this Prospectus as the Investigating Accountant to the Company in
_ the form and context in which it is named and has given and not withdrawn
- its consent to the inclusion of the Investigating Accountant's Report in the
El form and context in which it is included.
I
i (g) Intellectual Property Expert (USA)
- Flynn, Thiel, Boutell & Tanis, P.C. has given, and has not withdrawn prior to
.1 the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to being
named in this Prospectus as the Intellectual Property Expert (USA) to the
I, Company in the form and context in which it is named and has given and not
withdrawn its consent to the inclusion of the Intellectual Property Experts'
Report (USA) in the form and context in which it is included.
15 (h) Intellectual Property Expert (Australia)
N Williams + Hughes Pty Ltd has given, and has not withdrawn prior to the
. lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to being named in
this Prospectus as the Intellectual Property Expert (Australia) to the Company
I in the form and context in which it is named and has given and not withdrawn
its consent to the inclusion of the Intellectual Property Experts' Report
_ (Australia) in the form and context in which it is included.
a (i) Independent Industry Expert
II Frost Et Sullivan Australia Pty Ltd has given, and has not withdrawn prior to
the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to being
named in this Prospectus as the Independent Industry Expert to the Company
in the form and context in which it is named and has given and not withdrawn
its consent to the inclusion of the Independent Industry Expert's Report in the
form and context in which it is included.
100


. (j) Lead Manager and Corporate Advisor
Otsana Capital has given, and has not withdrawn prior to the lodgement of
this Prospectus with ASIC, its written consent to be named in this Prospectus
as the Lead Manager to the Public Offer and the Corporate Advisor to the
Company in the form and context in which it is named, together with all
references to it in this Prospectus.
>| (k) Proposed Directors
- The Proposed Directors have each given their written consent to being named
- as the proposed directors of the Company in the form and context in which
— they are named, and to all other information relevant to them in this
ﬁ Prospectus.
10.10 Expenses of the Offers
I The expenses of the Offers (excluding GST) are estimated to be approximately
$429,532 and are expected to be applied towards the items set out in the table below.
I:
E Items of expenditure ‘ Amount (5)
 Capital raising fees 150,000
I Legal fees 150,332
-
IE Accounting and Investigating Accountant‘s Report 14,000
I
L Independent Industw Expert fees 13,500
—-
_ ASIC and ASX fees 80,350
3r 
l
a Total estimated expenses 429,532
1 10.1 1 ASX waivers
1] The Company has obtained the following ASX waivers in relation to the Offers and the
5 Acquisition:
(a) a waiver of Listing Rules 1.1 Condition 11 to allow existing options, and the
I Options offered under this Prospectus, to have an exercise price of less than
— $0.20 each; and
.l (b) a waiver from Listing Rule 2.1 Condition 2 to allow the Company's existing
Shares and the Shares to be issued under the Offers to have an issue price of
1' less than $0.20 each.
The Company has also obtained confirmation from ASX for the purposes of Listing
Rule 6.1 that the terms of the Performance Shares as set out in Section 10.2 are, in
ASX‘s opinion, appropriate and equitable.
 10.12 Continuous disclosure obligations
 As the Company is admitted to the official list of ASX, the Company is a "disclosing
 entity" for the purposes of the Corporations Act. As such, it is subject to regular

,3 —
,1, 101


. reporting and disclosure obligations. Specifically, like all listed companies, the
Company is required to continuously disclose to the market any information it has
which a reasonable person would expect to have a material effect on the price or the
value of the Company‘s Securities.
Price sensitive information is publicly released through ASX before it is disclosed to
Shareholders and market participants. Distribution of other information to
Shareholders and market participants is also managed through disclosure to ASX. In
addition, the Company posts information on its website after the ASX confirms an
announcement has been made, with the aim of making the information readily
accessible to the widest audience.
10.13 Litigation
As at the date of this Prospectus, neither the Company nor Flamingo is involved in any
material legal proceedings nor are the Directors aware of any legal proceedings
pending or threatened against the Company or Flamingo or any of their respective
subsidiaries.
=1:
f
*1] —
z; 102


. 1 1. Directors' Authorisation
The Prospectus is issued by the Company and its issue has been authorised by a
resolution of the Directors.
In accordance with section 720 of the Corporations Act, each Director and Proposed
Director has consented to the lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC and has not
withdrawn that consent.
Signed for and on behalf of the Company.
Bryn Hardcastle
Chairman
13 September 2016
103


. 12. Definitions
5 means Australian dollars.
Acquisition means the acquisition of Flamingo in accordance with the Acquisition
Agreement.
> Acquisition Agreement means the share sale agreement between the Company,
‘ Flamingo and the Signing Sellers for the acquisition of Flamingo by the Company, dated
—
- 1 June 2016.
—
! Agenda means Global Agenda Technologies Pty Ltd (ACN 608 952 254).
. Agenda Platform means the online platform developed and operated by Agenda for
sales conversions between businesses and consumers.
Application Form means the Public Offer Application Form, the Consideration Offer
II I Application Form, the Facilitation Offer Application Form or the Employee Offer
r Application Form, as the context requires.
a Application Monies means the amount of money in dollars and cents payable for Shares
at the Offer Price per Share pursuant to the Public Offer. No application monies will
5 be payable pursuant to the Secondary Offers.
I Article means an article of the Constitution.
-
U! ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
I
_ ASX means ASX Limited (ACN 008 624 691) or the Australian Securities Exchange, as
- the context requires.
-
g ASX Settlement means ASX Settlement Pty Limited (ACN 008 504 532).
r ASX Settlement Operating Rules means the settlement and operating rules of ASX
I: Settlement.
_ Board means the board of Directors.
 Business Day means Monday to Friday except for any day that ASX declares is not a
a business day.
a CHESS means the Clearing House Electronic Sub-register System operated by ASX
I Settlement.
= Class A Performance Shares has the meaning given in Section 10.2.
.1 Class B Performance Shares has the meaning given in Section 10.2.
II Class C Performance Shares has the meaning given in Section 10.2.
Closing Date means the date that the Offers close which is 5.00pm (WST) on
30 September 2016 or such other time and date as the Board determines.
Company means Cre8tek Limited (ACN 000 031 292).
m
E
if
ct
ﬁ
:5 —
Lv 104
l.)


. Consideration Offer means the offer of the Consideration Securities to the Vendors
(or their nominees) under this Prospectus in the respective proportions set out in the
Acquisition Agreement.
Consideration Offer Application Form means the Application Form in respect of the
Consideration Offer.
Consideration Securities means the Initial Consideration Shares and 272,727,273
>| Performance Shares.
- Constitution means the constitution of the Company.
! Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
.1 CRM means customer relationship management.
1 Director means a director of the Company.
II 1 Employee Offer means the offer of the Employee Options under this Prospectus to
I certain Flamingo employees in consideration for the cancellation of existing Flamingo
’e options.
5 Employee Offer Application Form means the Application Form in respect of the
Employee Offer.
I Employee Options means 6,567,382 Options offered to Flamingo employees under this
— . .
- Prospectus pursuant to the Employee Offer on the terms set out In Section 10.5.
ml ESOP means the Company‘s Employee Share Option Plan (Transitioning Flamingo
i Employees), a summaw of which is set out in Section 10.4.
- Essential Resolutions has the meaning set out in Section 1.4.
g Exposure Period means the period of 7 days after the date of lodgement of this
r Prospectus, which period may be extended by the ASIC by not more than 7 days
I]: pursuant to section 727(3) of the Corporations Act.
_ Facilitators means Risely Resources Pty Ltd (ACN 147 700 052) and Mr Paul Hunyor.
 Facilitator Securities means the Shares and Performance Shares offered to the
—‘ Facilitators (or their nominee/s) under this Prospectus pursuant to the Facilitation
.! Offer in the amounts set out in Section 2.2(b).
Facilitation Offer means the offer of the Facilitator Securities under this Prospectus
to the Facilitators (or their nominee/s) for facilitating the Acquisition.
Facilitation Offer Application Form means the Application Form in respect of the
. Facilitation Offer.
II Flamingo means Flamingo Customer Experience, Inc. (a company incorporated
pursuant to the laws of Delaware, USA).
Flamingo Platform means the online platform developed and operated by Flamingo
for an 'intelligent guided selling', onboarding or retention experience between
Providers and their customers, a description of which is contained in Section 3.4.
Flamingo Shares means 100% of the issued share capital in Flamingo, being
4,939,843 fully paid ordinaw shares.
105


. Flamingo Ventures means Flamingo Ventures Pty Ltd (ACN 163 845 056).
Founder means Dr Catriona Wallace.
General Meeting means the annual general meeting of Shareholders to be held on
Wednesday, 14 September 2016.
Independent Industry Expert means Frost & Sullivan Australia Pty Ltd (ACN 096 869
> 108).
- Independent Industry Expert's Report means the report contained in Section 4.
! Initial Consideration Shares means 272,727,273 Shares to be issued to the Vendors (or
5 their nominees) pursuant to the Acquisition Agreement.
Intellectual Property means:
II (a) inventions, discoveries and novel designs, whether or not registered or
I registrable as patents or designs, including developments or improvements of
r equipment, products, technology, processes, methods or techniques;
a (b) copyright (including future copyright) throughout the world in all literary
5 works, artistic works, computer software, and any other works or subject
matter in which copyright subsists and may in the future subsist;
I (c) trade and service marks (whether registered or unregistered), domain names,
- branding and marketing materials; and
El (d) proprietaw rights under the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth).
—
- Intellectual Property Experts means Flynn, Thiel, Boutell & Tanis, P.C. and Williams
- & Hughes Pty Ltd (ACN 109 119 253) trading as Williams + Hughes.
g Intellectual Property Experts' Reports means the reports contained in Section 7.
.r‘
I ] Investigating Accountant means BDO Corporate Finance (WA) Pty Ltd (ACN 124 031
‘ 045).
_
1]" Lead Manager means Otsana Capital.
a Listing Rules means the listing rules of ASX.
a Merged Group means the Company, and its wholly owned subsidiaries, including
I Flamingo, after completion of the Acquisition.
= Minimum Subscription means the raising of $3,000,000 by the acceptance of
a applications for 75,000,000 Shares at $0.04 each pursuant to the Public Offer.
Minority Flamingo Shareholders means the shareholders of Flamingo other than the
I Signing Sellers.
MVP means minimum viable product.
Non-Founder Vendors means the Vendors other than Phoenixavier Pty Ltd, an entity
m associated with the Founder.
E): Offer Price means $0.04 per Share under the Public Offer.
in
ct
ﬁ
:5 —
‘l‘ 106
i)


. Offers means the Public Offer and the Secondary Offers.
Opening Date means the first date for receipt of completed Application Forms under
the Public Offer, being 13 September 2016.
Option means an option to acquire a Share.
Otsana Capital means Otsana Pty Ltd (ACN 145 168 216), trading as Otsana Capital.
>>
‘ Performance Right means the right, subject to certain conditions to be allocated one
- Share in the Company, or such other number of Shares as determined by the relevant
- adjustment mechanism, for nil consideration or such other amount as determined by
n- the Board.
—
.1 Performance Share means any one of a Class A Performance Share, Class B
Performance Share or Class C Performance Share issued on the terms and conditions
contained in Section 10.2.
II 1 Plan means the Company‘s Performance Rights Plan, a summary of which is set out in
m Section 10.3.
‘ Proposed Directors means Dr Catriona Wallace and Ms Cathie Reid.
5 Prospectus means this prospectus dated 13 September 2016.
I Provider means a service provider client of Flamingo, for example, financial services
- institutions.
it Public Offer means the public offer of 75,000,000 Shares at the Offer Price pursuant
i to this Prospectus to raise $3,000,000 before costs.
- Public Offer Application Form means the Application Form in respect of the Public
.1 Offer.
.rO‘ SaaS means software as a service.
‘ Scheme means the Company‘s Employee Incentive Scheme, a summaw of which is set
_ out in Section 10.6.
 Secondary Offers means the Consideration Offer, the Facilitation Offer and the
—‘ Employee Offer.
a Section means a section of this Prospectus.
I Securities means Shares, Options, Performance Shares and/or Performance Rights.
a Share means a fully paid ordinaw share in capital of the Company.
Share Registry means Automic Pty Ltd (ACN 152 260 814), trading as Automic Registw
L Services.
Shareholder means a holder of one or more Shares.
Short Form Acquisition Agreements means the acquisition agreements between the
m Company and each of the Minority Flamingo Shareholders for the acquisition of 100%
3. of the ordinary shares in Flamingo held by the Minority Flamingo Shareholders.
‘3
g
ct
ﬁ
:5 —
‘l‘ 107
1,)


. Signing Sellers means Phoenixavier Pty Ltd (ACN 161 304 114), Flamingo 31 Pty Ltd
(ACN 600 216 797) and Badger 31 Pty Ltd (ACN 108 155 148).
US Subsidiary means Flamingo Merger, Inc.
USS means US dollars.
Vendors means the shareholders of Flamingo, comprising the Signing Sellers and the
Minority Flamingo Shareholders.
WST means Western Standard Time, being the time in Perth, Western Australia.
108

