
​ 2016 Half-Yearly Results - RNS - London Stock Exchange​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Regulatory Story
Go to market news section
Kenmare Resources PLC  -  KMR
2016 Half-Yearly Results
Released 07:01 24-Aug-2016
​ ​ ​
​ ​ ​ 2016 Half-Yearly Results
Kenmare Resources plc ("Kenmare" or "the Company")
24 August 2016
Half-Yearly Results for the six months to 30 June 2016
Kenmare  Resources  plc  (LSE:KMR,  ISE:KMR),  one  of  the  leading  global  producers  of  titanium
minerals  and  zircon,  which  operates  the  Moma  Titanium  Minerals  Mine  (the  "Mine"  or  "Moma")  in
northern Mozambique, today announces its half year results for the six month period ended 30 June
2016 ("H1 2016").
Overview
Ilmenite production in H1 2016 increased 24% to 402,900 tonnes compared to H1 2015, zircon
production in H1 increased 20% to 28,500 tonnes
Total shipments of finished products in H1 2016 increased 7% to 441,700 tonnes, a new half
yearly record
Revenues of US$56.2 million (H1 2015: US$73.9 million), as a result of lower average prices
due to pricing and subsequent contracts being at the bottom of the cycle in late 2015, and a
reduced value sales mix during the period
The ilmenite market has shown signs of recovery in recent months with prices increasing
Cash operating costs per tonne of finished product declined 22% in H1 2016 to US$153 per
tonne (H1 2015: US$197 per tonne), a result of continued cost savings and increased production
EBITDA of negative US$10.7 million remains stable year on year (H1 2015: negative US$10.6
million), despite commodity prices reaching lowest point in H1
Operating loss reduced to US$24.9 million (H1 2015: US$27.2 million)
On 28 July 2016, the Group completed a capital restructuring to reduce debt to US$100 million
(from US$392.4 million using agreed exchange rates) and to provide an additional US$75 million
of cash for working capital and to meet fees and expenses of the capital restructuring
Michael Carvill, Managing Director, said:
"The  Company  has  made  significant  progress  in  reducing  unit  operating  costs  by  22%  during  the
period, through cost savings and increased production. Further reductions are expected in the second
half of the year as higher production is generated from increased grade levels, volumes of ore mined,
recoveries and operating time. Prices received for our products in H1 2016 are a reflection of the weak
market conditions experienced at the end of 2015, when prices for the majority of H1 2016 shipments
were struck.
I am pleased with the recent improvement in ilmenite prices from their low point, following four years of
decline,  and  expect  higher  prices  to  flow  through  our  revenues  in  H2  2016  and  thereafter.  The
conclusion of the capital restructuring has provided the Company with a robust balance sheet, reduced
interest payments and enhanced liquidity and will position the business to take advantage of what we
believe will be a sustained recovery in the market."
  
Results conference call & presentation
A  conference  call  for  analysts  will  be  held  at  09:30am  BST  on  Wednesday,  24  August  2016.  A
presentation 
the  Company  website,
www.kenmareresources.com. Participant dial-in numbers are as follows:
the  conference  call
to  accompany
is  available  on
0808 237 0030
1800 936 842
UK:
Ireland:
Rest of the world:+44 (0) 203 139 4830
Participant ID#
69337500#
The Half Yearly Financial Report for the period ended 30 June 2016 is available on the Company
website, www.kenmareresources.com
For further information, please contact:
Kenmare Resources plc
Michael Carvill, Managing Director                                     
Tel: +353 1 671 0411                                                              
Mob: + 353 87 674 0110
Tony McCluskey, Financial Director
Tel: +353 1 671 0411                                                              
Mob: + 353 87 674 0346
Jeremy Dibb, Corporate Development and Investor Relations Manager
Tel: +353 1 671 0411
Mob: + 353 87 943 0367
Murray                                                                                      
Joe Heron / Aimee Beale                                                        
Tel: +353 1 498 0300                                                              
Mob: +353 87 690 9735
Buchanan 
Bobby Morse
Tel: +44 207 466 5000
Forward Looking Statements
This announcement contains some forward-looking statements that represent Kenmare's expectations
for its business, based on current expectations about future events, which by their nature involve risks
and  uncertainties.  Kenmare  believes  that  its  expectations  and  assumptions  with  respect  to  these
forward-looking statements are reasonable. However, because they involve risk and uncertainty, which
are in some cases beyond Kenmare's control, actual results or performance may differ materially from
those expressed or implied by such forward-looking information.
INTERIM MANAGEMENT REPORT
Overview
On 28 July 2016, the Group completed a capital restructuring to reduce debt to US$100 million (from
US$392.4 million using agreed exchange rates) and to provide an additional US$75 million of cash for
working capital and to meet fees and expenses of the capital restructuring. This was achieved by the
raising of new equity from new and existing shareholders, the conversion of certain debt to equity in
the Company, and certain debt write-offs agreed by Lenders. The capital restructuring also provided for
a  reduction  in  the  interest  rates  on  outstanding  debt,  an  extension  to  the  term  of  that  debt,  and  a
principal repayment holiday until February 2018.
In  H1  2016,  production  volumes  of  Heavy  Mineral  Concentrate  ("HMC")  and  finished  products
(ilmenite, zircon and rutile) increased by 33% and 24%, respectively, compared to  H1 2015, primarily
due to the improvements in power supply and reliability, as well as improved mining techniques and
recovery rates at the Mineral Separation Plant ("MSP").
Key Performance Measures
Revenue
EBITDA
Cash operating cost per tonne of finished product
Operating cashflow after additions to sustaining capex US$3.6m (US$4.2m)
Net Debt
US$345.5mUS$317.0m
H1 2015Change
%
US$56.2m US$73.9m (24%)
(1%)
US$197 (22%)
N/A
9%
H1 2016
(US$10.7m)(US$10.6m)
US$153
*Additional information in relation to these Alternative Performance Measures ("APMs") is disclosed in
the glossary
Revenue of US$56.2 million decreased by 24% or US$17.7 million compared to H1 2015 despite a
7% increase in shipments. H1 2016 ilmenite prices were mainly agreed at the bottom of the market in
December 2015. The drop in revenue was principally a result of the average ilmenite prices received
during  the  period  declining  by  31%  on  a  Free  On  Board  ("FOB")  basis,  a  sharper  decline  than  the
underlying  commodity  market  due  to  a  change  in  sales  mix  as  finished  product  inventories  were
reduced, resulting in a higher proportion of lower quality ilmenite sales.
Total  operating  costs  of  US$81.1  million  decreased  by  US$20.0  million  from  H1  2015.  Total  cash
operating costs declined by 4% to US$66.6 million as a result of the full effect of the 2015 cost control
measures  delivering  savings  and  foreign  exchange  gains  in  the  period.  Management  continues  to
pursue further sustainable cost reductions.
Kenmare recorded an operating loss for the first half of 2016 of US$24.9 million (H1 2015: US$27.2
million)  and  negative  EBITDA  of  US$10.7  million  (H1  2015:  negative  US$10.6  million).  Cash  flow
generated  by  operating  activity  increased  by  US$9.8  million  over  the  prior  period,  from  negative
US$3.2 million in H1 2015 to positive US$6.6 million in H1 2016, benefitting from management's focus
on disciplined management of working capital. 
                                                       
Operations
Production
H1 2016H1 2015Change
(tonnes) (tonnes)
%
606,100 454,500
HMC
 
 
402,900 324,100
Ilmenite
28,500 23,800
Zircon*
Rutile
2,800
3,000
Total finished product production 434,400 350,700
33%
 
24%
20%
7%
24%
* Includes 9,200 tonnes secondary zircon product (H1 2015: 4,000 tonnes)
H1 2016H1 2015Change
Shipments
 
(tonnes) (tonnes)
%
7%
Product Shipped 441,700 412,000
HMC  production  increased  33%  in  H1  2016  compared  to  H1  2015  as  the  Mine  benefitted  from
increased  power  quality  and  reliability  as  a  result  of  additional  power  transmission  capacity
commissioned  by  Electricidade  de  Mocambique  ("EdM")  in  December  2015.  Electricity  generation
capacity in northern Mozambique has also been increased by EdM, with a ship-based 100MW mobile
power generation plant positioned nearby at Nacala since April 2016. The plant provides significant
additional capacity as well as stabilising EdM's northern transmission network. These enhancements
have led to increased operating times and production in H1 2016.
Production of ilmenite was up 24% to 402,900 tonnes, compared with 324,100 tonnes in H1 2015. The
increase is attributed to recovery improvements in the MSP, as well as increased HMC production,
impacted in H1 2015 by power outages as a result of extreme weather and flooding. Production of
primary zircon decreased by 3% to 19,300 tonnes compared with 19,800 tonnes in H1 2015, as non-
magnetic concentrate stocks from circuit improvement projects contributed to higher yields in the prior
period.  Steady  primary  zircon  recovery  improvements  took  place,  aided  by  power  stability,  and  the
processing of reject streams led to increased secondary zircon production. Rutile recoveries improved
by 50% in H1 2016, compared to H1 2015, as a result of circuit improvement projects.
The  benefits  of  the  2015  cost  reduction  programme  continued  through  H1  2016,  resulting  in  cost
savings compared to H1 2015. Total cash operating costs declined 4% in H1 2016 to US$66.6 million,
compared to US$69.1 million H1 2015, despite higher production volumes of finished products. As a
result,  cash  operating  costs  per  tonne  of  finished  product  declined  22%  over  the  same  period  to
US$153 per tonne (H1 2015: US$197 per tonne). Building on this progress to date the Company is
committed to further reducing costs where possible.
Sales  of  total  finished  products  were  at  record  levels,  and  up  7%  to  441,700  tonnes  in  H1  2016
compared to 412,000 tonnes in H1 2015.  Sales  in  H1  2016  comprised  414,800  tonnes  of  ilmenite,
24,300 tonnes of zircon and 2,600 tonnes of rutile. Closing stock of finished products at 30 June 2016
was 230,100 tonnes, down from 237,300 tonnes at 31 December 2015. The closing stock of finished
products includes 103,900 tonnes for which the Group has received advance payment from certain
customers.
Market
The  titanium  dioxide  pigment  industry  is  the  largest  consumer  of  titanium  feedstocks,  of  which
Kenmare produces the minerals ilmenite and rutile. The pigment industry has been performing well
after an extended period of weakness, inventories have normalised and demand is increasing. Given
the  improved  pigment  market  outlook,  feedstock  purchasing  activity  has  increased  due  to  improved
offtake requirements and re-stocking. Sulphate ilmenite demand, in particular, saw good improvement
in  Q2  2016  with  increased  activity  in  China  as  a  result  of  strong  pigment  production  and  reduced
ilmenite  supply  from  domestic  producers.  The  impact  of  low  iron  ore  prices  on  Chinese  ilmenite
production  (a  by-product  of  iron  ore  mining)  has  continued  a  downward  trend  in  domestic  ilmenite
production seen in the second half of 2015. There has also been reduced supply due to mine closures
in Russia and Australia and restricted output from other suppliers, partially offset by increased supply
from some regions including from that which Kenmare operates.
Sulphate ilmenite prices have started to move up in response to the tightening supply outlook in recent
months, and a shortage of supply is now forecast for the remainder of 2016. While the impact of market
improvement has not impacted on H1 figures, Kenmare is currently setting prices for the second half of
the year with contracted customers at a point when prices have just started to trend up and we expect
further gains going into 2017.
Demand for Kenmare's chloride ilmenite continues to be strong and shipments to date in 2016 are in
line with expectations. The demand for chloride ilmenite is expected to remain strong given the recent
mine closures and increased demand for pigment production and beneficiation.
Market conditions for zircon in the first half of the year were more subdued than H2 2015 due to weak
offtake  in  China,  partially  offset  by  stronger  demand  in  other  regions,  notably  Europe.  Although
construction activity is improving in China, excess ceramic tile inventories remain with producers and
distributors. Enforcement of stricter environmental regulations by Chinese authorities is also negatively
impacting  on  ceramic  tile  production.  The  outlook  beyond  2016  is  better  as  Chinese  ceramic
production activity is expected to recover. Some stability has returned to zircon pricing in Q3 2016,
helped by price increase announcements by some of the larger producers.
Kenmare continues to receive good support from its global ilmenite and zircon customer base and we
continue to target new growth markets for our products. Our expanded production capability and high
quality ilmenite product suite, suitable for both sulphate and pigment production processes, as well as
a feed for upgrading into higher grade titanium feedstocks, positions the Company well to benefit from
the improving demand conditions and tightening feedstock supply outlook.
Financial Review for the six months ended 30 June 2016
Revenues for the period decreased to US$56.2 million (H1 2015: US$73.9 million), notwithstanding a
7% increase in tonnes sold to 441,700 tonnes (H1 2015: 412,000 tonnes) of ilmenite, zircon and rutile. 
The drop in revenue is principally a result of received average ilmenite prices declining by 31% on an
FOB basis, a sharper decline than the underlying commodity market due to a change in sales mix as
finished  product  inventories  were  reduced,  resulting  in  a  higher  proportion  of  lower  quality  ilmenite
sales.
Total  operating  costs,  consisting  of  cost  of  sales  and  other  operating  costs,  of  US$81.1  million
decreased by US$20.0 million from US$101.1 million in H1 2015. A reduction in operating costs of
US$3.7  million  contributed  to  this  decrease,  reflecting  the  cost  savings  implemented  in  2015  and
foreign exchange gains in the period. Depreciation and amortisation decreased by US$2.4 million, due
to  an  increase  in  the  life  of  mine  resulting  in  a  lower  depreciation  charge  on  property,  plant  and
equipment. These reductions were offset by an increase in arbitration costs of US$3.1 million in the
period, due to the February 2015 hearing in relation to Kenmare's construction contractor arbitration
proceedings. In H1 2015, due to lower production, finished product inventory of US$6.0 million was
drawn down to meet shipment obligations and inventory was written down by US$8.6 million to reflect
lower prices being achieved in the market at the end of the financial period. Included as an offset to
cost  of  sales  in  H1  2015  was  a  business  interruption  insurance  receivable  of  US$2.0  million  for
production losses due to flood damage to the EdM power transmission line in Q1 2015.
Included in other operating costs are freight, demurrage and distribution costs of US$8.3 million (H1
2015: US$8.1 million), administration costs of US$0.9 million (H1 2015: US$0.2 million), arbitration
costs of US$3.7 million (H1 2015: US$0.6 million), and a share-based payment cost of US$0.2 million
(H1 2015: US$0.2 million).
Adjusting total operating costs for depreciation of US$14.2 million (H1 2015: US$16.6 million), total
Group share-based payments of US$0.1 million (H1 2015: US$0.8 million credit), freight reimbursable
by  customers  of  US$2.4  million  (H1  2015:  US$1.6  million)  and  the  increase  in  mineral  product
inventory  for  the  period  of  US$2.2  million  (H1  2015:  US$14.6  million  decrease),  the  total  cash
operating cost for the period amounted to US$66.6 million (H1 2015: US$69.1 million).
EBITDA for the period amounted to negative US$10.7 million (H1 2015: negative US$10.6 million).
The gross loss for the period was US$11.8 million (H1 2015: US$18.1 million) and the operating loss
was US$24.9 million (H1 2015: US$27.2 million). The decrease in the gross loss for the period is a
result of the lower cost of sales of US$23.9 million, offset by lower weighted average sales prices in
the period (H1 2016: US$123 per tonne on FOB basis; H1 2015: US$178 per tonne on FOB basis)
reducing revenue by US$17.7 million. The cost of sales decreased as a result of finished product write
downs of US$8.6 million and finished product stock level reduction of US$9.4 million in H1 2015 and
production cost decreases of US$5.9 million in H1 2016 compared to H1 2015. The operating loss
reduction was a result of the gross loss reduction of US$6.3 million, detailed above offset by additional
arbitration  costs  of  US$3.1  million,  additional  administration  costs  of  US$0.7  million  and  additional
freight and demurrage costs of US$0.2 million in the period.
Net finance costs of US$21.5 million (H1 2015: US$18.2 million) increased as a result of additional
interest charges (including on Super Senior Loans of US$10.0 million which were outstanding during
the period), an increase in the subordinated loan balances as a result of capitalisation of interest, a
higher subordinated loan fixed interest rate of 11%, agreed in the April 2015 Amendment, higher US
Dollar costs of Euro denominated loans, as a result of the strengthening of the Euro against the US
Dollar in the period, and higher loan fees amortised in the period.
The Group reported a foreign exchange loss of US$2.7 million (H1 2015: US$17.4 million gain), due to
the  retranslation of Euro-denominated loans. A deferred tax asset of US$1.9 million is recognised in
the  period  as  it  is  anticipated  that  unused  tax  losses  of  Kenmare  Moma  Mining  (Mauritius)  Limited
("KMML")  will  be  carried  forward  for  offset  against  future  profits.  The  resultant  net  loss  after  tax  is
US$47.1 million for the period (H1 2015: US$27.9 million).
During  the  period,  additions  to  property,  plant  and  equipment  were  US$3.0  million  (2015:  US$1.0
million),  reflecting  continued  tight  expenditure  control.  Depreciation  during  the  period  decreased  to
US$14.2 million from US$16.6 million in H1 2015 as a result of the increase in the life of mine. The
mine  plan,  based  on  the  Namalope  and  Nataka  proved  and  probable  reserves,  runs  to  2056.  The
Group carried out an impairment review of property, plant and equipment. The key assumptions of this
review are set out in Note 5. No impairment provision is required as a result of this review.
Inventory  at  the  period  end  amounted  to  US$47.4  million  (2015:  US$46.2  million),  consisting  of
intermediate and final mineral products of US$29.8 million (2015: US$27.6 million) and consumables
and spares of US$17.6 million (2015: US$18.6 million). Closing stock of finished products at 30 June
2016 was 230,100 tonnes (2015: 237,300 tonnes). The Group has received advance payment from
customers for 103,900 tonnes (2015: 40,000 tonnes) of finished product. The revenue for this stock will
be recognised in the statement of comprehensive income when all criteria for recognition as a sale are
met, including delivery to the customer's vessel.
Trade and other receivables amounted to US$12.5 million (2015: US$20.9 million), of which US$8.2
million (2015: US$17.2 million) were trade receivables from the sale of mineral products and US$4.3
million (2015: US$3.7 million) was comprised of prepayments, mainly insurance premia. During the
period there were sales of US$56.2 million and receipts of US$65.2 million resulting in a reduction in
trade receivables since the year-end.
Included in trade and other payables of US$63.9 million (2015: US$47.8 million) is US$19.6 million
(2015:  US$19.6  million)  relating  to  capital  projects  which  are  disputed  by  the  Group  in  arbitration
proceedings, and US$12.4 million (2015: US$3.0 million) relating to advanced payments from certain
customers as noted above.
Bank  loans  amounted  to  US$357.7  million  (2015:  US$341.9  million)  at  the  end  of  the  period.  The
reported bank loans have been adjusted for applicable lender fees of US$29.2 million (2015: US$25.9
million).
On 28 July 2016, the Group completed a capital restructuring to reduce debt to US$100 million (from
US$392.4 million using agreed exchange rates) and to provide an additional US$75 million of cash for
working capital and to meet fees and expenses of the capital restructuring. This was achieved by the
raising of new equity from new and existing shareholders, the conversion of certain debt to equity in
the Company, and certain debt write-offs agreed by Lenders. The capital restructuring also provided for
a  reduction  in  the  interest  rates  on  outstanding  debt,  an  extension  to  the  term  of  that  debt,  and  a
principal repayment holiday until February 2018.
At 30 June 2016 the Group was in breach of a number of loan covenants which, as and from 1 July
2016 were temporarily waived by Lenders. As a result, the loan balances as at 30 June 2016 were
classified as falling due on demand in the statement of financial position. Upon the effectiveness of the
Amended  Financing  Agreements  on  28  July  2016,  all  then-existing  breaches  were  permanently
waived, with the effect that, as from such date, the loan balances are no longer classified as falling due
on demand.
During  the  period,  loan  interest  of  US$2.7  million  (H1  2015:  US$3.4  million)  was  paid,  interest  of
US$18.6 million (H1 2015: US$15.2 million) accrued, and the Euro-denominated loans increased by
US$3.3 million (H1 2015: US$16.1 million decrease) as a result of the US Dollar weakening against
the Euro. Loan fees and expenses of  US$5.7  million  were  incurred  (H1  2015:  US$5.7  million)  and
US$2.4 million loan fees and expenses amortised (H1 2015: US$2.2 million). The average interest
rate on the Group loans at the period end was 10.0% (2015: 9.1%).
Cash and cash equivalents as at 30 June 2016 amounted to US$12.3 million (2015: US$14.4 million).
Health, Safety and Community
The Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate ("LTIFR") was 0.37 for the twelve months to 30 June 2016 as
compared to 0.14 for the twelve months to 30 June 2015. There was one lost time injury experienced in
H1 2016, a significant improvement on H1 2015 (3 lost time injuries) as a result of the delivery of a
safety  improvement  strategy.  Kenmare  remains  committed  to  providing  a  safe  and  healthy  work
environment for its employees, contractors and visitors.
The Kenmare Moma Development Association (KMAD) continued to support local communities during
the period through its economic, social and infrastructure projects, notwithstanding increased capital
constraints as a result of lower commodities prices.
Board Update
Mr.  Tony  Lowrie  has  provided  great  service  to  the  Board  and  the  Company  as  a  Non-Executive
Director for more than nine years and retired at the AGM on 25 July 2016. The Board and the Company
would like to thank him for all that he has done for the Company and wish him well for the future.
Outlook
The outlook for the mineral sands market has been steadily improving since the beginning of the year.
Ilmenite  has  been  the  main  beneficiary  due  to  a  combination  of  improved  offtake  from  the  pigment
sector and the continued decline of ilmenite supply from a number of regions. As a result, Chinese
domestic ilmenite prices have been steadily increasing since the beginning of the year and Kenmare
has implemented price increases on spot sales during Q2 to be shipped in the early part of Q3.
In  H2  2016,  it  is  expected  that  increases  in  ore  mined,  ore  grades,  recoveries  and  operating  time
should  all  contribute  to  higher  production  levels  in  order  for  the  Company  to  achieve  production
forecasts for 2016. Given the largely fixed cost base and continued progress that management has
made  in  executing  operating  cost  savings,  increased  production  will  further  reduce  unit  operating
costs.
In addition, the completion of the capital restructuring has provided the Company with an enhanced
working capital position and significantly reduced debt, greatly strengthening the Company's balance
sheet.
Principal risks and uncertainties
The Group's business may be affected by risks similar to those faced by many companies in the mining
industry. There are a number of potential risks and uncertainties that could have a material effect on
the Group's performance over the remaining six months of the financial year and could cause actual
results to differ materially from expected results. These principal risks and uncertainties, together with
relevant mitigating factors, are outlined below.
The Group's performance depends on the demand and the prices it receives for its products
The  Group's  revenue  and  earnings  depend  upon  the  demand  for  and  prevailing  prices  of  ilmenite,
zircon  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  rutile.  Such  prices  are  based  on  world  supply  and  demand  and  are
subject to large fluctuations in response to changes in the demand for such products, whether as a
result  of  uncertainty  or  a  variety  of  additional  factors  also  beyond  the  Group's  control,  as  well  as
changes in supply, including as a result of new heavy mineral sands projects commencing production
or  closure  of  existing  operations.  Weighted  average  prices  for  Kenmare's  products  (on  a  Free  On
Board  ("FOB")  basis)  in  H1  2016  declined  31%  compared  to  H1  2015.  Demand  for  the  Group's
products  may  be  reduced  by  thrifting  or  substitution  by  users  of  the  Group's  products.  The  Group's
revenue generation, results of operations and financial condition may be significantly and adversely
affected by declines in the demand for and prices of ilmenite, zircon and rutile.
Product prices may not increase as anticipated or may fall
The Group's revenue and earnings depend upon prevailing prices for ilmenite and zircon and, to a
lesser  extent,  rutile.  If  the  increase  in  prevailing  market  prices  for  the  Group's  products  that  is
anticipated by the Directors were not to occur (or if the prices negotiated by the Group were not to
capture any such increase in market price) or if market prices were to fall or the Group were otherwise
unable  to  negotiate  satisfactory  pricing  terms,  this  would  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  Group's
revenue generation, cash flow, results of operations and financial condition.
The  Group  fixes  its  prices  for  its  products  under  certain  contracts  by  reference  to  the  market  price
prevailing at the time of the entry into, or renewal, of the contract. Some of the Group's products are
sold to customers under contracts of three to five year duration, which provide for the supply of fixed
volumes of product at fixed prices with annual inflation-related price escalation. The balance of the
Group's products are sold to its customers under contracts providing for the delivery of fixed volumes
with annual or semi-annual price negotiations or under spot contracts for specific shipments.  As some
of the Group's products are sold under contracts at fixed price, or price set by a discount to market
price, the Group will not immediately capture the full benefit of any increase in prevailing market prices
for the Group's products.
The Group is dependent on contracts with, and the Group has credit exposure to, a number of
key customers
As is typical in the titanium minerals industry, a small number of customers account for a significant
proportion of the Group's revenue. In H1 2016 substantially all of the Group's revenues were derived
from sales to less than ten customers. If any customer were to cease dealing with the Group or if any
such customer with an existing off-take contract sought to cancel or defer delivery or payment, and the
Group was unable to sell the product in the market on comparable or superior terms, then this would
have an adverse impact on the Group's revenue generation, cash flow, financial condition and results
of operations.
Further, the Group's contracts and sales process is such that, other than in specific cases where pre-
payment has been negotiated by the Group, the customer receives the product prior to the due date for
payment. If any of the customers were unable to, or failed to, pay for such products, then, unless the
relevant  customer's  invoice  had  been  factored  (pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  Group's  factoring
agreement), this would have an adverse impact on the Group's revenue generation, cash flow, results
of operations and financial condition. Contracts can vary in duration from less than a year to up to five
years, in some cases with the possibility of extensions of duration by the relevant customer. In the case
of zircon, rutile and spot ilmenite sales, prices are generally variable in nature and agreed at the time of
order.
The Group's production is concentrated on a single asset, the Moma Mine, and if production is
delayed or interrupted, Kenmare's ability to generate revenue would be harmed, which would
have a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition and results of operation
As a result of the concentration of its production on Moma, Kenmare is exposed, without the benefit of
diversification which would come from multiple assets at multiple locations, to the effect of disruptions,
loss  of  licence  or  interests  at  Moma,  Government  regulation,  mining,  processing  or  transportation
capacity  constraints,  availability  of  equipment,  equipment  failure,  facilities,  personnel  or  services
market limitations, weather events, or interruption of the transportation of diesel.
Physical aspects of the Moma reserve may impact adversely on production
The Namalope mineral deposit being mined has declining head feed grades (for the five year period
from 2011 -2015 head grade at the Mine was c 5.2% but over the following five years from 2016 - 2020
it is expected that the average grade will decline to c. 4.5%) and hence over time additional mining
capacity is required to maintain heavy mineral concentrate feed to fill the mineral separation plant and
therefore maximise production.
The timing of further capital investment to meet the additional mining capacity required depends on the
performance of existing operations as well as market demand and prices. Development of an optimal
plan is underway and prefeasibility studies are to be undertaken in 2016 and 2017 to optimise the
mine plan from a production and financial perspective. The capital expenditure required to enhance
the mining fleet to take account of declining head grades has yet to be approved by the Board and will
be subject, inter alia, to market conditions. However, preliminary studies estimate the additional capital
requirement to be approximately US$100 million over the five year period. No decision has been made
on any such expenditure and no significant capital expenditure is expected prior to 2018 in any event.
This estimate of capital expenditure may alter as further studies are completed. In addition, while such
expenditure would only be progressed in the event of market conditions being favourable (such that
the expenditure could be financed from existing resources) and would, if occurring, occur primarily in
and subsequent to 2018, the consequence of failing to make all or any of the investment required in the
envisaged time frame would be a decline in volume produced. This would have an adverse impact on
the financial performance of the Group.
The production rates forecast in the mining plan are based on the expected performance of the mining
units  in  response  to  the  characteristics  of  the  orebody.  Kenmare  operates  a  model  that  predicts
operating throughputs in response to varying orebody characteristics.
The metallurgical performance of the mining operations has remained steady and of high quality and is
expected to be maintained in the future based on proper maintenance and operational procedures.
The Namalope deposit is currently being mined and will be mined until 2026 by WCP A and until 2022
by WCP B. There will be a capital cost associated with the movement of the plants from the Namalope
deposit to the Nataka deposit which, absent alternative financing, would be intended to be financed
from operating cash flows. This capital cost may be in excess of the amount currently estimated by the
Group and/or the Group may have insufficient resources to finance this capital cost. In such a situation
mining would be unable to move from the Namalope deposit to the Nataka deposit, resulting initially in
a reduction in output and, as Namalope is depleted, in cessation of mining pending the re-location.
In addition, the WCP A dredge path envisages mining an area known as Monte Filipe in late 2016 and
in  2017  and  2018.  The  area  is  within  the  Mining  Concession;  however,  there  has  been  some
opposition  to  mining  Monte  Filipe  on  spiritual  and  economic  development  grounds.  The  Group
continues  to  have  extensive  engagement  with  the  local  community  and  local  and  provincial
Government seeking resolution of the matter. Should the matter not be resolved in a timely fashion, a
change  in  the  dredge  path  to  avoid  Monte  Filipe  could  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  Group's
production and consequently on the Group's business, results of operations and financial condition.
Dry  mining  operations  are  used  to  supplement  the  Mine's  dredge  mining  operations,  including  to
address mining ore body characteristics such as elevated slimes levels and to optimise product mix.
Dry mining operations are currently being used, have been used from time to time in the past, and may
be used in the future.
While dry mining is suitable for purposes of supplementing dredge operations, it is more expensive to
operate than dredge mining, resulting in some of the benefits of the Mine's inherently low-cost dredging
being reduced.
In the event of any further difficulties being experienced, it may be necessary to expand dry mining.
 There can be no certainty that dry mining of the scale which may be required would be financially
efficient.
The  Mine  is  heavily  reliant  on  the  power  supply  and  power  transmission  line  to  the  Mine  for
which supply may fluctuate
The  Mine  is  highly  reliant  on  the  power  supply  comprising  the  Cahora  Bassa  hydroelectric  power
station  on  the  Zambezi  River,  the  electricity  transmission  system  of  northern  Mozambique  that  is
owned  and  operated  by  the  national  power  company  Electricidade  de  Mocambique  ("EdM")  and  a
single 170km transmission line, owned by the Company, to the Mine from EdM's Nampula substation.
Despite significant improvements in power generating and transmission capacity and reliability, power
stability  in  EdM's  northern  transmission  system  remains  a  point  of  focus  for  the  Board  and
management.
In  the  first  quarter  of  2015,  northern  Mozambique  experienced  exceptionally  heavy  rains  and
unprecedented  flooding.  The  unprecedented  flooding  resulted  in  sections  of  the  transmission  line
being brought down, cutting power to the Mine for extended periods. Physical loss of power lines had
not been experienced before in Kenmare's operations.
EdM has, both before and since this time, been investing in the power line infrastructure to increase
capacity on the power network servicing the Moma Mine, from 118MW to 168MW. While power supply
quality remained poor during 2015, since December 2015 there has been a marked improvement in
power  quality  and  consistency  and  further  equipment  is  expected  to  be  installed  through  2016,
providing another 10MW of transmission capacity. Additions to date appear to have fixed the network
overloading issues which were previously the cause of voltage collapse during peak demand periods.
Electricity generation capacity in northern Mozambique has also been increased by EdM, with a ship-
based 100MW mobile power generation plant positioned nearby at Nacala since April 2016.  These
improvements in grid transmission and generation capacity help to provide a more stable power supply
to the Mine, with additional capacity to allow for increased power needs in the future.
Despite these measures, there is no certainty that there will not be further interruptions to power which
could affect production.
If either the Cahora Bassa power station or the transmission line to the Mine were to experience faults
for a prolonged period of time, resulting in serious disruptions to electricity supply, the Group might be
unable to produce sufficient ilmenite, rutile and zircon to fulfil customer contracts, which would reduce
cash flow and which could impact customer relationships and have an adverse impact on the Group's
trading  and  financial  position.  The  rented  10MW  diesel  generation  capability  at  the  Mine  partially
mitigates  such  risk.  While  the  Group  has  insurance  covering  business  interruption  in  respect  of  its
operations, such insurance may not be sufficient and/or fully cover the consequences of such business
interruption. No assurance can be given that such insurance will continue to be available, or that it will
be available at economically feasible premiums.
The Mine is heavily reliant on diesel, the price for which may fluctuate
Certain  of  the  Group's  operations  and  facilities  are  intensive  users  of  diesel.  Factors  effecting  the
global  energy  market,  such  as  the  level  of  supply  of  oil  by  OPEC,  the  level  of  supply  of  oil  by  the
fracking industry in the US, and the level of economic activity and subsequent demand for oil in China
are beyond the control of the Group and may put upward pressure on the prices paid by the Group for
the fuel used by it.
Any increases in energy costs will adversely affect the results of operations and financial condition of
the Group.
The Group depends on marine operations for the export of products and may not be able to
export final products if, in particular, the jetty is out of commission
The  Group  is  reliant  on  the  continued  successful  operation  of  the  marine  terminal  for  the  export  of
products. If the marine terminal became unusable (as a result of damage or otherwise) or inaccessible
for any significant period, the Group would be unable to export its products or would be limited in the
amount  which  it  could  export.  In  this  case,  the  Group  would  be  unable  to  meet  its  commitments  to
customers, which could result in ocean freight penalties and reduced revenue, each of which would
have an adverse effect on the Group's cash flow, results of operations and financial condition.
The Group is also reliant on the effective operation of its trans-shipment system. The Group operates
two trans-shipment vessels which transport products from the jetty to the trans-shipment point, where
they self-discharge into the customer's vessel. If both trans-shipment vessels became unavailable or
were  simultaneously  in  need  of  repair,  the  Group  would  seek  to  implement  alternative  methods  of
loading customers' vessels. If this were to occur, it could adversely affect the business and financial
position of the Group as the loading rate could be less than that of the current trans-shipment system,
in which case, demurrage costs may be payable by the Company.
In addition, the Group and its customers depend upon ocean freight to transport products purchased
from  the  Group.  Disruption  of  ocean  freight  as  a  result  of  any  impact  of  piracy,  terrorism,  weather-
related  problems,  key  equipment  or  infrastructure  failures,  strikes,  lock-outs  or  other  events  could
temporarily impair the Group's ability to supply its products to its customers and thus could adversely
affect the Group's cash flow, results of operations and financial condition.
The Group is required to maintain licences for the current mining operation
Kenmare is currently mining the Namalope Reserve which contains the titanium minerals ilmenite and
rutile and the zirconium silicate mineral, zircon. This reserve is held under Mining Concession 735C
issued  by  the  Government  of  Mozambique  which  is  valid  until  26  August  2029  and  is  renewable
thereafter.
Mining is governed by the terms of a Mineral Licensing Contract which was entered into in January
2002 covering an initial period of 25 years of mining and renewable thereafter.
A  further  key  agreement  with  the  Government  of  Mozambique  in  relation  to  the  Mine  is  the
Implementation  Agreement  which  governs  the  operation  of  an  Industrial  Free  Zone  covering  the
processing and exporting aspects of the Mine and provides favourable tax treatment. This agreement
was entered into in January 2002.
The  Company  is  not  aware  of  any  incidents  which  may  result  in  the  Mining  Concession,  Mineral
Licensing Contract or Implementation Agreement being revoked by the Government of Mozambique.
The  permissions,  approvals  and  leases  required  for  the  Group's  operations  are  subject,  in  certain
circumstances, to the occurrence of certain events or to modification, renewal or revocation. The Group
may not receive the permits or renewals or modifications thereof necessary for it to operate profitably,
or at all. Further, if the Group does not receive the necessary permits, it may not be able to implement
its  required  production  plans  which  may  adversely  affect  the  results  of  operations  and  financial
condition of the Group.
The Group could face increased risk and uncertainty in the event of political, economic,
regulatory and fiscal developments in Mozambique
The Mine is located in Mozambique, which has been politically stable for over two decades. Kenmare
has operated in Mozambique since 1987, and has executed the Mineral Licensing Contract and the
Implementation Agreement which each contain provisions that provide certain protections to the Group
against adverse changes in Mozambican law. The Group's operations in Mozambique may, however,
become subject to risks similar to those which are prevalent in many developing countries, including
extensive  political  or  economic  instability,  other  political,  economic  or  regulatory  developments,
changes  in  fiscal  policy  or  application  thereof  (including  increased  taxes  or  royalty  rates),
nationalisation, inflation, and currency restrictions, as well as renegotiation, nullification, termination or
rescission of existing concessions, licences, permits, approvals and contracts.  In addition, there may
be an increase in, and tightening of, the regulatory requirements (including for example in relation to
employee health and safety, permitting and licensing, planning and developments and environmental
compliance). The occurrence of these events could adversely affect the economics of the Mine and
could have a material adverse effect on the results of operations or financial condition of the Group.
Health,  safety,  environmental  and  other  regulations,  standards  and  expectations  evolve  over
time and unforeseen changes could have an adverse effect on the Group's earnings and cash
flows
The Mine is subject to the environmental laws and standards in force in Mozambique, together with
international standards and guidelines of the World Bank, African Development Bank and FMO, as
well as its own policies. The Mine applies the International Finance Corporation ("IFC") Performance
Standards  (2006),  as  set  out  in  the  Environmental  Management  Plan  ("EMP")  and  is  targeting
compliance  with  the  IFC  Performance  Standards  2012.  The  Mine  consistently  seeks  to  apply  best
practice  in  all  of  its  activities.  Where  standards  differ,  Kenmare  has  committed  to  meeting  the  most
stringent standard applicable.
Governmental  authorities  and  the  courts  have  the  power  to  enforce  compliance  (and,  in  some
jurisdictions,  third  parties  and  members  of  the  public  can  initiate  private  procedures  to  enforce
compliance) with applicable laws and regulations, violations of which may result in civil or criminal
penalties, the curtailment or cessation of operations, orders to pay compensation, orders to remedy the
effects of violations and/or orders to take preventative steps against possible future violations.
In addition, a violation of environmental or health and safety laws relating to the Mine or production
facility or a failure to comply with the instructions of the relevant environmental or health and safety
authorities could lead to, among other things, a temporary shutdown of all or a portion of the Mine or
production facility, a loss of the right to mine or to continue with production or the imposition of costly
compliance procedures, fines and penalties, liability for clean-up costs or damages. If environmental,
health and safety authorities require the Group to shut down all or a portion of the Mine or to implement
costly compliance measures, or impose fines and penalties, liability for clean-up costs or damages on
the Group, whether pursuant to existing or new environmental, health and safety laws and regulations,
such measures could have a material adverse effect on the Group's results of operations and financial
condition.
The Company may face the risk of industrial action
Non-supervisory  employees,  amounting  to  over  80%  of  the  workforce,  are  represented  by  a  union
under  a  collective  agreement.  The  Group  may  not  be  able  to  satisfactorily  renegotiate  labour
agreements  when  they  expire  and  may  face  higher  wage  demands.  In  addition,  existing  labour
agreements may not prevent a strike or work stoppage, which could have an adverse effect on the
Group's results of operations, financial condition and reputation.
The Group is dependent on the continued services of senior management and skilled technical
personnel. Should key personnel leave or should the Group be unable to attract and retain
qualified personnel, the Group's business, results of operations and financial condition may be
adversely affected.
The Group's success depends upon the expertise and continued service of certain key executives and
technical  personnel,  including  the  Executive  Directors.  The  loss  of  the  services  of  certain  key
employees, including to competitors, could have a material adverse effect on the results of operations
or financial condition of the Group. In addition, as the Group's business develops and expands, the
Group's  future  success  will  depend  on  its  ability  to  attract  and  retain  highly  skilled  and  qualified
personnel. Due to the increasing extractive industry activity in Mozambique and new projects in the
heavy mineral sands industry in recent years, the Group has encountered increasing competition in
attracting and retaining experienced mining professionals. Should key personnel leave or should the
Group be unable to attract and retain qualified personnel, the Group's business, results of operations
and financial condition may be adversely affected.
The  Mine  employs  a  number  of  non-Mozambicans,  including  in  senior  management  and  technical
positions.  Should expatriate personnel be unable to work at the Mine for prolonged periods of time,
this could have an adverse effect on the Group's results of operations and financial condition.
Cash flow constraints have impacted on the continued development of the Moma operation and
this may adversely impact on current or future production
Due  to  cash  flow  constraints  in  recent  years,  pressures  have  been  placed  on  the  capital  budgets
allocated to the Mine. This has impacted the continued development of the Mine in terms of operational
efficiency,  with  the  principal  areas  impacted  being  the  Group's  replacement  strategy  for  mobile
equipment  used  to  support  the  operations  and  the  Group's  planning  for  improvement  of  product
recovery and quality in the MSP.
In recent years, Kenmare has not followed a defined replacement strategy for the mobile equipment
used to support the Moma operations. There is a risk that without further investment in new equipment,
production  rates  at  Moma  may  be  impacted.  Kenmare  has  sought  to  mitigate  this  risk  through
measures to extend the life of the existing equipment and rentals but a catch-up spend is required.
Kenmare has delayed implementation of identified projects for the improvement of product recovery
and quality in the mineral separation plant.
If  production,  process  or  recovery  rates  are  lower  than  anticipated,  the  Group  may  generate  lower
revenue and cash flow than anticipated which would have an adverse effect on the Group's results of
operations and financial condition.
Kenmare is exposed to a number of operational factors which may be outside its control, does
not insure against certain risks, and its insurance coverage may not be adequate for covering
losses arising from potential operational hazards and unforeseen interruptions
The success of the Group's business is affected by a number of factors which are, to a large extent,
outside its control. Such factors include the availability of water and power. In addition, the Group's
business  is  subject  to  numerous  other  operating  risks  which  include:  unusual  or  unexpected
geological features, seismic activity, climatic conditions (including as a result of climate change) such
as  flooding,  cyclones  or  drought,  interruption  to  power  supplies,  industrial  action  or  disputes,
environmental hazards, and technical failures, fires, explosions and other accidents at the Mine and
related facilities. These and other risks and hazards could result in damage to, or destruction of, the
mining, processing or trans-shipment facilities, may reduce or cause production to cease, may result in
personal injury or death, environmental damage, business interruption, monetary losses and possible
legal liability, and may result in actual production differing from estimates of production.
While the Group has insurance covering various types of business interruption arising from property
damage or machinery breakdown in respect of its operations, such insurance may not be sufficient
and/or fully cover the consequences of such business interruption and, in particular, may not cover
interruption arising from all types of equipment failure, labour disputes or "force majeure" events. No
assurance can be given that such insurance will continue to be available, or that it will be available at
economically feasible premiums. Equally, there can be no assurance that operating risks and the costs
associated  with  them  will  not  adversely  affect  the  results  of  operations  or  financial  condition  of  the
Group. Although the Group maintains liability insurance, the Group's insurances do not cover every
potential  risk  associated  with  its  operations  and  meaningful  coverage  at  reasonable  rates  is
unobtainable  for  certain  types  of  environmental  hazards.  The  occurrence  of  a  significant  adverse
event, the damage from which is not adequately covered by insurance, or in respect of which adequate
disaster  recovery  arrangements  may  not  be  in  place,  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the
results of operations and financial condition of the Group.
The Group is a party to a number of disputes that are subject to resolution through court or
arbitral proceedings and  may, from  time  to  time, face the risk of other litigation in connection
with its business and/or other activities
The Group is a party to a number of disputes that are subject to resolution through court or arbitral
proceedings and may from time to time face the risk of other litigation in connection with its business
and/or  other  activities.  Recovery  may  be  sought  against  the  Group  for  significant  but  indeterminate
amounts and the existence and scope of liabilities may remain unknown for substantial periods of time.
Of the two current material claims against the Group, the estimated defence costs of one have been
provided for under legal provisions, with further details disclosed in Note 8 to these interim condensed
consolidated  financial  statements,  and  the  value  of  the  other  is  included  in  the  Group's  current
liabilities, in relation to a capital projects dispute with a construction contractor, although the Group is
disputing the claim in full and has raised a substantial counter-claim. A substantial legal liability and/or
an adverse ruling could have a material adverse effect on the Group's financial condition.
The  Group's  reserves  and  resources  estimates  may  be  materially  different  from  quantities  it
may  ultimately  recover,  its  estimates  of  mine  life  may  prove  inaccurate,  and  market  price
fluctuations  and  changes  in  operating  and  capital  costs  may  render  certain  reserves  or
resources uneconomical to mine
The reserves and resources of the Group were compiled by Mr Paul Leandri (MAusIMM and MAIG)
and Dr Alastair Brown (FIMMM). Both Mr Leandri and Dr Brown have sufficient experience relevant to
the  style  of  mineralisation  and  type  of  deposit  under  consideration  and  to  the  activity  which  they
undertook to qualify as Competent Persons as defined in the JORC Code 2012.
The Group's estimates of ore reserves and mineral resources are subject to a number of assumptions
that may be incorrect and may be materially different from mineral quantities that may ultimately be
recovered. Actual ore reserves may not conform to geological or other expectations and the volume
and grade of ore recovered may be below the estimated level. Changes in the forecast prices of the
Group's products, exchange rates, production costs or recovery rates may result in reserves ceasing to
be  economically  viable  and  needing  to  be  downgraded  or  reduced.  Moreover,  short-term  operating
factors  relating  to  the  reserves,  such  as  the  need  for  sequential  development  of  ore  bodies  and
variations in ore grades, may adversely affect the Group's production and profitability in any particular
accounting period.
Changes in operating and capital costs within the mining industry
Mining requires substantial maintenance to prolong the life of the mining equipment and infrastructure,
thus enabling the full recovery of the mining reserve. The Group believes that the technology it uses to
mine and process titanium minerals and zircon is advanced and, in part due to high investment costs,
subject  only  to  slow  technological  change.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  more  cost-
effective production or processing technology will not be developed, or that the economic conditions in
which current technology is applied will not change. Capital expenditure required to keep pace with
unexpected  technological  advances  of  equipment  would  negatively  impact  the  Group's  future  cash
flows if there were insufficient benefit from such expenditures.
Additionally, as the prices the Group receives for its products is determined by demand and supply, its
competitiveness and long-term profitability depend, to a significant degree, on its ability to control costs
and maintain low-cost, efficient operations. Important cost inputs in the Group's operations generally
include the extraction and processing costs of raw materials and consumables, such as power, fuels,
labour, transport and equipment, many of which have been, and continue to be, particularly susceptible
to inflationary and supply and demand pressures. It is difficult for the Group to pass these costs in full
onto its customers due to the fact that prices are determined by demand and supply of the products and
not by cost pressures. Any increases in input costs would adversely affect the results of operations or
financial condition of the Group.
Kenmare  is  exposed  to  fluctuations  in  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  that  could  have  a
material adverse impact on its profitability
As and from 28 July 2016 the interest rates on the Group's bank loans are variable. The combined
interest  rate  on  senior  and  subordinated  loans  is  US  LIBOR  for  the  applicable  period  (typically  six
months) plus a margin, which until 31 January 2020 is 4.75% per annum and thereafter is 5.50% per
annum.  Commencing  1  August  2016,  interest  on  both  senior  and  subordinated  loans  is  payable  in
cash on 1 February and 1 August. Any increase in the six month US Dollar LIBOR would increase
finance costs and therefore have a negative effect on the Group's profitability.
All the Group's sales are denominated in US Dollars. Although, as and from 28 July 2016, all Project
Loans are denominated in US Dollars, the Group's operating and capital costs are incurred in a variety
of currencies, including in US Dollars, South African Rand, Mozambican Metical, Euro, Sterling, and to
a lesser extent in Australian Dollars and Chinese Renminbi. Fluctuations in these currencies will affect
the Group's financial results.
Group's ability to meet its obligations under the Amended Financing Documents
The terms of the Group's Project Loans under the Amended Financing Agreements include a number
of covenants (including operational, organisational, insurance and financial covenants) applicable to
the Group. Any failure to comply with any of the foregoing provisions could result in an event of default
under the Amended Financing Agreements. The details of these covenants are set out in Note 7.
Uncertainties in relation to the realisation of assets of the Group
The  ability  of  the  Group  to  realise  the  value  of  property,  plant  and  equipment  of  US$824  million
included in the consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2016 is dependent on the
successful operation of the Mine and the realisation of cash flow forecasts. An emphasis of matter to
this effect and reflecting the related uncertainties is included in the independent auditor's review report
in respect of the financial statements for the six month period ended 30 June 2016 and it is noted that
no adjustments relating to the uncertainties concerning the realisation of assets has been included and
that the ultimate outcome can not be determined at the time of the review report.
Related party transactions
There have been no material changes in the related party transactions affecting the financial position
or the performance of the Group in the period other than those disclosed in Note 10 to the condensed
consolidated financial statements.
Going Concern
On 28 July 2016, the Group completed a capital restructuring to reduce debt to US$100 million (from
US$392.4 million using agreed exchange rates), to provide an additional US$75 million of cash for
working capital and to meet fees and expenses of the capital restructuring. This was achieved by the
raising of new equity from new and existing shareholders, the conversion of certain debt to equity in
the Company, and certain debt write-offs agreed by Lenders. The capital restructuring also provided for
a  reduction  in  the  interest  rates  on  outstanding  debt,  an  extension  to  the  term  of  that  debt,  and  a
principal repayment holiday until February 2018.
As a result of the capital restructuring and based on the cash flow forecast the Directors have, at the
time  of  approving  the  financial  statements,  a  reasonable  expectation  that  the  Group  has  adequate
resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future. They therefore continue to
adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
Key assumptions upon which the forecast is based over the next twelve months include a mine plan
covering production using the Namalope reserves as set out in the Reserve and Resources table in
the 2015 Annual Report. Production levels for the purpose of the forecast are approximately 1 million
tonnes of ilmenite, zircon and rutile. Assumptions of product sales prices are based on contract prices
as stipulated in marketing agreements with customers, or where contracts are based on market prices
or production is not presently contracted, prices are forecast taking into account independent titanium
mineral sands expertise and management expectations. Operating costs are based on budget costs for
2016  taking  into  account  current  running  costs  of  the  mine.  Capital  costs  are  based  on  the  capital
budget for 2016 taking into account revisions to this plan and the scheduling of outlay over the next
twelve months.
Events after the Statement of Financial Position Date
Effective 25 July 2016, Mr. Tony Lowrie retired as a Non-Executive Director of the Company.
On 28 July 2016, the Group completed a capital restructuring to reduce debt to US$100 million (from
US$392.4 million using agreed exchange rates), to provide an additional US$75 million of cash for
working capital and to meet fees and expenses of the capital restructuring. This was achieved by the
raising of new equity from new and existing shareholders, the conversion of certain debt to equity in
the Company, and certain debt write-offs agreed by Lenders. The capital restructuring also provided for
a  reduction  in  the  interest  rates  on  outstanding  debt,  an  extension  to  the  term  of  that  debt,  and  a
principal repayment holiday until February 2018.
Forward-looking statements
This report contains certain forward-looking statements. These statements are made by the Directors in
good faith based on the information available to them up to the time of their approval of this report and
such  statements  should  be  treated  with  caution  due  to  the  inherent  uncertainties,  including  both
economic and business risk factors, underlying any such forward-looking information.
On behalf of the Board,
Managing Director                                                              Financial Director
Michael Carvill                                                                    Tony McCluskey
24 August 2016                                                                   24 August 2016
RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT
The Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Half Yearly Financial Report in accordance
with  the  Transparency  (Directive  2004/109/EC)  Regulations  2007,  the  Transparency  Rules  of  the
Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  and  with  IAS  34,  Interim  Financial  Reporting  as  adopted  by  the  European
Union. The names and function of the Directors is as listed in the Group's 2015 Annual Report and
Accounts, with the exception that effective 25 July 2016, Mr. Tony Lowrie retired as a Non-Executive
Director of the Company. A list of the current Directors is maintained on the Kenmare Resources plc
website: www.kenmareresources.com.
The Directors confirm that, to the best of their knowledge:
The Group condensed consolidated financial statements for the half year ended 30 June 2016
have been prepared in accordance with IAS 34 'Interim Financial Reporting', as adopted by the
European Union;
 
The Interim Management Report includes a fair review of the information required by Regulation
8(2) of the Transparency (Directive 2004/109/EC) Regulations 2007, being an indication of
important events that have occurred during the first six months of the financial year and their
effect on the condensed consolidated financial statements, and a description of the principal risks
and uncertainties for the remaining six months of the year; and
 
The Interim Management Report includes a fair review of the information required by Regulation
8(3) of the Transparency (Directive 2004/109/EC) Regulations 2007, being related party
transactions that have taken place in the first six months of the current financial year and that
materially affected the financial position or performance of the entity during that period; and any
changes in the related party transactions described in the last annual report that could do so.
On behalf of the Board,
Managing Director                                                              Financial Director
Michael Carvill                                                                    Tony McCluskey
24 August 2016                                                                   24 August 2016
INDEPENDENT REVIEW REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF KENMARE RESOURCES PLC
Introduction
We have been engaged by the Company to review the group condensed consolidated set of financial
statements  in  the  Half-Yearly  Financial  Report  for  the  six  months  ended  30  June  2016  which
comprises  the  Group  Condensed  Consolidated  Statement  of  Comprehensive  Income,  the  Group
Condensed  Consolidated  Statement  of  Financial  Position,  the  Group  Condensed  Consolidated
Statement of Changes in Equity, the Group Condensed Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows and
related notes 1 to 13. We have read the other information contained in the Half-Yearly Financial Report
and considered whether it contains any apparent misstatements or material inconsistencies with the
information in the group condensed consolidated set of financial statements.
This report is made solely to the Company's members, as a body, in accordance with International
Standard  on  Review  Engagements  (UK  and  Ireland)  2410  "Review  of  Interim  Financial  Information
performed by the Independent Auditor of the Entity" issued by the Auditing Practices Board.  Our work
has been undertaken so that we might state to the Company's members those matters we are required
to  state  to  them  in  an  independent  review  report  and  for  no  other  purpose.  To  the  fullest  extent
permitted by law, we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and
the Company's members as a body, for our review work, for this report, or for the conclusions we have
formed.
Directors' Responsibilities
The Half-Yearly Financial Report is the responsibility of, and has been approved by, the Directors. 
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Half-Yearly Financial Report in accordance with the
Transparency (Directive 2004/109/EC) Regulations 2007 and the Transparency Rules of the Central
Bank of Ireland.
As disclosed in note 1, the annual financial statements of the group are prepared in accordance with
IFRSs  as  adopted  by  the  European  Union.    The  group  condensed  consolidated  set  of  financial
statements  included  in  this  Half-Yearly  Financial  Report  has  been  prepared  in  accordance  with
International Accounting Standard 34 'Interim Financial Reporting,' as adopted by the European Union.
Our Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express to the Company a conclusion on the condensed consolidated set of
financial statements in the Half-Yearly Financial Report based on our review.
Scope of Review
We conducted our review in accordance with International Standard on Review Engagements (UK and
Ireland) 2410, "Review of Interim Financial Information Performed by the Independent Auditor of the
Entity"  issued  by  the  Auditing  Practices  Board  for  use  in  Ireland.  A  review  of  interim  financial
information consists of making inquiries, primarily of persons responsible for financial and accounting
matters, and applying analytical and other review procedures. A review is substantially less in scope
than an audit conducted in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (UK and Ireland) and
consequently does not enable us to obtain assurance that we would become aware of all significant
matters that might be identified in an audit. Accordingly, we do not express an audit opinion.
Conclusion
Based  on  our  review,  nothing  has  come  to  our  attention  that  causes  us  to  believe  that  the  group
condensed  consolidated  set  of  financial  statements  in  the  Half-Yearly  Financial  Report  for  the  six
months ended 30 June 2016 is not prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with International
Accounting Standard 34 (IAS 34 -Interim Financial Reporting) as adopted by the European Union, the
Transparency (Directive 2004/109/EC) Regulations 2007, and the Transparency Rules of the Central
Bank of Ireland.
Emphasis of Matter - Recoverability of Property, Plant and Equipment
In  forming  our  conclusion  on  the  condensed  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the  six  months
ended 30 June 2016, which is not modified, we have considered the adequacy of the disclosures in
note  5  concerning  the  recoverability  of  Property,  Plant  and  Equipment  of  US$824  million  which  is
dependent  on  the  recovery  in  market  prices  for  titanium  mineral  sands  and  consequently  the
realisation  of  the  underlying  cashflow  forecast  assumptions.  The  Group  condensed  financial
statements do not include any adjustments relating to these uncertainties and the ultimate outcome
cannot at present be determined.
Kevin Sheehan
for and on behalf of Deloitte
Statutory Audit Firm
Dublin
24 August 2016
GROUP CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
KENMARE RESOURCES PLC
Notes
 
 
2
Unaudited
6 Months
30 June
2016
US$'000
 
 
56,195
 
(67,961)
 
(11,766)
 
(13,116)
 
(24,882)
 
20
Unaudited
6 Months
30 June
2015
US$'000
 
 
73,887
 
(91,941)
 
(18,054)
 
(9,125)
 
(27,179)
 
25
Revenue
   
Cost of sales
 
Gross loss
 
Other operating costs
 
Operating loss
 
Finance income
 
Finance costs
 
Foreign exchange (loss)/gain
 
Loss before tax
 
Income tax credit 
 
Loss for the period/year
 
Attributable to equity holders
 
 
 
Loss per share: basic
 
Loss per share: diluted
Audited
12 Months
31 Dec
2015
US$'000
 
 
142,583
 
(168,138)
(25,555)
(21,780)
 
(47,335)
 
543
 
(37,805)
 
22,658
 
(61,939)
 
1,320
 
(60,619)
(21,535)
 
(2,664)
 
(49,061)
 
1,917
 
(47,144)
 
(47,144)
(18,151)
 
17,376
 
(27,929)
 
  -
 
(27,929)
  
(27,929)
(60,619)
 
 
 
 Cent per shareCent per shareCent per share
 
 
4
  (2.18)
 
 
4
  (2.18)
(1.69)
 
(1.69)
(1.00)
 
  (1.00)
The accompanying notes form part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
GROUP CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
KENMARE RESOURCES PLC
AS AT 30 JUNE 2016
Assets
UnauditedUnaudited Audited
 
30 June 31 Dec
 
 
 
 
2015
Notes US$'000 US$'000 US$'000
30 June
2016
2015
Non-current assets
Property, plant and equipment
Deferred tax asset
Other receivables
Current assets
Inventories
Trade and other receivables
Cash and cash equivalents
 
 
Total assets
 
Equity
Capital and reserves attributable to the Company's equity
holders
Called-up share capital
Share premium
Retained losses
Other reserves
Total equity
 
Liabilities
Non-current liabilities
Bank loans
Obligations under finance lease
Provisions
 
 
Current liabilities
Bank loans
Obligations under finance lease
Provisions
Other financial liability
Trade and other payables
 
 
Total liabilities
 
Total equity and liabilities
5
823,775
3,236
464
827,475
 
 
 
47,438
12,058
12,279
71,775
 
899,250
-
  835
849,609 834,961
1,320
  649
850,444 836,930
 
 
 
 
 
 
46,228
46,829
20,268
29,345
  12,928   14,352
  89,102   80,848
 
939,546 917,778
218,606
512
22,166
241,284
6
225,523 214,941
214,941
 
431,380 431,380
431,380
6 (226,590)
(142,961)(175,651)
32,943
 
  22,126   32,804
452,674   536,068 503,474
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
-
 
264
8
22,100
 
22,364
 
 
 
 
7
111,294  341,943
 
479
447
8
1,714
2,006
 
22
863
47,584
 
47,782
162,194 391,940
 
 
 
403,478 414,304
 
 
 
939,546 917,778
-
-
22,440
22,440
 
 
357,742
512
1,714
236
63,932
424,136
 
446,576
 
899,250
The accompanying notes form part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
KENMARE RESOURCES PLC
GROUP CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
Called-
Up
Share
Capital
CapitalRetained Share
Total
SharePremiumConversionRedemption  Losses Option
Reserve
Capital
Reserve 
Fund
Reserve
Fund
US$'000 US$'000
US$'000
US$'000 US$'000US$'000US$'000
Balance at 1 January 2015
Loss for the period
Share-based payments
225,523
431,380
-
-
-
-
754
-
-
(115,032)
-
22,142
564,767
-
-
(27,929)
-
(27,929)
-
(770)
(770)
Balance at 30 June 2015
225,523
431,380
754
-
(142,961)
21,372
536,068
Loss for the period
Share-based payments
Redemption of deferred
shares
Balance at 31 December
2015
Loss for the period
Share-based payments
-
-
(10,582)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,582
(32,690)
-
(32,690)
-
-
96
-
96
-
214,941
431,380
754
(175,651)
10,582
21,468
503,474
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(47,144)
-
(47,144)
-
139
139
Transaction costs of an equity
transaction
Balance at 30 June 2016
-
-
-
-
(3,795)
-
(3,795)
214,941
431,380
754
(226,590)
10,582
21,607
452,674
The accompanying notes form part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
KENMARE RESOURCES PLC
GROUP CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
Cash flows from operating activities
Loss for the financial period/year before tax
Adjustment for:
Foreign exchange movement
Share-based payments
Finance income
Finance costs
Depreciation
Increase/(decrease) in other financial liability
 
Increase/(decrease) in provisions
Operating cash outflow
 
(Increase)/decrease in inventories
Decrease/(increase) in trade and other receivables
Increase/(decrease) in trade and other payables
Cash generated by operations
 
Interest received
Interest paid
 
Net cash from/(used in) operating activities
 
Cash flows from investing activities
Additions to property, plant and equipment
30 June
2016
30 June
2015
UnauditedUnaudited Audited
  6 Months 6 Months12 Months
 
31 Dec
 
2015
  US$'000 US$'000 US$'000
 
 
(61,939)
 
(22,658)
(674)
(45)
37,805
35,820
(498)
 
  (742)
(12,931)
 
16,224
7,222
  (1,901)
8,614
 
45
  (5,700)
 
2,959
 
 
 (5,564)
(27,929)
 
(17,376)
(770)
(25)
17,808
16,604
343
 
  (119)
(11,464)
 
15,623
(2,042)
 (1,945)
172
 
25
 (3,365)
 
 (3,168)
 
 
  (996)
(49,061)
 
2,664
139
(20)
21,535
14,155
214
 
112
(10,262)
 
(1,210)
8,395
12,377
9,300
 
20
(2,703)
 
6,617
 
 
(2,969)
Net cash used in investing activities
 
Cash flows used in financing activities
Increase in borrowings
Loan amendment fees
Equity transaction costs
Payment of obligations under finance leases
 
Net cash used in financing activities
 
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of period/year
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period/year
(2,969)
 
 
-
(5,730)
(460)
(280)
 
(6,470)
 
(2,822)
 
14,352
749
12,279
(996)
 
 
-
(5,673)
-
  (280)
 
 (5,953)
 
(10,117)
 
21,795
  1,250
12,928
(5,564)
 
 
10,000
(17,330)
-
  (560)
 
  (7,890)
 
(10,495)
 
21,795
   3,052
 
 14,352
The accompanying notes form part of these condensed consolidated financial statements.
KENMARE RESOURCES PLC
NOTES TO THE GROUP CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
1. BASIS OF PREPARATION AND GOING CONCERN
The annual financial statements of Kenmare Resources plc are prepared in accordance with IFRSs as
adopted by the European Union. The Group Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for the six
months  ended  30  June  2016  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  the  Transparency  (Directive
2004/109/EC) Regulations 2007, the Transparency Rules of the Central Bank of Ireland and with IAS
34 'Interim Financial Reporting', as adopted by the European Union.
The  accounting  policies  and  methods  of  computation  adopted  in  the  preparation  of  the  Group
Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements are the same as those applied in the Annual Report
for the financial year ended 31 December 2015 and are described in the Annual Report.
In  the  current  financial  year,  the  Group  has  adopted  all  Standards  and  Interpretations  which  are
effective from 1 January 2016. Adoption has resulted in no effect on the financial statements.
The financial information presented in this document does not constitute statutory financial statements.
The  amounts  presented  in  the  Half  Yearly  Financial  Statements  for  the  six  months  ended  30  June
2016 and the corresponding amounts for the six months ended 30 June 2015 have been reviewed but
not audited. The independent review report is on pages X and X. The financial information for the year
ended  31  December  2015,  presented  herein,  is  an  abbreviated  version  of  the  annual  financial
statements  for  the  Group  in  respect  of  the  year  ended  31  December  2015.  The  Group's  financial
statements have been filed in the Companies Registration Office and the independent auditors issued
an  unqualified  audit  report,  with  emphases  of  matter  in  relation  to  going  concern  and  realisation  of
assets in the opinion, in respect of those annual financial statements.
Other than the transaction costs of an equity transaction, as disclosed in the Consolidated Statement of
Changes in Equity, there were no other gains or losses during the six month period ended 30 June
2016 other than those reported in the Condensed Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
On 28 July 2016, the Group completed a capital restructuring to reduce debt to US$100 million (from
US$392.4 million using agreed exchange rates) and to provide an additional US$75 million of cash for
working capital and to meet fees and expenses of the capital restructuring. This was achieved by the
raising of new equity from new and existing shareholders, the conversion of certain debt to equity in
the Company, and certain debt write-offs agreed by Lenders. The capital restructuring also provided for
a  reduction  in  the  interest  rates  on  outstanding  debt,  an  extension  to  the  term  of  that  debt,  and  a
principal repayment holiday until February 2018.
As a result of the capital restructuring and based on the Group's forecast the Directors have, at the time
of  approving  the  financial  statements,  a  reasonable  expectation  that  the  Group  has  adequate
resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future. They therefore continue to
adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
Key assumptions upon which the forecast is based over the next twelve months include a mine plan
covering production using the Namalope reserves as set out in the Reserve and Resources table in
the 2015 Annual Report. Production levels for the purpose of the forecast are approximately 1 million
tonnes of ilmenite, zircon and rutile. Assumptions of product sales prices are based on contract prices
as stipulated in marketing agreements with customers, or where contracts are based on market prices
or production is not presently contracted, prices are forecast taking into account independent titanium
mineral sands expertise and management expectations. Operating costs are based on budget costs for
2016  taking  into  account  current  running  costs  of  the  mine.  Capital  costs  are  based  on  the  capital
budget for 2016 taking into account revisions to this plan and scheduling of outlay over the next twelve
months.
2. SEGMENTAL INFORMATION
Information on the operations of the Moma Titanium Minerals Mine in Mozambique is reported to the
Group's  Board  for  the  purposes  of  resource  allocation  and  assessment  of  segment  performance.
Information regarding the Group's operating segment is reported below.
Segment revenues and results
Moma Titanium Minerals Mine
Revenue
Cost of sales
Gross loss
Other operating costs
Segment operating loss
Other corporate operating costs
Group operating loss
 
Finance income
Finance expense
Foreign exchange (loss)/gain
Loss before tax
Income tax credit
Loss for the period/year
Unaudited Unaudited Audited
30 June 1630 June 1531 Dec 15
US$'000 US$'000 US$'000
56,195
(67,961)
(11,766)
(12,047)
(23,813)
(1,069)
(24,882)
 
20
(21,535)
(2,664)
(49,061)
1,917
(47,144)
73,887 142,583
(91,941) (168,138)
(18,054)
(25,555)
(20,529)
(8,849)
(46,084)
(26,903)
(276)
(1,251)
(47,335)
(27,179)
 
 
543
25
(18,151)
(37,805)
22,658
17,376
(61,939)
(27,929)
-
1,320
(60,619)
(27,929)
Segment assets
Moma Titanium Minerals Mine assets
Corporate assets
Total assets
890,091
9,159
899,250
925,759 905,795
13,787
11,983
939,546 917,778
3. SEASONALITY OF SALE OF MINERAL PRODUCTS
Sales of the Group's mineral products are not seasonal in nature.
4. LOSS PER SHARE
The calculation of the basic and diluted loss per share attributable to the ordinary equity holders of the
Company is based on the following data:
Loss for the period/year attributable to equity
holders of the Company
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weighted average number of issued ordinary shares
for the purposes of basic loss per share
 
Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares:
Shares,share options and warrants
Weighted average number of ordinary shares for
the purpose of diluted loss per share
 
 
Loss per share: basic
Loss per share: diluted
Unaudited
30 June 16
US$'000
Unaudited
30 June 15
US$'000
Audited
31 Dec 15
US$'000
(47,144)
 
Unaudited
30 June 16
Number of
Shares
(27,929)
 
Unaudited
30 June 15
Number of
Shares
(60,619)
 
Audited
31 Dec 15
Number of
Shares
 
 
2,781,905,503 2,781,905,503 2,781,905,503
 
 
-
-
-
2,781,905,503 2,781,905,503 2,781,905,503
 
Cent per shareCent per shareCent per share
(2.18)
(2.18)
(1.69)
(1.69)
(1.00)
(1.00)
For the six months ended 30 June 2016, the basic loss per share and the diluted loss per share are the
same, as the effect of the outstanding share awards, share options and warrants is anti-dilutive.
5. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2015
Transfer from construction in progress
776,953
52,917
9,808
-
Additions during the period
502
494
Balance at 30 June 2015
Transfer to/from construction in progress
787,263 53,411
Additions during the period
(1,206)
277
-
-
Balance at 31 December 2015
Transfer from construction in progress
786,057
53,688
1,089,662
9,808
(9,808)
-
-
929
4,568
5,497
(3,762)
3,248
4,983
249,984
-
-
-
996
249,9841,090,658
-
-
4,568
-
 
1,095,226
249,984
-
-
-
2,969
249,9841,098,195
Plant OtherConstructionDevelopment
 & Equipment Assets in Progress Expenditure
US$'000US$'000
Total
 
US$'000 US$'000
US$'000
Additions during the period
Balance at 30 June 2016
Accumulated Depreciation
Balance at 1 January 2015
Charge for the period
Balance at 30 June 2015
Charge for the period
Balance at 31 December 2015
Charge for the period
3,081
(279)
681
-
788,859 54,369
96,745
22,537
11,369
2,549
108,114
25,086
14,240
2,750
122,354
27,836
9,613
2,176
-
-
-
-
-
-
105,163
224,445
2,686
16,604
107,849
241,049
2,226
19,216
110,075
260,265
2,366
14,155
Balance at 30 June 2016
 
Carrying Amount
Balance at 30 June 2016
Balance at 30 June 2015
131,967
30,012
-
112,441
274,420
656,892
24,357
4,983
137,543
823,775
679,149
28,325
-
142,135
849,609
Balance at  31 December 2015
663,703
25,852
5,497
139,909
834,961
During the period the Group carried out an impairment review of property, plant and equipment. The
cash generating unit for the purpose of impairment testing is the Moma Titanium Minerals Mine. The
basis on which the recoverable amount of the Moma Titanium Minerals Mine is assessed is its value-
in-use.    The  cash  flow  forecast  employed  for  the  value-in-use  computation  is  from  a  life-of-mine
financial  model.  The  recoverable  amount  obtained  from  the  financial  model  represents  the  present
value of the future cash flows, before finance costs and before tax costs are considered, discounted at
11%.
Key assumptions include the following:
A mine plan based on the Namalope and Nataka proved and probable reserves which runs to
2056. The life of mine assumption has not changed from the year-end review, when it was
applied for the purposes of the impairment test. Application of this change in assumption was
applied to the provision for mine closure calculation in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Position as at 30 June 2016, as disclosed in Note 8.
 
Average annual production of approximately 1 million tonnes of finished products ilmenite, zircon
and rutile over the life of the mine. Minimum stock quantities are forecast to be maintained at
period ends. The assumption has not changed from the year-end review.
 
Product sales prices are based on contract prices as stipulated in marketing agreements with
customers, or where contracts are based on market prices or production is not presently
contracted, prices are forecast, taking into account independent titanium mineral sands expertise
and management expectations including general inflation of 2% per annum. Average forecast
product sales prices have remained relatively unchanged over the life of the mine from the year-
end review. 
 
Operating costs are based on budget costs for 2016 taking into account the current running costs
of the Mine and escalated by 2% per annum thereafter.
 
Sustaining capital costs are based on a life of mine capital plan considering inflation at 2% per
annum from 2016.
As a result of this review, the recoverable amount, being its value in use, is greater than its carrying
amount,  and  therefore,  no  impairment  loss  (2015:  nil)  was  recognised  in  the  statement  of
comprehensive income.
The discount rate is the significant factor in determining the recoverable amount. A 1% increase in the
discount  rate  to  12%  which  management  believe  could  be  a  reasonably  possible  change  in  this
assumption would result in an impairment charge of US$55.7 million in the period.
The  recovery  of  property,  plant  and  equipment  is  dependent  upon  the  successful  operation  of  the
Moma Titanium Minerals Mine; the realisation of the cash flow forecast assumptions, as set out in this
note, would result in the recovery of such amounts. The Directors are satisfied that at the reporting
date, the recoverable amount of property, plant and equipment exceeds its carrying amount, and based
on the planned mine production levels, the Moma Titanium Minerals Mine will achieve positive cash
flows.
All  additions  to  property,  plant  and  equipment  during  the  period  have  been  for  sustaining  capital
purposes.
The carrying amount of the Group's plant and equipment includes an amount of US$0.5 million (2015:
US$0.7 million) in respect of assets held under finance leases.
Substantially all the property, plant and equipment is mortgaged, pledged or otherwise encumbered to
secure project loans as detailed in Note 7.
6. SHARE CAPITAL
Share capital as at 30 June 2016 amounted to US$214.9 million (2015: US$214.9 million). During the
period, no ordinary shares in the Company were issued.
At 30 June 2016, transaction costs of US$3.8 million relating to an equity transaction were recognised
as a deduction from equity. These costs represent costs directly attributable to the equity transaction
which were committed at the period end. The transaction to which these costs relate is detailed in Note
12.
7. BANK LOANS
-
Corporate Loan
10,456
Project Super Senior Loans
79,511
Project Senior Loans
297,021
Project Subordinated Loans
386,988
Total Loans
(29,246)
Project Loan fees and expenses
357,742
Total Bank Loans
 
 
357,742
Within one year
-
In the second year
-
In the third to fifth years
-
After five years
 
357,742
Less amounts due for settlement within 12 months (357,742)
-
Amount due for settlement after 12 months
Unaudited Unaudited Audited
30 June 1630 June 1531 Dec 15
US$'000 US$'000 US$'000
-
19,647
10,417
-
79,209
79,178
246,558 278,216
345 414 367,811
(15,514)
(25,868)
329,900 341,943
 
111,294 341,943
-
30,477
188,129
-
-
-
329,900 341,943
(111,294) (341,943)
-
218,606
Project Loans
Balance at 1 January
Loan interest accrued
Loan interest paid
Loan drawdown
Loan amendment fees
Loan fees and expenses
Novated corporate loan
Foreign exchange movement
Balance at 30 June/31 December
 
Corporate Loan
Balance at 1 January
Loan interest accrued
Loan interest paid
Loan fees and expenses
Novated corporate loan
Balance at 30 June/31 December
Project Loans
341,943
18,607
(2,703)
-
(5,730)
2,352
-
3,273
357,742
 
 
-
-
-
-
-
-
318,275 318,275
31,264
13,964
(2,134)
(4,242)
10,000
-
(17,303)
(5,673)
1,939
3,214
20,000
-
(16,118)
(19,265)
310,253 341,943
 
 
19,399
1,441
(1,458)
618
(20,000)
-
19,399
1,224
(1,241)
265
-
19,647
Project Loans have been made to the Mozambique Branches of Kenmare Moma Mining (Mauritius)
Limited  ("KMML")  and  Kenmare  Moma  Processing  (Mauritius)  Limited  ("KMPL",  and  together  with
KMML, the "Project Companies"). The Project Loans are secured by substantially all rights and assets
of the Project Companies, and, amongst other things, the Group's shares in the Project Companies,
substantially all of the Group's cash balances and substantially all of the Group's intercompany loans.
On 22 June 2016 the Group and the Lenders entered into an Amendment, Repayment and Equitisation
Agreement for purposes of the proposed group capital restructuring and debt equitisation. The Group
also entered into Amended Financing Agreements setting out the terms and conditions applicable to
the US$100 million residual debt following the debt restructuring. Details of these agreements are set
out below. On 1 July 2016, the Group published the prospectus detailing the capital reorganisation and
capital restructuring.
At 30 June 2016 the Group was in breach of a number of loan covenants which, as and from 1 July
2016, were temporarily waived by the Lenders. As a result, the loan balances as at 30 June 2016 were
classified as falling due on demand in the statement of financial position. Upon the effectiveness of the
Amended  Financing  Agreements  on  28  July  2016,  all  then-existing  breaches  were  permanently
waived, with the effect that as from such date the loan balances are no longer classified as falling due
on demand.
Amendment, Repayment and Equitisation Agreement
On 22 June 2016 the Group entered into an Amendment, Repayment and Equitisation Agreement with
the Lenders which, amongst other things, set out their respective obligations to implement the capital
restructuring.
The Amendment, Repayment and Equitisation Agreement provided that the debt balance of US$392.4
million as at 28 July 2016, using agreed exchange rates and without deducting fees and expenses,
was repaid as follows: US$179.6 million of the proceeds from the capital raise was used to repay debt;
US$20.4 million of shares were issued to Absa, EAIF, EIB and FMO, discharging that amount of debt
under their US$40.8 million underwriting commitment; US$23.8 million of shares were issued to Absa,
EAIF,  EIB  and  FMO  discharging  that  amount  of  senior  and  subordinated  loans  under  the  debt
reduction equitisation;  and US$68.6 million of debt was written off by the Subordinated Lenders. In
consideration for providing the underwriting, the Subordinated Lenders were paid a fee of 1.75% of
their US$40.8 million underwriting commitment. Following completion of the capital restructuring on 28
July 2016, residual Group debt was US$100 million. US$0.6 million of shares were issued to Absa in
settlement of an outstanding fee.
    
The repayments above are not subject to any prepayment or other Lender fees. The Group applied a
portion of the US$75 million in equity proceeds retained for working capital and expenses of the equity
issue  towards  payment  of  all  deferred  restructuring  fees  and  commitment  fees  of  the  Super  Senior
Facilities.
Subject to certain exceptions, Lenders will not be permitted to dispose of ordinary shares issued to
them for a period of 179 days after 28 July 2016.
Amended Financing Agreements
On 28 July 2016 the debt restructuring was implemented pursuant to which the terms of the residual
debt of US$100 million are now effective.
The  residual  debt  is  in  two  tranches:  US$25.4  million  is  senior  debt  and  US$74.6  million  is
subordinated debt.
Senior debt will rank in priority to subordinated debt in repayment, subject to the waterfall provision
summarised below, on insolvency of the Group and on enforcement of security.
Voting thresholds will be calculated on the basis of aggregate outstanding debt, being the aggregate of
outstanding  senior  debt  and  outstanding  subordinated  debt.  Decisions  will  be  taken  by  majority
Lenders  (Lenders  whose  principal  amount  of  outstanding  debt  aggregate  more  than  50.1%  of  all
outstanding  debt)  or  supermajority  Lenders  (Lenders  whose  principal  amount  of  outstanding  debt
aggregate more than 66.7% of all outstanding debt).
Senior Debt
The final maturity date of each tranche of the senior debt is 1 February 2022. Interest on the senior debt
will be payable in cash on each semi-annual payment date (1 February and 1 August). The interest
rate on each tranche of senior debt is LIBOR plus a margin of 3.00% from and including 28 July 2016
to and including 31 January 2020, and 3.75% thereafter.
Scheduled repayment of the senior debt and subordinated debt is based on the following repayment
schedule, the percentage being applied to total senior and subordinated debt outstanding on 28 July
2016 of US$100 million, in each case subject to the waterfall provisions summarised below:
Payment DatePrincipal amount to be repaid (%)
1 Feb 2018
1 Aug 2018
1 Feb 2019
1 Aug 2019
1 Feb 2020
1 Aug 2020
1 Feb 2021
1 Aug 2021
9.52381
9.52381
9.52381
9.52381
9.52381
9.52381
9.52381
11.11111
22.22222
1 Feb 2022
The principal instalment is allocated 50% to senior debt until senior debt is fully repaid (provided that
once the amount of Absa senior debt is reduced to US$10 million, Absa ceases to participate in the
senior  debt  instalment  and  thereafter  participates  in  the  subordinated  instalment)  with  the  balance
being applied to subordinated debt.
In addition to the scheduled instalments of senior debt, prepayments based on 25% of cash available
for restricted payments are required under a cash sweep mechanism, commencing 1 February 2018.
Subordinated Debt
The final maturity date of each tranche of the subordinated debt is 1 February 2022. Interest on the
subordinated debt is payable in cash on 1 February and 1 August and will no longer be capitalised.
The  interest  rate  on  each  tranche  of  subordinated  debt  is  LIBOR  plus  a  margin  of  4.75%  from  and
including 28 July 2016 to and including 31 January 2020 and 5.50% thereafter.  Subordinated Lenders
will  receive  additional  interest  allocated  pro  rata  to  principal  amounts  outstanding  equal  to  the
difference  between  (i)  interest  on  the  senior  loans  calculated  on  the  basis  of  subordinated  loan
margins  and  (ii)  actual  interest  on  the  senior  loans.  Taken  together,  the  margin  on  the  senior  and
subordinated loans is thus 4.75% from and including 28 July 2016 to and including 31 January 2020,
and 5.50% thereafter.
As  mentioned  above,  scheduled  principal  instalments  on  subordinated  loans  will  equal  the  total
principal instalment due on a Payment Date less the principal instalment on senior loans.  In addition
to the scheduled instalments, payments based on cash available for restricted payments are required
under a cash sweep mechanism, commencing 1 February 2018.
Repayment waterfall
All  principal  repayments,  whether  scheduled  repayments,  prepayments  with  insurance  proceeds,
prepayments  with  proceeds  from  any  arbitral  award  related  to  the  dispute  with  E+PC  Aveng,  and
prepayments under the cash sweep mechanism, will be allocated as follows:
a.  the lesser of (i) 50% of the principal repayment and (ii) the principal amount of senior loans
outstanding will be applied to repaying the principal amounts outstanding under the senior loans
on a pro rata basis to each Senior Lender, provided that once the Absa senior loan is reduced to
US$10 million, Absa shall not participate in the senior loan instalment and shall participate
instead in the subordinated loan instalment on a pro rata basis.
b.  the balance shall be applied to repaying the principal amounts outstanding under the
subordinated loans (and, if applicable, under the Absa senior loan) on a pro rata basis to each
subordinated lender (and, if applicable, to Absa). Once the senior loans (other than the Absa
senior loan) have been fully repaid, the whole amortisation is applied to repaying principal
amounts outstanding under the subordinated loans, and, if applicable under the Absa senior
loan.
Cash Sweep
From and including the first principal Payment Date (1 February 2018), the Project Companies will be
required  to  prepay  outstanding  debt  in  an  amount  equal  to  25%  of  cash  available  for  restricted
payments (as defined below) in accordance with  and  subject  to  conditions  set  out  in  the  Amended
Financing Agreements, on each semi-annual payment date (1 February and 1 August), on which all
conditions to making a restricted payment set out in the Amended Financing Agreements are met.  For
this purpose only, conditions to making a restricted payment will be deemed to have been met unless
the Project Companies notify the administrative agent on or before the day falling 10 business days
prior to the Payment Date that one or more conditions are not met.
Cash sweep payments in accordance with the preceding paragraph will be applied towards repayment
of  outstanding  debt  in  inverse  order  of  maturity  and  in  accordance  with  the  repayment  waterfall
summarised above, without any break costs, prepayment premia, charges or penalties. If any Lender
elects not to participate in a cash sweep payment, the amount that would otherwise be available to
prepay that Lender shall be applied in mandatory prepayment of loans from the other Lenders of the
same ranking (senior or subordinated) as such non-participating Lender.
Cash available for restricted payments means in respect of any Payment Date on or after 1 February
2018 the Project Companies' estimate of (a) the aggregate balance expected to be (i) remaining in the
Proceeds Accounts, after making of all payments and transfers required or permitted to be made for
operating  and  capital  costs,  agents'  fees,  schedule  principal  and  interest  payments,  mandatory
prepayments from proceeds from the E+PC/Aveng dispute, mandatory prepayments upon illegality of
Project Loans, and deposits to a reserve account to fund certain expected capital expenditures, (ii) in
the senior debt reserve account and (iii) in the sinking fund account, minus (b) (i) the amounts that are
required to be in each of the senior debt reserve accounts and the sinking fund account in order to
meet the applicable Restricted Payment condition on the Restricted Payment Date associated with that
Payment Date and (ii) the amount of Project Costs (other than those related to and payable with funds
in  the  insurance  account,  the  price  drop  reserve  account  or  the  expropriation  account)  reasonably
estimated by the Project Companies for the month in which the Payment Date falls, provided that the
balance of Net Arbitration Proceeds retained by the Project Companies shall not in any case count as
cash available for restricted payments unless expected by the Project Companies to be used (in part or
in whole) for purposes of making a Restricted Payment on the Restricted Payment Date associated
with such Payment Date.
Arbitration Proceeds Mandatory Prepayment
In the event that the arbitration between the Project Companies and E+PC Aveng is resolved in favour
of  the  Project  Companies  (whether  by  way  of  arbitral  award,  settlement  or  otherwise),  the  resulting
proceeds received by the Project Companies following such resolution (net of all costs incurred by the
Project  Companies  in  connection  with  such  arbitration)  (such  net  proceeds,  the  "Net  Arbitration
Proceeds") shall be applied by the Project Companies as follows:
a.  the lesser of (i) 50% of the Net Arbitration Proceeds and (ii) the principal amounts outstanding
under the senior loans and the subordinated loans, shall be  applied towards repayment of
principal amounts of senior loans and subordinated loans then outstanding in accordance with
the repayment waterfall described above, in inverse order of maturities; and
b.  any residual amounts of Net Arbitration Proceeds may be retained by the Project Companies to
apply in accordance with applicable waterfalls and must be deposited in an operating cost
reserve account to fund future capital expenditures or be transferred to the proceeds account and
applied in accordance with the priority of payments.
Withdrawals from accounts: priority of payments
Unless  a  declared  default  has  occurred  and  is  continuing,  moneys  to  the  credit  of  the  Project
Companies  held  in  the  accounts  (other  than  the  senior  debt  reserve  account,  the  operating  cost
reserve account, the price drop reserve account, the sinking fund account, the insurance account and
the expropriation account) shall be applied in the following order of priority and solely for the following
purposes:
1.  Project costs;
2.  Agents' fees;
3.  On each payment date, accrued senior debt interest then due and payable;
4.  On each payment date, accrued subordinated debt interest then due and payable;
5.  On each payment date, senior principal repayment;
6.  On each payment date, subordinated debt principal repayment;
7.  Mandatory prepayments related to Net Arbitration Proceeds and in the event of illegality of a
Project Loan;
8.  Deposits to the senior debt reserve account;
9.  Deposits to the sinking fund account;
10.  On the first business day of the month in which a payment date falls, deposits in the price drop
reserve account to fund permitted capital expenditures;
11.  On each cash sharing date, cash sweep payments; and  
12.  Restricted payments or other general corporate purposes for cash available for restricted
payments
Undertakings
Key amendments to the undertakings of the Project Companies are summarised below.
1.  Undertakings added by the April 2015 Amendment, including those listed at items (1) to (5) and
(7) of page 126 of the 2014 Annual Report, are deleted.
2.  The limitation on indebtedness has been amended such that the unsecured financial
indebtedness the Project Companies are able to incur without the consent of the Lenders
increases from US$350,000 to US$7.5 million in aggregate at any time, provided that (a) such
unsecured financial indebtedness is in connection with overdraft facilities, working capital
facilities and/or capital leases of any mobile or other equipment and other similar arrangements
involving the deferral of the purchase price and (b) the interest rate for any such unsecured
indebtedness does not exceed that of similar facilities on commercial and arms' length terms.
3.  Offtake Agreements: KMPL will be able to cancel, terminate or agree to a reduction in term or
quantity of product to be delivered under certain Offtake Agreements without the consent of
majority Lenders (i) where the consequent reduction of gross revenues in the subsequent 12
months, when aggregated with any previous cancellation or amendment without majority
Lenders' consent from the preceding 12 months, would not reasonably be expected to result in a
reduction of gross revenues by an amount that is greater than 10% of the aggregate annual gross
revenues set forth in the most recent annual budget and operating plan delivered to the Lenders
and (ii) such termination, cancellation or reduction, does not give rise to any liability of KMPL.
4.  Restricted payments: these will be permitted subject to the Project Companies meeting certain
conditions. See paragraph entitled "Restricted payments" below.
5.  The Annual Budget and Operating Plan will no longer be subject to the approval of the Lenders.
6.   KMML and KMPL will be released from certain information undertakings relating to short term
cash flow projections, production figures, monthly management accounts, offtake agreements
and similar.
7.  In addition, certain existing undertakings which are historical and relate to construction,
expansion, first disbursement or similar have been deleted.
Events of Default
Key amendments to the events of default are summarised below.
1.  Events of default added by the April 2015 Amendment, listed at items (1) to (8) of pages 127-8 of
the 2014 Annual Report are deleted.
2.  KMML and KMPL will be able to remedy any event of default that is not a declared default, and
will have more time to do so with grace periods for certain events of default being increased. The
grace period for events of default under individual loan agreements has increased from 60 days
to 90 days. Events of default arising from breach of certain undertakings which prior to 28 July
2016 had no grace period now have a grace period ranging from 15 days to 90 days. Grace
periods for events of default for breach of or non-compliance with a covenant run from the earlier
of the administrative agent or any Lender giving written notice of the breach or non-compliance,
and the date on which either of the Project Companies become aware of the breach or non-
compliance.
3.  It is an event of default if any litigation, arbitration, administrative, governmental, regulatory or
other investigation or proceeding or dispute which is reasonably likely to be adversely
determined and if adversely determined, could be expected to have a material adverse effect (as
defined in the Amended Financing Agreements), is commenced on or after the date on which the
Amended Financing Agreements become effective (as defined in the Amended Financing
Agreements) against any member of the Group and is not stayed or discharged within 120 days
of commencement.
4.  DSCR Default:  the Project Companies fail to maintain an historical debt service coverage ratio
of at least 1.25:1 as calculated in relation to the previous six months on any Payment Date falling
on or after the earlier of Completion and 1 February 2018.  Prior to 28 July 2016, this applied only
after Completion, and Lenders could only take action if there were three consecutive defaults.
5.  In addition, certain existing events of default which are historical and relate to construction,
completion or similar have been deleted.
A single Lender is able to unilaterally declare a declared default only in relation to a payment default or
default under its individual loan agreement. A decision by the majority Lenders is required to declare a
declared default in connection with all other events of default.
The regime for taking enforcement action is simplified as a result of the ability to remedy events of
default, longer grace periods and simplified debt structure. Majority Lenders will have the right to take,
or  direct  the  taking  of,  enforcement  action  on  and  from  the  date  an  event  of  default  is  declared  a
declared default.
Restricted payments
The prohibition on the Project Companies making restricted payments to other Group companies (and
hence on the Company paying dividends to its shareholders) under the April 2015 Amendments has
been removed. The Project Companies will be permitted to make payments to other Group companies
by way of dividend or repayment of shareholder loans (other than amounts invoiced under the existing
Management Services Agreement between the Company and the Project Companies which remains
unchanged) ("restricted payments"), subject to the conditions referred to below. The result is that from 1
February 2018 the Project Companies would be permitted to make payments to the Company for the
purposes of dividend payments to shareholders if the relevant conditions are met.
The Project Companies will be permitted to make restricted payments:
1.  after the later of (i) 1 February 2018 and (ii) the date on which the Project Companies have
delivered the financial certificate (as such term is defined in the completion agreement); and
2.  if the other conditions to making restricted payments (including the cash sweep debt prepayment
summarised above) are satisfied. The other conditions to making restricted payments are
generally those that were in place prior to the April 2015 Amendments, with certain amendments
in favour of the Company. For example, conditions relating to (i) maintaining eligible offtake
agreements (as defined in the Amended Financing Agreements) in place to generate revenues
above a certain percentage of project costs, (ii) maintaining a specified balance in the operating
cost reserve account, and (iii) certain aspects of the periodic marketing certificate, have been
removed.
Completion Agreement
Key amendments to the undertakings of the Company and events of default (a "completion default") in
each case under the Completion Agreement are summarised below.
1.  Kenmare is no longer required to give Lenders notice of any change of its ownership in excess of
3%.
2.  Kenmare procures that on each cash sharing date, amounts to be prepaid to Lenders in
connection with the cash sharing arrangement summarised above are applied by the Project
Companies. The cash sweep summarised at page 125 of the 2014 Annual Report no longer
applies.
3.  The limitation on unsecured indebtedness incurred by Kenmare or any other affiliate other than
Kenmare Moma Mining (Mauritius) Limited and Kenmare Moma Processing (Mauritius) Limited
will be increased from US$150,000  to US$2.5 million in aggregate at any time, provided that (a)
in each case the interest rate of such indebtedness does not exceed that for similar facilities on
commercial and arms' length terms, and (b) no creditor of Kenmare receives a preferential right to
the proceeds of a subsequent equity raise. The restriction on the use of such indebtedness has
been broadened to include overdraft facilities, working capital facilities, capital leases of any IT or
office equipment and/or corporate credit card facilities.
4.  Kenmare is no longer subject to cooperation undertakings relating to Lenders' financial advisors,
site visits, full cooperation and weekly updates to Lenders on implementation of certain steps
required by the April 2015 Amendment.
5.  Completion defaults for breaches by Kenmare of an undertaking under the Completion
Agreement are now subject to a grace period of 30 days other than breaches of the limitation on
indebtedness and the limitation on guarantees, which now have a grace period of 15 days. Prior
to 28 July 2016 there was no grace period in most cases.
Other
The Subordinated Lenders' Option Agreement, FMO/EAIF Standby Put Rights Deed dated 30 June
2005 and the EIB Standby Put Right Deed dated 30 June 2005 have been terminated.
The parties to each super senior loan agreement have agreed to irrevocably cancel all available super
senior commitments and terminate each super senior loan agreement.
The security trustee will release any security given by the Project Companies in respect of the super
senior debt obligations and the Novated Absa debt obligations upon payment and discharge in full of
such obligations under the Amendment, Repayment and Equitisation Agreement, which occurred on
28 July 2016.
Lenders' right to appoint a Lender-Approved Non-Executive Director has been terminated effective 28
July 2016.
Group borrowings interest and currency risk
Loan facilities arranged at fixed interest rates expose the Group to fair value interest rate risk. Loan
facilities arranged at variable rates expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk. Variable rates are
based on six or one month LIBOR. The average effective borrowing rate at the period end was 10.0%.
The interest rate profile of the Group's loan balances at the period end was as follows:
Fixed rate debt
Variable rate debt
Total debt
Unaudited Unaudited Audited
30 June 1630 June 1531 Dec 15
US$'000 US$'000 US$'000
310,800
46,942
357,742
201,096 294,932
128,804
47,011
329,900 341,943
Under  the  assumption  that  all  other  variables  remain  constant  and  using  the  6  month  LIBOR  (and
ignoring the capital restructuring), a 1% change in LIBOR would in principle result in a US$0.5 million
(2015: US$1.1 million) change in finance costs for the year in respect of these loan balances.
The currency profile of the bank loans at the period end was as follows:
Euro
US Dollars
Total debt
Unaudited Unaudited Audited
30 June 1630 June 1631 Dec 15
US$'000 US$'000 US$'000
181,545
176,197
357,742
176,952 170,195
152,948 171,748
329,900 341,943
During  H1  2016,  the  Euro-denominated  loans  exposed  the  Group  to  currency  fluctuations.  These
currency fluctuations are realised on payment of Euro-denominated debt principal and interest. Under
the assumption that all other variables remain constant (and ignoring the capital restructuring), a 10%
strengthening or weakening of Euro against the US Dollar, would in principle result in a US$2.1 million
(2015: US$1.9 million) change in finance costs and a US$18.2 million (2015: US$17.0 million) change
in foreign exchange gain or loss for the year, in respect of these loan balances.
The  above  sensitivity  analyses  are  estimates  of  the  effect  of  market  risks  assuming  the  specified
change  occurs  based  on  the  currency  and  interest  rate  profile  of  the  bank  loans  at  30  June  2016.
However, with effect from 28 July 2016, all Group bank loans are denominated in US Dollars, and
have been reduced to US$100 million, so the above currency sensitivity ceased to be relevant from
such date. From such date, a 1% change in LIBOR would result in a US$1.0 million change in finance
costs over a 12 month period.
8. PROVISIONS
Mine closure provision
Mine rehabilitation provision
Legal provision
Executive Directors' bonus provision
Total provision
Unaudited Unaudited Audited
30 June 1630 June 1531 Dec 15
US$'000 US$'000 US$'000
20,117
2,593
1,444
-
24,154
19,595
2,786
1,444
347
24,172
19,890
2,480
1,444
-
23,814
1,714 2,006 1,714
Current
Non-current22,44022,16622,100
 
24,15424,17223,814
The mine closure provision represents the Directors' best estimate of the Group's liability for close-
down, dismantling and restoration of the mining and processing site. A corresponding amount equal to
the provision is recognised as part of property, plant and equipment. The costs are estimated on the
basis of a formal closure plan and are subject to regular review. The costs are estimated based on the
net present value of estimated future cost. Mine closure costs are a normal consequence of mining,
and the majority of close-down and restoration expenditure is incurred at the end of the life of the mine.
The  unwinding  of  the  discount  is  recognised  as  a  finance  cost  and  US$0.2  million  (2015:  US$0.3
million) has been recognised in the statement of comprehensive income for the period.
During the period the mine closure provision was adjusted as a result of the increased life of mine. In
2015 there was a reclassification of 776 million tonnes of ore from the Nataka indicated resource to the
Nataka probable reserve. Inclusion of these additional reserves extended the last year of operations
from 2033 in the 2014 mine plan to 2056 in the 2015 mine plan. Offsetting the increase in life of mine
was a reduction in the discount factor to 2.3% to reflect the 30 year US Treasury yield rate as at 30
June 2016.
The main assumptions used in the calculation of the estimated future costs include:
a discount rate of 2.3% (2015: 3%) based on a 30 year (2015: 20 year) US Treasury yield rate;
an inflation rate of 2% (2015: 2%);
an estimated life of mine of 40 years (2015: 24 years); and
an estimated closure cost of US$21.7 million (2015: US$20.4 million) and an estimated post-
closure monitoring provision of US$1.7 million (2015: US$1.9 million).
The significant factor in determining the estimated future cost is the discount factor and a 1% change in
the discount rate results in a 34% change in the estimated future cost.
The mine rehabilitation provision was increased by US$0.1 million as a result of additional provision of
US$0.4 million for areas disturbed net of US$0.3 million released for areas rehabilitated during the
period. US$0.3 million (2015: US$0.2 million) of the mine rehabilitation provision has been included in
current liabilities to reflect the estimated cost of rehabilitation work to be carried out over the next year.
On 17 November 2010, a High Court jury delivered a verdict of damages of €10 million in a defamation
case taken by a former Company Director. The Company has submitted an appeal to the Supreme
Court with a view to setting aside both the verdict and the amount, with the intention of securing a
retrial. The High Court granted a stay on the award subject to the payment of €0.5 million until the
hearing of the Supreme Court appeal. The Company's legal team strongly advise that the award will
be set aside on appeal. The same former director has also served notice that he intends to pursue a
number of non-defamation actions against the Company.
9. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS
The Company has a share option scheme for certain Directors, employees and consultants. Options
are exercisable at a price equal to the quoted market price of the Company's shares on the date of
grant. The options generally vest over a three year period, in equal annual amounts. If options remain
unexercised after a period of seven years from the date of grant, the options expire. The option expiry
period  may  be  extended  at  the  discretion  of  the  Board  of  Directors.  The  Company  also  has  an
incentive plan under which annual awards have a cash element and a separate share element.
During  the  period  the  Group  recognised    share-based  payment  expenses  of  US$0.1  million  (2015:
US$0.8 million credit).
10. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Transactions  between  the  Company  and  its  subsidiaries,  which  are  related  parties,  have  been
eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
Apart  from  existing  remuneration  arrangements  there  were  no  material  transactions  or  balances
between Kenmare and its key management personnel or members of their close families during the
period under review.
11. FAIR VALUE
The  fair  value  of  the  Group  borrowings  of  US$318.4  million  (2015:  US$333.3  million)  has  been
calculated by reference to the terms of capital restructuring that were agreed with lenders at 30 June
2016, subject to approval by shareholders which was given at an Extraordinary General Meeting on 25
July 2016.  These terms provided for a debt write-off by lenders of US$68.6 million.  The fair value is
calculated by deducting this write-off from the gross book value of group borrowings of US$387.0 at 30
June 2016 and by applying period end exchange rates.
The fair value of trade and other receivables, trade and other payables, other financial liabilities and
the finance lease are equal to their carrying amounts.
12. EVENTS AFTER THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION DATE
Effective 25 July 2016, Mr. Tony Lowrie retired as a Non-Executive Director of the Company.
On 28 July 2016, the Group completed a capital restructuring to reduce debt to US$100 million (from
US$392.4 million using agreed exchange rates) and to provide an additional US$75 million of cash for
working capital and to meet fees and expenses of the capital restructuring. This was achieved by the
raising of new equity from new and existing shareholders, the conversion of certain debt to equity in
the Company, and certain debt write-offs agreed by Lenders. The capital restructuring also provided for
a  reduction  in  the  interest  rates  on  outstanding  debt,  an  extension  to  the  term  of  that  debt,  and  a
principal repayment holiday until February 2018.
13. INFORMATION
The Half Yearly Financial Report was approved by the Board on 24 August 2016.
Copies are available from the Company's registered office at Chatham House, Chatham Street, Dublin
2, Ireland. The report is also available on the Company's website at www.kenmareresources.com.
Glossary - Alternative Performance Measures
Certain financial measures set out in our Half Yearly Report to 30 June 2016 are not defined under
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS),  but  represent  additional  measures  used  by  the
Board to assess performance and for reporting both internally and to shareholders and other external
users.  Presentation  of 
these  Alternative  Performance  Measures  ("APMs")  provides  useful
supplemental  information  which,  when  viewed  in  conjunction  with  the  Company's  IFRS  financial
information,  allows  for  a  more  meaningful  understanding  of  the  underlying  financial  and  operating
performance of the Group.
These  non-IFRS  measures  should  not  be  considered  as  an  alternative  to  financial  measures  as
defined under IFRS.
Descriptions of the APMs included in this report, as well as their relevance for the Group, are disclosed
below.
APM
EBITDA
Description
Operating profit/loss before
depreciation and amortisation
Total costs less freight and
other non-cash costs, including
inventory movements, divided
by final product production
(tonnes)
Bank loans net of cash and
cash equivalents
The result of cash inflows and
outflows from operating
activities minus sustaining
additions to property, plant and
equipment in the period
Cash
operating
cost per
tonne of
finished
product
Net Debt
Operating
cashflow
after
additions to
sustaining
capex
EBITDA
Relevance
Eliminates the effects of financing and accounting
decisions to allow assessment of the profitability and
performance of the Group
Eliminates the non-cash impact on costs to identify the
actual cash outlay for production and, as production levels
increase or decrease, highlights operational performance
by providing a comparable cash cost per tonne of product
produced over time
Measures the Group's's ability to repay its debts if they
were to fall due immediately, and aids in developing an
understanding of the leveraging of the Group
Provides a measure of the cash the Group is able to
generate after expenditure required to maintain its asset
base, and highlights the resources available to allow the
Group pursue opportunities to enhance shareholder value
Operating loss
Depreciation and amortisation
EBITDA
H1 2016H1 2015 2015
US$m US$mUS$m
(27.2) (47.3)
(24.9)
14.2
16.6 35.8
(10.6) (11.5)
(10.7)
Cash operating cost per tonne of finished product
H1 2016H1 2015
2015
 
 
US$m US$m US$m
168.1
Cost of sales
21.8
Other operating costs
189.9
Total operating costs
(3.7)
Freight charges
186.2
Total operating costs less freight
 
 
 
Non cash costs
(35.8)
Depreciation and amortisation
0.7
Share-based payments
 
 
 
Inventory movements
(14.7)
Finished product movements
 
 
136.4
Adjusted cash operating costs
 
 
434,400 350,700 821,300
Final product production
 
 
Cash operating cost per tonne of finished productUS$153 US$197US$$166
68.0
13.1
81.1
(2.4)
78.7
 
 
(14.2)
(0.1)
 
 
2.2
 
66.6
91.9
9.2
101.1
(1.6)
99.5
 
 
(16.6)
0.8
 
 
(14.6)
 
69.1
Net Debt
Bank loans
Cash and cash equivalents
Net Debt
H1 2016H1 2015 2015
US$m US$mUS$m
329.9 341.9
357.7
(12.3)
(12.9) (14.4)
317.0 327.5
345.5
Operating cashflow after additions to sustaining capex
Net cash from/(used in) operating activities
Additions to property, plant and equipment
Operating cashflow after additions to sustaining capex
H1 2016H1 2015 2015
US$m US$mUS$m
2.9
(5.5)
(2.6)
(3.2)
(1.0)
(4.2)
6.6
(3.0)
3.6
This announcement is distributed by NASDAQ OMX Corporate Solutions on behalf of NASDAQ OMX
Corporate Solutions clients.
The issuer of this announcement warrants that they are solely responsible for the content, accuracy
and originality of the information contained therein.
Source: Kenmare Resources via Globenewswire
HUG#2036849
Close
London Stock Exchange plc is not responsible for and does not check content on this
Website. Website users are responsible for checking content. Any news item (including any
prospectus) which is addressed solely to the persons and countries specified therein should
not be relied upon other than by such persons and/or outside the specified countries. Terms
and conditions, including restrictions on use and distribution apply.
©2014 London Stock Exchange plc. All rights reserved
2016 Half-Yearly Results - RNS
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​