
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS 
 
You are invited to Denison’s Annual and Special Meeting of Shareholders. 
When 
Thursday, May 9, 2013 
4:00 p.m. Reception 
4:30 p.m. Meeting
Where 
The Sheraton Centre Toronto Hotel 
123 Queen Street West 
Toronto, Ontario 
M5H 2M9
The purpose of the Meeting is:
(a)
to receive the consolidated financial statements of Denison Mines Corp. for the year 
ended December 31, 2012, along with the auditor’s report on the statements;
to elect eight directors to the Board for the upcoming year;
to reappoint the auditor for the upcoming year and to authorize the directors to fix the 
remuneration of the auditor;
to confirm an amendment to the Company’s by-laws to add an advance notice 
requirement for nominations of directors by shareholders in certain circumstances;
to approve certain amendments to the Company’s share option plan; and
to transact such other business as may properly come before the Meeting.
(b) 
 
(c)
(d)
(e) 
 
(f)
Your vote is important.  If you held shares in Denison Mines Corp. on March 20, 2013, you are 
entitled to receive notice of and vote at this Meeting or any postponement or adjournment of it. 
 
The attached Management Information Circular describes who can vote, how to vote and what the 
Meeting will cover.  Your package may also include a copy of the 2012 Annual Report, including the 
audited consolidated financial statements and related management’s discussion and analysis for 
the year ended December 31, 2012 (if you requested a copy).  This information is also available on 
Denison’s website at www.denisonmines.com, on SEDAR at www.sedar.com or by request to the 
Corporate Secretary of the Company at 595 Bay Street, Suite 402, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2C2.  
   
If you are not able to attend the Meeting, please vote by using the enclosed proxy form and 
returning it to Computershare Investor Services Inc., 100 University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, 
Canada, M5J 2Y1.  Your proxy is due before 4:30 p.m. (Eastern Time) on May 7, 2013.
Yours truly,
Ron F. Hochstein 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Dated March 20, 2013