
424B3 1 vtnr-424b3_081016.htm PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
PROSPECTUS
Filed Pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3)
Registration No. 333-211955
Vertex Energy, Inc.
19,671,090 Shares of Common Stock
__________________
This prospectus relates to the resale by the selling stockholders named herein of 19,671,090 shares of common stock, par value
$0.001 per share, which we refer to as common stock, of Vertex Energy, Inc., which we refer to as us, we, the Company, the
Registrant or Vertex Energy. The shares represent:
(1)
12,501,558 shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of 12,501,558 currently outstanding shares of Series B1 Preferred
Stock (which convert into common stock on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations));
(2)
4,068,606 shares of common stock either:
(a)
issuable in lieu of dividends payable in cash, on (i) such Series B1 Preferred Stock currently outstanding; and (ii) additional shares
of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in-kind, in lieu of dividends payable in cash on shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock; or
(b)
issuable upon conversion of additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in-kind (which convert into common stock on a
one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations)), in lieu of dividends payable in cash, on (i) such
Series B1 Preferred Stock currently outstanding; and (ii) additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issuable in-kind, in lieu of
dividends payable in cash on shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock, from time to time, which we refer to collectively, as the Series B1
Common Shares; and
(3)
3,100,926 shares of common stock that are issuable in connection with the exercise of outstanding warrants to purchase 3,100,926
shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.53 per share and held by the selling stockholders named herein, which we refer
to as the Warrant Shares.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock shares accrue a dividend, payable quarterly in arrears (based on calendar quarters), in the amount of
6% per annum of the original issuance price of the Series B1 Preferred Stock ($1.56 per share), provided that such dividend
increases to 9% if certain Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA targets are not met during 2016-2017, until the earlier of (a) the date the
next target is met, or (b) June 30, 2018. The dividend is payable by the Company, at the Company’s election, in registered common
stock of the Company (if available) or cash, subject to the terms of the Company’s senior loan documents. In the event dividends
are paid in registered common stock of the Company [which shares are described in (2)(a) above], the number of shares payable
will be calculated by dividing (a) the accrued dividend by (b) 90% of the arithmetic average of the volume weighted average price
(VWAP) of the Company’s common stock for the 10 trading days immediately prior to the applicable date of determination (the
“Dividend Stock Payment Price”)(provided the Dividend Stock Payment Price must be above $1.52 in order for the dividend to be
payable in shares of common stock). If the Company is prohibited from paying the dividend in cash (due to contractual senior credit
agreements or other restrictions) or is unable to pay the dividend in registered common stock, the dividend is paid in-kind in
additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock shares at $1.56 per share [which shares are described in (2)(b) above].
The shares of common stock being registered herein include the maximum number of shares of common stock issuable upon
conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock currently outstanding and the Series B1 Preferred Stock which may be issued by the
Company in the future, from time to time, in-kind, in lieu of accrued dividends on Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares of
Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-kind in lieu of dividends), or which may be issued in the future in lieu of cash
dividends on Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-kind in lieu of
dividends), by the selling stockholders named herein.
The shares of common stock described in this prospectus may be offered for sale from time to time by the selling stockholders
named herein. The selling stockholders may offer and sell the shares in a variety of transactions as described under the heading
“Plan of Distribution” beginning on page 28, including transactions on any stock exchange, market or facility on which our
common stock may be traded, in privately negotiated transactions or otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at
prices related to such market prices or at negotiated prices. We have no basis for estimating either the number of shares of our
common stock that will ultimately be sold by the selling stockholders or the prices at which such shares will be sold.
We are not selling any securities covered by this prospectus and will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of such shares
by the selling stockholders. We are registering shares of common stock on behalf of the selling stockholders. We are bearing all of
the expenses in connection with the registration of the shares of common stock, but all selling and other expenses incurred by the
selling stockholders, including commissions and discounts, if any, attributable to the sale or disposition of the shares will be borne
by them.
The selling stockholders and intermediaries through whom such securities are sold may be deemed “underwriters” within the
meaning of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), with respect to the securities offered hereby, and any
profits realized or commissions received may be deemed underwriting compensation.
In addition, any securities covered by this prospectus which qualify for sale pursuant to Rule 144 of the Securities Act may be sold
under Rule 144 rather than pursuant to this prospectus.
Our common stock is listed on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the symbol “VTNR”. The closing price for our common stock on
August 8, 2016 was $1.37 per share.
Investing in our securities involves risks. You should carefully consider the risk factors beginning on page 12 of this prospectus
and set forth in the documents incorporated by reference herein before making any decision to invest in our securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved of these
securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is August 10, 2016.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 
 
About This Prospectus 
 
Prospectus Summary 
 
The Offering
 
Forward-Looking Statements 
 
Risk Factors
 
Use of Proceeds 
 
Selling Stockholders 
 
Material Relationships with Selling Stockholders 22
 
Description of Capital Stock
Page
 
1
 
2
 
9
 
10
 
12
 
16
 
17
22
Plan of Distribution 
 
Experts
 
Legal Matters 
 
Where You Can Find More Information
 
Incorporation of Certain Information by Reference31
28
 
30
 
31
 
31
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC” or the
“Commission”). This prospectus relates to the resale by the selling stockholders listed in this prospectus of up to 19,671,090
shares of our common stock. We will not receive any proceeds from the resale of any of the shares by the selling stockholders. We
will receive proceeds from the exercise of any warrants. We have agreed to pay for the expenses related to the registration of the
shares being offered by the selling stockholders.
You should read this prospectus, including all documents incorporated herein by reference, together with additional information
described under “Where You Can Find More Information” and “Incorporation of Certain Information by Reference”, beginning on
page 31, before making an investment decision.
This prospectus does not contain all the information provided in the registration statement we filed with the SEC. For further
information about us or our securities offered hereby, you should refer to that registration statement, which you can obtain from the
SEC as described below under “Where You Can Find More Information”, beginning on page 31.
You should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus. We have not authorized any
other person to provide you with different information. If anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information, you should
not rely on it. This prospectus is not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any securities other than the securities to
which it relates and is not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any person to whom it
is unlawful to make an offer or solicitation in that jurisdiction. You should assume that the information appearing in this prospectus,
as well as information we have previously filed with the SEC and incorporated herein by reference, is accurate as of the date of
those documents only. Our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since those
dates.
We will disclose any material changes in our affairs in a post-effective amendment to the registration statement of which this
prospectus is a part, or a prospectus supplement. We do not imply or represent by delivering this prospectus that Vertex Energy,
Inc., or its business, financial condition or results of operations, are unchanged after the date on the front of this prospectus or that
the information in this prospectus is correct at any time after such date, provided that we will amend or supplement this prospectus
to disclose any material events which occur after the date of such prospectus to the extent required by applicable law.
Persons outside the United States who come into possession of this prospectus must inform themselves about, and observe any
restrictions relating to, the offering of the securities and the distribution of this prospectus outside of the United States.
In this prospectus, we may rely on and refer to information regarding the refining, re-refining, used oil, and oil and gas industries in
general from market research reports, analyst reports and other publicly available information. Although we believe that this
information is reliable, we cannot guarantee the accuracy and completeness of this information, and we have not independently
verified any of it. Some data is also based on our good faith estimates. In addition, assumptions and estimates of our and our
industry’s future performance are necessarily subject to a high degree of uncertainty and risk due to a variety of factors, including
those described in “Risk Factors” beginning on page 12 of this prospectus. These and other factors could cause our future
performance to differ materially from our assumptions and estimates.
Please see the “Glossary of Selected Terms” incorporated by reference as Exhibit 99.1 to the registration statement of which this
prospectus forms a part, for a list of abbreviations and definitions used throughout this prospectus.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this prospectus to “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Registrant”, the “Company,”
“Vertex” and “Vertex Energy” refer to Vertex Energy, Inc. and its subsidiaries. All dollar amounts in this prospectus are in U.S.
dollars unless otherwise stated. You should read the entire prospectus before making an investment decision to purchase our
securities.
1
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
The following summary highlights material information found in more detail elsewhere in, or incorporated by reference in, the
prospectus. It does not contain all of the information you should consider. As such, before you decide to buy our securities, in
addition to the following summary, we urge you to carefully read the entire prospectus and documents incorporated by reference
herein, especially the risks of investing in our securities as discussed under “Risk Factors” herein and therein. The following
summary is qualified in its entirety by the detailed information appearing elsewhere in this prospectus.
General
We are an environmental services company that recycles industrial waste streams and off-specification commercial chemical
products. Our primary focus is recycling used motor oil and other petroleum by-products. We are engaged in operations across the
entire petroleum recycling value chain including collection, aggregation, transportation, storage, re-refinement, and sales of
aggregated feedstock and re-refined products to end users. We operate in the following three divisions: the Black Oil, Refining and
Marketing, and Recovery divisions. Our Black Oil division collects and purchases used motor oil directly from third-party
generators, aggregates used motor oil from an established network of local and regional collectors, and sells used motor oil to our
customers for use as a feedstock or replacement fuel for industrial burners. Our Refining and Marketing division aggregates and
manages the re-refinement of used motor oil and other petroleum by-products and sells the re-refined products to end customers.
Our Recovery division is a generator solutions company for the proper recovery and management of hydrocarbon streams. We
operate three refining facilities, one located in Marrero, Louisiana which processes used motor oil into vacuum gas oil (VGO), one
located in Columbus, Ohio which produces a base oil product that is sold to lubricant packagers and distributors, and a third
refining facility located in Baytown, Texas, that uses our proprietary Thermal Chemical Extraction Process (“TCEP”) (described
below) technology, which is currently not being operated due to economic factors, and we also utilize third-party processing
facilities.
During fiscal 2013 and 2014 we acquired 100% of E-Source Holdings, LLC (“E-Source”), a company that leases and operates a
facility located in Houston, Texas, and provides dismantling, demolition, decommission and marine salvage services at industrial
facilities throughout the Gulf Coast. E-Source also owns and operates a fleet of trucks and other vehicles used for shipping and
handling equipment and scrap materials.
We acquired certain assets and operations from Omega Holdings, LLC (“Omega”) in May 2014. Included in the acquisition was
Omega’s Marrero, Louisiana re-refinery and Myrtle Grove complex in Belle Chasse, Louisiana and ownership of Golden State
Lubricants Works, LLC (“Golden State”). The Marrero, Louisiana facility re-refines used motor oil and also produces vacuum gas
oil. Golden State operates a strategic blending and storage facility located in Bakersfield, California.
We also acquired certain assets and operations from Warren Ohio Holdings Co., LLC. f/k/a Heartland Group Holdings, LLC
(“Heartland”) in December 2014. Included in the acquisition were substantially all of the assets and operations of Heartland related
to and used in an oil re-refinery and, in connection with the collecting, aggregating and purchasing of used lubricating oils and the
re-refining of such oils into processed oils and other products for the distribution, supply and sale to end-customers, including raw
materials, finished products and work-in process, equipment and other fixed assets, customer lists and marketing information, the
name ‘Heartland’ and other related trade names, Heartland’s real property relating to its used oil refining facility located in
Columbus, Ohio, used oil storage and transfer facilities located in Columbus, Zanesville and Norwalk, Ohio (provided that the
acquisition of the Norwalk, Ohio location is subject to certain terms and conditions and has not closed yet),  and leases related to
storage and transfer facilities located in Zanesville, Ohio, Mount Sterling, Kentucky, and Ravenswood, West Virginia. As part of the
acquisition, we also assumed certain liabilities of Heartland associated with certain assumed and acquired agreements.
2
Black Oil Division
Our Black Oil division is engaged in operations across the entire used motor oil recycling value chain including collection,
aggregation, transportation, storage, refinement, and sales of aggregated feedstock and re-refined products to end users. We
collect and purchase used oil directly from generators such as oil change service stations, automotive repair shops, manufacturing
facilities, petroleum refineries, and petrochemical manufacturing operations. We collect and purchase used oil directly from
generators such as oil change service stations, automotive repair shops, manufacturing facilities, petroleum refineries, and
petrochemical manufacturing operations. We own a fleet of 26 collection vehicles, which routinely visit generators to collect and
purchase used motor oil. We also aggregate used oil from a diverse network of approximately 50 suppliers who operate similar
collection businesses to ours.
We manage the logistics of transport, storage and delivery of used oil to our customers. We own a fleet of 15 transportation trucks
and more than 150 aboveground storage tanks with over 7.3 million gallons of storage capacity. These assets are used by both the
Black Oil division and the Refining and Marketing division. In addition, we also utilize third parties for the transportation and storage
of used oil feedstocks. Typically, we sell used oil to our customers in bulk to ensure efficient delivery by truck, rail, or barge. In
many cases, we have contractual purchase and sale agreements with our suppliers and customers, respectively. We believe these
contracts are beneficial to all parties involved because it ensures that a minimum volume is purchased from collectors and
generators, a minimum volume is sold to our customers, and we are able to minimize our inventory risk by a spread between the
costs to acquire used oil and the revenues received from the sale and delivery of used oil. We also use our proprietary TCEP
technology to re-refine used oil into marine fuel cutterstock and a higher-value feedstock for further processing; however we are
currently not utilizing our TCEP technology due to market conditions. In addition, at our Marrero facility we produce a Vacuum Gas
Oil (VGO) product that is sold to refineries as well as to the marine fuels market. At our Columbus, Ohio facility (Heartland
Petroleum) we produce a base oil product that is sold to lubricant packagers and distributors.
Refining and Marketing Division
Our Refining and Marketing division is engaged in the aggregation of feedstock, re-refining it into higher value end products, and
selling these products to our customers, as well as related transportation and storage activities. We aggregate a diverse mix of
feedstocks including used motor oil, petroleum distillates, transmix and other off-specification chemical products. These feedstock
streams are purchased from pipeline operators, refineries, chemical processing facilities and third-party providers, and are also
transferred from our Black Oil division. We have a toll-based processing agreement in place with KMTEX to re-refine feedstock
streams, under our direction, into various end products that we specify. KMTEX uses industry standard processing technologies to
re-refine our feedstocks into pygas, gasoline blendstock and marine fuel cutterstock. We sell all of our re-refined products directly
to end-customers or to processing facilities for further refinement.
Recovery Division
The Recovery division is a generator solutions company for the proper recovery and management of hydrocarbon streams. The
Recovery division also provides industrial dismantling, demolition, decommissioning, investment recovery and marine salvage
services in industrial facilities. The Company (through this division) owns and operates a fleet of eight trucks and heavy equipment
used for processing, shipping and handling of reusable process equipment and other scrap commodities.
We currently provide our services in 15 states, primarily in the Gulf Coast and Central Midwest regions of the United States. For the
rolling twelve month period ending March 31, 2016, we aggregated approximately 108.6 million gallons of used motor oil and other
petroleum by-product feedstocks and managed the re-refining of approximately 69.5 million gallons of used motor oil with our
proprietary TCEP, VGO and Base Oil processes.
Biomass Renewable Energy
We are also continuing to work on joint development commercial projects which focus on the separation of municipal solid waste
into feedstocks for energy production. We are very selective in choosing opportunities that we believe will result in value for our
shareholders; however, the ongoing venture may not successfully bring any projects to a point of financing or successful
construction and operation.
3
Thermal Chemical Extraction Process
We own the intellectual property for our patented TCEP. TCEP is a technology which utilizes thermal and chemical dynamics to
extract impurities from used oil which increases the value of the feedstock. We intend to continue to develop our TCEP technology
and design with the goal of producing additional re-refined products, including lubricating base oil.
TCEP differs from conventional re-refining technologies, such as vacuum distillation and hydrotreatment, by relying more heavily
on chemical processes to remove impurities rather than temperature and pressure. Therefore, the capital requirements to build a
TCEP plant are typically much less than a traditional re-refinery because large feed heaters, vacuum distillation columns, and a
hydrotreating unit are not required. The end product currently produced by TCEP is used as fuel oil cutterstock. Conventional re-
refineries produce lubricating base oils or product grades slightly lower than base oil that can be used as industrial fuels or
transportation fuel blendstocks.
We currently estimate the cost to construct a new, fully-functional, commercial facility using our TCEP technology, with annual
processing capacity of between 25 and 50 million gallons at another location would be approximately $10 to $15 million, which
could fluctuate based on throughput capacity. The facility infrastructure would require additional capitalized expenditures which
would depend on the location and site specifics of the facility. As noted above, we are currently not utilizing this technology.
Strategy and Plan of Operations
The principal elements of our strategy include:
Pursue Strategic Acquisitions and Partnerships
We plan to grow market share by consolidating feedstock supply through partnering with or acquiring collection and aggregation
assets. Our executive team has a proven ability to evaluate resource potential and identify acquisition targets, funding permitting.
The acquisitions and/or partnerships could increase our revenue and provide better control over the quality and quantity of
feedstock available for resale and/or upgrading as well as providing additional future locations for the implementation of TCEP,
assuming TCEP once again becomes economically viable. In addition, we intend to pursue further vertical integration opportunities
by acquiring complementary recycling and processing technologies where we can realize synergies by leveraging our customer
and vendor relationships, infrastructure, and personnel, and by eliminating duplicative overhead costs.
Expand Feedstock Supply Volume
We intend to expand our feedstock supply volume by growing our collection and aggregation operations. We plan to increase the
volume of feedstock we collect directly by developing new relationships with generators and working to displace incumbent
collectors; increasing the number of collection personnel, vehicles, equipment, and geographical areas we serve; and acquiring
collectors in new or existing territories. We intend to increase the volume of feedstock we aggregate from third-party collectors by
expanding our existing relationships and developing new vendor relationships. We believe that our ability to acquire large
feedstock volumes will help to cultivate new vendor relationships because collectors often prefer to work with a single, reliable
customer rather than manage multiple relationships and the uncertainty of excess inventory.
Broaden Existing Customer Relationships and Secure New Large Accounts
We intend to broaden our existing customer relationships by increasing sales of used motor oil and re-refined products to these
accounts. In some cases, we may also seek to serve as our customers’ primary or exclusive supplier. We also believe that as we
increase our supply of feedstock and re-refined products that we will secure larger customer accounts that require a partner who
can consistently deliver high volumes.
4
Re-Refine Higher Value End Products
We intend to develop, lease, or acquire technologies to re-refine our feedstock supply into higher-value end products. We believe
that the expansion of our facilities and our technology, and investments in additional technologies, will enable us to upgrade
feedstock into end products, such as lubricating base oil, that command higher market prices than the current re-refined products
we produce.
Products and Services
We generate substantially all of our revenue from the sale of four product categories. All of these products are commodities that are
subject to various degrees of product quality and performance specifications.
Used Motor Oil
Used motor oil is a petroleum-based or synthetic lubricant that contains impurities such as dirt, sand, water, and chemicals.
Fuel Oil
Fuel Oil is a distillate fuel which is typically blended with lower quality fuel oils. The distillation of used oil and other petroleum by-
products creates a fuel with low viscosity, as well as low sulfur, ash, and heavy metal content, making it an ideal blending agent.
Pygas
Pygas, or pyrolysis gasoline, is a product that can be blended with gasoline as an octane booster or that can be distilled and
separated into its components, including benzene and other hydrocarbons.
Gasoline Blendstock
Naphthas and various distillate products are used for blending or compounding into finished motor gasoline. These components
can include reformulated gasoline blendstock for oxygenate blending (RBOB) but exclude oxygenates (alcohols and ethers),
butane, and pentanes plus.
Base Oil
An oil to which other oils or substances are added to produce a lubricant. Typically the main substance in lubricants, base oils, are
refined from crude oil.
Unit Offering
On May 13, 2016, we closed the transactions contemplated by the May 10, 2016 Unit Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase
Agreement”) entered into with certain accredited investors (the “Investors”), pursuant to which we sold to the Investors an
aggregate of 12,403,683 units (the “Units”), each consisting of (i) one share of Series B1 Preferred Stock of the Company, $0.001
par value per share (the “Series B1 Preferred Stock”) and (ii) one warrant to purchase one-quarter of a share of common stock of
the Company, $0.001 par value per share, totaling an aggregate of warrants to purchase 3,100,926 shares of common stock (each a
“Warrant” and collectively, the “Warrants”). The Units were sold at a price of $1.56 per Unit (the “Unit Price”) (a 2.6% premium to the
closing bid price of the Company’s common stock on the NASDAQ Capital Market on the date the Purchase Agreement was
entered into which was $1.52 per share (the “Closing Bid Price”)). The Warrants have an exercise price of $1.53 per share ($0.01
above the Closing Bid Price), are exercisable beginning 185 days after the date of the closing of the Offering (November 14, 2016),
have a term of 5.5 years and have cashless exercise rights to the extent the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the
Warrants are not registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Total gross proceeds from the offering of the Units (the
“Offering”) was $19,349,740.
5
A total of $18,649,738 of the securities sold in the Offering were purchased by investors who participated in the Company’s prior
June 2015 offering of Series B Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase shares of common stock. A total of 60% of the funds
received from such investors was used to immediately repurchase such investors’ Series B Preferred Stock. As a result, a total of
$11,189,838 of the proceeds raised in the Offering were used to immediately repurchase and retire 3,575,070 shares of Series B
Preferred Stock and pay accrued interest on such repurchased shares through the closing date (the “Repurchases”), leaving net
proceeds of approximately $7.5 million, after deducting placement agent’s fees, described below and offering expenses. Of these
net proceeds, $800,000 was used to immediately pay amounts owed at the end of June 2016, under the terms of that certain
Amended and Restated Credit and Guaranty Agreement entered into between the Company, Vertex Energy Operating, LLC,
substantially all of our subsidiaries, Goldman Sachs Specialty Lending Holdings, Inc. (the “Lender”) and Goldman Sachs Bank
USA, as administrative agent for the Lender (“Agent”), dated as of and originally entered into on January 29, 2016, as amended,
restated, modified, supplemented, refinanced, renewed, extended, and revised from time to time (the “Credit Agreement”), and the
remaining proceeds are planned to be used for working capital purposes and potential acquisitions.
Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC (the “Placement Agent”) acted as exclusive placement agent in connection with the Offering. The
Placement Agent received a fee equal to 6.5% of the net proceeds from the Offering after affecting the Repurchases described
above, equal to $530,387, plus reimbursement for expenses totaling $75,000.
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chairman, Benjamin P. Cowart, and the Company’s Chief Financial Officer and
Secretary, Chris Carlson, each purchased 32,052 Units ($50,000 of Units) in the Offering and in connection with such purchases
were issued 32,052 shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase 8,013 shares of common stock.
As described in greater detail below, the holders of the Series B1 Preferred Stock have the right to convert such preferred stock
shares into common stock of the Company on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations),
subject to certain restrictions described below.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock is subject to the terms and conditions and has the rights and preferences set forth in the Certificate
of Designation of Vertex Energy, Inc. Establishing the Designation, Preferences, Limitations and Relative Rights of Its Series B1
Preferred Stock (the “Designation”), which was filed with the Secretary of State of Nevada on May 12, 2016. The Series B1 Preferred
Stock accrues a dividend, payable quarterly in arrears (based on calendar quarters), in the amount of 6% per annum of the original
issuance price of the Series B1 Preferred Stock ($1.56 per share or $19.5 million in aggregate), provided that such dividend
increases to 9% if the Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA (defined below) targets described below are not met during the periods
indicated below during 2016-2017, until the earlier of (a) the date the next target is met, or (b) June 30, 2018. “Consolidated Adjusted
EBITDA” means the Company’s operating income, plus (i) share-based compensation expense, (ii) depreciation and amortization,
(iii) goodwill impairment charges, (iv) acquisition related expenses, (v) nonrecurring restructuring charges, and (vi) other non-cash
expenses or one-time items, all as calculated in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, as
consistently applied by the Company.
The Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA targets are as follows:
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
Measurement Period
Negative $1,000,000
For the six months ending December 31, 2016
$1,000,000
For the three months ending March 31, 2017
For the six months ending June 30, 2017
$3,500,000
For the nine months ending September 30, 2017 $5,500,000
For the twelve months ending December 31, 2017$7,500,000
6
The dividend is payable by the Company, at the Company’s election, in registered common stock of the Company (if available) or
cash, subject to the terms of the Company’s senior loan documents. In the event dividends are paid in registered common stock of
the Company, the number of shares payable will be calculated by dividing (a) the accrued dividend by (b) 90% of the arithmetic
average of the volume weighted average price (VWAP) of the Company’s common stock for the 10 trading days immediately prior to
the applicable date of determination (the “Dividend Stock Payment Price”). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event may the
Company pay dividends in common stock unless the applicable Dividend Stock Payment Price is above $1.52. If the Company is
prohibited from paying the dividend in cash (due to contractual senior credit agreements or other restrictions) or is unable to pay
the dividend in registered common stock, the dividend will be paid in-kind in additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock shares
based on the original Unit Price.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock includes a liquidation preference (in the amount of the Unit Price) which is junior to the Company’s
Series A Preferred Stock, ranks senior to the Company’s Series C Preferred Stock and ranks equally with the Series B Preferred
Stock. The Series B1 Preferred Stock also ranks junior to the Company’s credit facilities and other debt holders as provided in
further detail in the Designation.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock prohibits us from (i) increasing or decreasing (other than by redemption or conversion (as described
in the Designation)) the total number of authorized shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (except to the extent required to issue
payment-in-kind shares); (ii) re-issuing any shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock converted or redeemed; (iii) creating, or authorizing
the creation of, or issuing or obligating the Company to issue shares of, any class or series of capital stock unless the same ranks
junior to (and not pari passu with) the Series B1 Preferred Stock with respect to the distribution of assets on the liquidation,
dissolution or winding up of the Company, the payment of dividends and rights of redemption, or increase the authorized number
of shares of any additional class or series of capital stock unless the same ranks junior to (and not pari passu with) the Series B1
Preferred Stock with respect to the distribution of assets on the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company, the payment
of dividends and rights of redemption; (iv) issuing, incurring or obligating the Company to issue or incur any indebtedness that is
convertible into, or exchangeable for, any equity security of the Company or instruments derivative of any equity security of the
Company; (v) granting any rights to require a mandatory repurchase, retirement or redemption by the Company of any of the
Company’s equity securities or instruments derivative of its equity securities on or prior to June 24, 2020, or issuing, incurring or
obligating the Company to issue or incur, any indebtedness with a maturity date on or prior to June 24, 2020, that is convertible into,
or exchangeable for, equity securities or instruments derivative of the Company’s equity securities; (vi) effecting an exchange,
reclassification, or cancellation of all or a part of the Series B1 Preferred Stock (except pursuant to the terms of the Designation);
(vii) effecting an exchange, or creating a right of exchange, of all or part of the shares of another class of shares into shares of
Series B1 Preferred Stock; (viii) issuing any shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock other than pursuant to the Purchase Agreement or
as payment-in-kind shares; (ix) altering or changing the rights, preferences or privileges of the Series B1 Preferred Stock so as to
affect adversely the shares of such series; or (x) amending or waiving any provision of the Company’s Articles of Incorporation or
Bylaws relative to the Series B1 Preferred Stock so as to affect adversely the shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock in any material
respect as compared to holders of other series, in each case without the prior written consent of holders of Series B1 Preferred
Stock holding a majority of the then outstanding shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock (including accrued and unpaid dividends) is convertible into shares of the Company’s common
stock at the holder’s option at any time after closing at the Unit Price (initially a one-for-one basis). If the Company’s common stock
trades at or above $3.90 per share (250% of the Unit Price) for a period of 20 consecutive trading days at any time following the
earlier of (a) the effective date of the resale registration statement (described below), or (b) six months after the closing of the
Offering (November 13, 2016), the Company may at such time force conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock (including accrued
and unpaid dividends) into common stock of the Company.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock votes together with the common stock on an as-converted basis, provided that each holder’s voting
rights are subject to and limited by the Beneficial Ownership Limitation described below.
7
The Company has the option to redeem the outstanding shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock at 110% of the Unit Price plus any
accrued and unpaid dividends on such Series B1 Preferred Stock redeemed, at any time beginning on June 24, 2017 (the two year
anniversary of the closing of the Company’s June 2015 offering of Series B Preferred Stock) and the Company is required to
redeem the Series B1 Preferred Stock at the Unit Price plus any accrued and unpaid dividends on June 24, 2020 (the five year
anniversary of the closing of the Company’s June 2015 offering of Series B Preferred Stock). Notwithstanding either of the
foregoing, the Series B1 Preferred Stock may not be redeemed unless and until amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement
have been paid in full.
Both the Series B1 Preferred Stock and the Warrants contain a provision prohibiting the conversion of the Series B1 Preferred
Stock and the exercise of the Warrants into common stock of the Company, if upon such conversion or exercise, as applicable, the
holder thereof would beneficially own more than 9.999% of the Company’s then outstanding common stock (the “Beneficial
Ownership Limitation”). The Beneficial Ownership Limitation does not apply to forced conversions undertaken by the Company
pursuant to the terms of the Designation (summarized above). The Beneficial Ownership Limitation also applies to the voting rights
of the Series B1 Preferred Stock. Certain of the investors also agreed to contractually reduce the Beneficial Ownership Limitation
applicable to them to 4.999% of the Company’s then outstanding common stock.
In addition, under the Purchase Agreement, the Company has agreed to register the shares of common stock issuable upon
conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock and upon exercise of the Warrants under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for
resale by the Investors, which securities are being registered in the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part.
The Company has committed to file a registration statement on Form S-1 by the 30th day following the closing of the Offering (June
12, 2016), which deadline was met, and to cause the registration statement to become effective by the 90th day following the closing
(August 11, 2016)(or, in the event of a “full review” by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 120th day following the closing
(September 10, 2016)). The Purchase Agreement provides for liquidated damages upon the occurrence of certain events, including,
but not limited to, the failure by the Company to cause the registration statement to become effective by the deadlines set forth
above. The amount of the liquidated damages is 1.0% of the aggregate subscription amount paid by an Investor for the Units
affected by the event that are still held by the Investor upon the occurrence of the event, due on the date immediately following the
event that caused such failure (or the 30th day following such event if the event relates to the suspension of the registration
statement as described in the Purchase Agreement), and each 30 days thereafter, with such payments to be prorated on a daily
basis during each 30 day period, subject to a maximum of an aggregate of 6% per annum.
Under the Purchase Agreement, the Company has agreed to indemnify the Investors for liabilities arising out of or relating to (i) any
untrue statement of a material fact contained in the registration statement, (ii) any inaccuracy in the representations and warranties
of the Company contained in the Purchase Agreement or the failure of the Company to perform its obligations under the Purchase
Agreement and (iii) any failure by the Company to fulfill any undertaking included in the registration statement of which this
prospectus forms a part, subject to certain exceptions. The Investors, severally, and not jointly agreed to indemnify the Company
against (i) any failure by such Investor to comply with the covenants and agreements contained in the Purchase Agreement and (ii)
any untrue statement of a material fact contained in the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, to the extent
such untrue statement was made in reliance upon and in conformity with written information furnished by or on behalf of that
Investor specifically for use in preparation of the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, subject to certain
exceptions.
The Company agreed pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, that until 90 days following effectiveness of the registration statement
filed, to register the shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock and underlying the
Warrants, i.e., the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part (the “Lock-Up Period”), to not offer or sell any
common stock or securities convertible or exercisable into common stock, except pursuant to certain exceptions described in the
Purchase Agreement, and each of the Company’s officers and directors agreed to not sell or offer for sale any shares of common
stock until the end of the Lock-Up Period, subject to certain exceptions.
Additional Information
Additional information about us can be obtained from the documents incorporated by reference herein. See “Where You Can Find
More Information.”
Our Contact Information
Our principal office is located at 1331 Gemini Street, Suite 250, Houston, Texas 77058. Our phone number is (866) 660-8156. Our
website address is www.vertexenergy.com. Information on our website or any other website is not, and will not be a part of this
prospectus and is not incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
8
THE OFFERING
Common
Stock
Offered by
the Selling
Stockholders
 
Common
Stock
Outstanding
Before this
Offering
 
Common
Stock
Outstanding
After this
Offering
Use of
Proceeds
19,671,090 shares1
28,506,774 shares2
48,177,864 shares3
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares in this offering by the selling stockholders. However, in the event that
the Warrants are exercised for cash, we may receive up to a total of approximately $4,713,407.50 in proceeds. We cannot
however predict the timing or the amount of the exercise of these securities. In the event the Warrants are exercised for cash,
 
we plan to use the proceeds from such exercises for working capital and general corporate purposes, as described in greater
detail under “Use of Proceeds”, provided that we will retain broad discretion over the use of these proceeds, if any. See “Use
of Proceeds” beginning on page 16.
____________________________
1 Representing (1) 12,501,558 shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of 12,501,558 currently outstanding shares of
Series B1 Preferred Stock; (2) 4,068,606 shares of common stock (a) issuable in lieu of dividends payable in cash, on (i) such Series
B1 Preferred Stock currently outstanding; and (ii) additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in-kind, in lieu of dividends
payable in cash on shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-kind,
in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation), from time to time, in accordance with and
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation; or (b) issuable upon conversion of additional shares of Series B1
Preferred Stock issued in-kind (which convert into common stock on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits
and recapitalizations)), in lieu of dividends payable in cash, on (i) such Series B1 Preferred Stock currently outstanding; and (ii)
additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issuable in-kind, in lieu of dividends payable in cash on shares of Series B1
Preferred Stock (including shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the
terms and conditions of the Designation), from time to time, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Designation; and (3) 3,100,926 shares of common stock that are issuable in connection with the exercise of outstanding warrants to
purchase 3,100,926 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.53 per share and held by the selling stockholders named
herein.
2 Does not include 1,258,928 shares of common stock which have been issued to date, but which are held in escrow in order to
satisfy the indemnification obligations of certain prior acquisition and sale transactions undertaken by us.
3 Includes 19,671,090 shares of common stock (a) issuable upon conversion of 12,501,558 outstanding shares of Series B1
Preferred Stock (and assumes complete conversion thereof), in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Designation; (b) issuable upon exercise of outstanding warrants to purchase 3,100,926 shares of common stock (and assumes
complete exercise thereof); and (c) issuable either (i) in lieu of cash dividends accrued from time to time on the Series B1 Preferred
Stock (and future Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in-kind), in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Designation; or (ii) upon conversion of additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in-kind in lieu of cash dividends
accrued from time to time on Series B1 Preferred Stock (and future Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in-kind), in accordance with
and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation (and assumes complete issuance/conversion thereof based on the
greatest amount of shares issuable in connection therewith) (totaling an aggregate of 4,068,606 shares of common stock), all of
which shares of common stock are being registered in the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part.
9
Risk
Factors
An investment in our Common Stock involves a high degree of risk. Before making an investment decision, investors should
carefully consider the “Risk Factors” discussed beginning on page 12, as well as the “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking
Statements” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, and our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for
the quarter ended March 31, 2016, which are incorporated by reference herein (see “Incorporation of Documents By Reference”,
beginning on page 31).
 
  
NASDAQ
Market
Symbol
VTNR
In this prospectus, unless otherwise indicated, the number of shares of our common stock and other capital stock outstanding, and
the other information based thereon, is as of July 22, 20164, and excludes, except as set forth herein:
2,958,582 shares of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock options at a weighted average exercise price
of $4.69 per share;
7,353,061 shares of our common stock issuable upon exercise of outstanding warrants at a weighted average exercise price of $2.34 per
share;
2,742,875 shares of common stock reserved for issuance under our 2008, 2009 and 2013 Stock Incentive Plans, as amended as
applicable;
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)
492,716 shares of common stock issuable upon the conversion of our 492,716 outstanding shares of Series A Convertible Preferred
Stock;
v) 4,895,244 shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of our 4,895,244 outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock;
 
vi) 12,501,558 shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of our 12,501,558 outstanding shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock; and
 
vii) 4,400,000 shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of our 44,000 outstanding shares of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus and the documents or information incorporated by reference herein contain forward-looking statements within the
meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the “Exchange Act”), and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, as amended. These forward-looking statements are
subject to risks and uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially
different from the results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. You should not
unduly rely on these statements. Factors, risks, and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in
the forward-looking statements include, among others:
•
risks associated with our outstanding credit facilities, including amounts owed, restrictive covenants, security interests thereon and our ability
to repay such facilities and amounts due thereon when due;
  
•the level of competition in our industry and our ability to compete;
  
•our ability to respond to changes in our industry;
____________________________
4 Does not include 1,258,928 shares of common stock which have been issued to date, but which are held in escrow in order to
satisfy the indemnification obligations of certain prior acquisition and sale transactions undertaken by us.
10
•the loss of key personnel or failure to attract, integrate and retain additional personnel;
  
•our ability to protect our intellectual property and not infringe on others’ intellectual property;
  
•our ability to scale our business;
  
•our ability to maintain supplier relationships and obtain adequate supplies of feedstocks;
  
•our ability to obtain and retain customers;
  
•our ability to produce our products at competitive rates;
  
•material weaknesses in our internal controls over financial reporting;
  
•our ability to execute our business strategy in a very competitive environment;
  
•trends in, and the market for, the price of oil and gas and alternative energy sources;
  
•our ability to maintain our relationship with KMTEX;
  
•the impact of competitive services and products;
  
•our ability to integrate acquisitions;
  
•our ability to complete future acquisitions;
  
•our ability to maintain insurance;
  
•potential future litigation, judgments and settlements;
  
•rules and regulations making our operations more costly or restrictive;
  
•changes in environmental and other laws and regulations and risks associated with such laws and regulations;
  
•economic downturns both in the United States and globally;
  
•risk of increased regulation of our operations and products;
  
•negative publicity and public opposition to our operations;
  
•disruptions in the infrastructure that we and our partners rely on;
  
an inability to identify attractive acquisition opportunities, successfully negotiate acquisition terms or effectively integrate acquired
companies or businesses;
•
•liabilities associated with acquired companies, assets or businesses;
  
•interruptions at our facilities;
  
•required earn-out payments and other contingent payments we are required to make;
  
•unexpected changes in our anticipated capital expenditures resulting from unforeseen required maintenance, repairs, or upgrades;
  
•our ability to acquire and construct new facilities;
11
•certain events of default which have occurred under our debt facilities and previously been waived;
  
•our ability to effectively manage our growth;
  
•prohibitions on borrowing and other covenants of our debt facilities; and
  
•the lack of capital available on acceptable terms to finance our continued growth.
We identify forward-looking statements by use of terms such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “hope,” “plan,”
“believe,” “predict,” “envision,” “intend,” “will,” “continue,” “potential,” “should,” “confident,” “could” and similar words and
expressions, although some forward-looking statements may be expressed differently. You should be aware that our actual results
could differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements. You should consider carefully the statements
included in and incorporated by reference in this prospectus which describe factors that could cause our actual results to differ
from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
The above statements are not the exclusive means of identifying forward-looking statements herein. Although forward-looking
statements contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus reflect our good faith judgment, such statements can only be
based on facts and factors currently known to us. Consequently, forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and
uncertainties and actual outcomes may differ materially from the results and outcomes discussed in the forward-looking
statements.
Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this prospectus or the date of any document incorporated by reference in
this prospectus, as applicable. Except to the extent required by applicable law or regulation, we do not undertake any obligation to
update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this prospectus, or to reflect the occurrence
of unanticipated events.
You should also consider carefully the statements under “Risk Factors” and other sections of this prospectus, and the documents
we incorporate by reference, which address additional facts that could cause our actual results to differ from those set forth in the
forward-looking statements. We caution investors not to place significant reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in
this prospectus, and the documents we incorporate by reference. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or review any
forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise, except as otherwise required
by law.
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our securities involves a high degree of risk and many uncertainties including the risks and uncertainties
described in the section entitled “Risk Factors”, in Part I, Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2015 (the “Form 10-K”), and Part II, Item 1A of our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 (the
“Form 10-Q”), which are incorporated by reference into this prospectus. You should carefully consider the risk factors in our Form
10-K, Form 10-Q and this prospectus before purchasing our securities. If one or more of the possibilities described as risks actually
occurs, our operating results and financial condition would likely suffer and the trading price of our securities could fall, causing
you to lose some or all of your investment in the securities we are offering.
12
RISKS RELATING TO THE UNIT OFFERING
We face significant penalties and damages in the event the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part is not
declared effective within required time limits or such registration statement is subsequently suspended or terminated.
Under the Purchase Agreement, the Company has agreed to register the shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the
Series B1 Preferred Stock and upon exercise of the Warrants under the Securities Act, for resale by the Investors, which securities
are being registered in the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part. The Company has committed to file a
registration statement on Form S-1 by the 30th day following the closing of the Offering (June 12, 2016), which filing deadline was
met, and to cause the registration statement to become effective by the 90th day following the closing (August 11, 2016)(or, in the
event of a “full review” by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 120th day following the closing (September 10, 2016)),
which effectiveness deadline was met. The Purchase Agreement provides for liquidated damages upon the occurrence of certain
events, including, but not limited to, the failure by the Company to cause the registration statement to become effective by the
deadlines set forth above. The amount of the liquidated damages is 1.0% of the aggregate subscription amount paid by an Investor
for the Units affected by the event that are still held by the Investor upon the occurrence of the event, due on the date immediately
following the event that caused such failure (or the 30th day following such event if the event relates to the suspension of the
registration statement as described in the Purchase Agreement), and each 30 days thereafter, with such payments to be prorated
on a daily basis during each 30 day period, subject to a maximum of an aggregate of 6% per year. If we fail to pay any liquidated
damages in full within seven days after the date payable, we are required to pay interest thereon at a rate of 12% per annum until
paid in full. In the event the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part is subsequently suspended or terminated,
or we otherwise fail to meet certain requirements set forth in the Purchase Agreement, we could be required to pay significant
penalties which could adversely affect our cash flow and cause the value of our securities to decline in value.
RISKS RELATED TO OUR SECURITIES
We have established preferred stock which can be designated by the Board of Directors without shareholder approval and have
established Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, Series B1 Preferred Stock and Series C Preferred Stock, which give
the holders thereof a liquidation preference and the ability to convert such shares into our common stock.
We have 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized, which includes 5,000,000 shares of designated Series A Preferred Stock
of which approximately 0.5 million shares are issued and outstanding, 10 million designated shares of Series B Preferred Stock, of
which 4,895,244 shares are issued and outstanding, 17 million designated shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock, of which 12,501,558
shares are issued and outstanding and 44,000 designated shares of Series C Preferred Stock, of which 44,000 are issued and
outstanding. The Series A Preferred Stock has a liquidation preference of $1.49 per share. The Series B Preferred Stock and Series
B1 Preferred stock have a liquidation preference of $3.10 per share and $1.56 per share, respectively, payable only after the
liquidation preference on the Series A Preferred Stock and amounts owed to our senior creditors are satisfied. The Series C
Preferred Stock has a liquidation preference of $100.00 per share, payable only after the liquidation preference on the Series A
Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock and Series B1 Preferred Stock and amounts owed to our senior creditor are satisfied. As
a result, if we were to dissolve, liquidate or sell our assets, the holders of our Series A Preferred Stock would have the right to
receive up to the first approximately $0.7 million in proceeds from any such transaction, holders of our Series B Preferred Stock
and Series B1 Preferred Stock would have the right to receive up to approximately $34.7 million of the remaining proceeds from any
such transaction, and the holders of our Series C Preferred Stock would have the right to receive up to $4.4 million of the remaining
proceeds from any such transaction, after the payment of amounts owed to certain other of our creditors, but before any amount is
paid to the holders of our common stock. The payment of the liquidation preferences could result in common stock shareholders
not receiving any consideration if we were to liquidate, dissolve or wind up, either voluntarily or involuntarily. Additionally, the
existence of the liquidation preferences may reduce the value of our common stock, make it harder for us to sell shares of common
stock in offerings in the future, or prevent or delay a change of control. Furthermore, the conversion of Series A Preferred Stock,
Series B Preferred Stock and Series B1 Preferred Stock (each of which convert on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for
stock splits and recapitalizations)) into common stock and the conversion of Series C Preferred Stock into common stock (which
each convert into 100 shares of common stock (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations)) may cause
substantial dilution to our common shareholders. Because our Board of Directors is entitled to designate the powers and
preferences of the preferred stock without a vote of our shareholders, subject to NASDAQ rules and regulations, our shareholders
will have no control over what designations and preferences our future preferred stock, if any, will have.
13
In addition to the above, we are required to redeem any non-converted shares of (a) Series B Preferred Stock, which remain
outstanding on June 24, 2020, at the rate of $3.10 per share (or $15.2 million in aggregate as of the date of this prospectus); and (b)
Series B1 Preferred Stock, which remain outstanding on June 24, 2020, at the rate of $1.56 per share (or $19.5 million in aggregate
as of the date of this prospectus), subject to the terms of our senior loan documents, which funds we may not have, or which may
not be available on favorable terms, if at all.
Our outstanding options, warrants and convertible securities may adversely affect the trading price of our common stock. Upon
effectiveness of the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, up to 19,671,090 shares of common stock will be
eligible for resale.
We have (i) 2,888,582 outstanding stock options at a weighted average exercise price of $5.02 per share; (ii) 7,353,061 outstanding
warrants to purchase 7,353,061 shares of common stock at a weighted average exercise price of $2.34 per share; (iii) 492,716 shares
of common stock issuable upon the conversion of our 492,716 outstanding shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (which
convert on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations) into common stock); (iv) 4,895,244
shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of our 4,895,244 outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock (which convert
on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations) into common stock); (v) 12,501,558 shares of
common stock issuable upon conversion of our 12,501,558 outstanding shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (which convert on a
one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations) into common stock); and (vi) 4,400,000 shares of
common stock issuable upon conversion of our 44,000 outstanding shares of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock (which each
convert into 100 shares of common stock (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations)). For the life of the options
and warrants, the holders have the opportunity to profit from a rise in the market price of our common stock without assuming the
risk of ownership. The issuance of shares upon the exercise of outstanding securities will also dilute the ownership interests of our
existing stockholders.
The availability of these shares for public resale, as well as any actual resales of these shares, could adversely affect the trading
price of our common stock. We cannot predict the size of future issuances of our common stock pursuant to the exercise of
outstanding options or warrants or conversion of other securities, or the effect, if any, that future issuances and sales of shares of
our common stock may have on the market price of our common stock. Sales or distributions of substantial amounts of
our common stock (including shares issued in connection with an acquisition), or the perception that such sales could occur, may
cause the market price of our common stock to decline.
Notwithstanding the above, upon effectiveness of the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part, an aggregate of up
to 19,671,090 shares of common stock being registered in such registration statement, will be available for resale, subject in certain
cases to the conversion of Series B1 Preferred Stock and exercise of the Warrants, and in other cases, upon the issuance of
common stock or additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock in lieu of the payment of cash dividends. The sale of such shares
in the public markets may decrease the trading price of our common stock.
The issuance and sale of common stock upon exercise of the Warrants may cause substantial dilution to existing stockholders and
may also depress the market price of our common stock.
The Warrants have an exercise price of $1.53 per share. The Warrants are exercisable beginning 185 days after the date of the
closing of the Offering (November 14, 2016) and have a term of 5.5 years. The Warrants contain a cashless exercise provision in
connection with any shares that are not then registered by the Company. Although the Warrants may not be exercised by the
holders thereof if such exercise would cause such holder to own more than 9.999% of our outstanding common stock (or 4.999% in
connection with certain holders), this restriction does not prevent such holder from exercising some of the Warrants, selling those
shares, and then exercising the rest of the Warrants, while still staying below the 9.999% limit (or 4.999% limit as applicable). In this
way, the holders of the Warrants could sell more than this limit while never actually holding more shares than this limit allows. If the
holders of the Warrants choose to do this, it will cause substantial dilution to the then holders of our common stock.
14
If exercises of the Warrants and sales of such shares issuable upon exercise thereof take place, the price of our common stock may
decline. In addition, the common stock issuable upon exercise of the Warrants may represent overhang that may also adversely
affect the market price of our common stock. Overhang occurs when there is a greater supply of a company’s stock in the market
than there is demand for that stock. When this happens the price of the company’s stock will decrease, and any additional shares
which shareholders attempt to sell in the market will only further decrease the share price. If the share volume of our common stock
cannot absorb shares sold by the Warrant holders, then the value of our common stock will likely decrease.
RISKS RELATED TO OUR SERIES B1 PREFERRED STOCK
The issuance of common stock upon conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock will cause immediate and substantial dilution to
existing shareholders.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock (including accrued and unpaid dividends) is convertible into shares of the Company’s common
stock at the holder’s option at any time after closing at $1.56 per share (initially a one-for-one basis). If the Company’s common
stock trades at or above $3.90 per share for a period of 20 consecutive trading days at any time following the earlier of (a) the
effective date of a resale registration statement which we are required to file to register the resale of the shares of common stock
underlying the Series B1 Preferred Stock and Warrants pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, which this prospectus forms a part of,
or (b) November 13, 2016, the Company may at such time force conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock (including accrued and
unpaid dividends) into common stock of the Company.
The issuance of common stock upon conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock will result in immediate and substantial dilution to
the interests of other stockholders since the holders of the Series B1 Preferred Stock may ultimately receive and sell the full amount
of shares issuable in connection with the conversion of such Series B1 Preferred Stock. Although the Series B1 Preferred Stock
may not be converted by holder if such conversion would cause the holder to own more than 9.999% of our outstanding common
stock (or 4.999% in connection with certain holders), this restriction does not prevent such holder from converting some of its
holdings, selling those shares, and then converting the rest of its holdings, while still staying below the 9.999% limit (or 4.999% in
connection with certain holders). In this way, the holders of the Series B1 Preferred Stock could sell more than this limit while never
actually holding more shares than this limit allows. If the holders of the Series B1 Preferred Stock choose to do this, it will cause
substantial dilution to the then holders of our common stock.
Our Series B1 Preferred Stock accrues a cash dividend.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock accrues a dividend, payable quarterly in arrears (based on calendar quarters), in the amount of 6%
per annum of the original issuance price of the Series B1 Preferred Stock ($1.56 per share or $19.5 million in aggregate), provided
that such dividend increases to 9% if the Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA (defined above) targets described above are not met
during the periods indicated below during 2016-2017, until the earlier of (a) the date the next target is met, or (b) June 30, 2018. The
dividend is payable by the Company, at the Company’s election, in registered common stock of the Company (if available) or cash,
provided that any cash dividend payment is subject to us previously having repaid all amounts owed to our senior lender. In the
event dividends are paid in registered common stock of the Company, the number of shares payable will be calculated by dividing
(a) the accrued dividend by (b) 90% of the arithmetic average of the volume weighted average price (VWAP) of the Company’s
common stock for the 10 trading days immediately prior to the applicable date of determination (the “Dividend Stock Payment
Price”). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event may the Company pay dividends in common stock unless the applicable
Dividend Stock Payment Price is above $1.52. If the Company is prohibited from paying the dividend in cash (due to contractual
senior credit agreements or other restrictions) or is unable to pay the dividend in registered common stock, the dividend will be
paid in-kind in Series B1 Preferred Stock shares at $1.56 per share.
We may not have sufficient available cash to pay the dividends as they accrue. The payment of the dividends, or our failure to timely
pay the dividends when due, could reduce our available cash on hand, have a material adverse effect on our results of operations
and cause the value of our stock to decline in value. Additionally, the issuance of shares of common stock or additional shares of
Series B1 Preferred Stock in lieu of cash dividends (and the subsequent conversion of such Series B1 Preferred Stock into
common stock pursuant to the terms of such Series B1 Preferred Stock) could cause substantial dilution to the then holders of our
common stock.
15
We may be required to issue additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock upon the occurrence of certain events.
As described above, in the event we do not have available cash to pay the dividends which accrue on the Series B1 Preferred Stock
in cash, we are prohibited from paying such dividends in cash, and we do not have sufficient registered shares of common stock
available to allow for the payment of such dividends in common stock or are otherwise prohibited from paying such dividends on
shares of common stock pursuant to the terms of the Series B1 Preferred Stock designation, we are required to pay such dividends
in-kind in Series B1 Preferred Stock shares at $1.56 per share, which will also include a $1.56 per share liquidation preference and
the right to convert into common stock on a one-for-one basis.
The issuance and sale of common stock upon conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock may depress the market price of our
common stock.
If conversions of the Series B1 Preferred Stock and sales of such converted shares take place, the price of our common stock may
decline. In addition, the common stock issuable upon conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock may represent overhang that
may also adversely affect the market price of our common stock. Overhang occurs when there is a greater supply of a company’s
stock in the market than there is demand for that stock. When this happens the price of the company’s stock will decrease, and any
additional shares which shareholders attempt to sell in the market will only further decrease the share price. If the share volume of
our common stock cannot absorb converted shares sold by the Series B1 Preferred Stock holders, then the value of our common
stock will likely decrease.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The proceeds from the sale of the shares offered pursuant to this prospectus are solely for the accounts of the selling
stockholders. Accordingly, we will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of shares offered by this prospectus. See “Selling
Stockholders” and “Plan of Distribution” below, beginning on pages 17 and 28, respectively.
We will however, receive proceeds upon the exercise of the Warrants, which shares of common stock underlying such Warrants are
being registered in the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, provided that such securities are exercised for
cash. If exercised, we plan to use the proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants (an aggregate of 3,100,926 Warrants held by the
Investors, totaling an aggregate of $4,713,407.50 in possible funding based on a per Warrant exercise price of $1.53 per share,
assuming such Warrants are fully exercised), for working capital and general corporate purposes. However, the timing and manner
of use of the net proceeds may vary, depending on the amount of actual proceeds received from the exercise of the Warrants, if
any, the timing of the receipt of such proceeds, our rate of growth and other factors. The foregoing represents our best estimate of
our use of the net proceeds of the offering based on current planning and business conditions. We reserve the right to change our
use of proceeds when and if market conditions or unexpected changes in operating conditions or results occur, or in our
management’s discretion. Pending the use of the net proceeds from the cash exercise of the Warrants as described above, we
intend to invest the proceeds in investment grade, interest-bearing instruments. Additionally, we can provide no assurances that
the Warrants, or any portion thereof, will be exercised in the future, or that such exercise, subject to the terms of the Warrants, will
be in cash. To the extent that any shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the Warrants are not registered under an
effective registration statement under the Securities Act, such unregistered Warrants or portion thereof are exercisable on a
cashless basis pursuant to the terms of the Warrant agreements.
The selling stockholders will pay any underwriting discounts and commissions and expenses incurred by the selling stockholders
for brokerage, accounting, tax or legal services or any other expenses incurred by the selling stockholders in disposing of the
shares. We will bear all other costs, fees, and expenses incurred in effecting the registration of the shares covered by this
prospectus, including, without limitation, all registration and filing fees, NASDAQ listing fees (if any), and fees and expenses of our
counsel and our accountants.
16
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
The following table provides information regarding the selling stockholders and the number of shares the selling stockholders are
offering under this prospectus. We have prepared this table based on information furnished to us by or on behalf of the selling
stockholders. Under the rules of the SEC, beneficial ownership includes shares over which the indicated beneficial owner exercises
voting or investment power. Beneficial ownership is determined under Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act, and generally includes
voting or investment power with respect to securities, including any securities that grant the selling stockholders the right to
acquire common stock within 60 days of July 22, 2016. We believe that the selling stockholders have sole voting and investment
power with respect to all shares beneficially owned. To our knowledge, none of the selling stockholders are affiliated with a broker-
dealer registered under the Exchange Act, except as set forth in the footnotes below.
The shares may be sold by the selling stockholders, by those persons or entities to whom they transfer, donate, devise, pledge or
distribute shares or by other successors in interest. The information regarding shares beneficially owned after this offering
assumes the sale of all shares offered by the selling stockholders in this prospectus. The selling stockholders may sell less than all
of the shares listed in the table. In addition, the shares listed below may be sold pursuant to this prospectus or in
privately negotiated transactions. Accordingly, we cannot estimate the number of shares the selling stockholders will sell under this
prospectus.
The selling stockholders have not held any position or office or had any other material relationship with us or any of our
predecessors or affiliates within the past three years, other than beneficial ownership of the shares described in the table below,
except as set forth in the footnotes below or below under “Material Relationships with Selling Stockholders”.
The selling stockholders have represented to us that they purchased the shares of common stock offered herein for their own
account, for investment only and not with a view toward selling or distributing them in violation of the Securities Act, except in sales
either registered under the Securities Act, or sales that are exempt from registration. In recognition of the fact that the selling
stockholders, even though purchasing its shares for investment, may wish to be legally permitted to sell their shares when they
deemed appropriate, we agreed with the selling stockholders to file a registration statement to register the resale of the shares.
Information regarding the selling stockholders may change from time to time. Any such changed information will be set forth in
supplements to this prospectus or amendments to the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, if required.
17
Number of Shares of Common
Stock Beneficially Owned
Prior to this Offering (1)
Number of Shares of
Common Stock
 
Being Offered (3)
Name of Selling Stockholders
Alexander Douglas 2K3 Trust
Amanda Douglas 2K3 Trust
Ardsley Partners Renewable Energy Fund, L.P.
B&S Cowart II Family, LP
Bradley W. Baker
Burguete Investment Partnership, L.P.
Chris Carlson
CVI Investments, Inc.
Gregory T. Clariday
Intracoastal Capital, LLC
IRA Services Trust Company
Jake Douglas 2K3 Trust
James H. Zavoral
KC Gamma Opportunity Fund LP
Kevin P. Harris
Osher Capital Partners LLC
Prescott Group Aggressive Small Cap Master Fund, G.P.(21)3,888,856
(22)3,766,898
Trellus Partners, LP
Trellus Small Cap Opportunity Fund, LP
(23)3,766,898
Number
 
(5) 1,296,315
(6) 1,296,315
(7) 1,797,240
(8) 8,299,536
(9) 64,610
(10)324,082
(11)1,125,867
(12)648,153
(13)429,218
(14)80,739
(15)5,474,364
(16)1,296,315
(17)32,305
(18)453,710
(19)96,913
(20)120,565
Percentage (2)
4.3%
4.3%
4.999%+
28.5%+
*
4.999%+
3.9%
4.999%+
1.5%
*+
4.999%+
4.3%
*
4.999%+
*
*+
9.999%
9.999%
9.999%
595,323
595,323
1,779,057
50,837
101,672
446,496
50,837
892,967
203,334
101,673
7,143,570
595,323
50,837
625,086
152,499
166,115
5,357,671
381,235
381,235
19,671,090
18
Beneficial
Ownership of
Common Stock
After Registration
Assuming All
Shares Are Sold (4)
Number Percentage
*
*
(24)161,292 *
(24)161,292 *
(24)666,593 1.4%
(24)8,267,23117%
(24)—
(24)40,323
(24)1,093,5622.3%
(24)80,646
*
(24)300,000 *
(24)16,130
*
(24)934,379 1.9%
(24)666,593 *
*
(24)—
(24)56,452
*
*
(24)—
(24)15,000
*
(24)483,871 1.0%
(24)3,282,3346.5%
(24)3,282,3346.5%
* Less than one percent (1%).
+ The Series B1 Preferred and Warrants held by the selling stockholder are subject to a provision prohibiting the conversion of
such Series B1 Preferred into common stock of the Company and exercise of such Warrants into common stock of the Company, if
upon such conversion, the holder thereof would beneficially own more than 4.999% of the Company’s then outstanding common
stock. While the “Percentage” owned column reflects this limitation (in the event the percentage of total beneficial ownership would
have exceeded 4.999%, but for the limitation), the “Number of Shares of Common Stock Beneficially Owned” column represents the
total shares beneficially owned without regard to the 4.999% beneficial ownership limitation.
“Beneficial ownership” means that a person, directly or indirectly, has or shares voting or investment power with respect to a security or
has the right to acquire such power within 60 days. The number of shares beneficially owned is as of July 22, 2016, and the percentage is
based upon 28,506,774 shares of our common stock outstanding as of July 22, 2016 (which does not include 1,258,928 shares which
have been issued, but which are held in escrow in order to satisfy the indemnification obligations of certain prior acquisition and sale
transactions undertaken by us). The number of shares of common stock beneficially owned do not include any shares of common stock
issuable upon exercise of the Warrants (described in greater detail above under “Prospectus Summary” – “Unit Offering”), as such
Warrants are not exercisable until November 14, 2016.
Percentages are based solely on the Company’s common stock, and do not include 492,716 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred
Stock, 4,895,244 shares of Series B Preferred Stock (except in connection with the beneficial ownership of applicable selling stockholders
to the extent such selling stockholder holds shares of Series B Preferred Stock which are convertible into common stock), 12,501,558
shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (except in connection with the beneficial ownership of applicable selling stockholders to the extent
such selling stockholder holds shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock which are convertible into common stock), which vote one-for-one with
the common stock of the Company and are convertible into common stock on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits
and recapitalizations)(subject to the Series B Beneficial Ownership Limitation and the Beneficial Ownership Limitation described below
under “Description of Capital Stock”) or 44,000 shares of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock which are each convertible into 100 shares
of common stock and vote 100 voting shares, subject to the Series C Beneficial Ownership Limitation described below under “Description
of Capital Stock”.
Includes for each holder of Series B1 Preferred Stock, (a) shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the Series B1 Preferred
Stock, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation; (b) shares of common stock issuable upon
exercise of the Warrants, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the warrant agreements evidencing such
Warrants; and (c) such selling stockholder’s pro rata portion of 4,068,606 shares of common stock being registered in the registration
statement of which this prospectus forms a part, which represent common stock which may be issued from time to time (i) in lieu of
dividends payable in cash, on shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-
kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation), in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Designation; or (b) upon conversion of shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares of Series B1 Preferred
Stock issued in the future in-kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation), issued in lieu of
dividends payable in cash, on shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-
kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation), in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Designation, which pro rata amounts are not included in the “Number of Shares of Common Stock Beneficially Owned
Prior to this Offering” column as such shares are not currently beneficially owned and such selling stockholders do not have the right to
acquire such securities within 60 days, which shares are being registered in the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a
part.
Assumes the sale of all shares offered herein. Based on 48,177,864 shares of common stock outstanding assuming all shares registered
herein are issued to the selling stockholders and sold.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
19
(5)
(6)
(7)
The address of the selling stockholder is 125 E. Sir Francis Dr. Blvd., Suite 400, Larkspur, CA 94939. James E. Douglas Jr. and Jean A.
Douglas, as trustees, have beneficial ownership over the shares held by the Alexander Douglas 2K3 Trust, the Amanda Douglas 2K3
Trust and the Jake Douglas 2K3 Trust. Beneficial ownership in the table above for the Alexander Douglas 2K3 Trust, the Amanda
Douglas 2K3 Trust and the Jake Douglas 2K3 Trust includes all securities held by each of such entities due to their common beneficial
ownership.
The address of the selling stockholder is 125 E. Sir Francis Dr. Blvd., Suite 400, Larkspur, CA 94939. James E. Douglas Jr. and Jean A.
Douglas, as trustees, have beneficial ownership over the shares held by the Alexander Douglas 2K3 Trust, the Amanda Douglas 2K3
Trust and the Jake Douglas 2K3 Trust. Beneficial ownership in the table above for the Alexander Douglas 2K3 Trust, the Amanda
Douglas 2K3 Trust and the Jake Douglas 2K3 Trust includes all securities held by each of such entities due to their common beneficial
ownership.
The address of the selling stockholder is 262 Harbor Drive, 4th Floor, Stamford, CT 06902. Philip Hempleman exercises voting and
investment power with regard to the securities held by Ardsley Partners Renewable Energy Fund, L.P. in his capacity as Portfolio
Manager.
The address of the selling stockholder is 1331 Gemini Street, Suite 250, Houston, Texas 77058. Benjamin P. Cowart, the Chief Executive
Officer and Chairman of the Company, beneficially owns the securities held by B&S Cowart II Family LP. The beneficial ownership for
B&S Cowart II Family LP in the table above includes all securities beneficially owned by Mr. Cowart, including securities held personally,
(8) and securities beneficially owned by VTX, Inc., Vertex Holdings, L.P., The Benjamin Paul Cowart 2015 Grantor Retained Trust, The
Benjamin Paul Cowart 2012 Grantor Retained Annuity Trust and The Shelley T. Cowart 2012 Grantor Retained Trust, all of which
securities Mr. Cowart is deemed to beneficially own.
The address of the selling stockholder is 3328 W. 55th St., Edina, Minnesota 55410. The selling stockholder is the Chief Executive
Officer of, and a managing partner of, Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, the Placement Agent in the Offering, a broker-dealer registered
under the Exchange Act. The selling stockholder acquired the securities being registered hereunder in the ordinary course of business,
and at the time of the acquisition of the securities, the selling stockholder did not have any arrangements or understandings with any
person to distribute such securities.
The address of the selling stockholder is 435 Martin St., Suite 2000-A, Blaine, Washington 98230. James J. Tiampo, the President of
Verbier Management Corp., the General Partner of the selling stockholder, exercises voting and investment power with regard to the
securities held by Burguete Investment Partnership, L.P.
The address of the selling stockholder is 1331 Gemini Street, Suite 250, Houston, Texas 77058. Mr. Carlson is the Chief Financial Officer
and Secretary of the Company.
The address of the selling stockholder is 101 California Street, Suite 3250, San Francisco, CA 94111. Heights Capital Management, Inc.,
the authorized agent of CVI Investments, Inc. (“CVI”), has discretionary authority to vote and dispose of the shares held by CVI and may
be deemed to be the beneficial owner of these shares. Martin Kobinger, in his capacity as Investment Manager of Heights Capital
Management, Inc., may also be deemed to have investment discretion and voting power over the shares held by CVI. Mr. Kobinger
disclaims any such beneficial ownership of the shares. CVI is an affiliate of a broker dealer.
Address: 2506 Deep Oak Court, Houston, Texas 77059. Includes 300,000 shares of common stock held by Clariday Partners L.P., which
shares Mr. Clariday is deemed to beneficially own.
The address of the selling stockholder is 245 Palm Trail, Delray Beach, FL 33483. Mitchell P. Kopin and Daniel B. Asher, each of whom
are managers of Intracoastal Capital LLC (“Intracoastal”), have shared voting control and investment discretion over the securities
reported herein that are held by Intracoastal. As a result, each of Mr. Kopin and Mr. Asher may be deemed to have beneficial ownership
(as determined under Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) of the securities reported herein that are held by Intracoastal. Mr. Asher, who is
a manager of Intracoastal, is also a control person of a broker-dealer. As a result of such common control, Intracoastal may be deemed to
be an affiliate of a broker-dealer. Intracoastal acquired the securities being registered hereunder in the ordinary course of business, and
at the time of the acquisition of the securities, Intracoastal did not have any arrangements or understandings with any person to distribute
such securities.
The address of the selling stockholder is 1160 Industrial Rd, Ste 1, San Carlos, CA 94070. The securities are beneficially owned by
Richard Jacinto II and are held by IRA Services Trust Company as custodian for the benefit of Mr. Jacinto.
The address of the selling stockholder is 125 E. Sir Francis Dr. Blvd., Suite 400, Larkspur, CA 94939. James E. Douglas Jr. and Jean A.
Douglas, as trustees, have beneficial ownership over the shares held by the Alexander Douglas 2K3 Trust, the Amanda Douglas 2K3
Trust and the Jake Douglas 2K3 Trust. Beneficial ownership in the table above for the Alexander Douglas 2K3 Trust, the Amanda
Douglas 2K3 Trust and the Jake Douglas 2K3 Trust includes all securities held by each of such entities due to their common beneficial
ownership.
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
20
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
Address: 4504 Edina Blvd., Edina, MN 55424. The selling stockholder is and employee of, and a managing partner of, Craig-Hallum
Capital Group LLC, the Placement Agent in the Offering, a broker-dealer registered under the Exchange Act. The selling stockholder
acquired the securities being registered hereunder in the ordinary course of business, and at the time of the acquisition of the securities,
the selling stockholder did not have any arrangements or understandings with any person to distribute such securities.
The address of the selling stockholder is 112 Route 39 North, Sherman, Connecticut 06784. Kevin Casey, the Managing Member of KC
Gamma Opportunity Fund LP, exercises voting and investment power with regard to the securities held by KC Gamma Opportunity Fund
LP.
The address of the selling stockholder is 4702 Lakeview Dr., Edina, MN 55424.  The selling stockholder is the President of, and a
managing partner of, Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, the Placement Agent in the Offering, a broker-dealer registered under the
Exchange Act. The selling stockholder acquired the securities being registered hereunder in the ordinary course of business, and at the
time of the acquisition of the securities, the selling stockholder did not have any arrangements or understandings with any person to
distribute such securities.
The address of the selling stockholder is 23 Tammy Rd., Spring Valley, NY 10977. Ari Kluger, the President of Osher Capital Partners
LLC, exercises voting and investment power with regard to the securities held by Osher Capital Partners LLC.
The address of the selling stockholder is 1924 S. Utica Ave, Suite 1120, Tulsa, OK 74104. Phil Frohlich, the Manager of the selling
stockholder, exercises voting and investment power with regard to the securities held by Prescott Group Aggressive Small Cap Master
Fund, G.P. The Series B1 Preferred, Series B Preferred, Warrants and certain other warrants held by the selling stockholder are subject
to a provision prohibiting the conversion and exercise of such securities, as applicable into common stock of the Company, if upon such
conversion, the holder thereof would beneficially own more than 9.999% of the Company’s then outstanding common stock. While the
“Percentage” owned column reflects this limitation, the “Number of Shares of Common Stock Beneficially Owned” column represents the
total shares beneficially owned without regard to the 9.999% beneficial ownership limitation.
The address of the selling stockholder is 767 3rd Ave., 32nd Floor, New York, New York 10017. The number of shares beneficially
owned includes shares beneficially owned by Trellus Partners, LP and Trellus Small Cap Opportunity Fund, LP which are beneficially
owned by Trellus Management Company, LLC (collectively “Trellus”) and personally by Adam Usdan. Adam Usdan exercises voting and
investment power with regard to the securities held by Trellus, Trellus Partners, LP and Trellus Small Cap Opportunity Fund, LP. The
Series B1 Preferred and Warrants held by the selling stockholder are subject to a provision prohibiting the conversion of such Series B1
Preferred into common stock of the Company and exercise of such Warrants into common stock of the Company, if upon such
(22)
conversion, the holder thereof would beneficially own more than 4.999% of the Company’s then outstanding common stock. While the
“Percentage” owned column reflects this limitation and does not include such Series B1 Preferred or Warrants in such percentage shown,
the “Number of Shares of Common Stock Beneficially Owned” column represents the total shares beneficially owned without regard to
the 4.999% beneficial ownership limitation. As shown in the table above, the selling stockholder beneficially owns more than 4.999% of
the Company’s outstanding common stock even after taking into account the 4.999% beneficial ownership limitation associated with the
Series B1 Preferred and Warrants described above. Certain securities (shares of Series B Preferred and warrants to purchase shares of
common stock) are subject to a provision prohibiting the conversion of such Series B Preferred into common stock of the Company and
exercise of such warrants into common stock of the Company, if upon such conversion, the holder thereof would beneficially own more
than 9.999% of the Company’s then outstanding common stock. As such, the percentage ownership of the selling stockholder in the table
above listed in the “Percentage” column has been capped at 9.999%, even though the “Number of Shares of Common Stock Beneficially
Owned” column does not take into account such limitation.
21
The address of the selling stockholder is 767 3rd Ave., 32nd Floor, New York, New York 10017. The number of shares beneficially
owned prior to the offering includes shares beneficially owned by Trellus Partners, LP and Trellus Small Cap Opportunity Fund, LP which
are beneficially owned by Trellus and personally by Adam Usdan. Adam Usdan exercises voting and investment power with regard to the
securities held by Trellus, Trellus Partners, LP and Trellus Small Cap Opportunity Fund, LP. The Series B1 Preferred and Warrants held
by the selling stockholder are subject to a provision prohibiting the conversion of such Series B1 Preferred into common stock of the
Company and exercise of such Warrants into common stock of the Company, if upon such conversion, the holder thereof would
beneficially own more than 4.999% of the Company’s then outstanding common stock. While the “Percentage” owned column reflects this
limitation and does not include such Series B1 Preferred or Warrants in such percentage shown, the “Number of Shares of Common
Stock Beneficially Owned Column” represents the total shares beneficially owned without regard to the 4.999% beneficial ownership
limitation. As shown in the table above, the selling stockholder beneficially owns more than 4.999% of the Company’s outstanding
common stock even after taking into account the 4.999% beneficial ownership limitation associated with the Series B1 Preferred and
Warrants described above. Certain securities (shares of Series B Preferred and warrants to purchase shares of common stock) are
subject to a provision prohibiting the conversion of such Series B Preferred into common stock of the Company and exercise of such
warrants into common stock of the Company, if upon such conversion, the holder thereof would beneficially own more than 9.999% of the
Company’s then outstanding common stock. As such, the percentage ownership of the selling stockholder in the table above listed in the
“Percentage” column has been capped at 9.999%, even though the “Number of Shares of Common Stock Beneficially Owned” column
does not take into account such limitation.
Represents (a) shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock held by each applicable selling
stockholder; (b) shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of Warrants held by each applicable selling stockholder (the number of
Warrants held by each selling stockholder which holds Warrants is 1/4 the total number of shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock held by
each selling stockholder); and (c) each selling stockholder’s pro rata portion of 4,068,606 shares of common stock being registered in the
registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part, which represent common stock which may be issued from time to time in lieu
of accrued dividends otherwise payable in cash on Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in
the future in-kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation), in accordance with and pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the Designation, and/or shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of additional shares of Series B1
Preferred Stock issued to the Investors in consideration for amounts due as dividends on the Series B1 Preferred Stock (including shares
of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation)
and paid in-kind in Series B1 Preferred Stock, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation (all of
which Series B1 Preferred Stock shares convert into common stock on a one-for-one basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and
recapitalizations)), which pro rata amounts are not included in the “Number of Shares of Common Stock Beneficially Owned Prior to this
Offering” column as such shares are not currently beneficially owned and such selling stockholders do not have the right to acquire such
securities within 60 days. The Series B1 Preferred Stock and Warrants are described in greater detail above under “Prospectus
Summary” – “Unit Offering”.
(23)
(24)
MATERIAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
Except as described below or in the footnotes above, no selling stockholder has had any material transaction or relationship with
us or any of our predecessors or affiliates within the past three years.
B&S Cowart II Family, LP is beneficially owned by Benjamin P. Cowart, our largest stockholder, Chief Executive Officer and
Chairman.
Chris Carlson is our Chief Financial Officer and Secretary.
Bradley W. Baker, James P. Harris and Kevin P. Harris, are each managing partners of Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, the
Placement Agent in the Offering, a broker-dealer registered under the Exchange Act. The Company has been party to various
placement agent, underwriter, investment banking and similar arrangements with Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC over the past
several years pursuant to which Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC has been paid placement agent, underwriting and similar fees and
expenses.
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
We have authorized capital stock consisting of 750,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value per share and 50,000,000
shares of preferred stock, $0.001 par value per share (“Preferred Stock”).
We have 28,506,774 shares of our common stock outstanding (which number does not include 1,258,928 shares which have been
issued, but which are held in escrow in order to satisfy the indemnification obligations of certain prior acquisition and sale
transactions undertaken by us), 5,000,000 designated shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (“Series A Preferred” or
“Series A Preferred Stock”) and 492,716 shares of Series A Preferred outstanding, 10,000,000 designated shares of Series B
Preferred Stock (“Series B Preferred” or “Series B Preferred Stock”), with 4,895,244 shares of Series B Preferred Stock issued and
outstanding, 17,000,000 designated shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (“Series B1 Preferred” or “Series B1 Preferred Stock”),
with 12,501,558 shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued and outstanding, and 44,000 designated shares of Series C Convertible
Preferred Stock (“Series C Preferred” or “Series C Preferred Stock”), with 44,000 shares of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
outstanding.
22
The following description of our capital stock is a summary only and is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the
applicable provisions of the Nevada Revised Statutes, and our charter and Bylaws, copies of which are on file with the SEC as
exhibits to previous SEC filings. Please refer to the “Where You Can Find More Information” section of this prospectus for
directions on obtaining these documents. You should refer to, and read this summary together with, our Articles of Incorporation,
designations of preferred stock and Bylaws, each as amended and restated to date, to review all of the terms of our capital stock.
Our Articles of Incorporation and amendments thereto are incorporated by reference as exhibits to the registration statement of
which this prospectus is a part and other reports incorporated by reference herein.
Common Stock
Each share of our common stock is entitled to equal dividends and distributions per share with respect to the common stock when,
as and if declared by our Board of Directors. No holder of any shares of our common stock has a preemptive right to subscribe for
any of our securities, nor are any shares of our common stock subject to redemption or convertible into other securities. Upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Company, and after payment to our creditors and preferred shareholders, if any, our
assets will be divided pro rata on a share-for-share basis among the holders of our common stock. Each share of our common
stock is entitled to one vote on all shareholder matters. Shares of our common stock do not possess any cumulative voting rights.
The presence of the persons entitled to vote a majority of the outstanding voting shares on a matter before the stockholders shall
constitute the quorum necessary for the consideration of the matter at a stockholders’ meeting.
The vote of the holders of a majority of the shares cast on each proposal at a meeting at which a quorum is present constitute the
act of the stockholders, except for the election of directors, who are appointed by a plurality of the shares entitled to vote at a
meeting at which a quorum is present. The common stock does not have cumulative voting rights, which means that the holders of
51% of the common stock voting for election of directors can elect 100% of our directors if they choose to do so.
Our common stock is listed and traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “VTNR”.
Through December 31, 2016, but subject to the prior approval of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of the
Company, Omega Holdings Company LLC has the right to designate three persons to fill one position for nomination to serve on
the Board of Directors of the Company, which nomination is subject to compliance with any rules of the SEC and further subject to
the rights of the stockholders of the Company to vote for such nominee for election to the Board of Directors of the Company.
Preferred Stock
Shares of Preferred Stock may be issued from time to time in one or more series, each of which shall have such distinctive
designation or title as shall be determined by our Board of Directors (“Board of Directors”) prior to the issuance of any shares
thereof. Preferred Stock shall have such voting powers, full or limited, or no voting powers, and such preferences and relative,
participating, optional or other special rights and such qualifications, limitations or restrictions thereof, as shall be stated in such
resolution or resolutions providing for the issue of such class or series of Preferred Stock as may be adopted from time to time by
the Board of Directors prior to the issuance of any shares thereof. The number of authorized shares of Preferred Stock may be
increased or decreased (but not below the number of shares thereof then outstanding) by the affirmative vote of the holders of a
majority of the voting power of all the then outstanding shares of our capital stock entitled to vote generally in the election of the
directors, voting together as a single class, without a separate vote of the holders of the Preferred Stock, or any series thereof,
unless a vote of any such holders is required pursuant to any Preferred Stock Designation.
23
The powers, preferences and relative, participating, optional and other special rights of each class or series of Preferred Stock, and
the qualifications, limitations or restrictions thereof, if any, may differ from those of any and all other series at any time outstanding.
Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
Holders of outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to receive dividends, when, as, and if declared by our Board
of Directors. No dividends or similar distributions may be made on shares of capital stock or securities junior to our Series A
Preferred Stock until dividends in the same amount per share on our Series A Preferred Stock have been declared and paid. In
connection with a liquidation, winding-up, dissolution or sale of the Company, each share of our Series A Preferred Stock is entitled
to receive $1.49 prior to similar liquidation payments due on shares of our common stock or any other class of securities junior to
the Series A Preferred Stock. Shares of Series A Preferred Stock are not entitled to participate with the holders of our common
stock with respect to the distribution of any remaining assets of the Company.
Each share of Series A Preferred Stock is entitled to that number of votes equal to the number of whole shares of common stock
into which it is convertible. Generally, holders of our common stock and Series A Preferred Stock vote together as a single class.
Shares of Series A Preferred Stock automatically convert into shares of our common stock on the earliest to occur of the following:
·The affirmative vote or written consent of the holders of a majority of the then-outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock;
  
If the closing market price of our common stock averages at least $15.00 per share over a period of 20 consecutive trading days and the daily
·
trading volume averages at least 7,500 shares over such period;
  
If we consummate an underwritten public offering of our securities at a price per share not less than $10.00 and for a total gross offering
·
amount of at least $10 million; or
  
·If a sale of the Company occurs resulting in proceeds to the holders of Series A Preferred Stock of a per share amount of at least $10.00.
Each share of Series A Preferred Stock converts into one share of common stock, subject to adjustment.
Series B Preferred Stock
The Series B Preferred Stock accrues a dividend, payable quarterly in arrears (based on calendar quarters), in the amount of 6% per
annum of the original issuance price of the Series B Preferred Stock ($3.10 per share or $15 million in aggregate).
The dividend is payable by the Company, at the Company’s election, in registered common stock of the Company (if available) or
cash, provided that any cash dividend payment is subject to us previously having repaid all amounts owed to our senior lender. In
the event dividends are paid in registered common stock of the Company, the number of shares payable will be calculated by
dividing (a) the accrued dividend by (b) 90% of the arithmetic average of the volume weighted average price (VWAP) of the
Company’s common stock for the 10 trading days immediately prior to the applicable date of determination (the “Dividend Stock
Payment Price”). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event may the Company pay dividends in common stock unless the
applicable Dividend Stock Payment Price is above $2.91. If the Company is prohibited from paying the dividend in cash (due to
contractual senior credit agreements or other restrictions) or is unable to pay the dividend in registered common stock, the
dividend will be paid in-kind in Series B Preferred Stock shares at $3.10 per share.
The Series B Preferred Stock includes a liquidation preference (in the amount of $3.10 per share) which is junior to the Company’s
previously outstanding shares of preferred stock, senior credit facilities and other debt holders as provided in further detail in the
designation of the Series B Preferred Stock.
24
The Series B Preferred Stock (including accrued and unpaid dividends) is convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock
at the holder’s option at any time after closing at $3.10 per share (initially a one-for-one basis). If the Company’s common stock
trades at or above $6.20 per share for a period of 20 consecutive trading days at any time following the earlier of (a) the effective
date of a resale registration statement which we are required to file to register the resale of the shares of common stock underlying
the Series B Preferred Stock and Warrants pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, which this prospectus forms a part of, or (b)
December 24, 2015, the Company may at such time force conversion of the Series B Preferred Stock (including accrued and unpaid
dividends) into common stock of the Company.
The Series B Preferred Stock votes together with the common stock on an as-converted basis, provided that each holder’s voting
rights are subject to and limited by the Series B Beneficial Ownership Limitation described below.
The Company has the option to redeem the outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock at $3.10 per share, plus any accrued
and unpaid dividends on such Series B Preferred Stock redeemed, at any time beginning on June 24, 2017, and the Company is
required to redeem the Series B Preferred Stock at $3.10 per share, plus any accrued and unpaid dividends, on June 24, 2020.
Notwithstanding either of the foregoing, the Series B Preferred Stock may not be redeemed unless and until amounts outstanding
under the Company’s senior credit facility have been paid in full.
The Series B Preferred Stock contains a provision prohibiting the conversion of such Series B Preferred Stock into common stock
of the Company, if upon such conversion, the holder thereof would beneficially own more than 9.999% of the Company’s then
outstanding common stock (the “Series B Beneficial Ownership Limitation”). The Series B Beneficial Ownership Limitation does not
apply to forced conversions undertaken by the Company pursuant to the terms of the designation (summarized above).
Series B1 Preferred Stock
The Series B1 Preferred Stock is subject to the terms and conditions and has the rights and preferences set forth in the Certificate
of Designation of Vertex Energy, Inc. Establishing the Designation, Preferences, Limitations and Relative Rights of Its Series B1
Preferred Stock (the “Designation”), which was filed with the Secretary of State of Nevada on May 12, 2016. The Series B1 Preferred
Stock accrues a dividend, payable quarterly in arrears (based on calendar quarters), in the amount of 6% per annum of the original
issuance price of the Series B1 Preferred Stock ($1.56 per share or $19.5 million in aggregate), provided that such dividend
increases to 9% if the Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA (defined below) targets described below are not met during the periods
indicated below during 2016-2017, until the earlier of (a) the date the next target is met, or (b) June 30, 2018. “Consolidated Adjusted
EBITDA” means the Company’s operating income, plus (i) share-based compensation expense, (ii) depreciation and amortization,
(iii) goodwill impairment charges, (iv) acquisition related expenses, (v) nonrecurring restructuring charges, and (vi) other non-cash
expenses or one-time items, all as calculated in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, as
consistently applied by the Company.
The Consolidated Adjusted EBIDTA targets are as follows:
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
Measurement Period
Negative $1,000,000
For the six months ending December 31, 2016
$1,000,000
For the three months ending March 31, 2017
$3,500,000
For the six months ending June 30, 2017
For the nine months ending September 30, 2017 $5,500,000
For the twelve months ending December 31, 2017$7,500,000
25
The dividend is payable by the Company, at the Company’s election, in registered common stock of the Company (if available) or
cash, subject to the terms of the Company’s senior loan documents. In the event dividends are paid in registered common stock of
the Company, the number of shares payable will be calculated by dividing (a) the accrued dividend by (b) 90% of the arithmetic
average of the volume weighted average price (VWAP) of the Company’s common stock for the 10 trading days immediately prior to
the applicable date of determination (the “Dividend Stock Payment Price”). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event may the
Company pay dividends in common stock unless the applicable Dividend Stock Payment Price is above $1.52. If the Company is
prohibited from paying the dividend in cash (due to contractual senior credit agreements or other restrictions) or is unable to pay
the dividend in registered common stock, the dividend will be paid in-kind in additional shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock shares
based on the original Unit Price.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock includes a liquidation preference (in the amount of the Unit Price) which is junior to the Company’s
Series A Preferred Stock, ranks senior to the Company’s Series C Preferred Stock and ranks equally with the Series B Preferred
Stock. The Series B1 Preferred Stock also ranks junior to the Company’s credit facilities and other debt holders as provided in
further detail in the Designation.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock prohibits us from (i) increasing or decreasing (other than by redemption or conversion (as described
in the Designation)) the total number of authorized shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock (except to the extent required to issue
payment-in-kind shares); (ii) re-issuing any shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock converted or redeemed; (iii) creating, or authorizing
the creation of, or issuing or obligating the Company to issue shares of, any class or series of capital stock unless the same ranks
junior to (and not pari passu with) the Series B1 Preferred Stock with respect to the distribution of assets on the liquidation,
dissolution or winding up of the Company, the payment of dividends and rights of redemption, or increase the authorized number
of shares of any additional class or series of capital stock unless the same ranks junior to (and not pari passu with) the Series B1
Preferred Stock with respect to the distribution of assets on the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company, the payment
of dividends and rights of redemption; (iv) issuing, incurring or obligating the Company to issue or incur any indebtedness that is
convertible into, or exchangeable for, any equity security of the Company or instruments derivative of any equity security of the
Company; (v) granting any rights to require a mandatory repurchase, retirement or redemption by the Company of any of the
Company’s equity securities or instruments derivative of its equity securities on or prior to June 24, 2020, or issuing, incurring or
obligating the Company to issue or incur, any indebtedness with a maturity date on or prior to June 24, 2020, that is convertible into,
or exchangeable for, equity securities or instruments derivative of the Company’s equity securities; (vi) effecting an exchange,
reclassification, or cancellation of all or a part of the Series B1 Preferred Stock (except pursuant to the terms of the Designation);
(vii) effecting an exchange, or creating a right of exchange, of all or part of the shares of another class of shares into shares of
Series B1 Preferred Stock; (viii) issuing any shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock other than pursuant to the Purchase Agreement or
as payment-in-kind shares; (ix) altering or changing the rights, preferences or privileges of the Series B1 Preferred Stock so as to
affect adversely the shares of such series; or (x) amending or waiving any provision of the Company’s Articles of Incorporation or
Bylaws relative to the Series B1 Preferred Stock so as to affect adversely the shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock in any material
respect as compared to holders of other series, in each case without the prior written consent of holders of Series B1 Preferred
Stock holding a majority of the then outstanding shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock (including accrued and unpaid dividends) is convertible into shares of the Company’s common
stock at the holder’s option at any time after closing at the Unit Price (initially a one-for-one basis). If the Company’s common stock
trades at or above $3.90 per share (250% of the Unit Price) for a period of 20 consecutive trading days at any time following the
earlier of (a) the effective date of the resale registration statement (described below), or (b) six months after the closing of the
Offering (November 13, 2016), the Company may at such time force conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock (including accrued
and unpaid dividends) into common stock of the Company.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock votes together with the common stock on an as-converted basis, provided that each holder’s voting
rights are subject to and limited by the Beneficial Ownership Limitation described below.
26
The Company has the option to redeem the outstanding shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock at 110% of the Unit Price plus any
accrued and unpaid dividends on such Series B1 Preferred Stock redeemed, at any time beginning on June 24, 2017 (the two year
anniversary of the closing of the Company’s June 2015 offering of Series B Preferred Stock) and the Company is required to
redeem the Series B1 Preferred Stock at the Unit Price plus any accrued and unpaid dividends on June 24, 2020 (the five year
anniversary of the closing of the Company’s June 2015 offering of Series B Preferred Stock). Notwithstanding either of the
foregoing, the Series B1 Preferred Stock may not be redeemed unless and until amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement
have been paid in full.
The Series B1 Preferred Stock contains a provision prohibiting the conversion of the Series B1 Preferred Stock into common stock
of the Company, if upon such conversion or exercise, as applicable, the holder thereof would beneficially own more than 9.999% of
the Company’s then outstanding common stock (the “Beneficial Ownership Limitation”). The Beneficial Ownership Limitation does
not apply to forced conversions undertaken by the Company pursuant to the terms of the Designation (summarized above).
Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
The Series C Preferred does not accrue a dividend, but has participation rights on an as-converted basis, to any dividends paid on
the Company’s common stock (other than dividends paid solely in common stock). Each Series C Preferred share has a $100 face
value, and a liquidation preference (in the amount of $100 per share) which is junior to the Company’s Series A Preferred, Series B
Preferred and Series B1 Preferred, senior credit facilities and other debt holders as provided in further detail in the designation, but
senior to the common stock.
The Series C Preferred is convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at the holder’s option at any time at $1.00 per
share (initially a 100:1 basis (subject to adjustments for stock splits and recapitalizations)). The Series C Preferred votes together
with the common stock on an as-converted basis, provided that each holder’s voting rights are subject to and limited by the Series
C Beneficial Ownership Limitation described below and provided further that notwithstanding any of the foregoing, solely for
purposes of determining the voting rights associated with the Series C Preferred, the voting rights accorded to such Series C
Preferred will be determined as if converted at $1.05 per share (the market value of the common stock as of the close of trading on
the day prior to the original issuance date of the Series C Preferred), and subject to equitable adjustment as discussed in the
designation. There are no redemption rights associated with the Series C Preferred.
The Series C Preferred contains a provision prohibiting the conversion of the Series C Preferred into common stock of the
Company, if upon such conversion or exercise, as applicable, the holder thereof would beneficially own more than 4.999% of the
Company’s then outstanding common stock (the “Series C Beneficial Ownership Limitation”). The Series C Beneficial Ownership
Limitation may be increased up and down on a per holder basis, with 61 days prior written notice from any holder, provided the
Series C Beneficial Ownership Limitation may never be higher than 9.999%.
So long as any shares of Series C Preferred are outstanding, we are prohibited from undertaking any of the following without first
obtaining the approval of the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Series C Preferred: (a) increasing or decreasing
(other than by redemption or conversion) the total number of authorized shares of Series C Preferred; (b) re-issuing any shares of
Series C Preferred converted; (c) creating, or authorizing the creation of, or issuing or obligating the Company to issue shares of,
any class or series of capital stock unless the same ranks junior to (and not pari passu with) the Series C Preferred with respect to
the distribution of assets on the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company, or increasing the authorized number of
shares of any additional class or series of capital stock unless the same ranks junior to (and not pari passu with) the Series C
Preferred with respect to the distribution of assets on the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company; (d) effecting an
exchange, reclassification, or cancellation of all or a part of the Series C Preferred (except pursuant to the terms of the designation);
(e) effecting an exchange, or creating a right of exchange, of all or part of the shares of another class of shares into shares of Series
C Preferred (except pursuant to the terms of the designation); (f) issuing any additional shares of Series C Preferred; (g) altering or
changing the rights, preferences or privileges of the shares of Series C Preferred so as to affect adversely the shares of such
series; or (h) amending or waiving any provision of the Company’s Articles of Incorporation or Bylaws relative to the Series C
Preferred so as to affect adversely the shares of Series C Preferred in any material respect as compared to holders of other series
of shares.
27
Anti-Takeover Provisions Under The Nevada Revised Statutes
Business Combinations
Sections 78.411 to 78.444 of the Nevada revised statues (the “NRS”) prohibit a Nevada corporation from engaging in a
“combination” with an “interested stockholder” for three years following the date that such person becomes an interested
shareholder and place certain restrictions on such combinations even after the expiration of the three-year period. With certain
exceptions, an interested stockholder is a person or group that owns 10% or more of the corporation’s outstanding voting power
(including stock with respect to which the person has voting rights and any rights to acquire stock pursuant to an option, warrant,
agreement, arrangement, or understanding or upon the exercise of conversion or exchange rights) or is an affiliate or associate of
the corporation and was the owner of 10% or more of such voting stock at any time within the previous three years.
A Nevada corporation may elect not to be governed by Sections 78.411 to 78.444 by a provision in its articles of incorporation. We
have such a provision in our articles of incorporation, as amended, pursuant to which we have elected to opt out of Sections 78.411
to 78.444; therefore, these sections do not apply to us.
Control Shares
Nevada law also seeks to impede “unfriendly” corporate takeovers by providing in Sections 78.378 to 78.3793 of the NRS that an
“acquiring person” shall only obtain voting rights in the “control shares” purchased by such person to the extent approved by the
other shareholders at a meeting. With certain exceptions, an acquiring person is one who acquires or offers to acquire a
“controlling interest” in the corporation, defined as one-fifth or more of the voting power. Control shares include not only shares
acquired or offered to be acquired in connection with the acquisition of a controlling interest, but also all shares acquired by the
acquiring person within the preceding 90 days. The statute covers not only the acquiring person but also any persons acting in
association with the acquiring person.
A Nevada corporation may elect to opt out of the provisions of Sections 78.378 to 78.3793 of the NRS. We have no provision in our
articles of incorporation pursuant to which we have elected to opt out of Sections 78.378 to 78.3793; therefore, these sections do
apply to us.
Removal of Directors
Section 78.335 of the NRS provides that 2/3rds of the voting power of the issued and outstanding shares of the Company are
required to remove a Director from office. As such, it may be more difficult for shareholders to remove Directors due to the fact the
NRS requires greater than majority approval of the shareholders for such removal.
Transfer Agent
The transfer agent for our common stock is Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, 17 Battery Place, 8th Floor, New York,
New York 10004.
Listing on NASDAQ Capital Market
Our Common Stock is listed on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the symbol “VTNR.”
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We are registering for resale by the selling stockholders and certain transferees a total of 19,671,090 shares of common stock
representing, (1) 12,501,558 shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of 12,501,558 Series B1 Preferred Stock shares
currently outstanding, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation; (2) 4,068,606 shares of
common stock issuable either (i) in lieu of cash dividends accrued from time to time on the Series B1 Preferred Stock (including
shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Designation), in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation ; or (ii) upon conversion of additional
shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in-kind in lieu of cash dividends accrued from time to time on Series B1 Preferred Stock
(including shares of Series B1 Preferred Stock issued in the future in-kind, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Designation), in accordance with and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Designation; and (3) 3,100,926
shares of common stock that are issuable in connection with the exercise of outstanding warrants to purchase 3,100,926 shares of
common stock at an exercise price of $1.53 per share and held by the selling stockholders named herein, which we refer to as the
Warrant Shares. We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale by the selling stockholders of the shares of common stock.
We will bear all fees and expenses incident to our obligation to register the shares of common stock. If the shares of common stock
are sold through broker-dealers or agents, the selling stockholder will be responsible for any compensation to such broker-dealers
or agents.
28
The selling stockholders may pledge or grant a security interest in some or all of the shares of common stock owned by them and,
if they default in the performance of their secured obligations, the pledgees or secured parties may offer and sell the shares of
common stock from time to time pursuant to this prospectus.
The selling stockholders also may transfer and donate the shares of common stock in other circumstances in which case the
transferees, donees, pledgees or other successors in interest will be the selling beneficial owners for purposes of this prospectus.
The selling stockholders will sell their shares of common stock subject to the following:
all or a portion of the shares of common stock beneficially owned by the selling stockholders or their perspective pledgees, donees,
transferees or successors in interest, may be sold on the over-the-counter market, any national securities exchange or quotation service on
 ·
which the shares of our common stock may be listed or quoted at the time of sale, in the over-the counter market, in privately negotiated
transactions, through the writing of options, whether such options are listed on an options exchange or otherwise, short sales or in a
combination of such transactions;
   
each sale may be made at market price prevailing at the time of such sale, at negotiated prices, at fixed prices or at carrying prices
 ·
determined at the time of sale;
   
some or all of the shares of common stock may be sold through one or more broker-dealers or agents and may involve crosses, block
transactions or hedging transactions. The selling stockholders may enter into hedging transactions with broker-dealers or agents, which may
 ·
in turn engage in short sales of the common stock in the course of hedging in positions they assume. The selling stockholders may also sell
shares of common stock short and deliver shares of common stock to close out short positions or loan or pledge shares of common stock to
broker-dealers or agents that in turn may sell such shares; and
   
in connection with such sales through one or more broker-dealers or agents, such broker-dealers or agents may receive compensation in
the form of discounts, concessions or commissions from the selling stockholders and may receive commissions from the purchasers of the
shares of common stock for whom they act as broker-dealer or agent or to whom they sell as principal (which discounts, concessions or
commissions as to particular broker-dealers or agents may be in excess of those customary in the types of transaction involved). Any broker-
 ·
dealer or agent participating in any such sale may be deemed to be an “underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act and will be
required to deliver a copy of this prospectus to any person who purchases any shares of common stock from or through such broker-dealer
or agent. We have been advised that, as of the date hereof, none of the selling stockholders have made any arrangements with any broker-
dealer or agent for the sale of their shares of common stock.
The selling stockholders and any broker-dealer participating in the distribution of the shares of common stock may be deemed to
be “underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act, and any profits realized by the selling stockholders and any
commissions paid, or any discounts or concessions allowed to any such broker-dealer may be deemed to be underwriting
commissions or discounts under the Securities Act. In addition, any shares of common stock covered by this prospectus which
qualify for sale pursuant to Rule 144 may be sold under Rule 144 rather than pursuant to this prospectus. A selling stockholder may
also transfer, devise or gift the shares of common stock by other means not covered in this prospectus in which case the
transferee, devisee or giftee will be the selling stockholder under this prospectus.
29
If required at the time a particular offering of the shares of common stock is made, a prospectus supplement or, if appropriate, a
post-effective amendment to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part, will be distributed which will set forth the
aggregate amount of shares of common stock being offered and the terms of the offering, including the name or names of any
broker-dealers or agents, any discounts, commissions or concessions allowed or reallowed or paid to broker-dealers.
Under the securities laws of some states, the shares of common stock may be sold in such states only through registered or
licensed brokers or dealers. In addition, in some states the shares of common stock may not be sold unless such shares have been
registered or qualified for sale in such state or an exemption from registration or qualification is available and is complied with.
There can be no assurance that any selling stockholder will sell any or all of the shares of common stock registered pursuant to the
registration statement, of which this prospectus forms a part.
The selling stockholders and any other person participating in such distribution will be subject to applicable provisions of the
Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder, including, without limitation, Regulation M of the Exchange Act, which may
limit the timing of purchases and sales of any of the shares of common stock by the selling stockholders and any other
participating person. Regulation M may also restrict the ability of any person engaged in the distribution of the shares of common
stock to engage in market-making activities with respect to the shares of common stock. All of the foregoing may affect the
marketability of the shares of common stock and the ability of any person or entity to engage in market-making activities with
respect to the shares of common stock.
We will bear all expenses of the registration of the shares of common stock including, without limitation, Securities and Exchange
Commission filing fees and expenses of compliance with the state securities of “blue sky” laws. The selling stockholders will pay all
underwriting discounts and selling commissions and expenses, brokerage fees and transfer taxes, as well as the fees and
disbursements of counsel to and experts for the selling stockholders, if any. We will indemnify the selling stockholders against
liabilities, including some liabilities under the Securities Act, in accordance with the registration rights agreement or the selling
stockholder will be entitled to contribution. We will be indemnified by the selling stockholders against civil liabilities, including
liabilities under the Securities Act that may arise from any written information furnished to us by the selling stockholders for use in
this prospectus, in accordance with the related securities purchase agreement or we will be entitled to contribution. Once sold
under this registration statement, of which this prospectus forms a part, the shares of common stock will be freely tradable in the
hands of persons other than our affiliates.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Vertex Energy, Inc. as of December 31, 2015 and for the year ended December 31, 2015
have been audited by Hein & Associates LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report thereon
(which report expresses an unqualified opinion and includes an explanatory paragraph relating to the Company’s ability to
continue as a going concern), and have been incorporated by reference in this Prospectus and Registration Statement in reliance
upon such report and upon the authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of December 31, 2014, and the related consolidated statements of operations,
stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2014, appearing in the Company’s Annual Report on Form
10-K/A (Amendment No. 1) for the year ended December 31, 2014, have been audited by LBB & Associates Ltd., LLP, as set forth in
their report thereon, and incorporated herein by reference. Such consolidated financial statements are incorporated herein by
reference in reliance upon such reports given on the authority of such firms as experts in accounting and auditing.
30
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the securities offered by this prospectus have been passed upon for us by The Loev Law Firm, PC. David M. Loev,
the President and sole owner of The Loev Law Firm, PC, beneficially owns 7,500 shares of common stock and stock options to
purchase 10,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.20 per share, of which all of such options have fully vested,
and which options have a term of 10 years and expire in May 2018.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly, and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”). Our SEC filings are available to the public over the Internet at the SEC’s web site at www.sec.gov and on the
“Investor Relations,” “SEC Filings” page of our website at www.vertexenergy.com. Information on our web site is not part of this
prospectus, and we do not desire to incorporate by reference such information herein. You may also read and copy any document
we file with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. You can also obtain copies
of the documents upon the payment of a duplicating fee to the SEC. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information
on the operation of the Public Reference Room. The SEC maintains an Internet site that contains reports, proxy and information
statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC like us. Our SEC filings are also available to
the public from the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov.
This prospectus is part of the registration statement and does not contain all of the information included in the registration
statement. Whenever a reference is made in this prospectus to any of our contracts or other documents, the reference may not be
complete and, for a copy of the contract or document, you should refer to the exhibits that are a part of the registration statement.
You should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus. We have not authorized anyone
to provide you with information different from that contained in this prospectus. The securities offered under this prospectus are
offered only in jurisdictions where offers and sales are permitted. The information contained in this prospectus is accurate only as
of the date of this prospectus regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus, or any sale of the securities.
This prospectus omits some information contained in the registration statement in accordance with SEC rules and regulations. You
should review the information and exhibits included in the registration statement for further information about us and the securities
we are offering. Statements in this prospectus concerning any document we filed as an exhibit to the registration statement or that
we otherwise filed with the SEC are not intended to be comprehensive and are qualified by reference to these filings and
documents. You should review the complete document to evaluate these statements.
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN INFORMATION BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” into this prospectus the information we file with it, which means that we can
disclose important information to you by referring you to another document filed separately with the SEC. The information
incorporated by reference is an important part of this prospectus, and any information contained in this prospectus or in any
document incorporated by reference in this prospectus will be deemed to be modified or superseded to the extent that a statement
contained in this prospectus or free writing prospectus provided to you in connection with this offering, or in any other document
we subsequently file with the SEC that also is incorporated by reference in this prospectus, modifies or supersedes the original
statement. Any statement so modified or superseded will not be deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to be a part of this
prospectus. The following documents filed with the SEC are hereby incorporated by reference in this prospectus; provided,
however, that we are not incorporating any information furnished under either Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of any current report on Form 8-
K:
31
·Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015, filed with the SEC on April 4, 2016;
   
 ·Our Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, filed with the SEC on April 25, 2016;
   
 ·Our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31, 2016, filed with the SEC on May 12, 2016;
   
Our Current Reports on Form 8-K and Form 8-K/A (other than information furnished rather than filed) filed with the SEC on January 15, 2016;
 ·
February 3, 2016; February 22, 2016; May 10, 2016; June 14, 2016; and August 4, 2016; and
   
The description of our common stock contained in our Registration Statement on Form 8-A, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2013 (File
 ·
No. 001-11476) pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act, including any amendment or report filed for the purpose of updating such
description.
Additionally, all reports and other documents subsequently filed by us pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(d) of the
Exchange Act after the date of this prospectus and prior to the termination of this offering shall be deemed to be incorporated by
reference in this prospectus and to be part hereof from the date of filing of such reports and other documents.
Notwithstanding the statements in the preceding paragraphs, no document, report or exhibit (or portion of any of the foregoing) or
any other information that we have “furnished” or may in the future “furnish” to the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act shall be
incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
We hereby undertake to provide without charge to each person, including any beneficial owner, to whom a copy of this prospectus
is delivered, upon written or oral request of any such person, a copy of any and all of the information that has been or may be
incorporated by reference in this prospectus, other than exhibits to such documents, unless such exhibits have been specifically
incorporated by reference thereto. Requests for such copies should be directed to the following person:
Vertex Energy, Inc.
1331 Gemini Street, Suite 250
Houston, TX 77058
Attn: Chris Carlson, Secretary
chrisc@vertexenergy.com
Phone: (866) 660-8156
Fax: (281) 754-4185
Statements made in this prospectus or in any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus as to the contents of any
contract or other document referred to herein or therein are not necessarily complete, and in each instance reference is made to the
copy of such contract or other document filed as an exhibit to the documents incorporated by reference, each such statement
being qualified in all material respects by such reference.
We maintain an Internet website at www.vertexenergy.com where the incorporated reports listed above can be accessed. Neither
this website nor the information on this website is included or incorporated in, or is a part of, this prospectus.
32
VERTEX ENERGY, INC.
___________________________________
19,671,090 Shares of Common Stock
___________________________________
PROSPECTUS
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. No dealer, salesperson or other person is authorized to give
information that is not contained in this prospectus. This prospectus is not an offer to sell nor is it seeking an offer to buy these
securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted. The information contained in this prospectus is correct only as
of the date of this prospectus, regardless of the time of the delivery of this prospectus or the sale of these securities.
