
MIDLAND SIGNS DEFINITIVE JOINT-VENTURE AGREEMENT NEAR ELEONORE
MINE AND CHEECHOO GOLD DISCOVERY AND PROVIDES AN UPDATE ON
EXPLORATION WORK
Montreal,  August  30,  2016.  Midland  Exploration  Inc.  (“Midland”)  (TSX-V: MD)  is  pleased  to 
announce  the  signing  of  a  definitive  joint-venture  agreement  (50%-50%)  with  Osisko  Exploration  –
James Bay Inc. (“Osisko”), whereby Midland and Osisko will collaborate and combine their efforts to 
explore geological settings favourable for gold deposits in the vicinity of the Éléonore gold mine and 
the recent gold discovery at Cheechoo (see Midland press release dated June 16, 2016). A total budget 
of  approximately  $1,000,000  has  been  allocated  for  2016;  the  first  phase  of  the  field  campaign  is 
currently underway.
This  new  joint  venture  comprises  several  properties  totalling  1,827  mining  claims  and  covering  a 
surface area of about 952.9 square kilometres. These new properties are located about 12 kilometres to 
the  southeast  and  northwest  of  Goldcorp’s  Éléonore  deposit.  This  world-class  gold  deposit  contains 
proven reserves of 4.17 million tonnes at a grade of 6.49 g/t Au (0.87 Moz Au) and probable reserves 
of 24.15 million tonnes at a grade of 5.76 g/t Au (4.48 Moz Au). The deposit also contains measured 
resources  of  0.94 million  tonnes  at  a  grade  of  6.84 g/t  Au  (0.21  Moz  Au),  indicated  resources  of 
3.65 million  tonnes  at  a  grade  of  5.14 g/t  Au  (0.60  Moz  Au),  and  inferred  resources  of  9.97 million 
tonnes at a grade of 7.11 g/t Au (2.28 Moz Au).  
 
Phase 1 of the exploration program, including till and lake-bottom sediment sampling, began last June. 
A  total  of  675  till  samples  and  101  lake-bottom  sediment  samples  were  collected,  in  an  effort  to 
complete the  coverage provided by SIGÉOM databases. This regional sampling  program covered an 
area of more than 100 kilometres, deemed highly favourable and respectively located northwest of the 
Eleonore gold mine and southeast of the new Cheechoo gold discovery. Assay results, including those 
for the fine fraction of till samples, heavy mineral concentrates and gold grain counts, are pending.  
 
This  strategic  alliance,  on  properties  with  strong  gold  potential,  is  favourably  located  relative  to  the 
recent gold discovery made by Sirios Resources Inc. (“Sirios”) on its Cheechoo project. Sirios recently 
confirmed the presence of gold mineralization along the contact between metasedimentary rocks and a 
tonalitic unit, with grades of 12.08 g/t gold over 20.3 metres, including 48.38 g/t gold over 4.4 metres 
(see Sirios press release dated March 29, 2016). Previous drill results reported by Sirios between 2012 
and  2015  on  the  Cheechoo  property  include  gold-bearing  intervals  grading  15.04  g/t  Au  over 
12.35 metres  and  15.61  g/t  Au  over  9.70 metres  in  hole  #20,  drilled  below  hole  #18,  which  had 
previously intersected the same two zones with grades of 7.24 g/t Au over 7.9 metres and 2.04 g/t Au 
over 8.8 metres respectively. This gold mineralization is reportedly hosted in a tonalitic intrusion.  
 
The area covered by this new alliance has received limited exploration work in the past. The southern 
property  covers  sedimentary  sequences  and  intrusions  belonging  to  the  La  Grande  Subprovince, 
whereas the two others cover metasedimentary rocks and intrusions of the Opinaca Subprovince. The 
sedimentary sequence on the southern property is believed to be similar to the one on the Cheechoo 
property,  according  to  geological  mapping  conducted  by  the  MERN,  and  therefore  possesses  strong 
potential for gold mineralization. 
 
Maps showing the location of properties included in the new strategic alliance may be consulted using 
the following link:  
http://file.marketwire.com/release/MD%20OR%20JV_Localisation_30aout16.pdf
About Midland Exploration
Midland targets the excellent mineral potential of Quebec to make the discovery of new world-class 
deposits of gold, platinum group elements, base metals and rare earth elements. Midland is proud to 
count on reputable partners such as Osisko Exploration James Bay Inc., Agnico Eagle Mines Limited, 
Teck  Resources  Limited,  SOQUEM  INC.,  Japan  Oil  and  Gas  and  Metals  National  Corporation  and 
Abcourt Mines Inc. Midland prefers to work in partnership and intends to quickly conclude additional 
agreements in regard to newly acquired properties. Management is currently reviewing opportunities 
and projects to build up the Company portfolio and generate shareholder value.
This press release was prepared by Mario Masson, Midland’s VP Exploration, certified geologist and 
Qualified Person as defined by NI 43-101. For further information, please consult Midland’s website 
or contact: 
 
Gino Roger, President and Chief Executive Officer 
Tel: 450 420-5977 
Fax: 450 420-5978 
E-mail: info@midlandexploration.com 
Website: www.midlandexploration.com 
 
Neither TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the 
TSX Venture Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release. 
 
This  press  release  may  contain  forward-looking  statements  that  are  subject  to  known  and  unknown  risks  and 
uncertainties  that  could  cause  actual  results  to  vary  materially  from  targeted  results.  Such  risks  and 
uncertainties include those described in Midland's periodic reports including the annual report or in the filings 
made by Midland from time to time with securities regulatory authorities.