
EX-99.1 2 v416787_ex99-1.htm EXHIBIT 99.1
Exhibit 99.1
Total Assumes Operatorship of PRL 15
Hand-over effective August 1, 2015
SINGAPORE and PORT MORESBY, Papua New Guinea, July 31, 2015 /PRNewswire/ --
InterOil Corporation (NYSE: IOC) (POMSoX: IOC) and Total E&P PNG Limited have agreed that
Total will become operator of Petroleum Retention License 15 in the Gulf Province of Papua
New Guinea from August 1, 2015.
On February 27, 2015 InterOil announced that the PRL 15 Joint Venture, which is developing the
Elk-Antelope gas discovery as the Papua LNG Project, had unanimously appointed Total as the
operator, subject to an agreed transition plan.
InterOil Chief Executive Dr Michael Hession welcomed the agreement with Total.
"We now look forward to Total bringing its global LNG experience and resources to Elk-Antelope
to develop what we anticipate will be the world's lowest cost new-build LNG project," Dr Hession
said.
"This represents an important milestone for the Papua LNG Project as the Joint Venture
continues to drive towards the earliest practical development of the Elk-Antelope resource."
Under the Operator Transition Agreement, InterOil will continue to provide certain technical
services for Total until the end of 2015. InterOil will continue to operate its remaining retention
and exploration licenses in Papua New Guinea.
Under the Operator Transition Agreement, InterOil on behalf of Total will drill the Antelope-4
sidetrack well, which is expected to begin drilling soon. Total will then operate the Antelope-6
well.
The Papua New Guinea Department of Petroleum and Energy will be advised of the effective
date of change of operator.
About InterOil
InterOil Corporation is an independent oil and gas business with a primary focus on Papua New
Guinea. InterOil's assets include one of Asia's largest undeveloped gas fields, Elk-Antelope, in
the Gulf Province, and exploration licences covering about 16,000sqkm. The company employs
more than 2,000 staff and contractors. Its main offices are in Singapore and Port Moresby. InterOil
is listed on the New York and Port Moresby stock exchanges.
Investor Contacts
Singapore
Michael Lynn
Singapore
David Wu
United States
Cynthia Black
Senior Vice President
Vice President
Investor Relations
T: +65 6507 0222
Investor Relations
T: +65 6507 0222
Investor Relations 
Coordinator
T: +1 212 653 9778
E: michael.lynn@interoil.com
E: david.wu@interoil.com
E: cynthia.black@interoil.com
Media Contacts
Singapore
Robert Millhouse
Vice President
Corporate Affairs
T: +65 6507 0222
Australia
John Hurst
Cannings Corporate Communications
T: +61 418 708 663
E: robert.millhouse@interoil.com
E: jhurst@cannings.net.au
Forward Looking Statements
This media release includes "forward-looking statements" as defined in United States federal
and Canadian securities laws. All statements, other than statements of historical facts, included
in this release that address activities, events or developments that InterOil expects, believes or
anticipates will or may occur in the future are forward-looking statements. These statements are
based on our current beliefs as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available
to us. No assurances can be given however, that these events will occur. Actual results could
differ, and the difference may be material and adverse to the company and its shareholders. Such
statements are subject to several assumptions, risks and uncertainties, many of which are
beyond the company's control, which may cause our actual results to differ materially from those
implied or expressed by the forward-looking statements. Some of these factors include risks
discussed in the company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and on
SEDAR, including but not limited to those in the company's annual report for the year ended 31
December 2014 on Form 40-F and its Annual Information Form for the year ended 31 December
2014. In particular, there is no established market for natural gas or gas condensate in Papua
New Guinea and no guarantee that gas or gas condensate from the Elk and Antelope fields will
ultimately be able to be extracted and sold commercially. Investors are urged to consider closely
the disclosure in the company's Form 40-F, available from us at www.interoil.com or from the
SEC at www.sec.gov and its Annual Information Form available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.