
1
PALADIN ENERGY LTD
ACN 061 681 098
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK 
 
 
The  Board  of  Directors  of  Paladin  Energy  Ltd  is  responsible  for  the  corporate  governance  of  the 
Group.   
 
Paladin  has  adopted  systems  of  control  and  accountability  as  the  basis  for  the  administration  of 
corporate governance. 
 
This  Corporate  Governance  Statement,  dated  30  June  2016  and  approved  by  Board  on  22  August 
2016,  outlines  the  key  principles  and  practices  of  the  Company  which, taken  as  a whole,  represents 
the system of governance. 
 
Shareholders  are  reminded  that  Paladin  operates  with  a  dual-listing  in  Australia  on  the  ASX  and  in 
Canada  on  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (TSX).    In  formulating  the  governance  framework,  the 
regulatory requirements in both Australia and Canada have been taken into account. 
 
The  ASX  Listing  Rules  require  the  Company  to  report  on  the  extent  to  which  it  has  followed  the 
Corporate  Governance  Recommendations  contained  in  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council’s 
(ASX CGC) 3rd Edition  of its Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations.  For  FY2016, 
Paladin  has  complied  with  all  the  recommendations  and  has  referenced  these  throughout  this 
Corporate  Governance  Statement.    Further,  the  Company  also  complies  with  the  Ontario  Securities 
Commission’s corporate governance requirements as set out in National Instrument 58-101. 
 
Paladin’s Corporate Governance Statement can be found in the Corporate Governance section of the 
Investor  Centre  on  its  website  at  www.paladinenergy.com.au,  along  with  the  ASX  Appendix  4G,  a 
checklist cross-referencing the ASX Principles and Recommendations to disclosures in this statement, 
the current Annual Report and the Company website.  The Corporate Governance Statement, together 
with the 4G, have been lodged with the ASX on 24 August 2015.  
 
The  Company  reviews  and  amends  its  corporate  governance  policies  as  appropriate  to  reflect  the 
growth of the Company, current legislation and good practice.  Copies or summaries of key corporate 
governance policy documents can be found on the Company’s website (www.paladinenergy.com.au) . 
 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
Role of the Board and Management 
ASX CGC Recommendation (3rd Edition) 1.1, 1.4, 1.7 
 
The Board guides and monitors the business of Paladin on behalf of shareholders, by whom they are 
elected and to whom they  are accountable.  The Board is responsible for setting corporate direction, 
defining policies and monitoring the business of the Company, to ensure it is conducted appropriately 
and  in  the  best  interests  of  shareholders.    It  is  also  responsible  for  CEO  succession  planning.  The 
Company Secretary is accountable to the Board, through the Chairman, on all matters to do with the 
proper functioning of the Board.
Paladin Energy Ltd – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
2
The  role  of  the  Board  is  to  oversee  and  guide  the  management  of  the  Company  with  the  aim  of 
protecting  and  enhancing  the  interests  of  its  shareholders,  taking  into  account  the  interests  of  other 
stakeholders, including employees, customers, suppliers and the wider community. 
 
The  Board  operates  under  a  Charter  and  has  a  written  Code  of  Conduct  (Code),  which  establishes 
guidelines  for  its  conduct.    The  purpose  of  the  Code  is  to  ensure  that  Directors  act  honestly, 
responsibly, legally and ethically and in the best interests of the Company. 
 
The Board is responsible for setting the strategic direction and establishing goals for management and 
the  monitoring  of  the  achievements  against  these  goals.    The  CEO  conducted  evaluation  interviews 
with all Senior Management during the reporting period with the Non-Executive Directors reviewing the 
performance of the CEO.  Open discussion on management performance takes place at Board level.  
A review of the performance appraisal process is underway.  
 
Other than the powers expressly reserved to the Board in the Board Charter, the Board has delegated 
responsibility  for  the  management  of  the  Company’s  business  and  affairs  to  the  CEO.    The  CEO  is 
supported  in  this  function  by  the  Company’s  senior  leadership  team,  which  comprises  the  direct 
reports  to the  CEO  and  the Group Company  Secretary.    The  Board maintains  ultimate  responsibility 
for strategy and control of the Group.  
 
 
Composition of the Board and Director Independence  
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 
 
The  Board  comprises  five  Non-executive  Directors,  including  the  Chairman.    The  names  of  the 
Directors, both in office at the date of this report and those who held the position during the past year, 
are  set out  in the  Directors’  Report  of  the  Paladin Energy  Ltd Annual  Report  2016.    This  information 
includes  their  status  as  Non-executive,  executive  or  independent,  their  qualifications  and  experience 
and length of service. 
 
Directors are expected to bring independent views and judgement to the Board’s deliberations.   Four 
of  the  five  Non-executive  Directors,  including  the  Chairman,  are  considered  by  the  Board  to  be 
independent.    In  considering  whether  a  Director  is  independent,  the  Board  has  regard  to  the 
independence  criteria  set  out  in  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council’s  Corporate  Governance 
Principles  and  Recommendations  and  the  Corporate  Governance  Guidelines  developed  by  the 
Ontario  Securities  Commission  pursuant  to  National  Policy  58-201  and  other  facts,  information  and 
circumstances that the Board considers relevant. 
 
The  Board  assesses  the  independence  of  new  Directors  prior  to  appointment  and  reviews  the 
independence of all Directors as appropriate. 
 
The Board does not believe that any Director has served on the Board for a period which could, or be 
perceived to, materially interfere with his ability to act in the best interests of the Company. 
 
In reaching this conclusion, the Board  has noted that Mr R Crabb (the  Chairman) has served  on  the 
Board for 23 years.  Notwithstanding his period of service, the Board concluded that Mr Crabb retains 
independence of character and judgement and continues to make outstanding contributions at Board 
level.  He brings unique skills to the Board and participates in robust constructive debate.  The Board 
considers that Mr Crabb’s international resource law experience remains valuable at Board level.   
 
The  structure  of  the  Board  has  evolved  over  time  to  reflect  the  changing  needs  of  the  Company  to 
ensure an appropriate mix of skills and experience is available to oversee the growth of Paladin to its 
full potential.   
 
 
Knowledge, Skills and Experience 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 2.2, 2.6 
 
Skill  sets  represented  at  Board  level  include  managerial,  technical,  financial,  corporate,  legal  and 
commercial.    Particularly,  members  have  a  broad  range  of  experience  and  expertise  in  the  uranium 
business.
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
3
During  2014,  the  Board  developed  a  skills  matrix  and  undertook  a  formal  assessment  via  the 
Nomination  Committee.    This  was  reviewed  in  2016  to  ensure  there  continued  to  be  no  gaps  in  the 
collective skills of the Board.  This review confirmed that all key skills considered to be most relevant 
to  the  business  were  currently  well  represented  across  the  Board.    The  range  of  skills  includes, 
amongst other more general business and corporate related matters, the following key areas: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

uranium industry knowledge;  
mining and exploration;  
strategic planning;  
mergers and acquisitions;  
legal;  
accounting/auditing and corporate finance;  
risk management;  
environmental; and 
health and safety.
To  assist  Directors  in  maintaining  an  appropriate  level  of  knowledge,  skill  and  experience  in  the 
operations  of  the  Company,  Directors  have  the  opportunity  to  undertake  site  visits  to  familiarise 
themselves with the Company’s operations. 
 
Directors  are  encouraged  to  undertake  continuing  education  relevant  to  the  discharge  of  their 
obligations  as  Directors  of  the  Company.    Subject  to  prior  approval  by  the  Company  Secretary,  the 
reasonable cost of such education is met by the Company.  Directors are also regularly briefed on any 
changes to legislation and practices relevant to the business.   
 
 
Retirement and Re-election 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 1.2 
 
The Constitution of the Company requires one third of the Directors to retire from office at each AGM.  
Directors  who  have  been  appointed  by  the  Board  are  required  to  retire  from  office  at  the  next  AGM 
and are not taken into account in determining the number of Directors to retire by rotation at that AGM.  
Directors cannot hold office for a period in excess of three years or later than the third AGM following 
their  appointment  without  submitting  themselves  for  re-election.    All  material  information  in  the 
possession of the Company relevant to a decision on whether or not to elect or re-elect a Director is 
included in the Notice of Meeting.  Retiring Directors are eligible for re-election by shareholders.  Phil 
Baily and Rick Crabb will seek re-election at the 2016 AGM, following their retirement by rotation.   
 
 
Nomination and Appointment of New Directors 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 1.2, 1.3, 2.6 
 
If it is necessary to appoint a new Director to fill a vacancy on the Board or to complement the existing 
Board,  a  wide  and  diverse  potential  base  of  possible  candidates  is  considered  and,  if  required, 
external  consultants  are  engaged  to  assist  in  the  selection  process.    The  Board  assesses  the 
qualifications  of  the  proposed  new  Director  against  a  range  of  criteria  including  background, 
experience,  professional  skills,  personal  qualities,  the  potential  for  the  candidate’s  skills  to  augment 
the existing  Board,  and  the  candidate’s  availability  to  commit  to the  Board’s  activities.    In addition  to 
considerable reference checking, appropriate checks are also made regarding any criminal record or 
bankruptcy history.  If these criteria are met and the Board appoints the candidate as a Director, that 
Director must retire at the next AGM and will be eligible for re-election by shareholders at that AGM.   
 
New  Directors  appointed  to  the  Board  must  participate  in  an  induction  programme,  which  includes 
provision of comprehensive written material regarding the Company such as: 
 
 
 

information on the financial, strategic and operational position of the Company; 
information on the nuclear industry and market generally;  
a  comprehensive  letter  of  appointment  which  sets  out  the  Company’s  expectations  on 
acceptance of the position;
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
4


a  written  statement,  which  sets  out  the  duties,  rights  and  responsibilities  they  undertake  on 
becoming  a  Director,  together  with  material  detailing  the  operations,  policies  and  practices  of 
the Company; and  
access  to  previous  Board  papers,  together  with  recent  Annual  Reports  and  interim  financial 
statements.
Furthermore, new Directors are invited to attend briefing sessions with the CEO and key members of 
the senior management team where they may ask questions and direct any queries they may have to 
the  Chairman  and/or  the  CEO  or  obtain  any  other  briefings  they  feel  necessary  from  the  Chairman 
and/or  the  CEO.    They  are  encouraged  to  attend  site  visits  in  liaison  with  the  CEO,  at  appropriate 
times.    Directors  agree  to  participate  in  continuous  improvement  programmes  from  time  to  time,  as 
considered appropriate. 
 
 
Meetings of the Board 
 
The Board meets formally face to face at least four times a year (each over a one to two day period).  
Conferencing facilities provide greater ease of communications and meetings via this medium are held 
at six week intervals between face to face meetings.  Additional ad-hoc meetings are held as required.  
Members of senior management attend and make presentations to the Board covering all aspects of 
the  Company’s  operations.    This  provides  an  excellent opportunity  for  dialogue  and  networking,  with 
management  from  all  operations  present.    Non-executive  Directors  meet  together  without  the  CEO 
and  management  being  present,  prior  to  each  of  the  four  principal  Board  meetings.    The  number  of 
meetings of the Board during the reporting period and the names on the attendance record are set out 
in the Directors’ Report of the Paladin Energy Ltd Annual Report 2016.  
 
Directors are provided with papers, presentations and briefings on the Company’s operations and on 
matters  which  may  affect  the  Company.    These  are  provided  in  addition  to  Board  papers  and  are 
designed  to  assist  the  Directors  in  gaining  relevant  and  timely  information  to  assist  in  their  decision 
making  process.    The  Company  has  implemented  a  secure  electronic  information  repository  to 
facilitate access to past and present Board documentation and other relevant reference material.   
 
The  entire  Board  is  required  (as  stated  in  their  Letters  of  Appointment)  to  attend  the  AGM  of  the 
Company.  
 
The  Board  holds  an  annual  strategic  planning  session  with  management  at  which  the  Company’s 
strategic  plans  for  each  operating  activity  and  the  Group  as  a  whole  are  presented.    This  is  held  as 
part  of  the  budget  review  process.    The  CEO  encourages  full  access  to  executive  managers  by  the 
Board  to  ensure  transparency  at  a  senior  management  level.    Access  to  all  Perth-based  staff  is 
available in a casual setting at each face to face meeting.  
 
 
Evaluation of Board Performance 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 1.6 
 
Improvement in Board processes and effectiveness is a continuing objective and the primary purpose 
of  Board  evaluation  is  to  identify  ways  to  improve  performance.    The  Chairman  is  responsible  for 
conducting an annual review of the Board performance. 
 
Evaluations of the performance of the Board, individual Directors, the Chairman of the Board and the 
Board  Committees  have  been  carried  out  during  the  reporting  period.    This  process  involved 
completion of individual questionnaires focused on process, structure, effectiveness and contributions.  
Responses  to  the  questionnaires  were  collated  and  discussed  by  the  Board  and  Committees  in  an 
open  forum  and  recommendations  for  improvement  considered.    These  discussions  were  also 
enhanced  by  using  an  Efficiency,  Effectiveness  and  Ethics  performance  review  model  to  promote 
frank and meaningful discussion.
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
5
Position Descriptions 
 
The Board has developed and adopted written position descriptions for the Non-executive Chairman of 
the  Board,  the  Chairman  of  each  Board  Committee,  the  Managing  Director/CEO  and  the  Company 
Secretary. 
 
These delineate the role and responsibility of each position and provide clarity on the expectations for 
those individuals occupying these key positions within the Company. 
 
 
Conflicts of Interest 
 
The Code of Conduct for Directors, a copy of  which is available on the Company’s  website, sets out 
the procedure to be followed if there is, or may be, a conflict between the personal or other interests of 
a Director and the business of the Company.  A Director with an actual or potential conflict of interest 
in relation to a matter before the Board does not receive the Board papers relating to that matter  and, 
when the matter comes before the Board for discussion, the Director  withdraws  from the meeting for 
the period the matter is considered and takes no part in the discussions or decision-making process. 
 
Minutes  reporting  on  matters  in  which  a  Director  is  considered  to  have  a  conflict  of  interest  are  not 
provided  to  that  Director;  however,  the  Director  is  given  notice  of  the  nature  of  the  matter  for 
discussions and, as much as practicable, of the general nature of the discussion or decision reached. 
 
 
Remuneration 
ASX CGC Recommendation (3rd Edition) 8.3 
 
Details  of  the remuneration policies  and practices  of  the  Company  and  the  remuneration paid  to the 
Directors  (Executive  and  Non-executive)  and  senior  executives  are  set  out  in  the  Remuneration 
Report included in the Directors’ Report of the Paladin Energy Ltd Annual Report 2016.  Shareholders 
will be invited to consider and to approve the Remuneration Report at the AGM in November 2016. 
 
In  relation  to  the  Non-executive  Directors,  there  are  no  termination  or  retirement  benefits  other  than 
those contained in statutory superannuation plans. 
 
 
Independent Advice 
 
The Board and its Committees may seek advice from independent experts whenever it is considered 
appropriate.    With  the  consent  of  the  Chairman,  individual  Directors  may  seek  independent 
professional  advice, at the expense of  the  Company,  on  any  matter  connected with the discharge of 
their responsibilities.  No Director availed himself of this right during the course of the year. 
 
 
BOARD COMMITTEES 
 
The  Board  has  established  Audit,  Nomination,  Remuneration,  and  Sustainability  Committees  which 
assist  in  the  discharge  of  the  Board’s  responsibilities.  In  addition  to  a  review  by  the  Board,  each 
committee  reviews  its  performance  by  way  of  individual  questionnaires  and  Charter  on  an  annual 
basis.  This review took place in 2016 and, as a result, the Board is satisfied that the Committees have 
performed effectively with reference to their Charters.   
 
Board approved charters set out the terms of reference and rules governing these Committees.  These 
committee charters are available in the Corporate Governance section of Paladin’s website.  
 
 
Audit Committee 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 4.1, 4.3, 7.3 
 
The Audit Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities to ensure that the Company 
complies  with  appropriate  and  effective  accounting,  auditing,  internal  control  and  compliance  and
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
6
reporting practices in accordance with the Audit Committee Charter.  The Audit Committee Charter is 
reviewed annually by the Board and minor changes were made to the charter during the financial year.  
 
The role of the Audit Committee is to: 
 

monitor  the  integrity  of  the  financial  statements  of the  Company,  reviewing  significant  financial 
reporting judgments; 
review  the  Company’s  internal  financial  control  system  and,  unless  expressly  addressed  by  a 
separate risk committee or by the Board itself, risk management systems; 
monitor and review the effectiveness of the Company’s internal audit function;  
monitor  and  review  the  external  audit  function,  including  matters  concerning  appointment  and 
remuneration, independence and non-audit services; and 
perform such other functions as assigned by law, the Company's constitution, or the Board.
 
 
The Audit Committee comprises three members, the majority of whom are independent Non-executive 
Directors.  The current members of the Audit Committee are: 
 


 



Donald Shumka – Committee Chairman 
Non-executive, Independent Director 
Peter Donkin   
Non-executive, Independent Director 
Wendong Zhang  
Non-executive, not independent Director
The  relevant  qualifications  and  experience  of  the  members  of  the  Committee  can  be  found  in  their 
biographical information, which is included in the Directors’ Report.  
 
The  Audit  Committee  meets  at  least  once  a  quarter  and  at  any  other  time  requested  by  a  Board 
member, Company Secretary or external auditor.  The external auditors attend each quarterly meeting 
and  on  other  occasions  where  circumstances  warrant.    At  the  discretion  of  the  Chairman,  having 
regard  to  the  nature  of  the  agenda,  relevant  members  of  management  may  be  invited  to  attend 
meetings.  The number of meetings of the Audit Committee during the reporting period and the names 
on the attendance record is set out in the Directors’ Report of the Paladin Energy Ltd Annual Report 
2016.  
 
The external auditors can meet with the Audit Committee without management present at any meeting 
and as a standing agenda item at the August meeting.  
 
The  external  auditors  are  required  to  attend  the  AGM  and  be  available  to  answer  any  shareholder 
questions relevant to the audit.  
 
The internal audit function is carried out by Deloitte Australia.  A plan is developed on an annual basis 
to determine the scope of work across the Group, which is then reviewed and endorsed by the Audit 
Committee.   Following  execution,  the  findings  and management  responses  are  reported  to the Audit 
Committee  and  remedial  actions  taken  are  tracked  and  reviewed  on  a  quarterly  basis  at  each 
committee  meeting.    The  Deloitte  representative  is  present  at  those  meetings  to  report  and  advise 
accordingly.  
 
 
Nomination Committee 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 2.1 
 
The responsibilities of the Nomination Committee include: 
 

reviewing  the  size  and  composition  of  the  Board,  taking  into  account  director  independence, 
outside directorships and time commitments, and making recommendations to the Board on any 
appropriate changes; 
developing  a  board  skills  matrix  to  assist  in  identifying  any  gaps  in  the  collective  skills  of  the 
Board for professional development, and succession planning purposes; 
making recommendations on the appointment and removal of Directors;


Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016


establishing  evaluation  methods  for  rating  the  performance  of  the  Board  on  an  annual  basis; 
and,  
providing  new  Directors  with  an  induction  into  the  Company  and  providing  all  Directors  with 
access to ongoing education relevant to their position.
7
Peter  Donkin  chairs  the  Nomination  Committee.    The  Board  considers  that,  given  the  importance  of 
Board  composition,  it  is  appropriate  that  all  members  of  the  Board  are  members  of  the  Nomination 
Committee.   
 
The number of meetings of the Nomination Committee during the reporting period and the names on 
the  attendance  record  is  set  out  in  the  Directors’  Report  of  the  Paladin  Energy  Ltd  Annual  Report 
2016. 
 
 
Remuneration Committee 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 8.1, 8.2 
 
The role of the Committee, in accordance with the Remuneration Committee Charter, is to assist the 
Board with respect to remuneration by reviewing and making appropriate recommendations on: 
 

remuneration packages of executive Directors, Non-executive Directors and senior executives; 
and,  
employee  incentive  and  equity  based  plans  including  the  appropriateness  of  performance 
hurdles and total payments proposed.

The  ASX  Listing  Rules  and  the  Constitution  require  that  the  maximum  aggregate  amount  of 
remuneration to be allocated among the Non-executive Directors be approved by the shareholders in 
a  general  meeting.    In  proposing  the  maximum  amount  for  consideration  by  shareholders,  and  in 
determining  the  allocation,  the  Remuneration  Committee  will  take  into  account  the  time  demands 
made on Directors given the increasing complexity of the Paladin Group and such factors as fees paid 
to Non-executive Directors in comparable Australian companies. 
 
The policies and practices regarding remuneration and the remuneration paid to Directors and senior 
executives are shown in the Remuneration Report, forming part of the Directors’ Report of the Paladin 
Energy Ltd Annual Report 2016. 
 
The  Remuneration  Committee  comprises  three  members,  all  of  whom  are  Non-Executive  Directors.  
Wendong Zhang is the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.  
 
The current members of the Remuneration Committee are: 
 

Wendong Zhang – Committee Chairman 
Non-executive Director 
Rick Crabb  
Non-executive, Independent Director, Board Chairman 
Donald Shumka  
Non-executive, Independent Director


The number of meetings of the Remuneration Committee during the reporting period  and the names 
on the attendance record are set out in the Directors’ Report of the Paladin Energy Ltd Annual Report 
2016.  
 
 
Sustainability Committee 
 
The  role  of  the  Sustainability  Committee  is  to  provide  the  Board  with  an  overview  of  Paladin’s 
performance in the areas of health, safety, environment, social responsibility and sustainability and to 
provide the Board with advice and recommendations where relevant significant incidents occur.  
 
The  Sustainability  Committee’s  Charter,  which  sets  out  further  details  on  the  role  and  duties  of  the 
Committee, is available in the corporate governance section of Paladin’s website.
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
8
The  Sustainability  Committee  comprises  three  members,  the  majority  of  whom  are  independent  
Non-executive Directors.   
 
The current members of the Sustainability Committee are:- 
 

Philip Baily – Committee Chairman 
Non-executive, Independent Director 
Rick Crabb  
Non-executive, Independent Director, Board Chairman 
Alex Molyneux 
CEO


The  Sustainability  Committee  meets  at  least  twice  a  year,  with  further  meetings  as  required.    At  the 
discretion  of  the  Chairperson,  having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  agenda,  relevant  members  of 
management and external consultants may be invited to attend meetings.  
 
The number of meetings of the Sustainability Committee during the reporting period and the names on 
the  attendance  record  are  set  out  in  the  Directors’  Report  of  the  Paladin  Energy  Ltd  Annual  Report 
2016.   
 
 
DIVERSITY POLICY 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 1.5 
 
The  Board  has  approved  a  Diversity  Policy,  which  documents  the  Company’s  commitment  to 
workplace  diversity  and  recognises  the  benefits  arising  from  the  recruitment,  development  and 
retention of a talented, diverse and motivated workforce.  
 
Diversity  within  the  Company  means  all  the  things  that  make  individuals  different  to  one  another, 
including, but not limited to, gender, ethnicity, religion, culture, language, disability and age.  It involves 
a commitment to equality and treating one another with respect.  
 
Responsibility for review of all matters contained within the Diversity Policy rests with the Board as a 
whole and is reflected accordingly in its Charter.  
 
The ASX Corporate Governance Council’s Principles and Recommendations requires the Company to 
set  ‘measurable  objectives’  for  achieving  gender  diversity  and  to  report  against  them  on  an  annual 
basis.    During  the  year,  the  Board  met  and  reviewed  the  measurable  objectives  set  for  FY2016  and 
looking forward to FY2017.  Due to the continuing record low uranium price and group wide efficiency 
initiatives,  the  Board  agreed  that  it  would  be  unrealistic  to  set  any  further  significant  measurable 
objectives for FY2017, given the focus on preserving cash and limiting further redundancies.  As such, 
the measurable objectives for FY2017 remain unchanged from the previous year.  
 
In respect to gender diversity specifically, 14.05% (a decrease from 16.57% the previous period) of the 
total  workforce  globally  are  female.    This  statistic  is  somewhat  skewed  due  to  the  cultural  and 
educational  challenges  faced  with  increasing  the  female  component  of  the  workforce  at  the  African 
operations.  The percentage of Australian based female employees has  increased slightly to 41.67% 
from 41.3% the previous year.  Details across the Group are included in the table set out in the “Our 
People”  section  in  the  Annual  Report  of  the  Paladin  Energy  Ltd  Annual  Report  2016.    There  are 
currently no female directors at the Paladin Energy Ltd level.   
 
Across  the  Group,  the  workforce  is  split  into  five  levels  –  senior  management,  management, 
professional,  skilled  and  unskilled  roles.    The  percentage  of  females  represented  in  the  top  three 
levels is shown in the table below:
Perth
LHM
KM
Senior Management 
Management 
Professional
0%  12.50% 
28.57%  19.00% 
50.00%  24.00%
Expats 
0% 
0% 
0%
Nationals 
0% 
0% 
16.67%
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
Aurora  Group 
wide
0%  11.11% 
0%  13.21% 
0%  21.30%
Measurable Objectives
Objective for FY2016
Outcome
9
Review Diversity Policy annually.  
Undertake an annual gender pay  audit to ensure 
equity in remuneration practices.  
Report annual data across the Group on diversity 
in the workforce.  
Encourage  training  and  development  to  assist  in 
furthering career goals.
Develop  and 
flexible  working 
arrangements  to  support  employees’  personal  or 
family 
in 
employment.
commitments  whilst
implement
continuing
When the Board next recruits for an independent 
non-executive director, at least one  woman must 
be included in the list of potential candidates.  
Initiate  diversity  training  and  awareness  across 
the Group.
Reviewed and remained unchanged.  
This was undertaken as part of the annual salary 
review process.  
Commenced in 2012 and ongoing.  
 
A reduced number of educational initiatives  were 
offered  during  the  year,  with  this  currently  being 
under review.  
The  Company  provides  employees  with  flexible 
working  arrangements  and  paid  parental  leave 
together  with  a  financial  incentive  paid  on  return 
to  work.    Females  participated  in  flexible  work 
arrangements group wide.  
Ongoing.  
 
 
Rollout  of  this  training  commenced  in  FY2015 
with  the  aim  being  for  all  employees  group  wide 
and key suppliers to have been trained by end of 
FY2017.
Further  information  on  diversity  within  the  Company  can  be  found  in  the  Our  People  section  of  the 
Paladin Energy Ltd Annual Report 2016. 
 
 
FINANCIAL REPORTING 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 4.2 
 
CEO and CFO Certification 
 
In  accordance  with  the  Corporations  Act  2001,  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Principle  4.2  and 
Canadian  Securities  Law,  relevant  declarations,  statements  and  certifications  are  provided  by  the 
Managing  Director/CEO  and  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  in  relation  to  the  Company’s  financial 
statements for a financial period.   
 
 
RELATIONSHIP WITH SHAREHOLDERS 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 
 
The Company places a high priority on communications with, and accountability to, shareholders.  The 
Board  recognises  that  shareholders,  as  the  ultimate  owners  of  the  Company,  are  entitled  to  receive 
timely  and  relevant  high  quality  information  about  their  investment.    Similarly,  prospective  investors 
should be able to make an informed decision when considering the purchase of shares in Paladin. 
 
To  safeguard  the  effective  dissemination  of  information,  a  Continuous  Disclosure  &  Communication 
Policy is in place.  This reinforces the Company’s commitment to its continuous disclosure obligations 
imposed by law. 
 
Information will be communicated to shareholders by: 
 

ensuring  that  published  financial  and  other  statutory  reports  are  prepared  in  accordance  with 
applicable laws and industry best practice; 
ensuring  the  disclosure  of  full  and  timely  information  about  the  Company’s  activities  in 
accordance with the general and continuous disclosure principles in the ASX Listing Rules, the 
Corporations Act in Australia and all relevant legislation in Canada; 
providing  detailed  reports  from  the  Chairman,  the  CEO  and  other  senior  executives  at  the 
Annual General Meeting (AGM);


Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
10


 

placing  all  material  information  released  to  the  market  (including  notices  of  meeting  and 
explanatory materials) on the Company’s website as soon as practical following release;  
placing the Company’s market announcements and financial data for the preceding seven years 
on its website;  
providing the Annual Report in a “user friendly” electronic format on its website;  
providing quarterly conference calls incorporating Q&A together with investor updates; and,
In  addition,  the  website  includes  a  facility  to  allow  interested  parties  to  subscribe  to  receive, 
electronically,  public  releases  and  other  relevant  material  concerning  the  Company.  There  are  also 
contact details if shareholders wish to contact the Company or its security registry with any queries.  
 
Shareholders  are  encouraged  to  attend  AGMs  and  ask  questions  of  Directors,  senior  management 
and  the  Company’s  external  auditors,  who  are  required  to  be  in  attendance.    In  the  event  that 
shareholders  are  unable  to  attend  meetings,  they  are  encouraged  to  lodge  proxies  signifying  their 
approval or otherwise of the business to be considered. Shareholders are able to directly  lodge their 
votes online via the Company’s website and the Computershare (the Company’s share registry) voting 
platform.  
 
 
DISCLOSURE CONTROLS 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 5.1 
 
Paladin  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  shareholders  and  the  market  are  provided  with  full  and  timely 
information and that all stakeholders have equal and timely access to material information concerning 
the Company. 
 
The Company understands and respects that timely disclosure of price sensitive information is central 
to  the  efficient  operation  of  the  ASX’s  and  Toronto  Stock  Exchange’s  securities  market  and  has 
adopted a Continuous Disclosure & Communication Policy with underlying procedures covering public 
announcements, the prevention of selective or inadvertent disclosure, conduct of investor and analysts 
briefings,  and  media  communications.    This  Policy  reflects  the  commitment  of  the  Directors  and 
management  to  promoting  consistent  disclosure  practices  aimed  at  accurate,  timely  and  broadly 
disseminated disclosure of material information to the market.   
 
 
RISK MANAGEMENT  
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 7.1, 7.2, 7.4 
 
The  Company  does  not  have  a  risk  committee  or  separate  committees  to  oversee  risk.    Risk  is 
managed at the Board level with all Board members involved in the process whilst taking into account 
the  individual  Sustainability,  Audit  and  Compliance  Committees’  inputs  in  relation  to  those  matters 
overseen by those committees.  
 
The Company has established policies on risk oversight and management and has a risk management 
and  internal  control  system  to  manage  the  Company’s  material  business  risks.  The  Company  has 
developed its risk management policy in line with the implementation of the risk management system 
and a risk management framework.   
 
The  Company’s  Risk  Management  Policy  is  to  identify,  assess,  evaluate,  monitor  and  mitigate  risks 
which  are  considered  unacceptable  to  the  Company.   Operational  business  controls  have  been 
identified and are in place to ensure unwanted threats to the business are managed.  Paladin has also 
developed  the  business  environment  for  managers  and  senior  personnel  to  assess  risks  and  make 
sound  business  decisions.   Whilst  all  personnel  have  a  responsibility  to  identify  and  report  to 
management risks which may materially affect the Company, the CEO has the overall responsibility for 
the management  of risk in  the Company. The CEO is assisted by the  heads of  operational business 
units  who  “champion”  risks  within  the  business  unit.  Paladin  has  adopted  the  Australian  and  New 
Zealand Standard ISO 31000:2009 - “Risk Management” in managing the risk management process. 
 
The risk management system is designed and implemented by the CEO, with assistance from senior 
executives, and is subject to review on a quarterly basis by the Board of Directors.  The latest review
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
11
from
took  place  at  the  May  2016  board  meeting.    A  report  is  provided  annually  to  the  Board  of  Directors 
detailing the management process in relation to the Group’s material business risks.  
 
The  Company  maintains  a  risk  register,  which  sets  out  all  of  the  enterprise  risks  that  have  been 
identified and includes an assessment of the risk (risks analysed and evaluated), and treatment plans 
to mitigate risks. The risk register has been compiled and is reviewed quarterly by the CEO and senior 
management  to  ensure  adequate  risk  control  measures  have  been  identified.   An  operational  risk 
assessment system is in place at the  Langer Heinrich operation,  which is continuously reviewed and 
updated. 
 
Paladin  is  committed  to  continual  improvement  of  the  risk  management  process  and  procedures  to 
ensure the highest return to shareholders and stakeholders. 
 
The Company has developed a Crisis and Emergency Management System with individual site plans 
for  LHM  and  KM.  The  Company  also  conducts  scenario-based  exercises  to  practise  crisis  and 
emergency response. 
 
The Company’s risk management processes  were  the subject of an internal audit programme during 
FY2016  and  recommendations 
the  review  were  considered  and,  where  appropriate, 
implemented.  
 
The  Company  also  commenced  formal  sustainability  reporting  in  FY2012  and  now  publishes  its 
Sustainability Report on an annual basis.  
 
The  Company  has  exposure  to  economic,  environmental  and  social  sustainability  risks.   Details  of 
Paladin’s  sustainability  aspects  and  how  they  are  managed  are  contained  within  the  Company’s 
published Sustainability Reports.  The most recent report (2015) is available on the Paladin website at 
www.paladinenergy.com.au   The  Company  is  currently  in  the  process  of  completing  the  2016 
Sustainability Report, which is expected to be published on the Paladin website by the end of the 2016 
calendar year. 
 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
Paladin is committed to ensuring that effective environmental management is planned and undertaken 
for all aspects of its operations.  The approach to environmental management is guided by Paladin’s 
Environmental Policy, which promotes a standard of excellence for environmental performance across 
its operations.  
 
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY 
 
The  safety,  health  and  wellbeing  of  employees,  contractors  and  the  community  are  of  core  value  to 
Paladin’s operations.  A healthy workforce contributes to business success and the Company’s aim is 
for  zero  injuries.    The  Company  encourages  safe  behaviour  by  employees  and  contractors, 
establishes  a  mindset  that  injuries  are  preventable,  provides  safety  education  and  training,  and 
conducts safety risk assessments. The safety and health performance of Paladin is measured through 
internal and external internationally recognised auditing and reporting processes. 
 
During the year, external health and safety audits were carried out at LHM and KM. 
 
 
SECURITIES OWNERSHIP AND DEALINGS 
ASX CGC Recommendation (3rd Edition) 8.3
The  Company  has  a  Policy  for  Trading in  Company  Securities,  which  is  binding on  all  Directors  and 
employees. As well as the overriding prohibition, which relates to all Directors and employees, against 
dealing in the Company’s securities, when a person is in possession of inside information, the Policy 
also  details  additional  restrictions  for  a  group  of  Restricted  Employees.  This  group  consists  of  all 
Directors  and  officers  and  other  key  personnel  as  nominated  by  the  Chairman  and  Company
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
12
Secretary  and  is  reviewed  on  a  regular  basis  to  take  into  account  changes  in  personnel.  Prescribed 
‘blackout’ periods are included in the Policy during which Restricted Employees will be prohibited from 
dealing in the Company’s securities. Additionally, Restricted Employees are at all times (irrespective of 
‘blackout’  periods)  required  to  complete  an  application  form  to  gain  the  written  acknowledgement  of 
either the Chairman, CEO or the Company Secretary before they deal in the Company’s securities.  
 
The  Company’s  Policy  also  prohibits  hedging  of  options  granted  under  share  options  plans.    This 
relates  to  both  vested  and  unvested  options.    Prohibited  hedging  practices  include  put/call 
arrangements  over  “in  money”  options  to  hedge  against  a  future  drop  in  share  price.    The  Board 
considers  such  hedging  to  be  against  the  spirit  of  a  share  option  plan  and  inconsistent  with 
shareholder objectives.  
 
This  Policy  is  included  in  the  annual  refresher  training  on  all  corporate  policies.  Training  is  also 
extended to all external directors on subsidiary boards with new employees completing the training as 
part of the induction process. 
 
 
ACTING ETHICALLY AND RESPONSIBLY  
 
Paladin  exists  to  create  value  for  its  shareholders.    In  pursuit  of  this  goal,  the  Company  recognises 
that  measurement  of  corporate  success  encompasses  economic,  environmental  and  social  values.  
Paladin  stakeholders  expect  their  Company  to  be  a  good  corporate  citizen  with  fair  and  beneficial 
business  practices,  operating  to  the  highest  ethical  standards,  contributing  to  the  growth  and 
prosperity of host countries, and responding positively to community needs.   
 
Paladin has adopted various policies to assist in this commitment, a summary of which can be found 
below.  These policies are also available on the Company’s website.  
 
 
 
Codes of Conduct 
ASX CGC Recommendations (3rd Edition) 3.1 
 
The Board has approved a Code of Conduct for Directors (incorporating underlying Guidelines for the 
Interpretation of Principles) together with a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, which applies to all 
Directors,  officers  and  employees,  including  those  employed  by  subsidiaries,  in  all  countries  where 
Paladin does business.  A copy of the Code is available on the Company’s website. 
 
These  Codes  demonstrate  and  codify  Paladin’s  commitment  to  appropriate  and  ethical  corporate 
practices.    Compliance  with  the  Codes  will  also  assist  the  Company  in  effectively  managing  its 
operating  risks  and  meeting  its  legal  and  compliance  obligations,  as  well  as  enhancing  Paladin’s 
corporate reputation. 
 
The principles outlined in this document are intended to: 
 

establish a minimum global standard of conduct by which all Paladin employees are expected to 
abide; 
protect the business interests of Paladin, its employees and customers; 
maintain Paladin’s reputation for integrity; and, 
facilitate compliance by Paladin employees with applicable legal and regulatory obligations.
 
 
 
 
The Code of Business Conduct and Ethics addresses honesty and integrity, following the law, conflicts 
of interest, confidentiality, protection of Company assets, dealing with public officials, responsibility for 
international operations, employment practices, record keeping and community relations.   
 
The Board has appointed the Company Secretary as the Company’s compliance officer in the case of 
employees,  and  the  Chairman  of  the  Audit  Committee  in  the  case  of  Directors  and  officers,  as  the 
person  responsible  for  receiving  reports  of  breaches  of  the  Code.    This  is  the  mechanism  by  which 
compliance with the Code is monitored.
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
13
Community Relations Policy 
 
Paladin  believes  that  mining  and  mineral  processing  activity  can  play  a  central  role  in  sustainable 
community development by acting as a catalyst for positive economic and social change.   
 
When operating in overseas jurisdictions, Paladin acknowledges the importance of understanding that 
it is operating in a “visitor” capacity in the country of interest and that it must engage with due respect 
in all interactions.  
 
Paladin  aims  to  achieve  a  balance  between  the  economic,  environmental  and  social  needs  in  all 
phases  of  its  projects  and  has  adopted  a  Community  Relations  Policy,  which  is  available  on  the 
Company’s website.  
 
 
Human Rights Policy 
 
Paladin is committed to respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms.  The aim of the Human 
Rights Policy is to provide the overarching framework for the business in respecting human rights. 
Paladin  commits  to  respecting  human  rights  throughout  its  business  and  to  upholding  the  laws  and 
regulations of the countries in which it operates. Human rights are fundamental principles of personal 
dignity and universal equality. Respect for human rights fosters social progress, better standards of life 
and greater freedom for individuals. 
 
Paladin supports and respects the following international guiding documentation and seeks to conduct 
its business in accordance with the spirit and intent of them, UN International Bill of Human Rights, UN 
Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,  UN  Guiding  Principles  on  Business  and  Human  Rights,  UN 
Global Compact, International  Labour Organisation (ILO) Declaration on Fundamental Principles and 
Rights  at  Work,  The  Voluntary  Principles  on  Security  and  Human  Rights,  OECD  Guidelines  for 
Multinational Enterprises and Equator Principles.  
 
 
Whistleblower Policy 
 
The Board has also approved a Whistleblower Policy, which documents commitment to maintaining an 
open  working  environment  in  which  employees  and  contractors  are  able  to  report  instances  of 
unethical, unlawful or undesirable conduct without fear of intimidation or reprisal. 
 
The purpose of the Whistleblower Policy is to: 
 
 

help detect and address unacceptable conduct; 
help  provide  employees  and  contractors  with  a  supportive  working  environment  in  which  they 
feel able to raise issues of legitimate concern to them and to the Company; and, 
help protect people who report unacceptable conduct in good faith.
 
 
To  assist  in  the  understanding  of  this  Policy  by  the  local  Malawian  workforce  due  to  language  and 
cultural differences, a storybook has been written  and translated  into the local  language  dealing  with 
the issues of fraud, corruption and whistleblowing.  This has been distributed to all local employees.  In 
addition,  the  local  acting  troupe  has  been  employed  in  presenting  small  plays  to  the  workforce  on 
these subjects.  Both mediums have been extremely well received and  proved effective in presenting 
the message.  
 
 
Anti-Bribery and Corruption Compliance 
 
Paladin does not operate in any country rated an extreme risk for corruption in the latest Transparency 
International Global Corruption Index – Australia and Canada are in the top quartile and rank 13th and 
9th respectively (out of 1675 countries surveyed); Namibia is in the second quartile and ranks 45th and 
Malawi is in the third quartile, ranked 112th.   
 
Paladin  opposes  corruption  and  honours  the  OECD  Convention  on  Combating  Bribery  of  Foreign 
Public  Officials  in  International  Business  Transactions  (OECD  Convention).  Paladin  is  committed  to
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
14
conducting  its  business  in  accordance  with  applicable  laws,  rules  and  regulations,  and  the  highest 
standards  of business ethics, and to full  and accurate disclosure  in compliance  with applicable laws, 
rules  and  regulations.  The  Company  operates  under  a  Code  of  Business  Conduct  and  Ethics  and  a 
Code of Conduct for its Directors.  An Anti-Bribery and Corruption (ABC) Compliance Guide provides 
practical  advice  on  ethical  business  conduct  for  Paladin  Directors,  employees  and  third  parties.    A 
Whistleblower  Policy  and  procedure  are  also  in  place  to  facilitate  disclosure  of  any  alleged  corrupt 
practices. 
 
The  Company  has  established  a  Compliance  Committee  which  has  been  trained  by  external  legal 
counsel,  expert  in  the  field.    The  Committee  operates  under  a  Charter,  its  role  being  to  oversee 
Paladin’s  anti-bribery  and  corruption  compliance  (as  documented  in  Paladin’s  Anti-Bribery  and 
Corruption Compliance Guide) and address employee or representative’s concerns.  
 
The  roll-out  of  unified  anti-bribery  and  corruption  training  across  the  Group  began  during  2012,  with 
substantially  all  employees  across  the  Group  trained  by  the  end  of  FY2014.    All  employees  also 
received  a  personal  copy  of  the  localised  guide  to  the  ABC  regime.    Given  educational  and  cultural 
challenges,  local  mine  site  workers  at  KM  operating  below  the  supervisor  level  received  training 
through a number of media – story books (each worker received a personal copy) and posters on the 
subject written in their local language, together with performances by the local drama group. The story 
book  was  produced  in  four  local  languages  in  addition  to  English  and  was  distributed  not  only  to  all 
local staff but to various government departments and the community both in the surrounding area and 
in Lilongwe, the capital.  Paladin also engages with significant suppliers and contractors in regard to its 
stance on anti-bribery and corruption and ensures the matter is specifically addressed with contracting 
parties.  During FY2017 it is expected all employees will receive refresher training on the subject. 
 
No employees at KM have been terminated over the past financial year due to bribery and corruption 
related offences.  
 
 
Privacy Policy 
 
The  Company  has  a  firm  commitment  to  protecting  the  privacy  of  any  personal  information  that  it 
collects and holds and recognises its obligations under the existing privacy legislation.  It has adopted 
a  Privacy  Policy  which  provides  details  on  the  collection  and  use  of  personal  information, 
circumstances under which it can be disclosed, management and security of personal information and 
how it can be accessed.  
 
Any changes to the above Codes and Policies are considered by the Board for approval.
Paladin Energy Limited – Corporate Governance Statement 2016
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Rules 4.7.3 and 4.10.31
Appendix 4G
Key to Disclosures
Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Introduced 01/07/14  Amended 02/11/15
Name of entity
Paladin Energy Limited
ABN / ARBN
061 681 098
Financial year ended:
30 June 2016
Our corporate governance statement2 for the above period above can be found at:3
☐
These pages of our annual report:
This URL on our website:
http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
The Corporate Governance Statement is accurate and up to date as at [insert effective date of 
statement] and has been approved by the board.
The annexure includes a key to where our corporate governance disclosures can be located.
Date:
24 August 2016
Name of Director or Secretary authorising 
lodgement:
Ranko Matic
Company Secretary
1 Under Listing Rule 4.7.3, an entity must lodge with ASX a completed Appendix 4G at the same time as it lodges its annual 
report with ASX.
Listing Rule 4.10.3 requires an entity that is included in the official list as an ASX Listing to include in its annual report either a 
corporate governance statement that meets the requirements of that rule or the URL of the page on its website where such a 
statement is located. The corporate governance statement must disclose the extent to which the entity has followed the 
recommendations set by the ASX Corporate Governance Council during the reporting period. If the entity has not followed a 
recommendation for any part of the reporting period, its corporate governance statement must separately identify that 
recommendation and the period during which it was not followed and state its reasons for not following the recommendation and 
what (if any) alternative governance practices it adopted in lieu of the recommendation during that period.
Under Listing Rule 4.7.4, if an entity chooses to include its corporate governance statement on its website rather than in its 
annual report, it must lodge a copy of the corporate governance statement with ASX at the same time as it lodges its annual 
report with ASX. The corporate governance statement must be current as at the effective date specified in that statement for the 
purposes of rule 4.10.3. 
2 “Corporate governance statement” is defined in Listing Rule 19.12 to mean the statement referred to in Listing Rule 4.10.3 
which discloses the extent to which an entity has followed the recommendations set by the ASX Corporate Governance Council 
during a particular reporting period. 
3 Mark whichever option is correct and then complete the page number(s) of the annual report, or the URL of the web page, 
where the entity’s corporate governance statement can be found. You can, if you wish, delete the option which is not applicable.
Throughout this form, where you are given two or more options to select, you can, if you wish, delete any option which is not 
applicable and just retain the option that is applicable. If you select an option that includes “OR” at the end of the selection and 
you delete the other options, you can also, if you wish, delete the “OR” at the end of the selection.
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 1
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
ANNEXURE – KEY TO CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DISCLOSURES
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
PRINCIPLE 1 – LAY SOLID FOUNDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT
1.1
A listed entity should disclose:
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
(b)
the respective roles and responsibilities of its board and 
management; and
those matters expressly reserved to the board and those 
delegated to management.
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
… and information about the respective roles and responsibilities of 
our board and management (including those matters expressly 
reserved to the board and those delegated to management):
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
1.2
A listed entity should:
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
(b)
undertake appropriate checks before appointing a person, or 
putting forward to security holders a candidate for election, 
as a director; and
provide security holders with all material information in its 
possession relevant to a decision on whether or not to elect 
or re-elect a director.
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
1.3
A listed entity should have a written agreement with each director 
and senior executive setting out the terms of their appointment.
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
1.4
The company secretary of a listed entity should be accountable 
directly to the board, through the chair, on all matters to do with the 
proper functioning of the board.
at this location:
☐  we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
4 If you have followed all of the Council’s recommendations in full for the whole of the period above, you can, if you wish, delete this column from the form and re-format it.
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 2
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
1.5
A listed entity should:
(a)
(b)
(c)
have a diversity policy which includes requirements for the 
board or a relevant committee of the board to set 
measurable objectives for achieving gender diversity and to 
assess annually both the objectives and the entity’s progress 
in achieving them;
disclose that policy or a summary of it; and
disclose as at the end of each reporting period the 
measurable objectives for achieving gender diversity set by 
the board or a relevant committee of the board in accordance 
with the entity’s diversity policy and its progress towards 
achieving them and either:
(1)  the respective proportions of men and women on the
board, in senior executive positions and across the 
whole organisation (including how the entity has defined 
“senior executive” for these purposes); or
(2)  if the entity is a “relevant employer” under the Workplace
Gender Equality Act, the entity’s most recent “Gender 
Equality Indicators”, as defined in and published under 
that Act.
… the fact that we have a diversity policy that complies with 
paragraph (a):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
Statement OR
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
at this location:
is therefore not applicable
… and a copy of our diversity policy or a summary of it:
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
… and the measurable objectives for achieving gender diversity set by 
the board or a relevant committee of the board in accordance with our 
diversity policy and our progress towards achieving them:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… and the information referred to in paragraphs (c)(1) or (2):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
1.6
A listed entity should:
… the evaluation process referred to in paragraph (a):
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
(b)
have and disclose a process for periodically evaluating the 
performance of the board, its committees and individual 
directors; and
disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether a 
performance evaluation was undertaken in the reporting 
period in accordance with that process.
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
… and the information referred to in paragraph (b):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
1.7
A listed entity should:
… the evaluation process referred to in paragraph (a):
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
(b)
have and disclose a process for periodically evaluating the 
performance of its senior executives; and
disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether a 
performance evaluation was undertaken in the reporting 
period in accordance with that process.
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
… and the information referred to in paragraph (b):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 3
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
PRINCIPLE 2 - STRUCTURE THE BOARD TO ADD VALUE
2.1
The board of a listed entity should:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (a):]
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
have a nomination committee which:
(1)  has at least three members, a majority of whom are
independent directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director,
and disclose:
(3)  the charter of the committee;
(4)  the members of the committee; and
(b)
(5)  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of
times the committee met throughout the period and 
the individual attendances of the members at those 
meetings; or
if it does not have a nomination committee, disclose that 
fact and the processes it employs to address board 
succession issues and to ensure that the board has the 
appropriate balance of skills, knowledge, experience, 
independence and diversity to enable it to discharge its 
duties and responsibilities effectively.
2.2
A listed entity should have and disclose a board skills matrix 
setting out the mix of skills and diversity that the board currently 
has or is looking to achieve in its membership.
… the fact that we have a nomination committee that complies with 
paragraphs (1) and (2):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… and a copy of the charter of the committee:
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
… and the information referred to in paragraphs (4) and (5):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (b):]
… the fact that we do not have a nomination committee and the 
processes we employ to address board succession issues and to 
ensure that the board has the appropriate balance of skills, 
knowledge, experience, independence and diversity to enable it to 
discharge its duties and responsibilities effectively:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… our board skills matrix:
Statement OR
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 4
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
2.3
A listed entity should disclose:
(a)
(b)
the names of the directors considered by the board to be 
independent directors;
if a director has an interest, position, association or 
relationship of the type described in Box 2.3 but the board 
is of the opinion that it does not compromise the 
independence of the director, the nature of the interest, 
position, association or relationship in question and an 
explanation of why the board is of that opinion; and
… the names of the directors considered by the board to be 
independent directors:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… and, where applicable, the information referred to in paragraph (b):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
(c)
the length of service of each director.
… and the length of service of each director:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
Statement
2.4
A majority of the board of a listed entity should be independent 
directors.
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
2.5
2.6
The chair of the board of a listed entity should be an independent 
director and, in particular, should not be the same person as the 
CEO of the entity.
at this location:
☐  we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
☐  we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
A listed entity should have a program for inducting new directors 
and provide appropriate professional development opportunities 
for directors to develop and maintain the skills and knowledge 
needed to perform their role as directors effectively.
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
PRINCIPLE 3 – ACT ETHICALLY AND RESPONSIBLY
3.1
A listed entity should:
… our code of conduct or a summary of it:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
have a code of conduct for its directors, senior executives 
and employees; and
(b)
disclose that code or a summary of it.
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 5
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
PRINCIPLE 4 – SAFEGUARD INTEGRITY IN CORPORATE REPORTING
4.1
The board of a listed entity should:
(a)
have an audit committee which:
(1)  has at least three members, all of whom are non-
executive directors and a majority of whom are 
independent directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director, who is not the
chair of the board,
and disclose:
(3)  the charter of the committee;
(4)  the relevant qualifications and experience of the
members of the committee; and
(5)  in relation to each reporting period, the number of
times the committee met throughout the period and 
the individual attendances of the members at those 
meetings; or
(b)
if it does not have an audit committee, disclose that fact 
and the processes it employs that independently verify and 
safeguard the integrity of its corporate reporting, including 
the processes for the appointment and removal of the 
external auditor and the rotation of the audit engagement 
partner.
The board of a listed entity should, before it approves the entity’s 
financial statements for a financial period, receive from its CEO 
and CFO a declaration that, in their opinion, the financial records 
of the entity have been properly maintained and that the financial 
statements comply with the appropriate accounting standards 
and give a true and fair view of the financial position and 
performance of the entity and that the opinion has been formed 
on the basis of a sound system of risk management and internal 
control which is operating effectively.
4.2
[If the entity complies with paragraph (a):]
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
… the fact that we have an audit committee that complies with 
paragraphs (1) and (2):
Statement
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… and a copy of the charter of the committee:
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
… and the information referred to in paragraphs (4) and (5):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (b):]
… the fact that we do not have an audit committee and the processes 
we employ that independently verify and safeguard the integrity of our 
corporate reporting, including the processes for the appointment and 
removal of the external auditor and the rotation of the audit 
engagement partner:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement
at this location:
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 6
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
4.3
A listed entity that has an AGM should ensure that its external 
auditor attends its AGM and is available to answer questions 
from security holders relevant to the audit.
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
☐   we are an externally managed entity that does not hold an
annual general meeting and this recommendation is therefore 
not applicable
PRINCIPLE 5 – MAKE TIMELY AND BALANCED DISCLOSURE
5.1
A listed entity should:
… our continuous disclosure compliance policy or a summary of it:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
have a written policy for complying with its continuous 
disclosure obligations under the Listing Rules; and
(b)
disclose that policy or a summary of it.
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
PRINCIPLE 6 – RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
A listed entity should provide information about itself and its 
governance to investors via its website.
… information about us and our governance on our website:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
Statement
A listed entity should design and implement an investor relations 
program to facilitate effective two-way communication with 
investors.
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement
at this location:
A listed entity should disclose the policies and processes it has in 
place to facilitate and encourage participation at meetings of 
security holders.
… our policies and processes for facilitating and encouraging 
participation at meetings of security holders:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
Statement OR
☐   we are an externally managed entity that does not hold
periodic meetings of security holders and this recommendation 
is therefore not applicable
A listed entity should give security holders the option to receive 
communications from, and send communications to, the entity 
and its security registry electronically.
… the fact that we follow this recommendation:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement
at this location:
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 7
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
PRINCIPLE 7 – RECOGNISE AND MANAGE RISK
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
7.1
The board of a listed entity should:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (a):]
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
have a committee or committees to oversee risk, each of 
which:
… the fact that we have a committee or committees to oversee risk 
that comply with paragraphs (1) and (2):
Statement
(1)  has at least three members, a majority of whom are
independent directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director,
and disclose:
(3)  the charter of the committee;
(4)  the members of the committee; and
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… and a copy of the charter of the committee:
at this location:
… and the information referred to in paragraphs (4) and (5):
(5)  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
times the committee met throughout the period and 
the individual attendances of the members at those 
meetings; or
at this location:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (b):]
(b)
if it does not have a risk committee or committees that 
satisfy (a) above, disclose that fact and the processes it 
employs for overseeing the entity’s risk management 
framework.
… the fact that we do not have a risk committee or committees that 
satisfy (a) and the processes we employ for overseeing our risk 
management framework:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
7.2
The board or a committee of the board should:
(a)
(b)
review the entity’s risk management framework at least 
annually to satisfy itself that it continues to be sound; and
disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether such 
a review has taken place.
… the fact that board or a committee of the board reviews the entity’s 
risk management framework at least annually to satisfy itself that it 
continues to be sound:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
Statement
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… and that such a review has taken place in the reporting period 
covered by this Appendix 4G:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 8
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
7.3
A listed entity should disclose:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (a):]
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
(b)
if it has an internal audit function, how the function is 
structured and what role it performs; or
… how our internal audit function is structured and what role it 
performs:
Statement
if it does not have an internal audit function, that fact and 
the processes it employs for evaluating and continually 
improving the effectiveness of its risk management and 
internal control processes.
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (b):]
… the fact that we do not have an internal audit function and the 
processes we employ for evaluating and continually improving the 
effectiveness of our risk management and internal control processes:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
7.4
A listed entity should disclose whether it has any material 
exposure to economic, environmental and social sustainability 
risks and, if it does, how it manages or intends to manage those 
risks.
… whether we have any material exposure to economic, 
environmental and social sustainability risks and, if we do, how we 
manage or intend to manage those risks:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
Statement
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 9
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
PRINCIPLE 8 – REMUNERATE FAIRLY AND RESPONSIBLY
8.1
The board of a listed entity should:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (a):]
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
(a)
have a remuneration committee which:
(1)  has at least three members, a majority of whom are
independent directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director,
and disclose:
(3)  the charter of the committee;
(4)  the members of the committee; and
(5)  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of
times the committee met throughout the period and 
the individual attendances of the members at those 
meetings; or
(b)
if it does not have a remuneration committee, disclose that 
fact and the processes it employs for setting the level and 
composition of remuneration for directors and senior 
executives and ensuring that such remuneration is 
appropriate and not excessive.
8.2
A listed entity should separately disclose its policies and 
practices regarding the remuneration of non-executive directors 
and the remuneration of executive directors and other senior 
executives.
8.3
A listed entity which has an equity-based remuneration scheme 
should:
(a)
have a policy on whether participants are permitted to 
enter into transactions (whether through the use of 
derivatives or otherwise) which limit the economic risk of 
participating in the scheme; and
(b)
disclose that policy or a summary of it.
… the fact that we have a remuneration committee that complies with 
paragraphs (1) and (2):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… and a copy of the charter of the committee:
at http://www.paladinenergy.com.au/corporate-governance
… and the information referred to in paragraphs (4) and (5):
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
[If the entity complies with paragraph (b):]
… the fact that we do not have a remuneration committee and the 
processes we employ for setting the level and composition of 
remuneration for directors and senior executives and ensuring that 
such remuneration is appropriate and not excessive:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
… separately our remuneration policies and practices regarding the 
remuneration of non-executive directors and the remuneration of 
executive directors and other senior executives:
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
at this location:
Statement OR
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation is
therefore not applicable
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
Statement OR
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
… our policy on this issue or a summary of it:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement OR
at this location:
☐   w e do not have an equity-based remuneration scheme and this
recommendation is therefore not applicable OR
☐   we are an externally managed entity and this recommendation
is therefore not applicable
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 10
Appendix 4G 
Key to Disclosures Corporate Governance Council Principles and Recommendations
Corporate Governance Council recommendation
We have followed the recommendation in full for the whole of the 
period above. We have disclosed …
We have NOT followed the recommendation in full for the whole 
of the period above. We have disclosed …4
ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES APPLICABLE TO EXTERNALLY MANAGED LISTED ENTITIES
Alternative to Recommendation 1.1 for externally managed listed 
entities:
The responsible entity of an externally managed listed entity 
should disclose:
(a)
(b)
the arrangements between the responsible entity and the 
listed entity for managing the affairs of the listed entity;
the role and responsibility of the board of the responsible 
entity for overseeing those arrangements.
Alternative to Recommendations 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3 for externally 
managed listed entities:
An externally managed listed entity should clearly disclose the 
terms governing the remuneration of the manager.
-
-
… the information referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b):
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement
at this location:
… the terms governing our remuneration as manager of the entity:
☐   an explanation why that is so in our Corporate Governance
in our Corporate Governance Statement OR
Statement
at this location:
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms 
2 November 2015
Page 11