
~""¥;‘ , < ~.
 '-  ;V;V.'\:;;E15Y:LE,;:?;&:1Jr «112;; 17-91%" 3.12:;
g, gt [5'3  x _- ﬁx I 9" W W5 ‘r‘
‘ \a :mantaré mo CE My {Elsewhere
1 ;\ V“ \ "« ,‘
 m mted ,
_.   v.11?“ "I 3‘  “ Q5 '1‘ 1‘ é“  7???“
 t          
1   \f.  4;. ﬁst} ‘gﬁ hwy» v; 1% was, M‘ , a) m, 7: 3:; ,,
w   w’  ,9; ~ 2+m§§ -, 32m. ~  f 
 My   an". “g. -  Y  5L my, ,. A»?  . a. 5.4.;  I b-
  Wwﬁ.   V,» M “m « m4 _ Add“ e‘w.‘  g: z
57:}  < 1: Iflvfuhlx ‘w‘ ‘, wk ‘ f   ‘fot  i ’  ~31
: ,;.v,  We»;  m; qzzvrﬁégzm   U
‘ a n >- 3.32.1: xxx \ 4;”  A  ,~ .w k A. ., In ,»;x
a: vay’ 1; gg‘n":é_{'~ gut?“ 533‘».  _ .. IV ._ v 1:. 973%..
* x  waéé; ~  r @551 s  ‘ii‘us
wag, .3ﬂrfg’ .7 égyggfgmgga‘ 3  V; far“. .3 I r;
 :~ 3:.  ..  .V  45:“  , L
 a        Vii} 
wt“: m ﬁt. «ﬁmgmér' . «233%  Aggﬁz“  ' ~ ~ 
A w xdmw  D  3%
, IM %. Mam ow Wm
r  ﬂ  -
» ' Deuember  £38
  ~   
    
  ,    


THIS DOCUMENT IS IMPORTANT AND REQUIRES YOUR IMMEDIATE ATTENTION.
it you are in any doubt ebotnthe contents or this dowmenL you should oonsuh an independent proressionai adviser authorised under the
Finantial Services and Markets Al: 2000 (the "FSMA') who specialises in arming on the acquisition Disham and other securities.
I
Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited i
(Registered in Bermuda under the Earmuda Companies Aci with Registration Number 55/239“) l
Admission to trading on AIM r
ism Code: 014534051042 ‘
Nomlnated Adviser Broker
RFc Corporate Flnanca Limited Keith, Bayley, Rogers 8- Co. Limited
Issued Share Capltal upon Admisslon:
57,925,784 issued common shares with a par value of US$0.01 each
IMPORTANT NOTICES
Application has been made tor the Shares to be admitted to mod on the AIM maritet oi the London Slooit Exchange pic
l-Alul"). Am is a market designed primarily tor emerging or smaller companies to which a higher investment rllk tends to tee r
attached titan to larger or more established companies Ami securities are not admitted to the crucial List of the United
r Kingdom Lietlng Authority.
A prospective investor should be aware or the rlslre ct investing in such companies and shouid make the decision to invest
only other cereiui consideration and, "appropriate. conciliation vrhh an independent iinaneial adviser.
London Stools Exchange pic nae not itseli examined or approved the contents oitl-rle Admluion Document,
This document is on Admission Document drawn up in accordance with the Add Rules and has been issued in connection with the
application ior Admission.
it is expected that Admission will become eiiealve and dealings in the Shares will commence on And on or about 13 December 2006.
Directors Declaration
The Directors oi Kallmantan Gold Corporation limited ("Kalimaman Gold or the 'Company), whose names appear in the corporate
Directory oithia Admission Document. and the company accept responsibility for the iniormaticn contained in this Admission Document.
including individuat and collective responsloiiity tor the company's compliance with the AIM Rules. To the best oi the knowledge and
belief oi the Company and the Directors (who have taken all reasonable care to ensure that such is the easel, the inionnation contained
in this Admission Doorment is in accordance with the lads and do not omit anything likely to street the import oieuoh iniormation.
Notice trom Nominated Adtnser end Drolrer
RFC corporate Finance Limited ("RFC") ie the Company] nominated adviser tor the purpose at the Alllil Rules. RFC':
responsibilities as the Compaan nominated advisar under the AIM Rules are owed solely to the London Stock sxmanga pic and ara not
owed to the company or to any Director or any other person. RFC will not be responsible to sud: persons ior providing protadions
aiiorded to customers or Ri=c horror advising them in relation to the arangomerns described In this Admission Document.
Keith. Bum, Rogers to Co. Limited l-xehh Dayiey Rogers") lathe Company's broker and is authorised and regulated by the
Financial Services Authority, Keith seyiey Rogers is acting tor the Company and no one else in delineate" with the proposed
arrangements desoibed in this Admission Document, it will not regard any other parson as its customer nor be responsible to any other
person ior providing protections aliorded to the clients oi Keith Dayiay Rogers nor for providing advice to any other person in connection
with the arrangements described in this Admission Document.
without limiting the slattnory rights at any person to whom this Admission Document Is issued, no representation or warranty, express or
implied. is made by RFC or Keith Dayley Rogers as to the contents oi title Admission Bowmath and no liability is accepted by rare or
Keith Daytey Rogers for the accuracy or opinions contained In this Admission Document or for the omission or any material iniorrnatlon
trom this Admission Document iorwhicn the Company and the Directors. and in respect at their reports contained in Fans 0, D and E oi
this doorment, Stelfsti Robertson 5 idrsten (Australasia) Ply Ltd, Emst d young LLP and Hidipuimnm Hodinoto at Panners
reapedively, are solely responsible.
Distribution Restrictions
The dlelrlpution oi the Admission Document in jurisdictions other than the united Kingdom may be restricted by law. and rherciore
persons into whose possession this Admission Document comes should iniomt themselves about and observe any such resiriaiona.
The whole or this document should be read and your attention is drawn to the “Risk Factors" Section in Part a at this
Admission Document
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
AiM Admission Documant


Contents ' l
—____—_—.__—._.___
Page
L Investment Summary 3
Admlssion Statistics and Expected Timetabie 4 
Corporate Directory 5 l
Deﬁnitions 6
Part A Information on the Group 8
1. Introduction and History
2. Corporate Struuure
3. Overview of Indonesia and Kalimenten
4. The KSK COW Project
5. The Jelai—Mewet Project
6. Community Development Activities
7. Prospects, Future Strategy and Objectives
8. Reasons for the AIM Listing
9. Use of Funds
10, Summary Capital Structure
11‘ Financial Mon-nation
12. Dividend Policy
13. Directors and Senior Management
14. Look—in Anangements
15. Corporate Governanoe
16. Admission. Settlement (CREST) and Dealings
Part B Risk Factors 18
Part C Competent Person’s Report 22
Part D Accounting Information 66
1. Independent Accountants Report
2, 3 Year Historical Financial Information
3, Unaudited interim Accounts for the Halt-Year Ended 30 June 2006 -
Part E Legal Report on Indonesian Mineral Titles 89
Part F Additional Intonation 119
__—____—..—____.___—____—
a Kelimentan Gold Corporen'on Limited
AIM Admission Document


Investment Summary
ﬁre following information shom‘d be read In conjunction with the hill text of this Admission Document
from which it is derived. Any capitalised terms have me meanings as defined on pages 6-7.
,3"; 48.}, r Kalimantan Gold is ejunior exploration company that is registered In Bermuda 
" ‘ ""‘ and whose Shares are currently listed on the TSX Venture Exchange. 5
t The Company has interests In two mineral exploration projects located in E
Kelimentan. indonesla: the KSK COW Project and the JelaivMewet Project, 
gm; 2114/ {NC : ’j r The Company has a 75% interest in the KsK Cow Project, a Contract of 
;  J ' Work providing exploration rights over 941km2 in Central Kalimantan. 
c ; :1; s
p Exploration over many years has identiﬁed a series of porphyry ooppar~gold 
targets on the KSK CoW‘, with better drill Intersections including 53m @ 2.6% 2
copper, 1.9% zinc. Sigms Ag/t and 0.2zgms Ault (drilled down-dip in vein 
material from the Baroi Far East Zone prospect) and 167m @ 0.59% copper 
(from the Eeruang Kanan prospect) 2, _ 
> Systematic drilling is now required to gain a better structural understanding of I i
the more advanced prospects and better test their resource potential”. ' j
a For this purpose, the Company entered Into a heads of agreement with
Oxiena in October 2006 to form an exploration joint venture for the KSK 00W x
Project, Subject to deﬁnitive documentation. Oxiana will initially fund a _
US$25 million data compilation and drilling program and will then have the _
right to earn up to a 66.67% Interest In the Project by funding Pre-Feaslblllty :
and Bankable Feasibility Studies (which Oxlana estimate will cost :
, approximately US$35 million). ;
i
c 1.1:. h: t The Company has an efiective 100% interest In the JelaI-Mewet Projecti
E V 5" *' which consists of exploration rights covering 5,000 hectares In East
| I’DjS'IIS Kalimantan (In the form of a general survey stage 'KF" authorisation granted
to a domestic Indonesian partner of Kalimantan Gold in August 2006).
> Work by previous explorers. including by Indochina Goldﬁelds Ltd (now
Ivanhoe Mines Ltd) in the late 1990's, Identiﬁed an extensive system 0'
epithermal gold-silver vein prospects in the Jelai-Mewet Project area‘.
> Only a small portion of the strike length of the identiﬁed vein systems has i
been drill tested1 and the Company intends to conduct a 4,000 metre drilling 
programme during the ﬁrst half of 2007 to further test the ﬁeld's potential. 3
a __t . . . ..__,,. _ We- . - ._- -4
it v j._ r The Company also intends to leverage off the expertise and industry network 
 “ ' ‘ of the Company's Directors and management to pursue new project 
opportunities in Kalimantan. / i
i
t The Board and management of the Company are fully committed to the j
Company’s activities in Kalimantan being conducted in la socially and 
environmentally responsible manner. To this end, the Company has already i
established a community development inundation in central Kalinlantan. 
> The Company completed a canszos million private placement In August 5
2006, fully funding Its current proposed activities through to the end of 2007. i
3 The Company has a wrrent market capitalisation of approximately 29.7 
million based on the recent price of its Shares on the TsX Venture Exchange. i
There are signiﬁcant risks associated with minerals exploration and with Investment In securities in
general. Your attention is drawn to the Risk Factors set out in Part B of this Admission Document.
1. As extracted from the Summary Seoilon of SRK’S Competent Persons Report in Part C afmis Admission Document.
2. As extmcled from Seeder: 9.1.1 aiSRK's Competent Persons Report in Part C of this Admission Document.
Kali/nantan Gold Corporatlon Limited 3
AIM Admission Document


_ 7,, r , , , N r , I
— ‘
Admission Statistics and Expected Timetable ‘
i
Admission Statistics ‘
Number cf Shares in issue on Admission (undiluted) 57,925,784
Market capitalisation on Admission (undiluted, at the last sale price on TSXV of Cdn$0.35) £9] million
Number 01 Shares in issue on Admission (fully diluted basis) 76,557,801
Note: the fully diluted share capital ﬁgure abuvs is calculated on the basis that all of the Company's outstanding
Warrants and Options, as set nutin the table in Section 10 cfPart A of this Admission Document, are exemtsed.
Expected Timetable
Date of publication of Admission Document 7 December 2006
Dealing ofthe Shares to commence on AIM 13 December 2006
Exchange Rate
Exchange rata of US$1.00 = 05111 = 5053 = A$O.75 = Indonesian Rp9100 (being the approximate market
rates as 915 December 2006) have been used throughout this document with the exception of Parts C, D and E of
this Admission Document
Kalimenten Gold Corporation Umlled
AIM Admission Document


Corporate Directory

Directors Mr Murray Clapham (Non-Executive Chairman)
Mr Rahman Connelly (Chief Executive Ofﬁcer & Deputy Chain-nan)
Mrs Doris Meyer (Director and ChiefFinsnc/‘al Ofﬁcer)
Mr Peter Boltos (Non-Executive Director)

other Senior Executives Mansur Geiger ( Vice President, Exploration)
Bardulf Paul (Manager, Community Relations)

Secretary Geraldine Burnett

Registered Office & Thistle House

Principal Share Register 4 Burnaby Street, 5'" Floor ,
Hamilton HM12
Bermuda

Executive Offices Corporate Ofﬁce in Canada Exploration Oﬂice in Indonesia i
Unit 1, 15782 Marine Drive Jl Teuku Umar 32A 
White Rock, British Columbia Palangkaraya l
Canada V4B 1E6 Kaiimantan Tengah 73112
Ph: *1 604 536 2711 Indonesia

Website wwwrkallmantanoom

Nominated Adviser RFC Corporate Finance Limited and
Level 3, 0V1 Building Level 14
250 St Georges Terrace 1H1 Pitt Street
Perth WA 6000, Austmlla Sydney NSW 2000
Ph: +618 9480 2500 Australia

'Eroker Kenn. Bayley, Rogers 8. Co. Limited
Sophia House
76-80 City Road
London EC1Y2EQ ‘
United Kingdom .

Competent Person sRK Consulting
Level 6. 44 Market Street
Sydney Nsw 2000
Australia

Auditor and Reporting Ernst & Young LLP

Accountant Paciﬁc Centre, PO Box 10101
700 West Georgie Street
Vanoower. British Columbia
Canada WY 167

Solicitors to the Company In Canada In Indonesia (regarding nIIes)
Axium Law Corporation Hadiputranto. Hadinoio & Partners
3350 - Four Bentall Centre Tower ll. 2151 Floor Sudirman
1055 Dunsmuir Street Central Business District
Vancouver, British Columbia .3]. Jendrel Sudirman Kav 5263
Canada V7X 1L2 Jakarta 12190. lndonesia
In the UK In Bermuda
Charles Russell LLF' Mello Jones & Martin
8-10 New Fetter Lane Thistle House
London EC4A 1R3 4 Eumaby Street
United Kingdom Hamilton HM FX. Bermuda

share Registrars In the UK {Depository Interests) In Canada (Branch Register)
Computeiahare investor Services Pic Paciﬁc Corporate Trust Company
The Pavilions 2“ Floor
Bridgwater Road 510 Burrand Street
Bristol 3599 7NH. United Kingdom Vancouver. BC V60 339, Canada

Kalimanbn Gold Corporatltm Limited
AIM Admission Document


r'
'Defi n itions
The following definitions apply throughout this Admission Document. unless the context requires otherwise.
Admission the admission of the Shares to trading on AIM becoming effective in
accordance with the AIM Rules
Admission Document this admission document issued by the Company
AIM the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange
AIM Rules the rulw govemlng the operation at AIM as published by the London l
Stock Exchange from time to time l
Bankable Feasibility Stu dy a comprehensive study of the preferred option from a Pre—teasibility study 
including the technical and ﬁnancial aspeds of developing and operating i
a mine in respect of the relevant deposlt(s), of a standard customarily
required by international ﬁnancial institutions to make a decision relating
to the lending ertunds for the development
Bermuda Companies Act the Companies Act. 1981, of Bermuda (as amended) and related
Bermudian company regulations (as relevant)
Board or Directors the Board of Directors of the Company unless the context Indicates
otherwise
Broker v the Company's broker as deﬁned in the AIM Rules (being Keith Bayley
Rogers)
cans or cs Canadian currency
City Code the UK City Code on Takeovers and Mergers
Companies Actor the Act the Companlﬁ Act 1985 (England and Wales) (as amended)
Company or Kalimanten Gold Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited. a company incorporated in
Bermuda. and where the context permits. its subsidiaries
Competent Persons Report the competent persons report by SRK Consulﬂng contained in Part C of
this Admission Document
Cow or Contract of Work a Centred of Work. a form oi mineral title in Indonesia as described in the
Indonesian legal report by HHP in Part E of this Admission Document
CREST the computerised system for trading securities In unoertlﬂcated form In the
UK operated by CRESTCCI Limited
Depository Interests the uncertlﬂcated Interests representing Shares to he eledronically listed
for trading on AIM and issued through the Company's UK registrar
Director a director of the Company
GBP or t: or pence or p UK currency
Group the Company and its subsidiaries
HHP Hadiputianto. Hadlnoto & Partners. the Compean Indonesian legal
advisors. whose Indonesian legal report ls contained in Part E of this
Admission Document
lndokal Indokal Limited. a company Incorporated in Hong Kong and a Wholly
owned subsidiary of Kaiimantan Gold
JCM FT Jelal Cahaya Minerals, El company incorporated in lndonesla that
holds the Jeiai-Mewet KP
Jelal-Mewet KP the General Survey stage KP held by JCM and covering around 5,000
hectares in northeastern Kallmantan. as described in HHP’s indonesian
legal report In Part E of this Admission Document
JelaI-Mewet or Jelai-Mewet the project to explore for goldsilver mineralisation on the JelaI-Mewet KP
Project
Kalimenten Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


_ Keith asyley Rogers Keith, Bayiey, Rogers & Co. Limited, a company incorporated in the UK
ch Kalimantan Investment Corporation. a company Incorporated in the British
Wrgin Islands
KSK PT Kailmanten Surya Kencana, a company incorporated in Indonesia
KSK COW the COW in central Kelimantan held by KSK, the terms and conditions of
which are set out In HHP'S Indonesian legal report in Part E of this
Admission Document
KSK oow Project the project to explore tor copper-gold and related mineralisation on the
KSK COW
KP a Kuase Pertambangan. a type of mineral title in Indonesia as dacribed
In I-IHP’s Indonesian legal report in Part E ofthls Admission Document
London Stock Exchange or LSE London Stock Exchange plc
Nomad or Nominated Adviser nominated adviser as deﬁned in the AIM Rules (being RFC)
Option(s) options to subsm’be for Shares
Option Holderis) a holder of any Options {
Oxlsna Oxlana Exploration Pty Ltd. an Australian Incorporated company and
wholly owned subsidiary of Oxlana Limited. a company listed on the
Austmllan Stock Exchange
Dxiana Heads of Agreement the heads of agreement between the Company and Oxlana dated 5
October 2006 and described in Section 4 of Part A and Section 9 of Part F
of this Admission Document
PCK PT Pancatan Cahaya Kahayan‘ a company incorporated in Indonesia
PrrFeasibility Study a study on alternatives for the development of a mining opelatlon In I
respect oi a delined mineral deposit(s) that is in suiticlent detail to i
determine the technical and ﬁnancial viability of each alternative I
Project or Projects either or both of the KSK Cow Project or the JeIaI—Mewet Project, as the l
context demands l
ch RFC Corporate Finance Limited. a company incorporated In Australia ‘
I shareholderis) holder(s) of Shares
Shams) or Common Sherets) lully paid common shares of US$0.01 par value in the capital of the
Company
SRK Consulting or SRK Steffen Robertson and Kirsten (Australasia) Pty Ltd. trading as SRK
Consulting, a company Incorporated in Australia, whose Competent
Person's Report is contained in Part C of this Admission Document
TSX Venture Exchange or TSXV A stock exchange In Canada operated by Tsx Group inc.
USD or USS or S or cents United States currency
UK the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland I
Warrantis) warrants to subscribe ior Shares
Warrant Holder(s) a holder of any Wanans
YTS Yayasan Tambuhak Sinle. the Upper Kailayan community development
foundation established by KSK
Glossary of Selected Technical Terms
A detailed glossary of selected technical terms (as used throughout this document) ls provided in SRK's report in
Part C or this Admission Document.
Kali/Iranian Gold Corporation Limlied
AIM Admission Documenr 7


“'3'
’ Part A - lnforrnation on the Group
1 Introduction and History
Kalimantan Gold was effectively formed through a corporate reorganisation in 1996 and 1997 that, coupled with
various agreements entered into in 1997 and 1998, resulted in it becoming a Bermuda registered and Canadian
listed company with its main aaeet being a 75% interest in the KSK eow Project The KSK Cow Project is a
parphyry copper-gold exploration project In Central Kailmantan that has been the primary focus of the Company
since that time
In August 2006 (following preliminary Investigations since 2004), the Company acquired an effective 100% Interest
In the JelaI-Mewet Prolect, an epithermal gold-silver exploration project in East Kalirnantan. in October 2006, the
Company then entered into a joint venture heads of agreement with Oxlana In relation to the KSK Cow Project
which remains subject to deﬁnitive documentation and under which Oxiana can earn up to a “157% interest in the
KSK Cow Project by funding a signiﬁcant exploration and feasibility program,
 5&3; we   3 ’8‘" “was  F‘w’! {iti- r? 1 g
 ‘taro__  33 g  Jelai-MewetFroject 3%   - ,t
  “ff   s t «a: '  W  1
 ‘ t :5 ix rem  ‘N/ ; a  WWII/cigié »
 ~52 KSK Cow Project 44>" "60' K   ’?<:‘§«§:»-~V~i  :23“
  4“  ~. anion lik‘ - ‘s~;;‘"7’=‘  la" 
   . ~5Palash a   r a”  : 
V‘s», 7": _ z  r rm ‘»  ~~ / m’  La 12‘ “'5 s i?
ig—wﬁ“ w      r * ﬁg >
Figure 1: Map showing location ofihe KSK Cow and Jeiai—Mewet Pro/acts l'n Ksiimantan, Indonesia
2 Corporate Structure
Kallmantan Gold’s wrrent corporate structure. indicating the structures through which it holds its interests in the
KSK CoW and JeiaI-Mewet Projects. is set out in the diagram below
my. Kaliman‘ian Gold Corporation
Limited
7 at hi 5' . 'Eﬂ" steoe aewcoa Cr'tlz'attur‘
Kalimatttan investmeer C
Corporation (Km) ,2: 1m 
Douaécr’d'iicor'téralion :25» . ,i g
‘ L  e indokalLtd  mfgmhgmi
amate— Hnnn Kano corneas: aﬂoeoveinw 
': Whipoﬂelal- 3
MewatFmJeu 
100% u 7_ 75m mineral rights 
FT Paooamn Cahaya Kahayars 25* i=7 Kailmentan Surya Keitcarra PT Jelai Cahayo Minerals :
(PCK) f ‘ (KSK? ' " (JCMI ;‘ e
Fmﬂ'eAi*r:€\1esiaL'xtmallarl e Paiaieslmzcileala Common-i Fmaie»1rldlonteat2Cumming“ E
r FurtdedtryKSK/‘f 1m inw-
:Yayasan ramouh‘olosinta (tn-s) KsK com-acid Work ‘ ﬁgqu mmgg; l 
EporarkahayanCcnéﬁmiigpeueiuwneni («sitcoweroioco  s: e A :v  I
 v Writ“; 53GeneratayztrLi34‘ikmi ewe Segrerseww engineer
Figure 2: Current corporate structure diagmm for the Group
Ka/fmanban Gold Corporeﬁan Limited
AIM Admission Document


The ownership structure ot the KSK Cow Project may potentially change pursuant to the Oxiana Heads of
Agreement or pursuant to community development activities. details of which are set out in Sections 4 and 6 at
this Part A respectively.
It should also be noted that under the Omaha Heads of Agreement (which is subject to deﬁnitive documentation).
In order to help tacilitate the proposed earn—in hy Oxiana into the Project. the Company is to use its reasonable
commercial endeavours to negotiate with KiC a restructuring oi the ownership of the KSK COW Project that would
proletany Involve KGC becoming the sole shareholder of F'CK through lndokal. Any such restnlcture
arrangements will be subject to related party disclosure rules both In respect of NM and the TSXV.

. i
3 Overview of lndonesta and Kaltmantan
Indonesia Is an ardiipelago of more than 17,000 islands straddling the equator in south east Asia. Kaiimantan is
the Indonesian part of the island of Borneo (see Figure 1). which is centrally located within the archipelago.
Kalimantan comprises approximately two-thirds of the island, with an area of about 540.00ka2. The other part oi
Borneo, being on the north coast. is divided into the Sultanate 0' Brunei and the Malaysian states of Sabah and
Sarawak,

Indonesia Is a developing Asian nation with an estimated population of 245 million people. who are predominantly

musllm. and estimated GDFI Per capita 0t US$3.600. Indonesia Is a republic with a democratically elected

President. currently $usllo Bambang Yudhoyono (since October 2004). who is both chief of state and head of

government. The oountry is divided Into 30 provinces and 440 districts or regencies. which following the
decentralisation in 2001. have become the key administrative units responsible for providing most government
services,

Indonesia has a signiﬁcant minerals Industry, with numerous foreign and domestic companies conducting active

mining operations and exploration projects. Notable existing operations Include Freeport-McMoRan Copper 8r

Gold Inc‘s Grasberg copper—gold operation, Newmont Mining Corporation's Batu Hljau copper-gold operation. PT

lnoo‘s nickel operations. the tin mining operations in Sumatm and substantial coal mining operations in Sumatm

and Kallmantan. Also In Kalimantan are the Mt Muro gold operation of Straits Resources Ltd. the Cempaka
alluvial diamond operation of EDI Mining Corporation and Rio Tinto's Kelian gold operation. which is currently In
closure mode,

As described in Section 6.1 and the Summary Section of the Competent Persons Report by SRK In Part C of this
Admission Document, both the KSK COW and Jetal-Mewet Projects are located In the 'Kalimantan Arc". a broad
magmatic arc that curves from the west coast. through the middle and then to the north east coast of Kallmantan
which also hosts the Mt Muro and Kelian deposits The Kalimantan Arc is a geologically complex area where the
formation of a plate suture (join) and associated deep heat source resulted in volcanic adivity and the
emplacement of magmatic (melted) rock into the middle and upper crust at the suture.

A summary of the mining laws of Indonesia are set out in the lndonaian legal report by HHP that Is contained in

Part E oi this Admission Document

4 The KSK Cow Project

A summary of the KSK Cow Project Is provided below. This summary should be read in conjunction with the

more comprehens'we details on the Project’s technical aspects and legal tenure as set out In SRK's Competent

Person's Report in Part C and HHP's Indonesian legal report in Part E of this Admission Dowment respectively,

Introduction and Ownership Strumme

The KSK CoW is a 5‘" generation Contract of Work between KSK and the Government of Indonesia providing

exploration and potential mlnlng rights over a 941km2 area In Central Kalimantan. As set out in Figure 2. the

Company has a 75% interest in the Project by virtue of the 75% shareholding in KSK that is held by the

Company's 100% owned subsidiary. lndokal. The other 25% of KSK is held by PCK, a subsidiary of KIC,

Subject to the recent Oxiana Heads of Agreement described below, the Company has been funding all activities

on the KSK Cow Project pursuant to a joint venture agreement between lndokal, KSK and FCK whereby:

I 10% of the shares held by F'CK In KSK (ie 2.5% of the KSK Issued shares) are funded on a tree-carried
basis by lndokal up until commencement of production. and any such advances made by lndokal pursuant
to such free carry shall not be repayable to lndokal; and

I the remaining 90% of the shares held by PCK In KSK (is currently 22.5% of the KSK issued shares) are
funded by lndokal on an interest free basis up until the commencement of production. but will be subject to
an interest rate of 2% above LIBOR (the London Interbank Offer Rate) from the commencement of

—————___——

Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admlssl'on Document


production until the outstanding balance is repaid. Such loans are to be repaid to lndokal out of dividends
which would otherwise be payable by KSK to PCK.
it should also be noted. that under this joint Vertwre agreement. F'CK. Indokal and KSK agreed that at their
discretion they will transfer in proportion to their respective holdings at the time of transfer 1% of the issued shares
of KSK to a community development foundation (being YTS) at zero value at the commencement of commena’al ‘
production. and a further 1% at par value (being Rp 2.415 per share) ten years after commencement of .
commercial production.
Contract of Work (Title) Status
The KSK Cow was initially entered into In April 1997 and it is currently within what is designated as the
"Exploration" period. KSK applied for a second mandatory relinquishment to the KSK 00W area on 15 May 2006.
reducing the size ofthe KSK CoW from 121,620 hectares to 94.119 hectares. The Minister of Energy and Mineral
Resources of lndonesla (“MEMR”) has not yet approved this relinquishment but as it is mandatory the Directors
consider that it is certain. The Exploration period for 60.949 hectares of the KSK COW ("Block E‘). is currently due
to expire on 27 April 2007 subject to any extension or suspension of the period as may be agreed to by.the
MEMR. Two 12 month extensions are possible. The other 33.170 hectara of the KSK COW ('Block A') Is in a
state 01 suspension (that was to expire on 27 August 2006) at the beginning of a first such agreed extension of the
Exploration period. KSK has submitted a request to extend this suspension period from 27 August 2006 and for
this suspension to apply to the entire Cow (ie both Blocks A and E). but the MEMR has not as at the date or this
report provided a response.
At any time that KSK determines that the results of exploration In respect or a particular part of the CoW area has
shown a deposit oi an apparent commercial quantity and quality. KSK may proceed Into a 12 month “Feasibility
study“ period in respect of that area (subjed to a possible 12 month extension). This is then followed by a 36
month “Construction” period and 30 year 'Operating" period. All such time periods are also subject to
discretionary extensions from the MEMR.
Part of the KSK sow tails within what are designated as “Protected Forest" areas in which open cut mining is
ordinarily not allowed. Whilst certain Indonesian legislation suggests that because the KSK Cow was granted
beiore the Protected Forest legislation was enacted then KSK will be able to conduct open cut mining operations
in accordance with its Cow within these areas. this remains an area of legal uncertainty and KSK will likely require
a Praldential Decree (along the lines of ones already given to some other companies) speciﬁcally authorising any
such open cut mining.
Further details on the terms and conditions of the KSK COW. the KSK joint venture agreement. the Proter
Forest restrictions and other relevant Indonesian legal matters are contained In HHP’s Indonesian legal report in
Part E at this Admission Document as well as in the risks section in Part B of this Admission Document.
Exploration History and Geology
A large amount of exploration work over many years by KSK and its predecessors has identiﬁed a series of
porphyry intrusive and other inthsive-related copper—gold (with sllver & rnoiybdenum) prospects within the KSK
CoW area. The most advanced prospect areas are at Baroi, Beruang and Mansur. where the mineralisation
shows similarities with that which occurs in similar arc-related settings in lndonesia and the south—west Paciﬁc
which are known to host economically signiﬁcant copper deposits.
In total. historical exploration on the KSK Cow to date has Included over 20.000 metra of drilling. over 190 line
kilometres of induced polarisation and magnetic surveys. over 9,000 samples and over 8,000 line kilometres of
asromagnetlc surveys. The better drill intersections including 83m @ 2.6% copper. 1.9% zinc. 61gms Ag/t end
0.229ms Aim (drilled down dip in a vein at the Barol Far East Zone prospect) and 167m @ 0.59% copper (in a
zone of narrow vein and disseminated mineralisation at the Beruang Kanan prospect and therefore also not
necessarily the true width of the structure being tested).
Systematic drilling is now required to gain a better stmdural understanding of the more advanced prospects and
better test their resource potential.
The above details are extracted trom the KSK Cow Project Summary section and the drilling results section
(being section 9.1.1) in the Competent Persons Report prepared by SRK that Is contained in Part C of this
Admission Document. Funher details on the exploration results and technical aspects of the KSK Cow Project
are contained In the SRK report.
The Oxiana Heads of Agreement
The Company entered into a heads of agreement with Oxiana in October 2006 to form an exploration joint venture
for the KSK Cow Project. Oxiana is 5 resources company listed on the Australian Stock Exchange and the
Toronto Stock Exchange with a current market capitalisation of approximately A343 billion. Oxiana owns and
H
10 Kalinlanten Gold Corporation Limlted
AIM Admission Document


operates the Sepcn copper and gold mining operations in Laos. the Golden Grove copper-zlnc-gold mining

operation in Western Australia and several other exploration and development projects in south east Asia and
Australia. Pursuant to the Oxiana Heads of Agreement, which remains’subject to deﬁnltlve documentation:
I In the "Initial Period" — Oxlana is obligated to sole fund a US$25 million exploration program conslsﬂng of a
full data compilation, review, reprocessing and assessment followed by a drilling program to test the
prioritised targets. The drill program is expected to Include drilling 12 deep holes at the Baroi, Beruang and
Mansur prospects. Oxlana will endeavour to complete the program within 12 months. but will have a
maximum of 18 months to do so. If Oxiana decided to withdraw at the end of the Initial Period, It Will have
earned no Interest in the KSK Cow Project. ‘
I After the Initial Period, Oxlana can elect to continue Into a "Sole Funding Perlod“. Ii so, it will sole fund ,
expenditure to earn up to a total Interest of 66.57% in the Project. with the following milatones: I
> 40% equity at the completion or a PreFeaeibility Study, which Oxiana will use reasonable endeavours 
to complete within 30 months from commencement of the joint Venture but for which it will have a
maximum of 42 months to do so.

> 66.67% equity at the completion of a Benkable Feaslbllity Study. Wriicl'l It will use reasonable
endeavours to complete Within 48 months of commencement oi the jolnt venture. but for which It will
have a maximum of 60 months to do so.

I Oxlana may withdmw at any time during the Sole Funding Period, and Kalimantan Gold will have an option
to acquire the interest of Oxlana at the time of withdrawal.

I After completion of the Bankable Feasibility Study. both parties will contribute to future expenditures In
accordance with their percentage interests (or otherwise have their interest diluted). and If the Company
requests, Oxiana will use he best endeavours to arrange the Company’s share of project ﬁnancing. If
possible. such ﬁnancing will be on a non-recourse basis. provided that Oxlana will not provide any security to
support such ﬁnancing

I As dlscussed in Section 2 of thls Part A above, to help facilitate the proposed eam~ln oi Oiciaria into the
Project, the Company and Oxiana will seek to negotiate with KIC a restructure of the current ownership
structure MPCK and KSK.

The formal documentation is currently being drafted and the Company expects this to be agreed and signed

before the end of 2006,

Further details on the Oxiana Heads of Agreement are set out in Section 9 ol Part F of this Admission Document

5 The JeIaI-Mewet Project

A summary of the Jelai-Mewet Project is provided below. This summary should be read In conjunction with the

more comprehensive details on the Project’s technical aspects and legal tenure as set out in SRK's Competent

Person’s Report in Part C and HHP's Indonesian legal report In Part E of this Admission Document respectively.

Ownership Structure and Title

The Company has an eﬁectlve 100% Interest in the Jelal-Mewet Project. which consists of exploration rights

covering 5.000 heaares In the provinoe of East Kalimantan. As set out In Figure 2 eartier, these rights are held in

the form of a "General Survey' stage ‘KP' authorisation gmnted to JCM, a domestic indonesian company with
whom the Company has entered into cooperation agreements which enemively give the Company full mining
rights to the Project area.

The Jelai-Mewet General Survey stage KP was lormally granted to JCM 28 August 2006 based on a Decree of

the Eupati of the Regency of Bulungan in the province of East Kalimantan. The KP is valid until 25 August 2007,

but may be extended for a further year at the discretion of the Bupatl. Permissible General Survey stage activities

consist of preliminary investigations and exploration, Including shallow drilling and surface sampling, carried out
along the broad features of an area tor Indications of mineralization.

Prior to expiry, JCM can apply for an Exploration KP, vitriich is granted for a maximum of 3 years. and Is capable of

being extended twice, each for a period of one year. An Exploitation KP can subsequently be applied for and Is

granted for up to 30 years, and may be extended for further 10-year terms. The Company (through JCM) Intends
to apply for an Exploration KP within the next 6 months.

Further details on the terms and conditions of the Jelei~Mewet KP and Cooperation Arrangements with JCM are

contained In i-IHP's Indonesian legal report in Part E of thls Admission Document.

M

Kallmalitan Gold Carpoleﬁon Limited

AIM Admission Document


Geology and Exploration History
The Jelai-Mewet Project Is located at the norttl-eastem end of the Kalimantan Arc In a regional rift basin setﬂng
that contains a regionally extensive system of epithermal vein hosted goldsiiver and basement sediment-hosted
copper deposits.
The signiﬁcant exploration undertaken to date has been done by Bureau de Recherches Geologiques et Minieres
from 1979 to 1982 and PT Masoan Mas Mlnerindo in joint venture with Indochina Gold Fields of Canada
(“Indochina' — now Ivanhoe Mines Ltd) from 1994 to 2000. This work included regional surveys which resulted in
identiﬁcation of a number oi target areas within the JeIaI-Mewet KP area of which Jelai-Mewet In particular was
trenched and drill tested by Indochina.

High gold grades were returned from quartz veins drilled by Indochina with the geology consistent with low-
sulphidatlon epitherrnal gold-silver mineralization Although no mineral resource has been deﬁned at Jelei-Mewet.
the exploration completed established the ﬁeld as one that has strong exploration potential. However. further
work is required to identify the areas where the veins are extensive enough to form a recoverable deposit. SRK
considers that this will be where the veinlng is related to a major fault system.

The above details are extracted from the JeIaI—Mewet Project Summary section In the Competent Persons Report
prepared by SRK which is contained In Part C of this Admission Document Further details on the exploration
results and technical aspects of the Jelai-Mewet Project are contained in the SRK report.

Proposed Work Program

Only a small portion of the strike length of the identiﬁed vein systems has been drill tested and the Company
Intends to conduct a 4,000 metre drilling programme, together with further data compilation and review. trendilng,
sampling and mapping. during the ﬁrst half of 2007 to further test the ﬁeld's potential. The proposed drilling
programme is for 32 Inclined holes to around 150m depth In the portions of the identiﬁed vein systems at Jelei-
Mewet that are judged to have the most lavourable geometry and structural setting for higher grade and volume
mineralisation The Directors expect that the results from this programme would enable a more detailed drlll
programme to be planned that would lead toward establishing a resource.

6 Community Development Activities

The Board and management of the Company are fully committed to the Company’s activities In Kalimantan being
conducted In a socially and environmentally responsible manner. and to ensuring It has full and honest
communication with the other stakeholders In the region.

Pursuant to this commitment, the Company established a central Kallmantan community development foundation.
Yawsan Tambuhak Sinta (“YTS') in 1997. YTS is substantially funded by KSK with minor funding received from
aid agencies. both local and international. The mission of YTS is to strengthen governance conditions to the KSK
Cow exploration area and In Central Kallmantan province in general. in order to ensure good conditions tor the
smooth development of a major mine

YTS's purposes include:

I promoting the maintenance. education and welfare oi the people of the region;

I promoting the ecological protection oi the region: and

I promoting the establishment and development of sustainable business in the region.

The activities of YTS are designed to provide a deeper level of understanding of the social. cultural. economic and
ecological dynamics in each community and to strengthen the capacity of villagers and village Institutions to
appropriately adjust and beneﬁt from the Impact that future mining development might have on the social.
economic and cultural integrity oi the community. Speciﬁc activities being undertaken by YTS include:

I facilitating participatory village planning that results in an annual 'Vlllage Development Plan":

I linking the Village Development Plan Into the government annual planning mechanism;

I the provision of a 'Wlage Development Fund" for supporting livelihood activities in the Village Development

Plan;
I provision of technical expenise to support improvement of livelihood activities in the villages;
I linking villages to outside resources to support other elements In the Village Development Plan. such as
hydraulic rams to provide clean water In the villages;
_____.__.__._—_J-
Kalimantan Gold Corpomn'on Limited
AIM Admission Document


- together with the United Nations Conference en Trade and Development (UNCTAD), promoting and
facilitating a cross-sectoral. mum-stakeholder and integrated approach to planning and implementing
development In the province, in a partnership of government, business, communities and donors:

I Kallmantan Kids Club which which helps provide continuing education to high school and university to the
children of poor local Dayak villagers To date. more than 50 young people have received scholarships In the
form of subsidized Sdrrool fees. supplies, and living expenses to continue their education to higherlavels;

I participalion in the World Vlﬁldliie Fund's 'Heart 0' Bomeo' conservation lnitiat'we and collaboration with The
Nature Conservancy in a scoping study of high conservation value forestry' in our COW; and

I collaboration with the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) on implementing the
Global Mercury Project, which is aimed at reducing unsafe mercury handling practices in small scale gold
mining worldwide.

7 Prospects, Future Strategy and Objectives

The primary objective of Kallmantan Gold is to create value tor its shareholders through the exploration and

ultimately the responsible development of Its mineral projects. The Company aims to achieve this goal through:

I tonnallslng the joint venture arrangement with Oxiana tor advancing exploration of the KSK CoW Project by I
systematically drill testing the priority targets with the aim of delineating a commercially mlnable resource: l

I completing drilling and other exploration work at the Jelai-Mewet Project with the aim of delineating an initial ‘
raource as a precursor to feasibility studies, and also conducting preliminary exploration to assess other
prospects within the broader Jeiai—Mewet KP area:

I the considered selection of new project opportunities in Kalimantan, leveraging off the expertise and
established industry network of the Company‘s Directors and management: and

I continuing its community development Initiatives in Kallmantan.

8 Reasons for the AIM Listing

The Directors consider that the Admission to AIM M'll provide the means to broaden the Company's investor base.

provide additional liquidity for trading shares In the Company and enhance the proﬁle and status of the Company

In international capital markets. The Directors believe this will Improve the Group's ability to attract funding to

advance the exploration and development of Its existing projects and pursue other mineral project opportunities.

9 Use of Funds

A summary oi the proposed application of the Company’s cash assets is set out in the table below‘ The

expenditure breakdown is based on the current intentions and estimata of the Company and is subject to

reassessment.

 “*4 5-  ' IEYEEEEEJ  ” 3  7i“:  4“: “  5:

Funding Sources
Approximate cash balance as at 31 October 2006 22
Total Funds Available 2.2
Use of Funds
Jelal-Mewet Project exploration program 08
Funding for YTS community development activities 0.2
Residual KSK and other Indonesian expenditure 0.2
Corporate and administration costs until 31 December 2007 0.6
AiM Admission costs 03
unallocated working capital 0.1
Total Funds Used 2.2
____—_—_——_——.——
Ka/lrnarrlan Gold Corporation Limited
AIMAdmission Document


Notes in relation to the above torecast expenditures are as tollows:

I it is assumed that pursuant to the Oxiana Heads of agreement, Oxlana will sole fund the KSK Cow
exploration program over the next 12 to 13 months and also make a contribution of US$20.000 per month to
the overheads of KSK during this period.

I The Company will continue to provide funding to YTS for community development activities during the 12 to
13 month period of Oxlana's initial exploration program.

I The proposed 4.000m drilling program at Jelai-Mewet Project is conducted and the raults reviewed before
turther signiﬁcant drilling and other exploiatlon is undertaken. Should the results warrant further drilling, the
Company may seek to raise further funding to cover the cost of any such program.

I Corporate and administration costs include an allowance for additional ongoing costs related to Admission,

I It is assumed that no Options or Wanants in the Company are exercised before the end oi 2007.

10 Summary Capital Structure

On Admission. Kallmantan Gold’s capital structure ls expected to be as follows:

     

Common shares

Existing Shares in issue - - , 57325153.,
Total Shares in issue toliowlng Admission - - d friggyjji A
Unlisted Warrants

Warrants issued as part ofAugust 2006 private CdnSOiSO 16 August 2008 13.270.890
placement

Broker Warrants Issued as part of August 2006 Cdn$0.23 16 August 2003 398.127
private placement

Warrants to be granted to RFC on Admission Cdn$027 13 December 2003 A“ jﬂﬁr
Total Warrants in issue following Admission H jjﬂyﬂL _
Unlisted Options

Employee & Director Options US$0.11 21 August 2007 201.000
Employee & Director Options Cdn$0.33 28 November 2008 415.000
Employee 8r Director Options Cdn$0.43 28 November 2008 65.000
Employee & Director Options Cdn$055 29 March 2009 1.000.000
Employee & Director Options Cdn$0.20 15 September 2009 1.070.000
Employee & Director Options Cdn$0.25 1 June 2011 27.000
Employee & Director Options Cdn$020 0 August 2011 
Total Options In Issue following Admission 
Fully diluted share capital 76,557.001

A turther 425.000 Shares may potentially be Issued immediately after Admission to RFC as part payment in lieu of

cash for its services as Nomad. However, this is at the discretion oi the Company.

KIC also holds a contingent option to acquire 1 million Shares at US$130 per share exercisable for two years

after the date that 1 million ounces of proven and probable gold reserves have been delineated on the KSK COW,

Each Option and each Warrant entitles the holder to subscribe for one Share. It all of the Options and Warrants
expected to be in issue at the date at Admission were exercised this would result in the issue of an additional
18.632.017 Shares with total exercise proceeds received of approximately Cdn$5.5 mllllon (US$540 million).
Further information about the terms. conditions. rights and liabilities attaching to the Shares. Warrants and Options
is provided in Part F of this Admission Dowment.

Shareholders orKaIlmanmn Gold

To the best ofthe knowiedge of the Directors. Shareholders that will have an Interest. directly or indirectly, jointly
or severally. in 3% or more of the share capital of Kalimantan Gold or who may exercise oontrol over the Company

_—_—_______.__.—.——

1‘ Kalimeriran Gold Corpamﬁcn Limited
AlMAdmIsslon Document


as at 5 December 2006 (being the last practicable date before the Issue of this Admission Document) and also
following Admission, are as follows: ,
x '     T “"9”  I  ‘Eeﬁﬁﬁgﬁet  *3 .Fl‘l'VlD!l.§i‘§§E§i5 f E'iltuiéz:
  ' Inn-o;  [13,”, (age  , ~  :;:
 é    ' Shares'ii “7 '  law-Qt!me Sliaiéiiiéiﬁtt t 'E‘l'lrl; 7 
Kalimantan Investment n
corpomﬁon (KIC) 11,433.759 19.8%: - 11,435,759 15.0%
Murray Ctapham‘ 3,109.395 5.4% 470.000 3,579,595 4.7%
Resources Investment Trust F'lc 3,000,000 52% 3,000,000 6,000,000 7.8%
RAE Capital plc 2.500.000 43% 2,500,000 5,000,000 6.5%
Rahmml Connelly' 2,363,790 4.1% 635,000 3,003,790 3.9%
" in addition. Murray Clapham and Rahman Conneily are both directors of KIC and shareholders In KIC. holding
approximately 2.5% and 4.7% of Kids issued caphal respectively. Further details on KIC are contained in Section
‘ s(a)(i) of Part F of this Admission Document.
11 Financial Information
Key ﬁnancial information of Kalimantan Gold is provided in Part D of this Admission Document. which contains
three yearﬂnancial Information ending 31 December 2005 as well as Ernst & Young LLF‘s aocountant's report on
it and the Company’s 30 June 2006 unaudited interim ﬁnancial statements. ltshould be noted that, as the Group
does not currently conduct any production activities. It duﬁ not currently generate any operating revenue
i
The Company had a cash balanoe of approximately Cdn$2.4 million at 31 October 2006, with a private placement l
completed in August 2006 of 13.270.890 Shares at Cdn$0.20 each. each with an attached Cdn$0.30 Warrant ,
expiring 16 August 2000, that raised gross proceeds of Cdn$2.65 million. 
i
12 Dividend Policy l
The Directors antia'pate that in the two year period following Admission the Company's activities and expenditure
will be focussed on the evaluation. exploration and possible development of its mineral properties. Accordingly,
the Company does not expect to derive any eamlngs or declare any dividends during that period. Thereafter it is
the Director's intention to pay dividends if and when proﬁt, available cash ﬂow and capital requirements allow.
13 Directors and Senior Management
Kalimantan Gold’s Board of Directors is comprised of two non-executive Directors and two executive Directors,
who between them have a mix of legal, technical. ﬁnancial. commercial and Indonesian expertise that it considers
is appropriate for the current business activities of the Company.
Brief biographies for the Directors are set out below.
MrMurray Hallen clapham (aged 67) LLB
Director, Non-Executive Chairman
A lawyer who was a resident of lndonesia since the early 1960's and is now a resident of Singapore, Murray
Ciapham has represented many intemationai companies in Indonesia and was one of the driving forces behind
establishlng modern mineral exploration in lndonesia. Mr Clapham has been a Director of the Company since 3
May 1996 and also works as a consultant to the Airtrust Group of Companies and is a director of KIC, a signiﬁcant
shareholder of Kalimantan Gold.
Mr Rahman Connelly (aged 56)
Executive Director, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and Deputy Chairman
Rahmen Conneily was the founding director of Connolly Temple, a major Austmllan pension fund management
company Wnich was sold to Royal Sun Alliance in 1597. Mr Conneily also has a range of other business interests
in the ﬁnancial sector. Mr Connolly has been a Director of the Company sinoe 16 October 2000, is also Chairman
of KIC and is a resident of Australia
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited 1
AIM Admission Document 5


Mrs Doris Aileen Meyer (aged 54) C.GA.
Director and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer
Doris Meyer has been involved with the Company since 1997 Initially as Corporate Secretary, then Chief Financial
Ofﬁcer. becoming a director on 7 June 2000. Mrs Meyer. who has extensive experience In the mining industry, is a
Member of the Msociations of the Certiﬁed General Accountants of British Columbia and Canada. Mrs Meyer is
the President and owner at Golden Oak Corporate Services Ltd. a private company that provides corporate
administrative services to public mining companies. Mrs Meyer is a resident of Canada.
Mr Pour Bojtos (aged 57) as; PEng. CEng 
Non-Executive Dinmr ‘
Peter Bojtos Is a professional engineer with over 34 years of international experience in the mining industry. He
has an extensive background in corporate management as well as In many facets of the Industry in senior
technical and management roles - from exploration through feasibility to mine constniction, operation and
decommissioning. For the past 10 years Mr Bolios has been an Independent director of several mining and
exploration companies Including. Vlﬁlliam Resources Inc., Birim Goldﬁelds lnD., Queenstake Resources Ltd,
Vaaldiam Resources Ltd, Falkland Gold and Minerals Ltd and Desert Sun Mining Corporation. Mr Bojtos has
been a Dlredor of the Company since 11 June 2002 and Is a resident of the USA.
Senior Management
Mr Mansur Geiger
Vice President, Exploration
Mansur Geiger has over 30 years mineral exploration experience in Australia and Indonesia. Mr Geiger is ﬂuent in
the Indonesian language and customs. He has worked on the KSK CoW Project from its inception in 1982 and it
is reasonable to say that he has committed his career to seeing Kallmantan Gold succeed In making a major
mineral discovery. Mr Geiger Is a resident of lndonesia.
Mr Bardolf Paul
Community Relations Manager
Bardolt Paul Is a rural and regional development specialist with around 20 years experience In the Asia region.
primarily in community development roles related to the natural resources sectort in Kalimantan. Eardolf heads
YTS and Is working with local communities close to the KSK cuw. with local and regional government in the
province, and with donors and other development agencies. Bardolt was a member of the Extractive Industries
Review Secretariat. commissioned by the World Bank’s Intematlonal Finance Corporation to examine the
perfonnanoe 01 the Worid Bank in the oil. gas and mining sectors.
The Company. together with in subsidiaries, had a total of 21 permanent and 102 contract employees as at
31 December 2005. a total oi 19 permanent and B4 contract employees as at 31 Deoember2004 and a total of 19
permanent and 72 contract employees as at 31 December 2003. YTS. the community development foundation
established by KSK. had a further 8. 5 and 7 employees In these years respectively. There have been no material
changes in the number of employees since 31 December 2005. The majority of the Company's employees are
based in Kalimantan.
14 Lock-in Arrangements
Pursuant to the AIM Rules. all at the Directors and their related partla. whose interests in Shares and Options are
detailed In Section B of Part F of this Admission Document. and KIC. whose interest In Shares is set out in Section
10 of this Part A of the Admission Document. have provided written undertakings under which they have
undertaken not to dispose of any Shares or Options in the Company that they or their related parties own for a
period at 12 months from Admission, The Company has no other related parties or "applicable employees". as
deﬁned in the AIM Rules. who would be required to be subiect to any lock in arrangements pursuant to the AIM
Rules.
15 Corporate Governance
The Directors acknowledge the importance of the guidelines set out in the revised Combined Code on Corporate
Governance published in June 2006 (“Combined Oode')t They thereiore intend to comply with the Combined
Code so tar as Is appropriate having regard to Kalimantan Gold's size and nature as a junlor exploration company.
The Company complies with the corporate govemanoe rules of the TSX Venture Exchange and the Canadian
(provincial) Securities Commissions as well as with Bermuda's corporate governance regime. which has a much
narrower scope.
—___—.__—_.—.____.——_
Kallmentan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


Details on the corporate governance practices or Kaiimantan Gold are set out In Section 12 of Part F of this
Admission Document,

15 Admission, Settlement (CREST) and Dealings

The Company will make an application for the admission of all of the Shares to trading on AIM. Trading In the
Shares on AIM is expected to commence on or around 12 December 2006. The Shares will continue to trade on
the TSX Venture Exchange.

To be traded on AIM. securities must be able to be transferred and settled through the ‘CREST' system. a UK
computerised paperless share transfer and settlement system. which allows securitiesto be held and transferred in
electronic form rather than In paper form. Foreign securities. such as the Shares. cannot be transiened and
settled through CREST. To enable Investors to settle trades in the Shares through CREST. the Company has
appointed Computershare Investor Services plc ('Computershare“) as its “Depository to hold the Shares on trust
(pursuant to a depository deed poll) and issue demateriallzed “Depository Interests" representing the Shares. The
deed poll sets out the procedures for ensuring that the Depository Interest holders have the same shareholder
rights as if they held the underlying Shares. Including voting at meetings and receiving dividends. with one
Depository interest equivalent to one Share.

The Depository Interests Will be independent UK securities and they will be held on a register maintained by the
Depository The Depository Interests will have the same security code as the underlying Shares which they
represent and will not require a separate admission to AIM. Shareholders who currently hold their Shares on the
Company‘s Canadian or Bermudian registers and wish to trade their Shares on AIM and settle such trades
through CREST can transfer their Shares to the Depository who will then Issue Depository Interests to you.
Shareholders who rece'n/e Depository interests will not hold a share certiﬁcate evidencing their interest In the
underlying Shares.

Participation in CREST is voluntary and Shareholders who wish to hold Shares in certiﬁcated form may do so,
They will not. however. then be able to settle their Shares through CREST and will have their holding recorded on
the Company’s Canadian or Bermudian share registers, Application has been made for the Depository Interests.
representing Shares. to be admitted to CREST with efiect from Admission

For more information ccnceming CREST and the procedure tor transierring shareholdings between the
Companys various registers. Shareholders should contact their brokers. I

It Is emphasised that. although the Shares will trade on AIM. the Company will not be subject to takeover
regulation in the UK, Being 3 Bermuda Incorporated company. Kallmantan Gold is subject to the provisions of the
Bermuda Companies Act. and as a "reporting issuef‘ in several Canadian province, will be subject to the
takeover provisions of the securities legislation In those provinces. further details otwhioh are provided in Sections
2 and 3 of Part F of this Admission Document.

Kalimannan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


' Part B - Risk Factors '
—————-—-——— l
Any Investment In Shares or other securities in the Company should be considered speculative because of the l
nature of the business activities of the Group and the stage of development of the properties in which it has an ‘
Interest. Many of the risk factors associated with the Group's businas and Its Involvement in the exploration and ‘
minerals industry in Indonesia are largely beyond the control of the Company and its Directors.

The following risks have the potential to materially adversely affect the Group’s business, ﬁnancial condition.
resutts of operations and/or Share price. In such case. an investor may lose all or part of his or her investment.
Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to the Directors may also have an adverse effect on the
Group's business. Neither the Company nor the Directors provide any assuranm or guarantees of future
proﬁtability, distributions. payment of dividends. return of capital or performance of the Company or its Shares.
Prospective Investors should carefully consider the risks described below. together with all other information
contained in this Admission Document or subsequentiy released to the market. and their own personal Investment
objectives and ﬁnancial circumstances before deciding whether to Invest in Shares or other securities in
Kelimantan Gold. If in any doubt. investors should consult with an independent ﬁnancial adviser who specialises
In advising on the acquisition of shares and other securities.
a) Risks Speciﬁc to Kalimantan Gold
- The Group has exploration stage mineral Project interesm only
The mineral Projects in which the Company has an interest. namely the KSK COW and the Jelal-Mewet Projects,
are both at the explomtion stage and are without a known body of commercial ore. No assurances can be given
that these Projects will achieve commercial viability through successful exploration. development and production.
Whilst some individually attmctlve drill Intersection assay results have been received for both the KSK COW and
the Jelal-Mewet Projects. considerable further exploration work Is required at both Projects to better understand
and test the extent of mineralisation. As SRK reports (reference: the Summary and Section 14 oithe SRK CPR),
the character of porphyry systems. as being targeted at the KSK CoW Project. and low sulphidatz'on epitherrnal
systems. as evident at the Jelai-Mewet Project. can often result in high grade vein intersections without sufﬁcient
extent for a commercially exploitable resource.
Furthermore. due to their relatively remote location and the lack of atabilshed roadways, access to the Group‘s
Projects in Kalimantan. Indonesia. in particular the KSK COW Project in Central Kelimantan. for drilling and other
exploration work. and ultimately project development and mining. is relatively difﬁcult and expensive. As a result.
signiﬁcant exploration budgets are required and It Is likely that relatively large and/or high grade deposits would be
required to provide a resource that could be economically mined.
. No earnings or dividend history
The Company has no earnings or dividend record. As It intends to continue to employ available funds for the
exploration of its Projects. It does not expect to generate earnings or pay dividends until such time as it can
delineate commercial resources and bring the projects Into production. or otherwise realise value from them.
- The Company will liker require further equity funding
The Company anticipates it will be required to raise additional equity capital to finance its future activities.
Inctudlng further exploration on the Jeiai—Mewet Project and potential future development of both Projects into
commercial mining operations. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise that ﬁnance on
acceptable terms or In a timely manner. Furthermore. any such future funding arrangements may result in
substantial dilution to the interests of existing shareholders in the Projects.
- Indonesia experiences economic. social and political volatility
The Group's mineral Project Interests are located in Indonesia. in developing nation with a large number of ethnic
and Indigenous groups. whose ﬁscal and monetary controls. laws. policies and regulatory processes in many
areas are less established than in developed nations, and where there is a wide range of policies. Ideologies and
attitudes between the numerous different political parties and candidates. Since the downfall of President
Suharto in 1998. there have been four Presidents and two changes of parliament The current President. Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono. has been in power since October 2004. and has sought to establish policies which reduce
corruptlve practices and enhance Indonesia as a destination for foreign investment.
The Group Is exposed to the resultant risk of being adversely affected by possible political or economic instability
in Indonesia through civil war. war. terrorism. military repression. expropriation. changa in mining or Investment
policies. laws and regulations. extreme ﬂuctuations in currency exchange rates and high rates of inflation.
Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


The Group's Projects in Kalimantan are located in areas where titers are indigenous communities and villages.
and other land users. Any exploration and potential mining activities needs to appropriately consider the needs of
these communities and land users and suitable land use compensation arrangements have to be entered into.
There Is a risk that compensation arrangement on amenable terms cannot be agreed with these parties and this
may adversely impact on any potential mining development.
Kalimantan, and In particular Central Kalimantan. has had outbreaks of inter—ethnic violence over the years. The
most recent signiﬁcant incidents were In 2001 when it Is reported that over 500 Madurese migrant settlers were
killed in central Kalimantan by Indigenous Dayak people. There Is a risk that further such incidents could occur
and adversely affect the exploration and potential mining activities of the Group.
As essentially all of the Company's material assets are located in Indonesia. it may be dlflicult to enforce against
the Company anyjudgment that Is obtained In a United Kingdom (or Canadian) court.
- The Group’s Indonesian mineral property titles have various risks
While the Company has diligently investigated the titles to its KSK COW and the JelaI-Mewet KP and to the best of 
the Company's knowledge title to all of the said mining contracts are In good standing. this should not be I
constnied as a guarantee that title will not be challenged or impugned by third parties. The properties may be ‘
subject to prior unregistered agreements or transfers and title may be affected by undetected defects or
governmental actions.
As set out In HHP‘s legal report in Part E of this Admission Document the "Exploration Period“ for the KSK Cow
has a current expiry date (for Block A) of 27 April 2007 and (for Block B) of12 months from when it is taken out of
suspension. Whilst these dates are subject to further extension or suspension. this at the discretion of the
relevant Indonesian authority, and approval for this can not be guaranteed. If such suspensions or extensions are
not granted then KSK may not be in a position to apply for the Feasibility Study stage before the Exploration
Period expires and this may result In KSK losing the cow. Similarly, there are dates by which KSK must
commence commercial operation (the "Operating Period“) under the KSK COW which may not be able to be met if
further extensions or suspensions are not granted or if exploration. feasibility and development activities take
longer than expected. However. the Group expects that the increased exploration activity planned pursuant to the
Oxlana Heads of Agreement will reduce these risks.
The Group's rights in relation to the Jelai-Mewet KP are contractual In nature only (under cooperation and other i
agreements). with the actual KP being held by JCM. The enforcement of contractual rights In Indonesia can be
difﬁcult and accordingly if JCM breaches its obligations under the cooperation or other associated agreements
then It may be difticult for the Company to achieve spedtic performance or receive satisfactory compensation.
Further. specific information on the KSK COW and the JeIal-Mewet KP. including information relevant for title risk
assessment Is set out in HHP's legal report in Pan E of this Admission Document.
- There are “protected forest" restrictions In areas covered by the Group’s mineral property titles 
In 1999 Forestry Law No 41/1999 was Implemented that banned open pit mining operations on land classiﬁed by
the Government as Hutan Lindung (protected forests). Part of the KSK Cow is covered by such protected forest
areas. including approximately half of the currently deﬁned Baroi area and possibly the Mansur area. Whilst a
Presidential Decree in 2004 conﬁrmed that those companies holding contracts of work that pre-dawd the
anactrnent of the new law (such as the KSK Cow) would be allowed to continue their actlvltla within protected
forest zona. there is some legal uncertainty as to the situation and KSK has not yet received speciﬁc l
authorisation for such activity. E
When KSK is at the position that It can demonstrate that it will be proceeding to development of a mining
operation. if required it intends to seek such speciﬁc authorisation (via a permit. Presidential Decree or otherwise)
for open cut mining activity within the protected forest areas. Such authorisation will likely require the necessary
cn'terla deﬁned in the Presidential Decree to be met, including that an economic resource is delineated. the capital 1
cost is determined. the beneﬁts to local communities and regional development are Identiﬁed and the Group has
the support of the regional govemmentt There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to meet the I
necessary criteria and/or be allowed to develop a mine in the protected forest area. Further. information on the
protected forest laws and regulations are set out in HHP's legal report in Part E of this Admission Document
- The Oxlane Heads of Agreement
The Oxiana Heads of Agreement should not be taken to imply that the panies will necessarily agree on deﬁnitive
documentation or that after completing the "Initial Program" Oxiana will proceed to the Sole Funding Period. This
will depend on the results of the Initial Program, on Oxiana's due diligence and on Oxiana'a position at such time i
If deﬁnitive documentation is not agreed and the Initial Program is not undertaken or if Oxlana withdraws from the l
Joint venture after the Initial Program. this may adversely affect the Group's ability to adequately progress the KSK
Cow expiomtion within the conditions of the KSK OoW,
“H !
Kallmantan Gold Corporallori Limited l
AIMAdm/‘ssion Document J


a
- Potential conﬂicts of interest and the relationship between the Group and KIC
Certain directors and ofﬁcers of the Company are involved as directors or ofﬁcers of outer companies engaged In
mineral exploration and may be presented from time to time with opportunities. which give rise to conflicts of
Interest. Furthermore, as described In Part A of this Admission Document. two Directors ofihe Company are also
Directors and/or shareholders of KIC, whose subsidiary Is the Group‘s Joint Venture partner In the KSK COW.
Whilst any Director who had a conﬂict of interest would not participate in the taking of decisions where such
conﬂict might exist. such conﬂicts of interest may potentially adversely impact on the board's decisions in relation
to the Project. ‘
- Intemal controls
In 2004 the Company uncovered a fraud in which an Indonesian based employee (who was subsequently
terminated) misappropriated funds of around US$63.135. Whilst the Company has reviewed its internal controls
and will use its bes1 efforts to ensure handling of the Group's cash in Indonesia is minimised, there is a risk that
further fraud may occur and adversely affect the Group‘s ﬁnancial position.
- Bermuda registration issues
As a company registered in Bermuda. the rights of Shareholders will be governed by Bermudian law and the '
Compaan Memorandum of Continuance and Byeaiaws, The rights of Shareholders under Bermudian law may
differ from the rights of shareholders or companies incorporated in other jurisdictions such as the UK.
Furthermore. all of the Directors and some of the named experts in this Admission Document are not residents of
the UK. Therefore the enforcement of any UK judgments obtained In UK courts against the Company. the
Directors or the omens may be more difﬁcult than for parties who are resident in the UK. _
b) Further Risks Speciﬁc to Mineral Exploration and Devaiopment Companies
- Exploration and feasibility risks and costs *
Exploration for minerals is speculative and involves signiﬁcant degrees of risk Exploration and feasibility activities
may be delayed or disrupted by the availability of drilling rigs or other technical contractors, adverse weather
conditions, difﬁculties in gaining access to the desired exploration sites, delays in approvals from authorities or
technology providers or technical issues such as unexpected geological formations or process testwork results
The proposed exploration expenditure set out In Section 9 of Part A of this Admission Document Is based on
certain assumptions with respect to the method and timing of exploration work. By their nature, these estimates
and assumptions are subject to signiﬁcant uncertainties and. accordingly, the actual costs may materially differ
from these estimates and assumptions, and the Group may have insufﬁcient funds to cover any cost rises
- Project development and operating risks
If Kalimanhn Gold achieves exploration success that leads to a decision to develop production opemtions. the
development and ongoing production from such operations can Involve a high degree of risk and may be
adversely affected by various factors. Fires, power outages, labour disruptions, unusual or unexpected rock
formations. adverse weather conditions, ﬂooding. explosions, cave<lns. landslides. infrastnicture availability and
the Inability to obtain suitable or adequate machinery, equipment or labour are some of the risks Involved in the
operation of mines and the conduct of exploradnn programs. The Company may become subject to liability for 3
pollution, cave-ins or hazards against which it cannot insure or against which it may elect not to Insure. I
- Grantofllcences I
I
The operations of the Company will require various licences and permits from Various govemmeniai authorities I
which are or may be granted subject to various conditions and may be subject to renewal from time to time. There [
can be no assurance that the Company will be able to comply with such conditions and obtain or retain all
necessary licences and permits that may be required to carry out exploration, development and mining operations 
at its projects. Failure to comply with these conditions may render the licences liable to forfeiture. For further
details see HHF’s legal report In Part E of this document.
- General environmental risks
In addition to the protected forest rastrlcn'ons detailed earlier, exploration and mining projects In general have
varying levels and types of potential impact on the natural environment and are subject to relevant environmental
legislation. Including for land remediation and the discharge of hazardous waste and materials. Kalimantan Gold
will be required to comply with this legislation and from time to time environmental management issus may arise
from factors beyond its control. The minerals Industry has become subject to increasing environmental
responsibility and liability and the potential for liability from such issues is an ever-present risk.
Regardless of compilch with environmental laws and best practices. mining developments globally, including In
lndonasla, are becoming Increasing subject to vigorous anti-development campaigns from non—govemment 1
environmental and other organizations. Such campaigns can potentially disrupt any mining development
%
Kelimantan Gold Corporation Limited
AlMAdmissl’on Document


- Economic. commodity price and general government risks .
Changa In the general economic climate in which the Group operates may adversely attain its future costs and
revenues and the value of its mineral assets. In particular. current and forecast commodity prices (such as copper
and gold) can change rapidly and signiﬁcantly and this can have a substantial effect on the value of the Group's
Projects and the potential future revenue and proﬂS that might be earned from any successful development of
those Projeas.
Commodity prices are Inﬂuenced by many fedora affecting their demand and supply inoludlng global industrial
production levels and economic sentiment. Inﬂation and interat rates. exchange rates. industrial disputes. wars
and other military activity, technological advancements. forward selling activities. government environmental
policies. Infrastructure investment. weather conditions and general exploration success.
Changes In government. monetary policies, export controls. ﬁxation. royalties. land tenure. water use, mlne
safety. environmental protection and other laws and regulations can also have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
outlook for projects and companies and the actual and potential retums to investors. There can be no assurance
that new rules and regulations will not be enacted. or that existing rules and regulations will be applied in a
manner that would not limit or curtail development or production of the Company‘s operations and thereby
adversely affect the Group.
- Foreign exchange risk ‘
The Group’s anticipated expenditures are denominated In Canadian dollars. US dollars. Indonesian mplah. 1
Australian dollars and in UK pounds. Exchange rates can ﬂuctuate quickly and this could materlaily affect the l
spending power of the Group‘s current cash balances. which are largely held in Canadian dollars. The Group
does not currently hedge these currency risks. l
- Reliance on key personnel ‘
The sums of the Company in part will depend on the ability of the Directors. management team and other i
executive personnel (employed by the Company or its business partners) to develop the Company’s Project 
portfolio and enhance Project value. Should one or more of the key personnel cease to be involved. for whatever
reason. then the upabiiity of the Company may be expected to be impaired pending suitable replacements being
identiﬁed and retained by the Company or Its business partners.
- Retention of key business relationships
The Group relies on good relationships with other entities (such as Oxiana. JCM and KIC). regulatory and
governmental departments. and community leaders. While the Directors have no reason to believe otherwlse.
there can be no assurance that its existing relationships will continue to be maintained or that new ens will be
successfully formed and the Group could be adversely affected by any such changes to these relationships.
- Insurance
Insurance against all risks associated with mineral exploration is not always available or affordable. Kalimantan
Gold intends to maintain Insurance where it is considered appropriate for its needs. However, It will not be insured
against most risks it is exposed to either because appropriate cover is not available or because the Directors
consider the required premiums to be excessive having regard to the benefits that would acuue.
c) General Securities Risks I
- Securities Investments and share market conditions
The prices at which the Shares trade may rise or fall in raponse to a number of factors affecting the market for
equities in general which are unpredictable and unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of the
Company. Such factors include changes in the general economic outlook. interest and Inﬂation rates, currency
exchange rates. Investor sentiment and the demand and supply for capital.
- Liquidity ofthe Company’s Shares
Admission of the Shares to trading on AIM should not be taken as implying that there will be an ongoing liquid l
market for the Shares.
As a result of the above. no guarantee can be given in respect of the Company’s future Share price.
earnings or realisable value of its valuations of the Company’s investments.
l
m
Kalimantsn Gold Corporation lelred l
AlMAd/nlssion Document E
l


Part C — Competent Person's Report v

Competent Person’s Report on the
Mineral Exploration Assets of
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
Report Prepared for
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
and

RFC Corporate Finance Limited

Report Prepared by 

—w— SRK Consulting 1

‘/ Engineers and Scienlisrs 

7 December 2006 I

i

l

:teffeur; 2ngzg1x7lgm (Australasia) Ply Lid ’

i

l


Competent Person’s Report on the Mineral
Exploration Assets of Kalimantan Gold
Corporation Limited

Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited 

l

Unit 1 — 15782 Marlne Drlve 

White Rock, B.C. V4B 1E6 Canada E

. . . i

RFC Corporate Finance LImIted i

Level 8, 250 St Georges Terrace l

Perth WA 5000, Australia ’

SRK Project Number KGCOO1 ’

SRK Consulting }
Level 6, 44 Market Street
Sydney NSW 2000
, ‘ Australia
Contact:

Stuart Munroe - smunroe @srk.cum.au 1

Richard Clayton — rclayton @srk.com.au I

l

l

7 December 2006 

1

Compiled by: Endorsed by: E

 “ ~ , l

WW W ;

Stuart Munroe Richard Clayton E
Principal Consultant Senior Consultant

Qualiﬁed Person I

l

l

ﬁlartayirsmm'm f

l


Table of Contents



1 Invoducﬂon
1.1 
1,2 
1.3 
1.4 statementorIndependence,__,__,,_V_,________________WWW,“_,_.._.__AV,mV_._“_.,.........................30
1,5 Qualiﬁcationcroonsullants__”__W_M_‘_MW._m_____"_"_“__,_,_____________mm..."...._..__.__...._m30
1.6 
2 
3 Property Descriptions and 
4 Accessibility, Cllmate, Local Resources. Infrastrucer and Physiography",Nm_m...,...,..,.,..‘.,..,H,.33
4,1 
4.2 
5 
5.1 
s Gaologlcal
6.1 RegionalgeologyofKalimanlanw"w__V_"__._V_"_V__._____________>_______>_WWWu__Mm.,m_unm_.__m35 l
6.2  i
6.3  ‘
7  ‘
7.1  l
7.2  ‘
a  
8.1  
8.1.1 Barol  1
3.1.2 Beyueng Kanan  1
8.1.3 Beruang Tengah  ‘
8.1.4  ‘
3.2 
9 Exploration 
9.1 
9.1.1 
9.1.2 Sampling Method and 
9.1.3 Sample Preparaﬂon. Analyses and 
9.1.4 Data 
9.2 
9.2.1 
9.2.2 Sampling Method and 
9.2.3 Sample Preparation, Analyses and 
9.2.4  I
10  I
11 Mineral Processing and Metallurgical :
12 Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve  ‘
13 other Relevanl Dara and  }
13.1 
13.2 Organisation 
14 Concluslonsand Rscommendationswuu..,,..,,.,_._,,.,.....m...",,..__,_......._..........................,........53
14,1 
14.2 
15 
15 
Appendix 1: Abbreviations and Glossary of
Appendix 2: Cortlﬂcates of Qualiﬁed 
1
AIM Admission Document I


List of Tables
Table 1. Summary of KGCL 
Table 2. Summary of regional exploration aotivityin the KSK COW. 
Table 3. Summary of exploration activity In Earol Prespects (Central and East Zones and Far East Zone)......,...46
Table 4. Selected better surface channel sample results at Baroi Prospect (Far East Zone)
Table 5. Summary oi expluratlun acﬂvlty in Beruang prospects (Beruang Kanan and Beruang Tengah)...........t..47
Table 6. Summary ofexploration activity at Mansurporphyry Au-Cu prospect
Table 7. Summary ofdrliilng at the Barul prospects 
Table 8. Selected drill hole results‘fmm the Barai Far East
Table 9. Summary ofdrllllng at me Eeruang prospecs 
Table 10. Selected drill hale results from Beruang Kanan Main Zone
Table 11. Selected drill hole results from Beruang Kanan (North Polymetallic 
Table 12. Selected drill hole results from Beruang Tengah Eastern 
Table 13. Selected drill hole results from Beruang Tengah Gold 
Table 14. Selected drill hole results frum Mansur(porphyry Au-Cu) 
Table15, Selected results from Jelai-Mewet 
Table 16. KGCL pmlecis - planned work programme and expenditure
List of Figures
Figure 1. Location orKecL exploration assets and location of Kalimantan Arc (aﬂer Cariile and Mitchell 1994) ,33
Figure 2. Gealoglcal settan and location of prospects and main geochemical anomalies In the KSK Oth..t..t...37
Figure 3. Geological setting and location orproepecls of the Jeiai-Mewet 
Figure 4. Geology, mineralisation and drill hole locations (orthe Barol orospeos.................................................4o
Figure 5. Alteration, drill hole locations and soil geochemical anomalies over the Berueng Kanan prospect.......,41
Figure 6. Alteration. drill hole locations and soil geochemistryforthe Bel'uang Tengah prospects
Figure 7, Geology. soil geochemistry and drilling at the Mansur 
Figure 3. Geology, vein systems and drill hole locations iorlne .lelal-Mewet prospect 
Figure 9. Beruang Kanan Prospect — Interpretative cross section with drill holes projected on to line

1OD5ON showing the distribution of alteration and sulphide mineral types (from Leach, 2001)......................51
Figure 10. Jelal Gold Pruspect— MewetVeln. Cross Section 356.450N 

l

l

l

l

i

r

l

____— l

Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited a l

AIMAdmlesion Document I

l


Summary
m
Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited (KGCL) holds exploration assets over two lease areas in Kaiimantari.
This Competent Person's Report (Report) by sterren Robertson 8. Kirsten (Austlalasia) Pty Ltd (SRK),
which reviews these assets. has been prepared for Inclusion in an “Admission Document” for the admission
oi the common shares of KGCL to the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange.
The assets that have been reviewed are:
. Porphyry intrusive and other Intrusive-related gold — copper — silver - moiybdenum prospects at
Earoi, Beruang and Mansur within the PT Kalimantan Surya Kencana (KSK) Contract of Work
(Cow), Central Kalimantan. Indonesia (KGCL current interest of 75%. but subject to reduction
pursuant to a reoentjoint venture heads 01 agreement with Oxiana Exploration Pty Ltd). This area
Is part of the "Kalimantan Arc". which contains a number of Intrusion-related deposits, including
Indo Muro and Kelian. A large amount of work has been done on the prospects in this CoW overa
number of years by KSK and predecessors The exploration work completed over the years has
resulted in deﬁnition of 38 prospects and has seen a number of these prospects tested beyond the
Initial exploration and conceptual geological model stage to having a number of well developed
anomalies. targets and showings.
o Eplthermal gold - silver prospects at Jelai—Mewet in Eastern Kallmantan (KGCL effectively 100%
of mining ﬁghts via a cooperation agreement with PT Jelal Cahaya Minerals (JCM) who holds a
“KP” licence over the area), This area Is at the north-eastem end of the Kallmantan Arc in a
regional rift basin setting that contains a regionally extensive system of epithermel gold — silver
and basement sediment-hosted copper deposits. The signiﬁcant exploration undertaken to date i
has been done by Bureau de Recherches Geologlques et Minieres irom 1979 to 1982 and FT ;
Masan Mas Minerindo In joint venture with Indochina Gold Fields of Canada (iGF) from 1954 to
2000. This work included regional surveys which resulted in identiﬁcation D! a number of target l
areas of which JelaI-Mewet in particular was trenched and drill tested by IGF. l
i
This Report Is based on a review of reports and maps on the material exploration assets or KGCL. review
of drill core from the Baruang. Mansur and Baroi prospects. a site visit to Jelal-Mewet prospecL a site visit
to Barol tar East Zone prospect and aerial surveys of the other prospects oi interest In the KSK CoWr
KSK COW _
The KSK Cow contains the Barol. Eeruang and Mansur prospects which have geological, geochemical l
and alteration characteristics that are consistent with the mineralisation being associated with porphyry
intrusive and Intrusive related vein systems. The mineralisation snows similarities with that which occurs in i
similar arc-related settings in Indonesia and the south-west Paciﬁc which are know to host economically ’
signiﬁcant copper deposits.
The KSK Cow has a long history of exploration that has targeted epithermal gold and porptiyry intrusive
copper — gold mineralisation. The history of the work done that is relevant to the Baroi. Eeruang and
Mansur prospects material to this report Is:
1982 — 1985: PT Pancaran Cahaya Bahagla and Sinar Enterprises International BV conducted geological i
and geochemical surveys for placer gold.
1986 — 1990: JV between PT Pancaran Cahaya Bahagia and Mclcpo targeted epithennal gold. Regional
stream sediment sampling and later soil sampling In 1987 and 1988 Identiﬁed gold mineralisation centres
near Mansur and recognised the potential (or porptiyry copper. _
1992 — 1995: Kalimantan lnvatment Corporation (KIC) conducted IP geophysical surveys and shallow
diamond core drilling to test bedrock geology and mineralisation at Mansur. Three adlts were tunneled at
Mansur where drilling was not possible.
1996: PT Cyprus Amax Indonesia in joint venture with KIC drilled four deep holes at Mansur,
1997 - 1999: KGCL applied for the current COW through KSK, which ms granted in 1997.
Reconnaissance geological mapping and sampling identiﬁed mineralisation in boulder samples in the Barol
area. A regional aercmagnetic survsy. ﬂown in 1998 added understanding or the regional geology and
structure that was important for mineralisation Exploration work at Eeruang Kanan included extens'n/e
mapping and sampling, petrogrephy. iP geophysical surveying and drilling (16 holes totaling 2,793 metres),
m—
“ Kalimanran Gold Corporation Limited
AlMAdmi'sslon Document


At Beruang Tengah. exploration work induded mapping and sampling. petrography. IP geophysical
suNeying and drilling (7 holes totaling 1.313 metm).
2000 — 2006: KSK focused exploration efforts on the Beruang Kanan and Baroi prospects. At Beruang
Kanan follow up mapping and sampling. petrography and IP geophysical surveying in 2000-2001 resulted
in an additional 9 drill holes (totaling 1.967 metres). At Baroi. exploration work included extensive mapping
and sampling. ground It” and ground magnetic geophyslcal surveys, shallow drilling to test bedrock
geology and near surface veins (38 holes totaling 2,681 metres). medium depth drilling to test geological
models and extent of mineralisation (24 holes totaling approximately 6.762 metres) and deep drilling to test
porphyry intruslve geological models and depth of mineralisation (4 holes totaling 2,933 metres).
October 2006: KGCL enters into a heads of agreement with Oxiana Exploration Pty Ltd (Oxiana) for the
formation of a joint Venture for the KSK COW under which Oxlana will fund an initial US$15 million
exploration program and can then earn up to a 66.67% interest in the KSK OoW by funding pre feasibility
and bankable feasibility studies.
In total. historical exploration on the KSK COW to date has included over 20kms of drilling. over 190 line
kms of IP and magnetic surveys. over 9,000 samples and over 8.000 llne kms of aeromagnetic surveys.
At Baroi. known mineralisation extends over an area of 6 x 4 kilometres. which is divided into two areas
(Central Zone and Far East Zone) by a regional nonh-wast trending fault. The Central Zone ls further
divided into Central Zone, South Zone and East Zone on the basis of geoloQY. alteration and surface
geochemistry.
The Baroi prospects have similar early stage Zn-Pb—Cu-AgtAu sulphide velns overprlhted by later Cu-Ag
sulphide 4- quanz—chlorite velnlng. The veins are hosted in a volcanic sucoession and are likely to be
intrusive-related or distal to a porphyry intruslve system. Monzonlte lntmslorrs In the Central Zone may be
related to the mineralisation. however this has yet to be fully tested. In the Baroi Far East Zone. intense
silica alteration. phillic alteration and argillic alteration occurs with the most Intense velning found in the
Barol system to date. Within this area. based on current information it is SRK’s opinion that swarms of
parallel. steeply dipping. north-west striking quanz — chlorite — Cu-Ag sulphide velns occurring for 600 to
1000 metres strike. 100 to zoo width and open at depth have the greatest exploration potential.
The Beniarrg prospecs occur within a volcanic succession that has been intruded by pro-mineralisation
gabbro intrusions and post<mineralisation basaltic and andesltlc porphyry dykes (up to 200 metres wide).
At Beruang Kanarl three prospective zones have been identiﬁed from geological mapping and surface
geochemical surveys. The Main Zone prospect is a centre of argillic. advanced argillic and silica and pyrite
alteration Which is associated with high Cu. Au and Mo geochemistry. These geological and geochemical I
characteristic are consistent with the Main Zone mineralisation having a porphyry—intrusive or intrusive- i
related origin. Prospects such as the North Zone and South Polymetalllc Zone have a strong structural
(fault) focus. the details of which require further work to determine controls on mineralisation and the extent
of the mineralised system,
At Beruang Tengah (four kilometres south-east of Beruang Karian in the same volcanic complex). two
prospects have been identiﬁed. The Eastern Zone has a central potassic alteration zone surrounded by
phyllic alteration which Is associated with quartz — sulphide velnlng. The surface soil sampling delineated
coincident circular copper and gold anomalisrn centered on the alteration system. The geological and
geochemical characteristics of the Eastern Zone are consistent with an intrusive-related or porphyry
intrusive centre. Details of the controls on the mineralisation have yet to be determined The watem
prospect (Gold Zone) Is a north-east trending ridge pt quartz dlorite with a strike of approximately 1.000
metres. Soil geochemical surveys revealed anomalous gold coincident with the ridge. suggesting the
quartz diorlte Intrusion and/or a major structure parallel to the intrusion is controlling gold mineralisation.
The details at the controls on mineralisation have yet to be tested atthe Gold Zone prospect. l
Mansur prospect Is a potassic altered diorlte and feldspar porphyry intrusion surrounded by pctassic i
alteration of the sandstone and siltstorle hosts rocks. Shallow soil surveys over the Intmslon show a gold I
anomaly coincident with the lntruslon and additional gold anomalies to the north and south of the intrusion.
Anomalous copper results from the soil survey occur in a semicircular arc around the southem and western
edges of the lntnislon. Quartz veins at surface and quartz — carbonate veins in drill core have retumed
anomalous copper and gold results. The geology. alteration. magnetic signature and geochemistry of the
Mansur prospect are strongly suggestive of a porphyry intrusive controlling the copper — gold and gold only
vein mineralisation. Funher work Is required to better test the extent of the vein systems and resource
potential.
KGCL commenced a review of the results of exploration results. which included a review and
recommendations for future exploration report by Dr Peter Pollard, who has particular porphyry
mineralization expertise. It Is proposed that pursuant to the agreement with Oxlana. Oxiana will complete a
Kellmaniarr Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Documenl


iull data compilation. review, reprocessing and assessment program followed by drill testing of the priority
targets within 12-18 months alter the joint venture ls formed. In SRK’s opinion, this would be an
appropriate and worthwhile program for advancing the project.
Jelai-Mewet
Jelai«Mewet is one of 11 main gold prospects identiﬁed on the Jelal I JCM KP licence area by regional
surveys. It Is the only one of the prospects that has had substantial follow up exploration work carried out
on it and been drill tested.
Regional stream sedlmerrt geochemistry and mapping by Bureau de Recherches Geologiques et Minieres
(BRGM) from 1979 to 1982 identiﬁed a number of mineralised centres and highlighted the potential for
epitherrnal mineralisation. In 1994. PT Mascan Mas Minerindo conducted reconnaissance geological
mapping. extensive sampling and soil geochemical surveys over areas highlighted by BRGM. A joint
venture was formed with indochins Gold Fields of Canada (lGF) to further explore the region. IGF
conducted regional mapping and sampling as well as trenching and drilling (26 drill holes totaling 3.872
metres) at the Jelai-Mewet prospect. High gold gmdes were returned from drill core samples of collofonn
banded quanz vein and quartz-heamatlte vein stockwork. The veins occur In three main zones striking
approximately north-northwest and splaying north or north-east. Although no mineral resource has defined
at Jelai-Mewet. the exploration completed established the ﬁeld as one that has strong explomtlon potential.
Surface alteration maps have not been generated due to the lack of unweathered exposure: however
altemtion was logged by IGF. but has yet to be compiled into geological models. Surface mapping of the
quartz vein ridges on the prospect identiﬁed three main zones of mineralisation (Mewet in the east.
Sembawang and Nyabi—Adau in the east). In SRK'S opinion. the Sembawang Veln has the greatest l
potential for a signiﬁcant resource as it appears that this system is related to a fault (quartz matrix fault .
breccla) at the contact between daclte volcanic and basalt volcanic units. 
Quartz veins and zones of slllclticatlon. including siliciﬁed breccias (possibly fault brecclas) at the Jelai— 
Mewet prospect are consistent with low sulphidatlon epltherrnal Au—Ag mineralisation. Volcanic host rocks l
have been chlorite altered and locally quartz — sericite altered around the quartz veins. l
The character of low sulphldation systems of the type at JelaI-Mewet ls such that high grade drill
Intersections such as those encountered by IGF will be relatively common. The veins containing the high
grades may be narrow and Individually may not be extensive enough to form a recoverable deposit. In
SRK's experience. a signiﬁcant resource will require the presence of a major fault-hosted veln system.
> High grade shoots and thickness variation within the system Is commonly a result of small scale venetian In
the geometry of controlling faults.
KGCL intend to take approximately 6‘12 months to map. trench and sample and drill test (32 inclined holes ‘
to 150m depth totalling around 4000m) the portions oi the vein systems at Jelei-Mewet judged to have the
most favourable geometry and structural setting for higher grade and volume mineralisation. In SRK's
opinion. this is a reasonable ﬁeld program to Initially test the potential of the ﬁeld. for which less than 10%
of the current identiﬁed maln vein strike lengths have been drill tested. and enable a more detailed drill
program to he planned that may lead toward establishing a resource. ’
___—_— l
Kall'mantan Gold Corporation Limited 1
AIM Admission Document


- sax Consulting
0115" "lg we a
t . . 'Muarketslreet
Engineers and Screntrsts stew New and . Austra n
I Email: syaneygsnmnsu
1’ wwws'k mmau
Tel: 6t 1 9024 saw 
_ Fax: 5i 2 am ma 1
7 December 2006
The Directors
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
Unit 1 - 15782 Marine Drive
White Rock
British Columbia V45 1E6
Canada
The Directors I
RFC Corporate Finance Limited
Levels. 250 St George's Terrace
Perth WA 6000
Australia
1 introduction i
1.1 Terms of Reference i
This Competent Person's Report comprises eteiren Robertson & Kirsten (Australasia) Pty Ltd's (SRK) i
independent technical review of the material mineral exploration assets currently held by Kalimantan
Gold Corporation Limited (KGCL), This Report has been prepared at the request of the Diredors of
KGCL and RFC Corporate Finance Ltd (KGCL's "Nominated Advisol’) ior Inclusion in an Admission
Document, to be dated on or about 7 December 2006 for ﬁle admission 0' the ordinary shares of KGCL
to the NM market oi the London Stock Exchange
The assets that have been reviewed consist of the following: I
1. The Baroi prospect located in the Kalimantan Surya Kencana (KSK) Contract of Work (Cow). |
Central Kallmantan. Indonesia, which KGCL considers prospective for copper-silver—gold i
mineralisation. associated with pprphyry style systems. Exploration activity to date at Barol i
includes geophysical surveys. geological mapping. sediment, channel and chip sampling and ‘
drilling. i
l
2. The Mensur and Eeruang prospects also located in the KSK Cow. These are also considered by 
KGCL to be prospective for porphyry style mineral deposits. Varying levels of work. including
drilling. have been done to date on these prospects and they are considered by KGCL to warrant
further exploration at some time in the future
3. The Jelai Mewet (Jelai) prospect localed in North East Kalirnantan which KGCL consider to be 
prospective for epithermal style gold mineralisation. This prospect has only recentiy been acquired '
by KGCL. Exploration undertaken to date by third parties includes geochemical soil sampling, i
geological mapping. trenching. rock chlp sampling and diamond drilling. 1
SRK considers the Baroi. Bemang. Mansur and Jelai—Mewet prospects to be the most material of KGCL's i
assets. Consequently U‘lese prospects form the focus of this Report. i
l
WW‘ 1 t 1 Men Robenacn and Kirsten (Australaslal Pty Ltd Group onion: Australian 0mm:
rater". k w; m Reg No Ann 56 on ya no Africa
 mile; Trading as SRK Consulting Asia Brisbane at 7 usz asap
- twin Aumta Manland at 2 49:54 seas
M97m.t:t Elmoe Penn 61892382000
V W Nort'i America
so;sz mm SM, mm 1
m
Kalimsntan Gold Corporation Limited 
AIM Admission Document 
i
i


.. got,“
3 :3":
1.2 Reporting Standard V V
This Report has been produced in accordance with the Standards of Disclosure fur Mineml Projects as
contained in National Instrument 43-101 (Nl43-101) and accompanying policies and documents. Nl43-
101 utilises the deﬁnitions and categories of mineral rﬁwrces and mlneml reserves as set out in the
Canadian Institute of Mining. Metallurgy and Petroleum (CIM) Standards on Mineral Resources and
Mineral Reserves Deﬁnitions and Guidelines (ClM Code). This Report is also considered by SRK to be a
Technical Assessment Report under the guidelines of the Valmin Code. The Valmin Code incorporates
the JORC Code for the reporting otMineral Resources and Ore Reserve and is binding upon all AusIMM
members.
1.3 Basis of Opinion
The opinions and comments presented in this Report are based on the rollowing work programme:
0 Early Febmary 2006 - review of documents sent via email which summarise the geology and
exploration undertaken at the KSK CeW (Barbi. Mansur. Beruang Kanan and Beruang Tengah) and
exploration property at Jelai Mewet.
o 12 February — 17 February 2006 — review of documents at KGCL ofﬁces In Falangka Raye and
review of selected drill core from Beruang and Mansur prospects (KSK Cow) at the KGCL ofﬁces in
Palangka Raya. ‘
o 13 April — 23 April 2006 — site visit and review of geology at Jelai-Mewet Prospect In Eastern
Kalimantan. site Visit and review of geology and drill core at Baroi Far East Prospect (KSK COW).
aerial helicopter survey of greater Berni, Mansur and Beruang prospects (KSK Cow)
I Late April - Early June 2006 — aﬂer checking factual details (via dran) with KGCL. initial version of
Competent Person's Report finalised for public release In relation to KGCL’s TSX Venture Exchange
listing.
0 October 2006 - reviewed September 2006 "Review and recommendations for future exploration"
report by Dr Peter Pollard. discussed recent activities on projects with KGCL executives, Including a
joint venture heads of agreement with Oxiana Exploration Pty Ltd (Oxiana). and updated and l
ﬁnalised the Report for Inclusion In the AIM Admission Document. 1
1.4 Statement of Independence ‘
Neither SRK nor any of the authors of this Report have any material pruent or contingent interest in the l
outcome of this report nor do they have any pecuniary or other interest that could be reasonably I
regarded as being capable of affecting their Independence or that of SRK. I
SRK has no prior association with KGCL In regard to the mineral assets that are the subject of this 
Report. SRK has no beneﬁcial interest in the outcome of the technical assessment being capable of 
affecting SRK‘s independence. 1
SRK's fee for completing this Report ls based on Its normal professional daily ram plus reimbursement 
of incidental expenses The payment of that professional fee is not contingent upon the outcome of the 
report. .r
I
1.5 Qualiﬁcation of Consultants i
I
SRK is part of an International group (the SRK Group) which comprises over 500 professional staff 5
offering expertise in a wide range of engineean disciplines, l
The SRK Group‘s independence is ensured by the fact that it holds no equity in any project and that its 
ownership resS solely with its staﬂ. The SRK Group has a demonstrated track record in undertaking j
independent assessments of Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. project evaluations and audits. ’
competent person's reports and Independent feasibility evaluations on behalf of explomtion and mining
companies and ﬁnancial Institutions wand-wide, The SRK Group also has speciﬁc experience In
transactions of this nature.
This Report has been prepared by a team of consultants based at the SRK ofﬁce in Sydney (Australia)
These consultants are specialists In the ﬁelds of geology, mlneml exploration. resource estimation.
resource classiﬁcation and Independent reporting. 1
The individuals responsible for this Report. listed below. have extensive experience In the mining |
Industry. inctuding at least ﬁve years relevant experience in the evaluation and assessment of the type of j
a Kalimanlan Gold Corporaﬁan Limited [
AIM Admission Document i


mlnemi deposits under consideration. and are members inygood standing at appropriate protessional
associations.
Stuart Munroe PhD, MAuslMM Principal Consultant (Geology)
Richard Clayton MSc. FGS, C.Geol. Senior Consultant (Resource Geology)
1.6 Consents
Pursuant to the AIM Rules, SRK consents to the inclusion of this Report in KGCL’s Admission Document.
In the form and context in which it is provided, and not ioi‘ any other purpose Pursuant to Section 4.4 or
National instrument 44-101 and Section 83 of National Instrument 43-101 SRK and the authors also
consent to this Report being published. In full on Sedar as part of the Admission Document,
i
For the purposes of the AIM Rules. SRK accepts rsponsiblilty for this Report. Having taken all
reasonable care to ensure that such is the case and subject to the disclaimer below. the information
contained in this Report Is to the best of our knowledge In accordance with the facts and contains no -
omission likely to affect its import, i
SRK provides this consent on the basis that the technical assessments expressed in the Summary and in i
the individual sections at this Report are considered with. and not Independently of. the Information set i
out In the complete Report. 1
E
2 Disclaimer . 
i
The opinions expressed in this Report have been based in part on observations made during site visits to 
the Jelal-Mewet and Baroi projects held over a 10-day period in April 2006 together with information and i
drill core made available to SRK by KGCL. The opinions in this report are provided in response to a 
speciﬁc request from KGCL to do so. SRK has exercised all due care in reviewing the supplied , 2
information. Whilst SRK has compared key supplied data with expected values. the accuracy of the 
raule and conclusions from the review are entirely reliant on the accuracy and completeness of the 3
supplied data. SRK does not accept responsibility ior any errors or omissions in the supplied information ?
and does not accept any consequential liability arising from commercial decisions or actions resulting i
from them. 
KGCL has represented in writing to SRK that full disclosure has been made at all material intorrnation i
and that, to the best of its knowiedge and understanding. such information is complete, accurate and 
true. i
This Report includes some details on the legal status associated with the tenure of the KGCL properties, I
SRK is not qualiﬁed to provide comment on the legal status of tenure and this Information has been \
provided by KGCL, has not been Independently veriﬁed by SRK and has been included for contextual 1
purposes only. ’
i
i
i
1‘
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
I
_——_ﬁ 3
Kallmanl‘an Gold cameraman Limited 1 i
AIM Admission Document 3 3
l
l
i
i
i


3 Property Descriptions and Locations
KGCL are currently actively exploring two geographically separate areas in Kallmantan. Indonesia which
are reierred to herein as the KSK Contract oi Work (COW) and Jelai-Mewet project. Table 1 below
summarises the status and nature of KGCL's assets. Figure 1 indicates the location of the assets In
Kallmantan.
Asset Holder KGCL Status Licence expiry date Licence Comments
interest area
l'/-)
KSK PT 75% 6'“ 27 April 2007 for 941 km2 Oxiana to
Cow Kalimantan (sum-em (0 Generation Exploration Stage complete a
Surya Manual Cow (In (subject to possible data review
Kencana mducﬁon "Exploration extension) prior to and
under Feriod") progressing to compilation
agreement Feasibility, prior to drill
with gonstgucllgn andd program
- pera rig eno s
0m“) (which has an Inltial
30 year term after
commencement of
mining)
Jelai- FT Jelai 100% KP 28 August 2007 for 50 km2 Programme
Mewet Cahaya ~ . General Survey stage of mapping,
Minerals “grim “"5323!” (subject to possible 1 trenching.
with JCM) ﬂags) year extension) with and drilling
priority for conversion planned
to Exploration (35
year term) and then
Exploitation (30+ year
term) KPs
Table 1. Summary of KGCL Assets _
SRK understands that the Joint Venture partner in the KSK CoW is FT Pancaran Cahaya Kahayan,
which is initially owned by Kallmantan Investment Corporation (KIC). SRK has been inlormed that two
KGCL Directors. Murray Clapham and Rahman Connelly. are directors of K10 and each hold
approximately 5% or the Issued share capital or KIC.
The KSK COW ls located in Central Kalimantan approximately 180 km north of Palangka Raya. close to
the geographic centre of the island of Borneo and immediately south 0' the equator (approximate
longitude 113‘20’E and latitude 0'35'8). After the application at the second mandatory area
rellnqulshment submitted in May 2006, the CDW will cover 94,110 hectares (94.1 kmz) which is
subd'wided into two blocks. Block A (33.170 hectares) is in the fourth year of exploration of the Cow and
Block B (60.949 hectares) which is in the third year of exploration of the COW.
Under a Cow. foreign general mining investors are able to explore and mine, The Cow is authorised by
the Indonesian central government. Under the Cow, the contractor oonducts all stages of the operation
and assumes all ﬁnancial and operational risks, The government’s latest eighth-generation COW (yet to
be ﬁnalised or implemented) contain new provisions that give regional governments greater Input In
community development plans Implemented by the contractor and provide for a larger share of royalties
and taxes.
The Jelal-Mewet project In Eastern Kalimantan is located approximately 50 kilometres southwest of the
city of Tarakan. (on Tarakan Island), immediately off the north—east cost of Kallmantan at the northern
edge oi the Sekatak River delta (approximate longitude 116°59'E and latitude 3'13'N). The Jelai-Mewel
lease covers approximately 5000 hectares of a regionally extensive gold and copper mineral ﬂeldt SRK
understands that KGCL has entered Into Cooperation agreements with the Indonesian Company. JCM.
under which KGCL effectiver has 100% of the mining rlghls over the Jelai—Mewet area which JCM holds
via a General Survey stage KP (Kuasa Pertambangan) licence. A General Survey KP is a permit that
allows KGCL to preliminary exploration including initial shallow drilling and taking samples. We
understand that KGCL intends to apply for an Exploration stage KP immediately prior to a proposed
drilling program at JeIaI-Mewet.
a Kali/Iranian Gold Corponatiori Limited
AIM Admission Document


‘ 5' ‘~ “norm Jean;  m v
Q...»  r « 2-, 
I 1i.  :3  d,
an,  ' ' "Z 31'   Klnabalu
23'? 2“.  €\V;r _, . Fallllirom
\ .1».  ‘ .   .. ‘3“: Kosakat ‘
  '    ~=  . .ar “3" .115 Wakita l
1  H‘a‘. “"9 r r at.   5""9‘ " f  é ~  -
 l    v   e u, ,  
ﬁst  «a 2  $4.;  a  a ./, «an 3‘  a
d \ ‘ ‘ “‘ r ’ if: so  ‘ 
71%» 33*? a «  "at  r  ‘. a
‘54:; 1 .fr‘  r 1»?  Jig   K ,
4  gag-s   ~ I
L'     ‘V ‘-
av’i'" ‘3? l
0 zoom l
Figure 1. Location of KGCL exploration assets and location of Kalimantan Arc (after Carille and
Mitchell 1994)
l
Under Indonesian Mining Law No. 11/1967, domestic investors are able to operate exploration and
mining under a KP. Draft law which is yet to be implemented, attempts to simplify mlnlng administration {
by removing the distinction between foreign and domestic investors. Under the draft law, both domech
and foreign investors will be able to operate mines under the authority of a 'mining operation permit“ (lzin
Usahe Pertambange. IUP) or a 'mining operation agreement” (Perjanjian Usaha Pertambangan, PUP).
4 Accessibility, Climate, Local Resources, Infrastructure and ,
Physiography i
4.1 KSK COW .
The nearest major centre to the KSK Cow is Psiangka Reya. which is connected to Jakarta by daily I
ﬂights from two commercial airline (Eatevis Air and Swirajaya Air),
The KSK COW is covered in densely vegetated tropical ralntorest at elevations of 200 to 800m above sea I
level, Much of the KSK Cow is characterised by steep relief which is accessible only on foot or with
helicopter support. Lower lying areas are accessible using forestry roads which are built and maintained
at the discretion of the iorestry companies The lorestry roads did not access all the prospects on the
KSK CoW at the time of this review, making some helicopter support necessary to efﬁcientiy explore the
prospects Identiﬁed on the KSK COW.
M“
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document 33
i


Helicopter landing pads are presently mainmined at several locations in the KSK Cow. including the main
base camp at Earoi. Travel time to the base camp by helicopter is 50 minutes from Palangka Raya or 1 .
hour and 45 minutes from Balikpapan. Alternative access to the property is via road from Palangka Raye l
to Samba Village (4 hours). then by boat from Samba to Manggu \ﬁllage (1 hour). then by road from l
Manggu to the KSK Cow staging camp (5 hours]. then by toot to the base camp at Baroi (approximately l
3-4 hours). ‘
The climate for the KSK Cow is similar to other equatorial rainforest areas. There is relatively little
variation in the seasonal climate: however. there is a slightly wetter season from December to March
when roads may wash out and river access is difﬁcult or delays in helicopter movements are
experienced.

4.2 Jelal-Mewet
The nearest major centre to the Jeiai-Mewet vein system Is Tarakan, which is connected to Jakarta and
Singapore via Eallkpapan and to Kuala Lumpur via Kota Kinabalu and Tawau (located in the Malaysian
province of Sabah).
Access to the prospect from Tarakan is via Sekatak Village. on the Sekatak River. This can be done
efﬁciently by speedboat that can be hired from Tarakan. Further upstream. past Sekatak Village, large
canoes with small outboard motors can be hired from local settlements. From Sekatak Village. access to
the prospect is to the west along the Sekatak River and south via the Mewet River. A 15 to 20 kilometre
long road from Sekatak Village to the prospect was not passable during the iield visit accompanying this
review as a result oi washed out bridges. however it is expected that these could be repaired. The travel
time from Tarakan to Jelai-Mewet is approximately 1.5 hours by speedboat and 3.5 to 4 hours by canoe.
The retum trip is quicker downstream. taking approximately 2 and 1.5 hours by canoe and speedboat
respectively.
The topography consists of ﬂat to gently sloping plains with some steep sided ridges. The area is oovared
in thick forest vegetation but is generally accessible by foot or motorbike tracks. Exposure of the geology
is poor. however. a number of prominent quartz veins and quartz breccla veins are exposed. Topographic
contours at 2.5 metre intervals over the prospect have been generated during grid surveying. soil
sampling and trench surveying undertaken during the historical exploration of the prospects.
The climate tor the prospect area is similar to other equatorial climates. The wetter season is commonly
from December to March. when rivers may ﬂood and roads become impassable.

5 History

5.1 KSK COW ’
From 1982 to 1985 geological and geochemical surveys for placer gold deposits in the Baroi area were
conducted by PT Fancaran Cahaya Bahagla and Sinar Enterprises Intemationai EV.
From 1986 ~ 1990 a joint venture between PT Pancaran Cahaya Bahagla and Molopo focused on
explomtion for eplthermal gold mineralisation. During 1987 and 1988 regional stream sediment sampling
identiﬁed gold mineralisation centres at Mansur, Lakapoi end Tambang Huol (Figure 2). Soil auger
sampling over the anomalous areas deﬁned weak copper and gold ancmalism. The joint venture
recognised potential for porphyry copper style mineralisation.
From 1992 - 1995 Kalimantan Investment Corporation (KIC) conducted "3 geophysical surveys and
shallow diamond drilling was completed at the Tambang Huoi and Mansur prospects, Three edits were
also tunneled at Mansur in areas inaccessible by drilling. PT Cyprus Indonesia (Cypnis) drilled tour deep
holes over a high ctlargeabillty IP anomaly in the eouth—westem part of the Mansur Prospect in 1956 as
part of a JV agreement to earn into the project. Later in 1996 KGCL applied for the current CoW through
KSK. which was granted in 1997.
A regional magnetic survey was ﬂown by Aerodat In 1990 and re-processed in 2003. lnterpremtion oi the
re-processed data indicated 38 targets on the KSK CoW and added some understanding of the geology
and alteration at the Beruang Kanan. Beruang Tengah and Mansur prospects.
In November 2002. KGCL reported that logging reads allowed access to the Baroi prospects which
enabled follow up of high grade mineralisation encountered in boulder sampla during exploration
surveys in 1985 and later in 1997.
Since 2002, under the current COW. KSK has undertaken:

a Ka/imanmll Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


0 Geological mapping; ,
o [P and magnetic surveys ovsr Baroi Far East Zone Prospect:
I Shallow drilling. medium drilling and deep drilling (to down hole depths 0' 80m, 300m and 500m
respectively) at Baroi‘s Central, Far East. East Zone and South Zone prospects;
0 Logging and sampling or drill core and analysis of alteration geochemistry by spectral scanning
(PIMA):
- Petrological studies:
. Stream sediment sampling:
o Trench and rock chip sampling: and
I Interpretation of magnetic surveys. air photographs, Landsat arid Radarsat imagery,
There Is no mineral resource or reserve currently delineated on the KSK Cow. There has been no
mineral or metal production from the KSK Cow. however a number of Illegal miners are working the
Mansur River for alluvial gold (located immediately south of the Mansur prospect).
5.2 Jelal-Mewet
The .lelei region was the subject of regional stream sediment geochemistry by Bureau de Recherches
Geologlques et Minieres (ERGM) from 1979 to 1982. The potential for epitherrnal gold-silver
mineralisation at Jelai was highlighted by this work with 1t main prospects being identiﬁed on the current
Jelal KP licence area, one of which was Jelai-Mewet.
In 1994 PT Mascan Mas Mineriridc conducted reconnaissance surveys over areas highlighted by BRGM
and formed a Joint venture with Indochina Gold Fields oi Canada (lGF) at that time. l
Between 1995 and 2000 Jeial-Mewet was the subject of exploration mapping, sampling and drill testing l
by lGF. Initially poor geological exposure resulted in only regional mapping, supplemented by use of
remote sensing (Landsat. Radarsat) Interpretation and regional stream sediment geochemical sampling, ‘
In 1997 and 1998, follow-up exploration included further soil sampling, geological mapping, trenching and ‘
rock chip sampling. l
i
Twenty-six diamond drill holes were completed by lGF totalan 3.372 matra. of which: twelve holes l
totalan 1,825 metres tested the northern part of the Mewet Vein (155 m strike): ten holes (totaling 1,597 l
metres) tested the intersection or the Nyabi-Adau vein (200 m strike): and four holes (totaling 446 metres) 
tested the Sembaweng Vein and associated vein splays (including the Lipan Vein). ‘
There is no mineral resource or reserve delineated in the Jelai-Mewet vein system. i
Three shallow shafts were observed (one on the Nyebi and two on the Mewet Vein). These shafts are l
rumoured to have been sunk by Illegal miners aﬂer lGF withdrew from their exploration In 2000. At Mo 01
these shafts (one on each of the Nyabi and Mewet veins) there Is evidence of small scale extraalon of
quartz veln material (probably less than two thousand tonnes at each shaft). There is no evidence of
processing of the extracted material and no reported or rumored gold production from the area.
. . l
6 Geological Setting 1
l
6.1 Regional geology of Kalimantan l
Kallmantan covers most of the island of Borneo, which overlies continental crust Of the Eurasian Plate. 1
Basement consists of Cretaceous and older sedimentary and volcanic rocks and Cretaceous granite that
was emplaoed at tectonically active margins of mlcropiates that make up the Eurasian Plate in Borneo. i
From Eocene to Late Miocene time (40—10 Ma), a microplate that underlies the northern part of Borneo l
Island was pushed below a plate underlying the southern part of the island. The interaction between I
these two microplates is not well understood and is e geologically complex area, where surface exposure
is poor, however the result of this Intemctlon at that time was the formation at a plate suture (join) where l
deep crustal thermal highs caused lower crustal and sub-crustal melting, resulting In volcanic actlety and
emplacement Of melts into the middle and upper crust at the suture. This event created a terrane which Is i
Kalimanian Gold Corporation Limited 
AlMAdml'ssion Document l
l
r


—
known as the Kalirnantan Arc In existing geological literature. Figure 1 presents a schematic
representaﬂon of the location. orientation and dimensions of this arc.
The southern part of the Kalimantan Arc (on which the KSK COW is located) was an area where Eocene—
Middle Miocene (40—20 Ma) volcanic and sedimentary rocks were deposited in broad depressions,
elongate in an east-northeast direction. At the same time a number of fractionated porphyrltic intrusions
were emplaced which are known from the exploration work that KSK has done in their CoW. The
movement of thick cnistal microplates during and after volcanism has subsequently deformed the
volmnlc and sedimentary rocks deposited in this area.
The eastern part of the Kalimantan Arc (on which the JeiaI-Mewet Project is located) was an area where
microplate accommodation resulted In relatively tightly restricted basins that are elongate for several
hundred kilometres in a north-northeast direction and are tilled with Late Miocene volcanic and
sedimentary rocks (20—10 Ma). These basins are relatively gently deformed. perhaps because they are at
the eastern edge of the main zone of microplate convergence.
6.2 KSK COW
The KSK cow is located at the contact between a sequence of folded. north-east striking sedimentary
and volcanic rocks with a sequence of metamorphic and older intrusive basement rocks that occur to the
south of the KSK COW. The contact between these two geological belts strikes north-east1 parallel to the
strike of the arc rocks and parallel to a number of north-east striking faults which were likely responsible
for defining the limits of deposiﬁon of the volcanic rocks in north-east trending rift basins. A number of
Intrusions (Including porphyrilic intnlsions at KSK Cow) have Intruded the volcanic sequence and
basement along this wntaﬂ. The locations of the intrusions are likely controlled by the north-east
trending faults. but are particularly focused around the intersection of these faults with north-west
trending basement faults. The detailed history of the interaction between the faults before. during and
after volcanism and mineralisation in Kallmantan is yet to be fully understood.
The geological setting indicates the KSK Cow Is at the southem edge of a volcanic sequence. The faults
parallel to the contact and a number of orthogonal (north-west striking) faults are similar in style to the
tanks that occur in other similar continental suture settings in the Paciﬁc (e.g. Papua New Guinea) which
is host to intnislve—related Cu—Au resources. high sulphidation style Cu-Au-Zn-Ag-Pb resources and low—
sulphidation style Au-Ag resources. Within Kalimantan. intrusion-related vein Au resources occur at l
Kellan and at Indo Mum. Outside of the KSK Cow, the only known porphyry copper systems known i
ocwr in eastern Sabah (north-eastem Bomec). Within the KSK. porphyry copper - gold and alteration
systems consistent with mlneralised porphyry intrusions ccwr In a number of centres including Mansur.
Beruang Tengah and Beniang Kanan (Leach et al 2002). The intrusions and the deeper sources for the
Inthslons are Important indicators for potentially economic mlneralised systems as they provide a source
of heat and hydrothermal fluid. which is important for generating the styles of mineralisation Indicated.
Previous work by KGCL has ouﬂined 33 intrusive—related centres which are prospective for Cu - Au
resources (Figure 2). Of these, a number of Intrusive-related vein systems and mlneralised pcrphyry
intmsions are considered to be highly prospective for copper and gold. This report concentlales on the i
mineralisation at Baroi. Beruang Kanan. Beruang Tengah and Mansur. Other mineralised centres occur 1
throughout the KSK Cow. but are concentrated (in a "V' shape) on a 30 kilometre north-east trend (from
Tumbang Hot to Memuring) and on a 20 kilometre north-west trend from (T umbang Hoi to Mansur). I
6.3 Jelal-Mewet V
The JeIaI-Mewet project area is located in a series of norlh»northeast trending Oligoceneoncene basins.
These basins are ﬁlled with Oligocene—Miocene sedimentary rocks and volcanic rocks which are
overprlnted by volcanic-related intrusions (Figure 3). Basin extension is associated with the collision of
mimlates that make up the Eurasian Plate in South-East Asia. The north-northeast trending section of
the Kallmantan suture acted as an accommodation zone during north-to-north-west directed crustal
compression. The resulting graben that hosts the Jelai-Mewet proiect extends north—northeast along the
Kalimantan Arc for over 200 kilometres.
The basement to the basin consists of folded and metamorphosed sedimentary rocks (sandstone and
siitstone) of Cretaceous age. The basin sequence at JeIaI-Mewet ls composed of sedimentary and
volcanic rocks which are overprintad by post-mineralisation dadte and dolerite intrusions I
The volcanic rocks at Jeial-Mewet have been chlorite altered near the mlneralised areas (propylitic I
altemtion) and locally overprinted by quartz + serlcite (phyllic alteration) around the quartz veins. I
Alteration at surface ls difﬁcult to map due to lack of unwaathered exposure. IGF has not complied maps l
of alteration that has been logged in the drill core, although this could be done from the detailed drill logs. }
—_____—_____ I
a Kalimanran Gold Corporation Limited 1
AIM Admission Document
I
i
l
I


n ‘ 
PIECE“ WQN 1
“ms  W?”
%:,,;7:; ",-\’”;\ﬁ‘\/«H_'  r   (W. ‘ I:
"   R j , ' a}, /J' __ 5 ‘ ‘
«fit? 2:", g? s v 5 , o g
 3,; ,  o , z e :
 I  g ’z: 2’; A  f 5  <
53.93% Jawx‘mco" y b 3" A w.” i 3% ., 0
 #5»: ~ ~ »  ‘u 2 VI
 r w, A. . ‘ CB ; or
 “1"  .:~ “  . vd‘"
;  (E._:~  \f' umgpuuu
1mm . M " , . v. M ’ . r »
  ,  If”? A g * 1“
ag;;;:;;§§. $7.174; gzﬁgga;r’:z.zn..;.-zm  um
gin.  » :3. “A  1.1?  ; Salu’l’uan g3
r    : ‘ i
 \i‘figggi'll  2  é
   1 _ ‘.,¢:<"~:i 3
  ii???  *‘ﬁwwm-mgf Via as?“ g
_ V r, “ ' 7—3; .Jv r / ":./ _ z
"A >  mama,  g Na}:an «1H, ;
  2’, "FM is?  7r " , '
 F o  VA,   v ‘3 “Wag W
x mum-magi ‘  ‘ (D o! W“
31,; 443+“ '4 44‘; "pr—wg ‘w77‘4--”:-~’"‘v-§
  r  in.  twi‘m a   1 _
my: a ii‘h‘.  i‘ ‘ a?  M1 '  1 s
In 1-15" -. z   vz‘: m 1
9r   w   - n  . a,
35 «z.   "‘ ‘-’ ’ I  *' I”; ‘ a < ‘3  51' r ,
i  ﬁg?" r
s “  g   1 .  “  . 
‘~ gm. =    we  i‘ ‘
mm m” uer
W, mmmmwm
QCMMMMW -nymmwm:mumw ‘5
.wawwm “mm” m I I
’ m
WWW [:3 «mm- ‘
r. «WWW.» :p WWW ""
[3 mm“.  m 
255mm   [E
:=
Flgure 2. Geological senlng and location of prospects and main geochemical anomallea In the
KSKCoW
Kalimanian Gold Corporallon Limited
AIM Admission Document 37


'  7  m _m VV_V__?W , '
I i: , lg“; r ,7 ,, “1; :33 w sf  I,”
'3. ‘g'  \  run-Qtﬁgs  Mtg/xv
 ‘i  , 2:::;;:-\ i; . y  :2:  '
gt»  'F" x u ~.,i_   r 
  i V w' *  :’ a. 
,   7,4 ’7‘. -  M? 1’ fr
‘      ‘   / i
  »-  r » leg»:  F 5%
i    - u '   ‘
gi',‘  gr ~ '   ;;g “in $332 1
’ -  W Li};‘“§'“?’   17*; f1? ‘
  R  g   
  9  /    
  :   
L’ W,       ‘3   i
       .t:
 A   :   a   
.i .‘z is“ u- . »  w .Hsiky i s” \z
    '7   g
m x .3  W"  -, =;  A51:»: 32    s
[a         '  j  
W mm W 902M011 $040016
mam”
m mayhem ﬂ (mm ~ V ﬁﬁﬁw ,m,
a In-th‘awanmwmhm —— man mm:  ’1; ;.’Z » _
“Aw-mm —- gnu» m ‘w 551117;,7;
ass." u mm. 1  _
m4 m—vau- s. was», I  21,
iii»; WWW)”. [:3 «Names sags.“ \in 'f
 mmwvmnm a “k ‘   {.L'.
 www~m ‘.-_-;.=== rig, 4%, 
“M.” 
Flgura 3. Gsoiagicai setting and iocaiion af prospects of me .ieisi-Mswat project
a Kailmsnran Goid Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


7 Deposit Types
7.1 KSK COW
The KSK CoW contains a number of targets which show Indications of being associated with porphyry
Cu-Au-Mo ster mineralisation. In addition. Beniang Tengah and Beruang Kanan are prospects that have
porphyry-style alteration systems with copper- gold mineralisation systems (Leach et al 2002).
There are indications that some of the mineralised vein systems may be distal to an intrusive heat
source, which Is a phenomenon that is similar h: other known vein systems In Kallmantan and in other
continent-continent collision margin zones elsewhere in the region (e.g. Papua New Guinea). These vein
systems contain Cu—Au and may also be associated with elevated Pb. Zn. Sb and/or Mo. 3
Based on airbome surveys. KGCL has also identiﬁed geophysical anomalies at Llang Bulau in the
northern section of the KSK Cow (as shown in Figure 2) that are conslsterrt with the signatures of
kimberiite or lampmlte pipes. Given the alluvial diamond mining history of Kalimanlan. there is some (
merit In KGCL continuing reconnaissance stream sediment sampling for diamonds and diamond Indicator I
minerals in the Liang Bulau area and if this sampling is encouraging. testing the geophysical anomalies. I
However. as this is not a current focus of KGCL and given the early stage nature of this prospect. the (
Liang Buiau diamond exploration prospect has not been further reviewed by SRK in this Report. 1
7.2 JelaI-Mewet ‘
Quartz veln textures and zones of slllclticatlon around the veins suggest the mineralisation is a ‘iow-
sulphidation epithermal" vein system. Such systems are commonly controlled by the fault systems that
host the mineralisation,
8 Mineralisation
8.1 KSK COW
8.1.1 Baroi prospects
Known mineralisation In the Baroi centre extends over an area of 6 x4 kilometres and can be divided into
two areas (Central Zone and Far East Zone). separated by a major (northeast-trending) iault which Is
evident in remote sensing images and deﬁned by geological mapping, surface geochemistry (copper and
gold In soil) and geophysics (Figure 4). The Central Zone has been further divided into the Central Zone,
South Zone and East Zone. The Central Zone Is centred on a monzonite intrusion which has an
unknown association with the mlnerallsatlonl
The Barol prospects all have similar stylﬁ of vein-hosted mineralisation In volcanic and sedimentary
rocks with minor dyke Intrusions and are likely to be Intrusive-related or distal to a porphyry intmsive
system. Monzunlte Intrusions in the Central Zone diiferentiate this prosped. however their relationship to
the mineralisation is unknown and not fully tested. The fault that separates the hm: prospects is
associated with a high IP chargeability anomaly. which may also be due to sulphides or graphitic fault
gouge within that fault.
In the Far East Zone. a gossanous silim cap surrounded by argllllc (hydrothermal clay) alteration occurs
within the zone or mineralisation. which is likely related to a zone of disseminated pyrite and very narrow
pyrite veln stringers which are also rapensible for the high IF' chargeablilty anomalies,
In both the Far East Zone and the Central Zone, mineralisation is hosted by predominantly northwest and
nonh—northwest trending. steeply southwest dipping veins up to ten metres thlck. containing early
ohalcopyrite (Cu) a galena (Pb) + sphalerlte (Zn) and later quartz + chalcopyrlte 4- chlorite mineralisation.
Channel samples of the Baroi Far East veins consistently return copper grades of 1— 5% cu and elevated
Zn. Ag and Pb. Similarly, In the Central Zone. elevated Cu and Ag values are associated with elevated
gold (commonly 1-3 g/tAu where the Cu grades are 1<5 %Cu).
Of the two vein assemblages Indicated. the quartz + chalcopyrlte é chlorlte vein systems appear. from
current information and observations of drill core made during this review. to have the greater potential as
a base tor a signiﬁcant resource.
KaI/‘manhn Gold Corpomtion Limited
AIM Admission Document 39


‘   was: ' s  r ...~. _ ’W  1.
  ,  a;  -, a: ; t??? l
 2 :~ "7  m». =7 i.  37“.“ ; N
’» ‘ ‘ ‘5‘ ,’~ 3% 9     “ ‘3‘: r. i  :is‘éhék’t‘ 'J E65
           5* i an”.
‘ 7        ,    f mm”
a r. .'   ~.;‘ 4M «.3 . :ts ’ ~ie' At 4 mm
. z... 1: ,  a  A. ~ at   a   y 1.. .t w. |
my.   J? :: iia‘t‘a  ‘ ~.(:»:‘  3: m
AW 5.: ; - .43, I» at; 7;: 1 §  sass. .... we“
:.  ; 32-1!» “v K yrs  e- x.  a; . 32.,”
’~. ‘  » ~;  :~.  49‘3- . , P  V  " "31"”;  ‘1 
“‘2‘ a": i’ sf    F ’a' = is “' «at ‘2‘” 
g1:  a £4: .5. :25  9 g  3 g ‘_ E  ‘ e :. s  < w: r—
  «i: {If    ii“: ’: e;  ~- '_ ' l
: n. r:  :1   dc“:  ‘ ‘r: ,
Figure 4. Geology, mineralisation and drill hole locations for the Barol prospects.
3.1.2 Beruang Kanan prospect

Beruang Kanan is a volcanic complex In a sedimentary basin in an area of signiﬁcant lntersecﬁng fault

zones. The volcanics host pre-minerelisatlon gabbroic intrusions and post—mineralisation basaltic and

andesitic porphyry dykes. which are up to 200 metres wide.

Geological and geochemical surveys dlﬁerentieted three maln zones (Figure 5):

1. Main Zone In a centre of argiillc and advanced argillic alteration with anomalous Cu. Au and Mo
in soil geochemistry. In addition, the pH of the stream water is >4 over a large part of the Main
Zone (highly acidic due to sulphide weathering from the rock). The Main Zone has been the
focus of most of the explomtion and follow up drilling.

2. South Polymetallic Zone (within the South Zone).

3. West Zone. which has large areas of anomalous Cu in soil (> 200 ppm), but hes not been
followed up as a result of the apparent lack of a geological or structural focus within the large
area of anomalous geochemistry.

The division between the Maln Zone and South Zone is largely a result of the division of gold In sol]

geochemistry into a nonhem and southern zone. In the combined North Zone and South Zone prospects.

alteration mapping indicates a broadly north — south trending zone of phytlic and advanced argillic
alteration. extending approximately 25 kilometres north—south and 1 kilometre east—west.

Within the South Zone. a north-east striking fault zone is associated with Intense phyliic alteration and

stockwork quart * sulphide veins. Tne soil survey assays Indicate high antimony and arsenic in this

area. The zone (known as the South Polymetaillc Prospect) is likely controlled by a north-east striking
fault which separates the South Zone and North Zone copper and gold anomalous soil geochemistry.

The North Zone gold and copper soil anomalies occur with the advanced argillic alteration and zone of

high acidity measured in the streams. It is likely that the advanced argillic alteration occurs with a large

amount of disseminated pyrite which is responsible for the high acidity in the surrounding creek waterl

Drilling has lntersected base metal sulphide (Zn. F'b. Ag. Cu) as disseminated grains In the wall rock and

in veins. Within the North Zone Is a smaller prospect (North Polyrnetaliic) which has surface veins that

have returned high Au. Ag and Zn Values from rock chips Follow up drilling intersected Pb. Zn. Cu

sulphide veins with anomalous Au and Ag associated with quanz + clay + serlolte + barite, calcite and

gypsum alteration.
_—_—__—..—_—
4o Kallmalllall Gold Corporation Limited
v AIM Admission Document


 aver; --  ’79:; , V , _ Sh: ‘ » a a A“.
 '  9 '  m  * «222;: i A
t ,   _ ft”  My, ‘ H
3' > ~  » > > ‘ ’V     anew-e  snags—-
_ 8,! r g -:;t~ 1<vwvn~ .a neutral w
_  r t i *5 wastes   i
’ '3  _, ‘ *v‘wv;  '  1m . w
‘  c or-w-       r   
:  ' ' if 1::  _-     i a '  ‘11 Tel:
‘-  -- r: T4: " \3  «éflz  = '  i‘.‘ a 3m
_ i (S’W (1/ a .  tax/:st'ﬁ. ‘f r ' is“ ii iii "a
:‘ s ‘\ 'v ~ ~ 7:, “i: k‘ :  ‘e‘i‘r" t ' -  i 5 ~33»-
,  "~   3:; v -,   :E 1; 11”“
’  k- 7} 3.1 .r   v” . ‘ a,»  a at-
, r ‘   f; .    a e.»
e r '  -    I; W“ i
 ‘-; lg“ < a». a; 9,. [m r  c s
g g "yea ‘7 24am  c' I“ ,  é
’  52329:"    ‘ I
3 ‘ «2s  f‘ o 555’? ,_, , i
it: , t “gnaw; - ~  ray  «st  a»: l
 is  $445 j ; a» > 1
  «35* - my? 2:52:37: ‘12:: i
r ;- 1 ~ .i: r v z .x mi ;3;:L,,m i
V} ’ 3 ' a $233365 Wit; :93  I
§  ’ f 'g‘, g; umuonw I
I,   mmlecnmm 1
   ram-“m” :
Figure 5. Alteration, drill hole locations and soil geochemical anomalies over the Beruang Kanan I
prospect
i
The South Zone gold and copper soil anomaly occurs outside the more intense alteration, implying the
alteration (phyillc and advanced argillio) and gold mineralisation are not related. In the South Zone. quartz
+ oopper sulphide veins ocwr within the anomaloust high copper In soil anomaly. Petrological
examination of the Velns show native gold occurs with the chaloopyrite, which explains the oolncldent
popper + gold anomaly in the soil.
Anomalous copper in soil in the West Zone is associated with lower gold in soil anomalism and a lack of
intense alteration. The geochemical surveys across all prospects at Bemang Kanan suggest a complex
minerallsed system spread over a large area, the details of which have yet to be understood. The West
Zone is separated from the other prospects by a north-south shear zone evident by a break In the soil
geochemistry grid and the edge of the mapped north-south zone of phyllll: alteration
8.1.3 Beruang Tengah prospects
Beruang Tengah ls two prospects (eastern prospect and western prospect) that are located
approximately4 kilometres south-east of Bemang Kanan.
The eastern prospect (Eastern Zone) has a central potasslc alteration zone surrounded by phyllic
alteration, which is associated with sheewd quartz + sulphide veins. A cirwlar gold in soil anomaly at the
Eastern Zone closely follows anomalous oopper in soil (Figure 6).
The western prospect (Gold Zone) Is dominated by phyllic alteration or volcanic rocks with associated
Intrusions A gold in soil anomaly is coincident with an erosion resistant ridge of quartz diorite intrusion
and minor quartz Veins found in trenohes (Figure 6). There is no slgnlﬂoant copper in the soil surveys
oonduded over the Gold Zone,
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limlled
AIM Admission Document 41


l
l
l
‘ _: gall   ,,  r l 1 -
 :«t , -  :s‘-   i “   9°?“
:‘   lvw' c V» r_  :  12:“
 r A; : ,, H .2 1; n... as _  , ~  “M
$584 »   V .‘z   . fa= * é _, : We
3  ifs: . “ >3  w, ' 4V i  
i ‘  “"‘ ix  2   “$19 a '1» g"?  a m V
i a  ,V,  , gwe; ; ,1.  V‘ V,  5 éwmw
3 _  3   A? :1 Va  ,1 W; : ,mm ‘
j \‘1'33 Vi  V1413“; 'fis‘i‘! 7 '-  iii-h ‘ v  {i  ‘7' mm” 1
 «     w   _  e 
.-  ‘ use: w  ‘1  m , ,I l
‘ A  . i‘   a“ r V ! l
« r_ V  ;,, tam-V V ' i r
’“ r z? c  : digs»: :1   _- » l
   s   , V  ; é .
, ~  _ (:15:  g    i ,  if i
3%  ,,;f>,*- “:3, gen/,5 ~  V :r- » a, .
   "‘9 “   , \ r «Eta.  ‘ "in
v2  a if  '~ ,, A a  5:: 33:53  £1
Egg -   -  h r - i; _ ﬁtmmmma'mredml
_ a: r ‘   ~ g; “Amnesia;
  , ,  wmroovenAm
V  ﬁr, , Vi; autumn“
’ Vim V a",   V,  mi“  W7, ,,  V. “"vaﬁA-i‘mm‘w‘f‘ V
Figure 6. Alteration, drill hole locations and soil geochemistry for the Beruang Tengah prospects
8.1.4 Mansur prospect
The Mansur prospect is a potassic altered dlurlte and feldspar porphyry intrusion surrounded by potasslc
altered siletone and sandstone sedimentary rocks. lMthIn the altered dlorlte. quartz + K—feldsper
alteration overprints the potassic alteration. The intrusion and sedimentary rocks are overprinted by later
ieldspar porphyry dyka. There is some contact alteration of the host sedlmentary sequence as a result
of heating mm the intrusion.
A gold In soil anomaly is centered on the diorite porphyry Intrusion. Gold in soil anomalies also oocur to
the south olthe dlorite and to the south-west (approximately 1 kilometre from the dlorlte). The gold in soil
anomalles were drill tested by Cyprus Amax Indonesia (Cypnis) in 1596 (Figure 7) without retumlng
signiﬁcant zones of minemllsatlon. This may indicate the gold in soil anomaly Is wldely dispersed in the
soil and more precise targeting is required to intersect the veln systems associated with the dlorlte.
A oopper In soll anomaly occurs in a semi-circular zone around the western and southern edges of the
copper in soil anomaly and coincides with the extent of the potassic altered sedimentary rocks. A
number of trenches have tested the dominant north—south trending copper in soil anomaly at the western
edge of the diorite intrusion. Channel samples of the C-horizon soil from the trenches returned values
that are slmllar to the near surface soil values (all less than 0.2 °/u Cu). however, the bedrock has not
been tested In this area by the KSK shallow drill rigs and Cyprus did not test the copper in soil anomalies
at Mensur.
42 Kalimanian Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


   .       .,     
    .          '  
    :      
r t ~ ~     \ 5;; t ’   .yg xi
 ‘     - . r  ‘r 
1 2V ~~ Mir   e, r?“ my _ z  
We... 1:: ~  :I my 1r 2?. w   , r W.» .; n:
":4 - a 4-: " :     5:: ’ .‘ " K ~ . z »  ,: :
i?» :l ._  r v‘ ’ f‘t: 4:!" fr ,. 3  ﬁg:
6;; xi"; , ngx  ;  , ;.~  3n}, a   
'rkl‘rﬁs   r ’   :‘g‘
   r  ’1' ‘e‘ ~2 ‘. w:  .r
 M  =~  1' 1 2g“. . r
3  ‘  '  $5“ Us  wt ‘1   ’ "
    1 r   -an:§cfdsparPo(ph/ry Q WWW>WW
   1 nits: f: PomsicMeIed Q wmwm
vii-3:." i  ~ .   mm:”””‘ 9—- omissmmm
 t  ~   Dsmmwrm 3.: Wm»
 ngfﬂi’ - ‘  Framed
“3,; 1;,   .. ~ v ~z~ .. '5 reins
  -  . 7 ~~ "  ‘ 5” omymm —— 7mm
  7   .  GEOLOGYMAPOF MANSUR PROSPECT
Figure 7. Geology, soil geochemistry and drillan at the Mansur pmspect
8.2 Jelai—Mewet
Two styles 0! quariz vein have been noted by IGF as belng iypicai 0f the area:
1. White quanz veins which may be culloform handed or with aduleria, which contain fragments of
quartz and host ruck. These styles of mineralisation commonly contain high guld grades. and
2. Heamatlte in quartz veins which are a pale red colour and are out by a ﬁne fracture networks of
quartz which may extend Into the host rock. This quartz stuckwork style of mineralisation hosts
Kalimanlan Gold Carporallon Limited a
AlMAdmission Document


 5;
lower gold grades. however high gold grades may be found associated with the hematite rich 1
quartz. ‘
In drill core. sheer Iones parallel to the quanz veining have been reported. The shear zones contain
friable chlorite schist. poorly consolidated clay 4- silica gouge and siilciﬁed breocia. None of the core is
oriented. however steeply dipping (approximately 70") shear zones are Indicated. This is an important
observation since it Is likely that a vein system controlled by fault zones is likely to be more continuous
(larger tonnage potential) than a network of veins (Figure 5). Bends along faults associated with
mineralisation will result in pinching and swelling of the veins, creating thicker higher grade intersections
In some arses and narrower lower grade Intersections in others. At the time of this report. these detailed
controls on mineralisation are yet to be established. Further exploraan is required to identify the detailed
controls on mineralisation and periodicity of higher grade shoots.
WE 49ml; WE
44W  <Wit‘737 "Kﬁ'riv‘  '  ’i
r Nemnurwmm;   :    
g JELAIV'EINSYSTEM j” : 7:7;   ,ri’itﬁirgﬁfi  i
it:er    '   A \  i Jigs;  ﬁr!
Z:’."-‘“£€£li""ﬂ . 2~ v _ a g i    r ,g
g as. t it» .t a ,  _;,...:; . LAes“ " Iii: i “' WWW»:
_,.::;z‘::.i ,. ,l 5.; 1. s g  ‘3‘ ,3;  ,1 w.
  i ‘ j?  E’ “a "z if 2‘. :3'
my;  ~- :7 i. w;  i3: ’ zit-iii:  a:
 ‘  , r r‘ ’ '  2',  ‘
i t '~.. 1:: '    
\‘ _   e - x . ' .: Q“  “ g1»...
ﬂ     <3   a    3*
r .41. f r.  In »   ‘2 ’ e
,  ,t w , “Lg: ,-z,- .u,. , S
E l "  r‘r « f,  2"”. 3“: ‘2’ :,,‘,' ‘ t2
i    _. i   :1 11$; »  " ~ 
‘ A -»~r  s z  as» m in  n {a  , i is» z
‘ r   ~s  e?   :   “3 a   i » i
i ‘ 3  “’ 't“  19‘ é .    ~ .322  5»
._ V‘:  z”:    " "  »-   :1, it 
gt, ,, ,. ' wt» V   z   “3‘19 2;. : c  a? L- Q 23.} a, 
ei r  <71- : xx»: :1 ~ “gaﬁw K»: i x; am. / , . 1g
 i    "urez'. ~ «- -:   ~ 5 tn
\ :x: a.»   . V \1».  3e 3’
n g:‘  :32 _-"-: ‘ ..  J i {3  g ; 
 t7}; :  '  ‘ 33" . i‘ 
«in :‘i»¢?$.f\'-  » a: ‘ ‘ ~r i : z. 3
«ii wuss-EQ- ,. w.  ,  ;, g;  :- . . z,
a  ’Jsii gin.” ~, ;,;§;  ., ,, », ',  , a!
‘ v "1‘".  :“  '§~%§i7i'   . z E
!   *    z     : om .
z' =.- a 3’2- . 'r.  ~. ~.  A as  ig
  , «5" "1y “‘ V "v   .  3:,,:.‘r:?:’§:§§
l  V V yr ' Eh?   o MWQDHIIHMHKGQ ‘
i w- a ' ' nil urn v. «:- .
r  Mr, ,A' g um , in“ a .1:  :7 Dnﬂﬂwilcm
 i   iii ‘: I‘: ‘- Wham
v, ’ V- '  fer    w ammo
‘i :5 '  :3? if} {3:1 " V  r won-l mli n l
M,   l   .3....:-.;:i::..ig;i“..:::i.
,1,    I.  ._- .mmamh
 .  g;   w: a...“ i
      1
,1‘.  , , 27:73,,   *3 AndcaiivTiilY i
l . - ‘  r  zi’ _—,-;
 - g  ,. gig In as e: .‘ L ,..,i Selim“
  a: ,e    
mm 49mm
Kalimenlen Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


Figure 8. Geology. Vein systems and drill hole locations for the Jeiai-Mewet prospect I
9 Exploration .
9.1 KSK COW '
Regional surveys }
A summary of the regional exploration activity Is shown in Table 2. i
Exploration activity 1987-94 1995-99 2002 2004 
Reconnaissance 672 samples 569 samples 3 samples l
mapping and sampling 3
Aeromagnetic survey 8.000 line Reprocessing and .
kilometres reinterpretation ‘
Structural analysis Incorporating ‘
aeromagnetic. .
satellite and aerial
photogmmy
Table 2. Summary of regional exploration activity in the KSK Cow.
During 1987 and 1988 regional stream sediment sampling identiﬁed gold mineralisation at Mansur,
Lakapoi and Tambang Huol.
A regional magnetic survey was completed in 1998 for the purposa of better understanding the geology
of the region and Identifying target areas (inthsive systems inythe volcanic belts). Interpretation of the
original data and interpretation of the re-proceseed date (in 2003) indicated 38 targets on the KSK COW
and added some understanding of the geology and alteration at the Beruang Kanan. Beruang Tengah
and Mansur prospects.
Soil auger sampling over the follow-up areas irom the stream sediment surveys deﬁned areas of copper
and gold anomalism. Different soil sampling techniques have been used at different limes. At Beruang
1.476 C-horizon. ridge and spur sampla were collected at 50 metre Intervals. Later C-horizon soil
samples were collected along north-south lines (spaoed 100—200 metres apart with samples taken at 20-
40 metres along the line), At Barol. 407 C-horizon soil samples have been taken on east-west lines. The
early samples were assayed for Cu. Pb. Zn, and Me. The samples were analysed for Au if Cu exceeded
500 ppm. At Mansur1,488. 2-3 kg samples were oollected at 0.3-0.5 metres depth (which may be prone
to slope soil weep and distortion of the anomaly). These were analysed for Au, Cu. Pb. Zn. and Mo and
As.
In 2003. regional Interpretation of Landsat and ASTER (satellite data). the regional magnetic data.
Radarsat and air photographs was done to provide a more detailed view of the regional stmcture of Dow.
This work Identiﬁed a number of regional structura that may be important for mineralisation.
Earoi prospects
A summary of the exploration activity in the Baroi prospects (Central and East Zone. Far East Zone) is
shown in Table 3.
Ka/Imantan Gold Corporation Limited
AIMAdnrissior-r Document



Exploration 1995-99 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
activity
Mapping. trenching 14 74 564 samples 145 398
and sampling samples samples samples samples
Petrography (Terry 9 samples 11 samples 15
Leach) samples
PIMA (alteration 450 samples
analysis)
Ground IP and 10.3 line 52.4 line
magnetic surveys kilometres kilometres
far east central &
zone east zone
Shallow drilling 9 holes (634 10 holes 2 holes
m) central & (686 in) far (164 m)
east zone. east zone central 8.
17 holes east zone
(1 .197 m) far
east zone
Medium drilling 18 holes 3 holes 3 holes
(4.934 m) (902 m) (approx 876
far east far east m) central &
zone zone east zone
Deep drilling 1 hole 4 holes ‘
(539 m) (2.394 ml l
tar east far east ‘
zone zone ‘
Table 3. Summary of exploration activity In Barol Prospects (Central and East Zones and Far East 
Zone) i
In 2002 and 2003. access to the Baroi area was possible via logging roads that had opened up the area
at that time. During 2002—2003 geological mapping. soil sampling and trench sampling were done to
tollow up on mineralisation discovered ln nearby creeks during regional mapping done In 1997. Analysis
oi 450 rock samples from surface and drill core was done using PIMA (short wavelength infra~red
reﬂectance spectroscopy) to identify alteration assemblages. Thid< clay soils in the Baroi area made
recovery of soil samples from the C—horizon difﬁcult. Nevertheless. in SRK‘s opinion, the data provided by
the soil programs is useful at a regional scale for Identiﬁcation of mineralised centres that required some
follow up exploration activity.
At Baroi Far East. Veins were mapped. from which samples were collected which returned high Cu. Zn.
Pb and Ag. Selected better Beroi Far East surface channel results are tabled in Table 4 below. High Cu
and Ag values from the soil geochemistry surveys and alteration (argillic) mapping deﬁned a broad north—
south zone of mineralisation (approximately 500 metres wide) at the western edge of a magnetic high
that has been deﬁned oy ground magnetic surveys.
Sample No Metres Cu °/. F17 7. Zn V. Au_(glt) Ag (gm
0633-5 12 3.90 0.01 0.03 0.07 53.3
672-5 12 6.06 0.17 0.40 0.72 197.5
1800 & 1845-5 9 4.16 0.24 0.76 0.05 62
1802 & 1863-4 9 0.03 0.17 3.79 0.08 24.7
1869-71 9 2.42 0.54 3.26 0.16 149.7
0641-3 9 14.03 0.04 0.66 0.11 464.3
0669-71 a 3.63 0.01 0.51 0.07 46
024180330 6 6.68 3.51 5.70 0.61 240
0648—9 6 6.73 0.04 0.32 0.14 1045
676—7 6 15.60 0.02 0.25 0.14 2405
632-3 6 6.30 0.02 0.17 0.04 103
724-5 6 4.82 0.30 1.84 0.04 1195
822-3 5 7.68 0.52 0.70 0.05 3325
Table 4. Selected better mimics channel sample results at Earol Prospect (Far East Zone)
Kalimentan Gold Corpomﬁon Limited
AIM Admission Document


In 2003 nine shallow drill holes In the Central and East Zones and seventeen shallowydriil holes In the Far
East Zone were also completed at that time. These holes tested shallow intersections of exposed high
grade Cu—Zn (base metal) 2Au :Ag veins. some of which are seveml metres wide at the surface.
In 2004. ground magnetic and IP surveys over the Earol Far East Zone were completed to follow up an
anomalous soil geochemistry and provide a better understanding of the geology and alteration. These
surveys were followed up with additional IP and ground magnetic surveys in 2005. In 2004. drilling
focused on me vein systems at the Far East Zone. Extension of the ground magnetic and iP surveys into
the Central and East Zones were done In 2005.
Most recently, deep drilling (approximately 600 metres to end of hole) at the Far East Zone targeted high
chargeability IF anomalla. co-lncident ground magnetic lows (possibly representing alteran'on systems).
surface advanced argiliic alteration and regional fault intersections. The drilling of these deep holes was
done to test the potential of a postulated deep porphyry intrusion which may be responsible for the
mineralisation. Four deep drill holes were completed in 2006 in the Earol Far East Zone without
intersecting a porohyry Intrusion, although potassic alteration at depth was observed in one hole, The drill
holes did intersect volcanic hosted Cu—Zn (base metal) :tAu :Ag and quartz-chlorite—Cu veins. many of
which returned encouraging grades over signiﬁcant down-hole widths. The ﬂuid that formed these veins
is liker to be a result oi cooling of an intrusive complex at depth
Barol Far East Zone drill hole and surface rock chip and trench samples at early stage vein material (Zn-
Pb—Cu~Ag massive sulphide veins) consistently return high cu. Zn, Pb and Ag as suggested by the
mineral assemblages. eg. BF05 drilled 24 metres (from 40 metres down hole) down dip of a vein and
returned 5.08% Cu. 1.24% Zn and 88 g/t Ag (out of a total mlnerallzed Intersection tram 2,45m of 83
metres at 2.6% Cu. 015% Pb. 1.8% Zn. 61glt Ag and 0.229)! Au). Current information and observations
made during this review at Earol Far East Zone indicates the vein density for the early stage Veins would
not be high enough to form a signiﬁcant raource. Late stage chalcopyrite(Cu)—quartz veins are more
extensive and consistently return high Cu and Ag Values. These late stage veins have greater potential
for producing a resource and need to be systematically drill tested.
Similar vein systems to those at Baroi Far East Zone reportedly occur in the Baroi Central Zone and in
small mineralised centres approximately one kilometre northeast and one kilometre south-west oi the
Far East Zone mineralisation centre. Current lnfonnatlon suggests these centres are less extensively
mlneralised than the centre oi the Far East Zone.
Velns observed at surface and in drill core dip steeply to the south west and strike south-east (120140“).
The orientation of the veins and the zone of veins as mapped suggest drilling to the northeast would be
optimal. Relatively few holes have been systematically drilled in this direction. such that the true
dimensions (lithe minemllsed system have yet to be aiabllshed.
Repeat assays on rock chip samples from the Barol prospect sent to different analytical labomtories had
a strong correlation (correlation coefﬁcient of 0.994 for Cu. 0.993 for Zn. 0.995 for Au. 0.956 for Ag)
Indicating accuracy of the results between the labs and reducing risk of analytic error aﬂecting results.
Beruang prospects
A summary of the exploration activity in the Eeruang prospects (Beruang Kanan and Bemang Tengah) is
shown in Table 5.
Exploration 1987-94 1995-99 2000 2001
activity
Mapping and 950 samplﬁ 2,231 samples (B Kanan) 563 samples 161 samples
sampling (B Kanan) 95 samples (B Tengah Gold Zone) (E Kanan) (B Kanan)
Petrography 91 samples (B Kanen) 5 samples (B 21 samples
(Terry 14 samples (a Kanan North) Kanan) (o Kanan)
Leach) 22 samples (B Tengah)
PIMA 561 samples
(altemtlon
analysis)
Ground |P 12 line km (B Kanari) 30.5 line km
123 line km (a Kanan North) (5 Karian)
 ,_  __  ,,.,,.,.12;4Ji_ne_l<_ml5Tenseliaaia , , WW, , WE
Drilling 10 holes (1.922 m) (a Kanan) 9 holes
5 holes (871 m) (E Kanan North) (1.967 m)
3 holes (702 m) (B Tengah) (a Kanan)
4 holes (611 m) (a Tengah Gold Zone)
Table 5. Summary of exploration activity in Eeruang prospects lBeiuang Kanan and Beruang
Tengah)
Ka/Imanten Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


I
l
l
Bemang Kanan and Beniang Tengah are two prospects within the same circular topographic feature 
Identiﬁed in regional satellite and magnetic images and interpreted to be related to a deepseated
intrusive complex and possibly alteration of the volcanic host rocks caused as a result of the Intrusions
From 1996 to 1999. 1.190 rock chip and channel samplu. 1.476 ridge and spur soII auger samples and
130 kilometres of grid soil samples at 200 metre spacing have been collected at the Beruang prospects.
The earlier samples were analysed tor Cu. Pb. Zn. Mo. As. Ag. so and Au and later samples analysed
only for Cu and for other elements It Cu was greater than 500 ppm.
Also In the late 1990's. the Beniang prospects were mapped for geology and alteration, IP surveys have
been completed to identify sulphide and intrusion centres. PIMA was used to Identify aitemtlon
assemblages. In addition samples from surface and drill core have been petrographically described to
conﬁrm host rock composition and alteration assemblages.
At Beruang Tangah Gold Zone 415 channel samples (each sample taken over two metres) returned
assays oi up to 11 g/t Au. Subsequently tour drill holes (totaling 562 metres) tested high gold in soil
anomalies and high gold values from the trench sampling program.
Drlll core from Eemang Kanan which was observed during this review indicated a strongly altered (phyliic
and advanced argillic) centre Which was strongly deformed In some areas Quartz + pyrite + chaioopyrite
In veins are associated with a strong cleavage in the altered rock. suggesting a strong structural control
to the veins.
Mansur porphyry ALI-Cu prospect
A summary of the exploration activity at the Mansur porphyry Au-Cu prospect is shown in Table 6.
Exploration activity 1987-94 199589 2001 2002
Mapping and sampling 1,301 samples 72 samples
Fetrography (Terry Leach) 5 samples
ﬁnned liarlélrlasnsticac .  27A “"9 km ,, 77,,i,
Drilling 11 holes (1.109 m) 7 holes (2.072 m)
3 adlts (where drill
pads could not be
located)
Table 6. Summary of exploration activity at Mansur porphyry Au-Cu prospect
The Mansur porphyry intrusion was discovered in 1993 by mapping up stream from anomalous stream
sediment anomalies In the Mansur Creek. The source of the anomalies is an intrusive system that is
expressed in the regional magnetic data as a prominent high In 1994. the predecessor to KSK
completed further stream sediment sampling. trenching. rock chip sampling. soil geochemistry. an eleven
hole shallow drill hole program and the construction Of three adiS in 1994. This was lurther followed up
with ground magnetic and IP geophysical surveys over the Mansur system. which was done to further
understand the geology and alteration.
One north—south trending soil auger line (81.200 E) is highly anomalous In copper. Copper analyses of
trench channel samples ofoxldlzed. weathered bedrock in the area returned values of less than 02% Cu
and up to 106 glt Au. The low copper values in the bedrock may be a function of soil creep (the bedrock
source for the high Cu values may be upslope). The results from the trenching do reduce the Cu
prospectivlty of the Mansur system in that area. however. the remainder of the system remains poorly
tested for Cu and Au.
In 1996. PT Cyprus Amax Indonesia (Cyprus) completed inﬂll soll sampling (237 samples). trenching (50
metres) and seven drill holes (totaling 2.072 metres) Petrological examination 01 some of the drill core
was done in 2001.
Within the soil sample analyses. trench channel sample analyses and drill core analyses. the highly
anomalous gold assays are commonly associated with only low copper. however the anomalous copper
results may also be associated with elevated gold. A working model of two stages of mineralisation (early
copper + gold. and later gold only) needs to be further tested.
Drill core irom shallow holes at Mansur was obseNed during this review. SRK's observations correlate
high gold Values in quartz + carbonate veins with carbonate 4' sericite alteration of the host volcanic at the
edge of the porphyry system. In SRK's opinion. this style of vein mineralisation. although apparentiy distal
from a nearby hydrothermal centre. forms a sound basis for further exploration of the Mansur system for
a Au 2 Cu resource.
Kalimsntsn Gold Carporaﬁan limited
AIM Admission Document


9.1.1 Drilling .
Three drilling techniques have been successfully employed to drill test targets.
1. A “scout drill rlg' Is owned by KSK and has been used to test a number of prospects anciuding
Baroi. Mansur. Bemang Kanan and Bemang Tengah). This drill is capable of being deployed
quickly and is able to test to down hole depths of approximately 80 metres with a change In the
size 01 the drill bit from N0 (47.6 mm diameter core) to BQ (36.4 mm diameter core) at
approximately 30 to 35 metres down hole. The scout drill rig is capable of being mobilised and
set up manually. negating the need lor helicopter or heavy vehicle transport. Drilling costs
including drill pad set up. mobilisation oi drill rig. drilling, core recovery. sampling and assay has
been achieved at a rate of approximately US$55 per metre.
2. A larger drill rig. also owned by KSK is also capable of being mobilised and set up manually.
This drill rig is capable or drilling down to depths of approximately 300 metres with a change in
the drill bit from NO to 50 required at approximately 100 metres down hole. Drilling posts
Includan drill pad set up. mobilisaﬂon of drill rig. drilling. core recDVery. sampling and assay has
been achieved ata rate of approximately US$60 per metre.
3. Contact drilling using larger drill rigs with hellpopter support has been used to test up to 600
metres down hole. Deep drilling at Mansur using large drill rigs has been done in the past under
Joint venture with Cypms. Deep drilling has also recently been completed under contract for
KSK at the Barbi prospect on the KSK COW. Drill cure recovered using these drill rigs Is
commonly HQ (core recovered is 54 mm in diameter) to approximately 400 metres down hole
and NO beyond these depths. Drilling costs including drill pad set up. mobilisation 01 drill rig.
drilling. core recovery. sampling and assay has been achieved at a rate or approximately
US$120 per metre. }
Barol prospect E
A summary of the drilling at Baroi prospects In shown in Table 7. Drilling at Earol was done during 2003 I
and 2004 and most recently, deep drilling was completed early In 2006. The focus of the exploration i
drilling at Barol has been on The Far East Zone. Less drilling has been done at the Central Zone and i
some areas between the Central Zone and the Far East Zone. 1
.
Prospect Number of holes Metres
Far East Zone 52 10.172
Central Zone 8 823
East Zone and South Zone 11 1,981 i
Table 7. Summary of drilling at the Earol prospects ‘
The better drill intersections at Earoi have come from the Far East Zone. where drilling has intersected
early chalcopyrite + galena + sphalerite + pyrite veins and later quartz + chalcopyrite + chlorlte veins. ‘
which extend in a south-east direction as a swarm throughout the prospect. The vein system has several
hundreds of metres to one kilometre of strike length. is approximately 500 metres wide and extends down i
dip for several hundred metres. Although Individual early stage sulphide veins are up to 10 meb'es thick. i
the number and location or these veins has not encouraged more Intense drilling. 
Four deep drill holes. drilled into the western edge of a magnetic high intersected predominantly narrow i
Veins (quartz + chlorite). The best intersections of these veins are shown in Table 8. 1
l
_____—_______.—____— l
Hole Orientation From - To Metres Cu Pb Zn Ag Au 3
(azimuth I dip) (1) (1) (7-) (“/n) ('In) (9") iii/t) ‘
BF-4 260 I 60 52.8 - 76.3 24 1.53 0.25 2.27 20.6 0.13 }
BF-5 210 I 60 2.4 - 85.4 83 2.64 0.62 1.35 61.1 0.22 i
Incl. 2.4- 31.4 29 3.13 1.71 4.21 97.1 0.57 .
incl. 40.4 — 34.4 24 5.05 0.04 1.24 88.5 0.02 :
BF-S 70 I 50 6.8 - 36.8 30 2.1 E 0.07 0.37 53.7 0.05 ;
BF023 210 I 60 252 - 258 S 0.82 ’7 .
BF024 230 I 60 13.5 — 61.5 43 0.52 0.26 0.18 28.1 0.02 ‘
BF281030 230 I 60 1.0 —42.8 41.0 3.18 0.99 1.85 101 0.16
Incl. 1.0— 12.0 11 11.05 1.64 2.55 296 0.24
BF29I033 28.0 - 64.9 37 0.73 1.08 0.02 144.7 0.23
BF037 vertical 65 — 71 6 0.67 7
BF040 210 I 80 36.3— 57.3 31 1.04 0.59 2.9 29.6 0.17
BFO‘iB vertical 154 - 184 30 1.12 0.2 0.8 29.4 0.02
Ind. 163 - 175 12 2.2 0.05 0.5 47.8 0.02
Table 8. Selected drill hole results from the Barn! Far East Zone
Kalimanian Gold Corporarl’an Uni/ted n
AIM Admission Document


(1) Note that the widths expressed in the table above are intersected widths which are not necessarily
coincident with true widths.
The drill core. surface geochemistry and surface exposure (mapped geology) indicate copper i
mineralisation occurs In narrow later stage veins which tollow e southeast trend. The orientation of the i
vein systems at surface suggests optimal drilling to intersect the Vein systems near suriace would be to ‘
the northeast. Porphyry intrusive geological models that have been tested have not necessarily involved
drilling In this direction. As a result. the true dimension and grade of the Vein systems near surface has
yet to be established. However. observations made during this study suggest there is potential for e
mineralized zone 600 to 1000 metres in strike length and 100 to 200 metres In width. with the veining
open at depth.
Berueng prospect
Drilling at Beruang was done during the period from 1997 — 2001. The drilling completed to date ls shown
in Table 9. .
—_—.______—_
Prospect Holes Metros
Bemeng Kanan 19 3.859
Beruang Kanan (North Polymetellic) 6 e71
Bemeng Tengah 3 702
Beruang Tengah Gold Zone 4 611
Table 9. Summary oidrilling anhe Beruang prospects
Eeruang Kanan
Drilling at Eeruang Kanen Main Zone (1998-2001) retumed the best intersections shown in Table 10.
__.—____—__—._
Hole End of Hole (In) Orientation From —To (1) Metres (1) Cu (“4)
BK2 171.5 70“—>090° 4.5 — 171.5 167 0.59
Incl. 4.5 — 97.5 93 0.75
BK3 240.4 sour/0° 6.4 — 85.4 79 0.89
BK4 200.2 90‘ﬁ0' 6.0 — 111.0 105 0.53
BK5 212.7 60°—>270° 3.0 —105.0 102 0.62
Incl. 3.0 - 53.0 63 0.75
Table 10. Selected dﬁll hole results tram Benlarlg Kanan Main Zone
(1) Note that the widths expressed In the table above are lntersected widths which are not necessarily
winddent with true widths.
BKZ end 5K3 have been drilled from the same pad in opposite directions in the phyllic to advanced
argllllc alteration (see the interpretative crossseotion in Figure 9 below). The drilling indicates a
signiﬁcant zone at narrow vein and disseminated mineralisation which returns 0.7—0.9% Cu. BK5 was
drilled 500 metres south of BK2 and EKS in the phyilic alteration. Indicating there may be signiﬁcant
tonnage or low grade wpper mineralisation on a north-south trend et Berueng Kanan.
Kali/Iranian Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


V W gm em .
.. r WMMWW _. beseea
we. _ ‘  , r7 ,j-V‘ - Z 6  v.  WV 7 7  V __
, sire: is s" a " - ~  s
  y y 7:. I M   i5;
r  . *1 ‘14.: . i if  I. ‘ V
     ‘
‘  i J:  I:
E »:‘  “:5 r: ‘ w
v in”; mumm— siege:  ~ " ‘ v 15% 3  /
u  W. i ‘~   /
 [fi’m’f W.“— 5" m‘w” w e‘ , ,____N . ‘ :I  , ,
 shower/i mm . .: r- A.  i
ism. W!  ‘ 16"  i
 2:.” W /’ My?“ ’ : ‘ .72? l
r w ‘ (2th! l . ‘H V
l :va V :5: ~
Figure 9. Beruang Kanan Prospect - Interpretative cross section with drill holes projected on to
line 10050N showing the distribution of alteration and sulphide mineral types (from Leach, 2001)
At the North Folymenallic Zone prospect. drilling intersected Pb, Zn, Cu sulphide veins with high All and ‘
Ag values In a pervasiver quartz—clay—serlclte altered zone. The best drilling result from luur drlll holes in
mls area is shown in Table 11.
___—.___..—_._.—._——
Hole End of Hole gm) From — To (1) Meme (1) Au (git)
BKZ1 123.1 30—34 4 1.3
Table 11. Selected drIII hole result: lrom Beruang Kanan (North Polymetalllc Zone)
(1) Note that the widths expressed In the iable above are intersected widths which are not necessarily
Dolncldent with true widths.
Eerueng Tangah
At Beruang Tengah. seven holes (totaling 1,266 m) have been drilled to fellow up on mappan and soil
sampling programs and bedruck trenching programs.
At Bemang Tengah Eastern Zone. three holes (totalan 704 m) have been drilled. The best result is ,
1 shown in Table 12.
_—_.—__.—...___—._—
Hole End of Hole (In) Orientation From -To (1) Merres (1) Au 1in) an iv.)
BT2 250 60-w200' 35 — 39 3 5 0.24
Table 12. Selected drill hole results from Bmang Tengsh Eastern Zone
(1) Note that the widths expressed in the lable above are intersected widths which are not necessarlly
coincident with true widihs,
At Beruang Tengah Gold Zone, tour hula (for 562 m) have been drilled. The best raults are shown in
Table 13.
____——___.——
Hole End of Hole (In) From - To (1) Metres (1) Au (git)
621 250 200 — 204 4 1.4
(322 154 15 — 19 4 1.2
GZS 105 14 — 18 4 1.5
Table 13. Selected drill hole resulﬁ from Beruang Tongan Gold Zone
__——_—#—_—._—._
Kalimanten Gold Carporen'on LImIted
AIM Admission Document 51


(1) Note that the widths exprased in the table above are intersected widths which are not necessarily
coincident with true widths.
Mansur prospect
In 1994 KSK predecessor completed an eleven hole (totalllng 1.078 rn) shallow drilling program at
Mansur targeting surface gold geochemistry. The best raults are shown In Table 14.
______—__.—_.—._.—._———
Hole From - Tc (1) Metres (1) Au (git)
SMHS 31 — 32 1 6.1
and 59 - 50 1 5.7
SMHB 12 — 13 1 4.1
SMH3 33 - 39 1 3.2
SMHS 31 — 32 1 2.1
Table 14. Selected drill hole results from Mansur(porphyry Au-Cu) prospect
(1) Note that the widths expressed in the table above are intersected widths whidi are not necessarily
coincident with true wldthsl
This program was followed up with ground magnetic and IP geophysical surveys, inﬁll soil geochemistry,
trenching and peoographic analyses. The results of this work provided JV partner Cyprus with targets for l
a further seven drill hola (totalling 2.072 m). Although surface trenches provided channel samples that l
returned up to to metres at0.5 g/tAu, the drilling did not return signiﬁcant results. l
Repeat gold assays from a number of samples from Mansur prospect have large variations suggestive of
inﬂuence by coarse gold in the samples, The same effect is less obvious in channel samples from the
three edits driven at Mansur Prospect where drilling was Inaccessible. The coarse gold problem reported
from the drill core may be a function of the smaller sample volume retrieved from drill core.
9.1.2 Sampling Method and Approach
Core from the KSK COW was placed into wooden core boxes on the drill platform and marked with depth
down hole at the start and ﬁnish of each run. The core was then transported by hand to a central core
logging and measurement facility built on site at each drlll program. Halt core has been sampled at 1
metre Intervals only where there is an lndicatlon of alteration or mineralisation that would be of interest.
9.1.3 Sample Prepamtion, Analyses and Security
The core ls measured for recovery and geologically logged prior to sampllng. The geologist marks the
core where sampling had been deemed necessary and haltcore ls sampled at one metre intervals. The
core is cut in half using a chisel and one half of the core is brushed into a plastic sample bag for analysis.
An aluminum tag with the hole number and sample interval ls placed into the bag and the bag is marked
with the hole number and sample Interval. The plastic sample bag is taped down and the tape Is also
marked with the hole number and sample interval.
Two or three sample bags are placed into a larger bag for transporting to Palangka Raya. On arrival in
Palangka Raye the larger bags are checked for damage. Broken bags are not sent for analysis. Core
samples are repacked and sent by commercial courier for analysis to lndoassays Laboratory in
Ealikpapan.
lndoassays Laboratory In Balikpapan produce pulp and residue from each sample. Fifty grams of pulp ls
produced from each sample for analysis. Residue from each sample ls repacked into a new plastic bag
by the laboratory and given a reference number. Pulp is packaged into an enVelope. Both residue and
pulp is returned to Falangka Raya and stored in a separate facility at the KSK ofﬁces.
Geochemical sampling and drill testing procedures used by KSK are of a good standard for regional
exploration. The drill core may be more precisely sampled using a diamond saw to split the core and
blanks and standards are not submitted by KSK to check consistency of assay results. However, check
samples that are analysed by the Interlek Laboratory in Jakarta do not Indicate any issues with regard to
analytical imprecision or bias. Although the authors of this report have not reviewed these laboratories
and their procedures. SRK Consulting undershnds that both laboratorla are of international standard
and are capable of promptly ramming reliable assay results.
9.1.4 Data Veriﬁcation
KGGL periodically send pulp and residue samples to PT Intertek Utama Services in Jakarta lor analysis
to test the precision of the analysis results received from PT lndcassays Laboratories (Balikpapan). A
small number ofthese results (from Barol) were reviewed as part of this study, however, SRK have done
no re-sampling, re-analysls or data base veriﬁcation dunng this review.
__—__—__—_—_..———
Ksiimenon Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


9.2 Jelai-Mewet ' '
C—horizon ridge and spur soil sampling by Ice was analysed for Au, Ag, As, Cu. Pb. Zn and so. From
these surveys. broad north-south vending Au and As geochemical anomalies were mapped. which
followed exposed quartz veins and siliciﬁed ridges. Closer spaced soil geochemical sampling. geological
mapping. trenching and rock chip sampling of veins deﬁned the current prospects.
Early exploration identiﬁed a number of north-south trending vein systems. The main vein systems from
west to east are known as the Mewet Vein, Sembawang Vein and the Nyabi-Adau Vein. These are
accompanied by a number of smaller veins that strike north-northeast. northeast and north-horﬂ'twest.
The Obi Vein (a subsidiary of the Sembaweng Vein) has not been drilled. but ICG reported 15m at 3.82
git Au from trench TRMW15 which contained a quartz breccl'a near a contact between dacite porphyry
and andesite turf. The contact possibly represents a fault zone.
A surface investigation of the vein systems by SRK Consulting for this review indicated the presenoe of
vein material at the Mewet and Nyabl-Adau veins without the presence of a major fault. As is common
with low-sulphidatlon systems. high gold grades in veins without the presence of a major stnicture
indicates low tonnage potential. The Semhawang Vein at the centre at the ﬁeld is a brecoia. which
appears to be linked to a fault system. Veins and breccias associated with fault systems (such as that at ‘
Sembawang) have a greater chance of providing the higher tonnage and grade required to form a i
signiﬁcant low-suiphidation eplthennal deposit. 1
9.2.1 Drilling i
i
Drilling at Jelai-Mewet had been undertaken by IGF at the Mewet Vein. Nyabi-Adau Vein and I
Sembawang Vein. IGF used a man-portable drill rig which collected P0 (85 mm diameter). HQ (70 mm
diameter) and NO (47.6 mm diameter) core from immediately under the soil cover. Down-hole surveying
of the drill holes was done at 50 metre Intervals for the ﬁrst 17 atthe 26 drill holes. After drill hole JMO17
was surveyed, no orientations were taken as a result of down-hole camera malfunction.
Core recoveries in the Mewet Vein (JM011 — JM022) average 92.4%. Core recovery for the Sembawang
drill holes was also high. i
I
The drilling at the northern Mewet veins intersected a vertically continuous vein system over a 165 metre [
strike. High grade intersections on a 150 metre strike length section of the Mewet Vein remain open
along strike to the south and are open down dip. All holes that reached target depth at Mewet Intersected
quartz veining and/or quartz matrix supported vein brecoias. many oi whim returned high grade gold
values. AuzAg ratios from the quartz veins are reported to be 1:1 to 1:2. A controlling fault was not i
observed at suriaoe or in drill core photos. which may indicate the Mewet Vein is an isolated mineralised 
system. Further work is required to conﬁrm this and close the extent of the veining. The better results
from the drill holes are presented in Table 15 and Figure 10. l
E‘—
Drill Hole From - To (In) intersection (in) Assay (git Au) i
(1) “l
m
JM011 26.3—28.4 2.1 5.9
JMU12 57.0—58.7 1.7 11.1 i
JMO13 333— 40.2 1.9 7,5 
JM015 56.6 - 58.0 1.4 9.5
and 67.5 — 69.3 1.8 7.4
and 59.3 - 70.8 1.5 7.4
JM018 115.0—1195 4.5 6.4
JM019 185.1 — 191.2 6.1 5.6
JM021 125.5 — 131.5 6.1 2.6
m
Table 15. Selected results from Jelai-Mewet drilling _
I
(1) Note that the widths expressed in the table above are interseded widths which are not necessarily
coincident with true Widths.
Shallow drilling of the intersection between the Nyahi and Adau veins (JM001 — JMDtO) encountered
8.6m at 2.1 glt Au, in the ﬁrst hole (JM001). however a further nine notes In the same area failed to
intersect similar gram in the quartz-rich ieult system. Surface trenching oi the Nyabi Vein above JMoot
returned 13 m at 1.42 git Au from quartz vein stockwork. Trenchihg of the Adau Vein. approximately 50 i
Ra—
Kallmaliran Gold Corporation leitsd
AIM Admission Document 53


V metres north of JMODl returned 12 m at 1.3 g/t Au, however this area has not been drill tested The
drilling has tested approximately 200 metres of a total strike length of 1.300 metres of surface veining.
delineated by mapping and surfaoe soil and rock chip geochemistry.
The Sembawang Vein is 1200 m In strike and is associated with a weaker surface geochemlml anomaly.
A number of surface trenches reported encouraging quartz vein mineralisation, many of which returned
encouraging gold values over several metres. Of the four drill holes that were completed in the
Sembawang vein system. only one appears to have tested the fault and vein mineralisation Hole JM024
returned 4.1 m at 4.3 git Au from 57.4 m. immediately south of surface trench TRMW18A which returned
5 m at 4.8 9/! Au Other drill holes failed to Intersect signiﬁcant mineralisation despite the positive surface
trench geology and assay results. This is likely a result of the non-optimal location of the drill holes as a
result of a poor understanding of the fault and vein relationships and role of a number of the vein splays
associated with the Sembawang Veinr Further work is required to Increase current understanding of the
continuity of the Sambaan system and test the gold resource potential.
“73%” s . ‘ " “ﬁlm‘s;  - ’rt‘vzkit‘g‘e» ,  3’5 “$493le .
: .r k t
 A l f B;
“7‘ Mm JW‘lD 2 mm M12 Mn 7‘ ‘ ‘
z «m k , ‘ wach . my
‘ . \.\_ r t, t ,_ v x \ ugh-EQS-n.lJtmﬂlngp-mw i 1
V 2 I " l ‘e ' a“  maxim-t outrun“. 
 g k '« \5  ‘1, - roams-.52.; x@ﬁJprmIﬂ ‘
 \   x 2 I
 a. I; v’  ‘ 51.nmswwwmmxmmu, , l
:s _ ' s . s ‘t - 
r r ‘I‘ » g \\ .= ‘ t \x. 
w A ' - \‘ .r . . 0‘. "
list.” gin :_ g {3 r when {x : and? l
g turns—nun Mm um Tye"? “3, v~ Xusomtssm, ‘ mam. ..\ ‘ 
-‘ V 'g ,  I t 3 Qt, ‘52
t e s:  r a  I
Lam—3i -  _ ’x. tap." t3; E
t _ , r as _ ' g4:
;, :e‘tntglmtzageamL»  I ’r 1; r
   *   \ I _
‘ IStNmJNJM mnuqehlrhpnm -  nus-n I 
i7.ltlm-2mlln.lmrn@140ppm I . §  r 1/ . ' <
r . , g, s
 awauammama |.7ﬂppll%k|v—-  ’
I  um  e m )9 .1 :4 [I
~ - r , g_ :3: _
_ 2 ﬁg w §_,:_,%; _
3 mm  «max » ‘ «meow ’4‘?"me ' {~u;;.,r.t ‘ ~ w a n,  ' - u l
Figure 10. Jelal Gold Prospect— Mewet Vein, Cross Section 356,450N
9.2.2 Sampling Method and Approach
Core from the Jelai-Mewet drill programs was logged. photographed and out using diamond saw at a
facility near Mewet Village. Photographs of core from holes JM0011-JM026 were rew'ewed during this
review. Half core was sampled with a minimum sample interval of 10 cm and a maximum interval of one
metre In drill core that lacked Indications of attention or mineralisation. quarter core was sampled over
two metre intervals. 1
9.2.3 Sample Preparation, Analyses and Security i
Samples were transported to FT lndo Assay in Bailkpapan and analysed for gold by ﬁre assay and for
silver by AAS. Limited samples were submitted to PT Indo Assay in Jakarta and PT Inchoape Ulama In
Jakarta for check analyses. iCG report a strong oorrelation between assay results for repeat analyses
from different labs (correlation coefﬁcient of 0.979 for samples that returned up to 1 on Au and a
oorrelation coefﬁcient of 0.998 for Au from 1—5 g/tAu). This also suggests a low nugget effect for gold in
the samples that returned up to 5 git Au. There Is no Information regarding the use of standards or blanks |
In the samples sent for analysis by Ice. I
—.—_____—.—__
Kalimanten Gold Corponaﬁon Limited
AIMAdmission Document
l
I


After logging. photographing and sampling. IGC transported the core to a central facility near the airport
in Tarakan. The core was left In a storage shed. which has subsequenti’y deteriorated. The core has been
dumped in a pile on the ilcor ot the derelict warehouse where it has subsequeme deteriorated, SRK is of
the opinion that this core will he of no use to KGCL due to its condition.
9.2.4 Data Veriﬁcation
All data available to KGCL and available to SRK during this review was reported by IGF in a number of
reports Mitten during exploration. Neither KGCL nor SRK have been able to verify the data base or any
of the sample analyses at this time. however ﬁeld visits undertaken during this review indicate the style of
mineralisation encountered ls consistent with the results reported. The initial stages of the proposed
exploration by KGCL will locus on repeat sampling of some of the work done by REP,
10 Adjacent Properties
The Piton deposit. located approximately ten kilometres to the south for Bemeng, has been mined by
local miners (both hard rock and alluvial) for the past 20 years, No production data are available tor these 
operations. .
In recent years. there has been some small scale alluvial gold mining by local miners in the Mansur 1
River, downstream from the Mansur porphyry Cu-Au prospect. No production data are available. ‘
There are no other known wrrent or historically Endive properties immediately adjacent to the either the
KSK CoW or Jelai—Mewet project. 
11 Mineral Processing and Metallurgical Testing 
No mineral processing or metallurgical tat work has been undertaken to date on either the KSK Cow or 
Jelai-Mewet project. f
i
12 Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve Estimates l
i
At the current time no Mineral Resource or Raerve estimates have been prepared for either the KSK i
Cow or Jelal-Mewet projects. l
13 Other Relevant Data and information i
13.1 Planned expenditure '
in light of the results of the work undertaken to date. KGCL intend to undertake further exploration of both i
the KSK Cow and Jelai-Mewet project areas. The proposed work Is summarized in Table 16. ‘
Asset Prospect Proposed Programme Duration Cost ‘
KSK COW All Review and consolidation of Approx 12 -1E US$2.500.0DO (to
prospects prior to 8 hole deep months Oxiana)
drilling programme by Oxiena l
Jelalr - Mapping. trenching. and Approx 6 - 12 US$760.000
Mewet approximate 4.000m drill months (.0 KGCL)
programme
Table 16. KGCL project: - planned work programme and expenditure
For the KSK Cow. pursuant to the heads of agreement with Oxlana. It Is proposed that Oxiane review l
and compile the exploration results to date to reﬁne and prioritise targets for drill mtlngt It Is estimated
that this programme will take approximately 12-18 months at an expected cost of US$2.500,000 to
Oxiana. I
At Jelal-Mewet KGCL propose to undertake a 4 to 6 week ﬁeld inspection which will include detailed i
mapping of vein and alteration systems, reopening. re-mapping and re-sampllng of trenches and 1
opening of new trenches. Drill testing of the most prospective vein systems is also proposed in a total
programme comprising 32 inclined holes down to a depth of 150 metres. totalling around 4,000 metres. it i
ls expected that the total programme would take approximately 6-12 months. 1
l
Kelimentan Gold Corporation Limited 5 5 l
AIM Admission Document I


13.2 Organisation and management
KGCL's iii—Country manager (Mansur Geiger) has been in place tor a number or years and provides
excellent long-term continuity. This long term invotvement has enabled the in-country manager to develop
geological and logistical experience speciﬁc to the local operating conditions. Relations with the local
government organizations in Central Kalimantan are also reportedly good This, together with the fact
that the company is in possession of two oi its own drill rigs. should enable future exploration to be
conducted with a minimum of lead time. Oxiana also brings with it signiﬁcant geological and operaﬂng
expertise relevant to the KSK Cow project.
14 Conclustons and Recommendations
14.1 KSK CoW
The regional geological setting oi Kailmantan and the geological setting of the KSK Cow is consistent
with a geological environment where economic porphyry—styie Cu—Au. Intrusion-related vein systems
containing Cu-Au-Zn-Ag and high sulphidation styie Cu-Au-Zn-Ag-Pb mineralisation is prospective
Exploration undertaken by KGCL has identiﬁed a number oi mineralised centres that show evidence of
these styles of mineralisation. The exploration work has been undertaken over a number oi years and
has advanced a number of prospects to the point where geological models and the extent at
mineralisation can be tested with further drillingr The geological Information retrieved from exploration to
date Is not sufﬁcient at any one oi the deposits to enable mineral resources to be delineated.
Given the remote location of the KSK CoW, it is likely that a large deposit would be required to provide a
resource that could be mined. Large deposits of gold and copper (within the top 10% of deposits by grade r
and tonnage) do exist in similar geological environments to that in Kalimantan and a number of the l
characteristics of mineralised porphyry copper — gold and Intrusive related copper — gold - silver systems i
are present in the KSK Cow. A signiﬁcant budget would be required to explore for these deposls in an l
environment where exploration is largely helicopter supported. ‘
SRK considers that the work done to date in the KSK COW has been of a high standard and has
generated many targets. it is SRK’s opinion that the proposed joint venture agreement with Oxiana. an
experienced mining project operator. and the initial program to review and compile the existing
exploration data prior to drill testing of the priority targets ls appropriate tor the current stage of the l
violent. l
14.2 Jelal-Mewet
In SRK‘s opinion. the geological setting and vein textures observed at Jelai-Mewet. are consistent with
the presence of a low sulphidation epithermal style Au (: Ag) vein system, Exploration for the vein
systems is made difﬁcult by thick rainforest vegetation that covers the area. Nevertheless. mapping by l
previous lease holders has Identiﬁed a number of veins in an area that suggests a large hydrothermal
system is present. which can potentially support a signiﬁcant Au-Ag deposit. Only a small portion
(around 10%) of the prospective strike lengths of these veins have been drill tested to date at Jelai—
Mewetr Furthermore. the other 10 main prospects Identiﬁed within the Jelai KP licence area have not any I
signiﬁcant follow up exploration conducted on them.
in SRK's experience. the nature of low sulphidaiion epithennal Au-m deposits ls such that high grade I
drill intersections will be relatively common. The veins containing the high grade intersections may be i
narrow and may not be extensive enough to {am a recoverable deposit. Higher grade veins and fault-
hosted veins containing gold and sliver will conform to the small scale variations in orientation of major
controlling faults. Mapping of the alteration, structure and vein textures of the major taults and the veins
within the major faults will enable exploration to target those parts of the system with high gold grades
that also have maximum tonnage potentialr
KGCL have proposed a ﬁeld Inspection, including detailed mapping of vein and alteration systems,
examination of drill core. re-assay of selected drill core samples, re-openlng. re-mapplng and re-sarnpling *
of trenches. opening of new trenches and drill testing of most prospective vein systems, down to a depth
of 150 metres. It is SRK's opinion that this program ls worthwhile and consistent with the exploration
required to deﬁne the prospective structures. SRK recommends that the exploration focus on identifying
the major faults and high grade shoots within those faults. mapping vein systems rather than individual
veins and mapping the alteration systems as a guide to the major mlnemllsed structures.
a Kallmenren Gold Corporation lelted l
_ AIM Admission Document i


15 References
Include a detalled llst or all references oiled In the technlcal report, 1
Carlile JC and Mitchell AHG, 1994. Magmallc arcs and associated gold and copper mlnerallsaﬁon in ‘
Indonesia. J, Geochem. Expl. v50. 91-142. ‘
Leach T. Geiger M and Prasetyo D. 2002. Porphyry Copper Systems in Central Kelimentan. Technical
Paper presentatlon: Open Session, Prospectors and Developers Associellon of Canada March 2002
Annual Oonvenlion.
Leach. T. 2001. Comments on exploration emiviry at the Beruang Kanan porphyry copper prospect,
Central Kalimantan, Unpubllshed report to RT, Kalimenlan Surya Kencana.
Pollard. FJ. 2006, Copper (-gold) prospects within (he Kelimentan Sum Kencana Comma of Work.
Kelimanlan. Indonesla: Review and recommenderlons for future exploration.
16 Signatures
For and on behalf 0' Stelfen Robertson & Klrsten (Austmlasia) Pry le.
(“I “v » z I
slow/{W \ 
/ \J /
Stuart Munroe (PhD, Grad Dip App Fin Rlcherd Clayton (M50, ESC (Hons), FGS.
II1V, MAuslMM. F Fin) CGeol)
Principal Consultant (Geology) Senior Consultant (Resource Geolow)
I
l
Kalimentan Gold Carporsh'un Limited 57
AIM Admission Documenl


Appendix 1: Abbreviations and Glossary of Terms
Abbreviations:
Ag silver
Au Gold
Cow Contract or Work
Cu Copper
E East
gll grams per ton
Mo Molybdenum
N Nortn
Pb Lead
5 Soulh
so Antlrnony
w West
Zn 2an
Glossary of Terms:
accommodation lne space locally available
acidic lower pH (<7sooi
edit a (subinorizontal tunnel driven into lne slda eta hill or mountain tor access to a mine
adularla potassium ieldspar commonly assoolated with nlgn sulpnldalion apilhermal deposits
aerial neliceptar survey airoome geophysical survey liown In a helicopler
alluvial gold gold eroded by llie action of running water and transported and deposited by rivers and
concentrated in river sediments
alteration change in tire physical or ctramical composition ole rock or mineral
analytic encr error resulting from lhe analysis
analytical at or relating to analysis — separating sometnlng into its constituent elements
andosilio a rod< or group of volcanle rocks comprising andeaita or closely related rock types
andaile luli a pyroclastlc mck oi intermediate mmpasilion formed by lhe accumulation or materlal (ash)
generated by he explosive lragnlenlation oi magma and/or existing rook durlng a volcanic
emotion
anomalous having statistical lovmrcr nigner concentration ofspan’ﬁed elemean in looks or soils
antimony a semi-mats} (sol. attracted lrom aucnite and other minerals and is used as an alloy for lead
arglllle alteration intense ac'd leacning oi plagioclaee and mal‘lc silicates producing olay minerals ‘
arsenlc a sent-metal (As) and la a good geocnemical lndicallon for gold ;
assay lha amount olmetal clr metals in all are }
assemblage coexisting in equilibrium or a group oi a number ol dllterent materials which may or not ce ‘
related i
M: Atomic Absorption Spectrometer— method of assaying rocks and minerals 
ASTER Advanced Spaoebcme Thermal Emission and Reﬂection Radiometer is a nign resolution 1
imaging lnslmmall um w obtain detailed maps allha land surfane miniature. reﬂectance 
and elevalion useful for Idetillfying geological features/swuduras which may be defleaed in l
outcrop and soil types
barile an economic mineral. E3504
basaltic a rock or group oi wlcsnil: rocks comprising oasalt (a mane igneous rock) or closely related
rock types
oase metal a mining industry term ior non-lemons metals inferior in value to tie pradcus metals ag.
copper. lead, zinc - J
basement surlace onto which ssdlmenls have been deposited and is mainly composed ot metamorphic
and/or igneous rocks 
a Kalinlanian Gold Corporation lelled i
AlMAdmlsslan Document I
l
r
l
l


basin a large topographic depression farmed by tectonic processes in which sediment has
accumulated ’
bedrock unweelhered rock beneath unconsolidated material
halt major structural unit that has a well deﬁned area which has shown or is showing marked
mobility typically characterized by the development oi detormatlon stnrctures (eg. ioids.
ioliaticns. Iineaiinnsi iaultsl I
blanks is the concentration at an element in a sample that has been prepared and analysed without i
the addition oia rock or mineral sample
boulder a rounded rock iregment with a diameter >255 mm
so core with a diameter of 36.4 mm recovered ircm a drill hole
breocia a rock consisting cl angular ciasts or iormed by tho iragmentatlon olrodr
caldte a caldum carbonate and alteration mineral. oacoa
cap impermeable layer oi rock
chalocpyrite copper sulphide mineral, CuFeSZ
channel sampling a sample irom channels cut across the race (exposed rock suriecel oian exposed ore
chargeability a measure of induced polarization in timcdomain induced polarilminn methods, equal to the
area under the limedecaying voltage curve over a given time period divided by the steady-
state voltage before measurement
chip sampling a sample otrock chips taken from a lace (exposed mck surracel
chlorlte a green alteration mineral or clay mineral
cirlorlte schist a medium to coarse grained metamorphic rock exhibiting a sohistosity containing a certain
amount at chlorite. Schistoaity is a ioliab'on (planar fabric) formed by metamorphic processa
e.g. deformation in Mitch minerals trains a preterrod orientation and can be seen by the ‘
unaided aye. i
C-horizon the lowest horiznn Ola soil pmﬁle and indudea consolidated rudt and sediment
day a sediment with paniclas (4 gm in leS, alteration mineral
coarse gold nugget-sized pieces oi native gold
colloiorm handed a lemurs, crystals have grown in radiating and concentric lormi common in low suiphidattcn
mineral deposits i
compression dinerential stress (stress not equal in all directions) that deiorrns rocks bysqueezing them i
crust the outermost solid layer oi the Earth iormlng the upper layer oi the lithosphere overlying the
 1
margin zones lwc continental margins converge when an ocean basin completely closes with the total I
elimination oi oceanic crust by subduction. Collision oi continental plates involves thickening at l
the lithosphere and the creation ofai-l orogenic belt or mountain belt. ;
contours lines oi equal elevation 3
convergence where two plate margins move towards each other I
correlation cceiilcienl a measure that determines the degree to which two variables movements are associated
Cretaceous period otthe Mesozoic, 145.6 — 55.0 Ma
dadte a line grained glassy quartz-bearing volcanic mat with a composition between andesiie and
rhyolite
deformed geological process in Which stress causes a change in the geometry of the rock by which they
are lolded or ieulted
density mass per unit volume urg/msl
deposited to lay down deposits i
depressions an area that has subsided
diamond drilling meurod oi obtaining a cylindrical core oi rock by drilling with a diamond drill bit
diamond saw a diamond-charged blade used as a cutting edge for rocks
dip the inclination of a planar surfaos, measured in the vertical plane perpendictilartc its strike l
disseminated ore minerals are dispersed throughout a country mck l
distal farfrom its source I
Halal-Re ﬁna- to medium—grained maﬁa ignenus ruck >
!
Kalimanian Gold Corporation Limited a ’
AIM Admission Document [
l
1


dn'll bit the artting or boring element used iordrilling I
drill care salid cankinuous Dara sample H! mm provided by drilling using diamnnd drill bi! as a rock
cutting tool
drill pad planarrn (mm which a drill rig is able to drill
drill rig a structure housing equipment used to driil (make a hole in the ground) ior exploration
purposes to obtain rock core samples
drilling the act or prooess oi making a circular hoie with a drill or other ortting loot ior the purpose oi
blasting. exploration. prospecting, valuation or obtaining oil, gas or water
dyke a tabular igneous intrusion which outs across the bedding or other pianar strudures in the
country mck
Eocene an epoch oi the Pataeogerre, 56.5 — 35.4 Ma
epithermal hydrothennat minerai deposit ionned at low temperatures and pressures near the Earth's
suriace associated with volcanism
erosion removal of regoltth (weathered material lying on the sunacei material
Eurasian Plate itlhospheric tectonic plate underlying lndonesia. Asia and Europe
exploration the search fordeposiis oi useiul minerals or iossii tueis
extension diiierenttal stress that deionns mcks by stretching them
iault a iraoiure tn moks along which rocks on one side have been moved relative to rocks on the
other. Faults act as a drannel ior passage oi tiulds oontaintng metais,
teidspar lock iorming silicate minerals oi sodium, potassium. calcium and aluminum
tire assay the basic standard method oi assaying gold by piadng a small sample of the gold, which has
been weighed, with a quantity oi lead in a small cup. Thls is heated in a muihe iumace with a
draught of air ilowlng over the cup. The lead and any base metals are oxidized and absorbed
into the Imp, while the gold and any silver remain as a small metallic buﬂnn. The silver is then
dissolved out with nitric acid, leaving pure gold whim can be weighed and the gold oontent
calculated by comparing with lhe original weight otthe sample.
ioid bend in rock strata or planar suriace
gabbro a odarsegrainsd matio igneous rook oontaining little at no silica
galena lead sulphide mineral. Pbs
geodiernioal surveys application at methods and techniques oi geooharnietry such as aoil and ruck sampling in the
Search for minerals
geochemistry the study oi the distribution and amouan oi the chemical elements in minerals. ores. rocks, ‘
soils. water. and the atmosphere i
geological mapping method oi displaying the distribution oi rocks in an area |
geolagy the study oi the solid Eanh !
geophysical surveys exploration oi an area in which physical properties teg. magnetic properties, density) urllque ,
to rocks in the area are guaniiiativeiy measured by one or more geophysical methods !
gossanous rock oomposed of hydrated oxides oi Iron, iorming a superiidal cover over rocks ocntaintng
sulphides of iron and/or other metals
gouge the clay titling ota vein
graben down iaulted blocks in an extensional regime
granite a course grained igneous mix with a high silioa content
graphitic fault gorge an inoohesive iault rock with 40% visible lragrnents with minaml oomposition ol granite
‘ surrounded by a matrix
grid surveying to identiiy highs and lows
ground magnetic magnetic survey applied at the grounds surlaca rather than in the air
gypsum caldum sulphate mineral (03504.2H20), evaporate mineral
haematite major ore mineral oi iron. also an aooesscry mineral (Fe203 — iron oxide)
grade the conoertration of a metal in an ore body
high sulphidation an epithermal goldrmpperdeposli with sulphur present in oxidized iorm, hosted in voioanio or
intrusive rocks close to volcanlc centres 3
HQ core with a diameter of 535 mm reoovered irom a drill hole '
hydrothermal a hot, aqusaus solution af high salinity originating from surface water. groundwater. sea water, E
a Kaﬁrnantan Gold Corporation Limited [
AlMAdmission Document i


I meteoric water. iormation water, metamorphic water or magmatic water
intrusive igneous oody empiaoed at depth intruding previously existing rocks
induced Polarisation (IP) a geophysical exploration method based on the phenomenon that metallic minerals can stem
electric charge. which ls gradually reieased when the cnergising orrrent is removed. The only
method capable of detecting disseminated deposits.
K-letdspar potassium feldspar mineral
Landsat satellite imagery providing reilectance data of the Earth's surtace and is used for identitylng
suriace geological featurs and structures which may be reﬁected In outcrop, vegetation
patterns or soil types
logging recording Information aboutthe drill core
lowsuiphidation an epithermal goldsiiver depost with sulphur present in reduced iorm end are more distant
irom volcanic centres (associated with geothermal springs) then high-sulphidation deposits
magneticsurvey measurement of variations in the Eanh's magnetic ﬁeld clue to diilerences in magnetic
properties olthe surrounding rotate
matrix ﬁne grained materiel separating clasts (parties oi rock) in a sedimentary rock
metallurgy the study of metals and their properties
metamorphic rock a rock which results irom the partial mcrystellisation in the solid state under temperature and
pressure conditions elevated with raspect to the suriaoe ,
micropiartes a small tectonic plate with identiﬁable margins between larger tedonic plates 1
Miocene an epoch oi the Neogene sup—period. 23.3 — 5.2 Ms
mineral deposits cuneenlralian Ufa minelal in the Emma crust l
mineral processing process of extraction and concentration of economic minerals ooniaihed in are i
Mineral Reserve the mineeoie pen at a resource, indusive of dilution, oi which at the time of reaching,
extraction could reasonaon be justiﬁed I
Mineral Resource mineralisation to which conceptual tonnage and grade ﬁgures are assigned but ior which 
exploration data are inadequate to calculate geological raw/es and/or to which mining {
parameters have not been applied
mineralisation precipitation oi minerals out oi solution !
monzonite a medium to coarse-grained intrusive igneous rock dominated by ieldspar and has less than '
5% quaru [
native a mineral comprising a chemical eiement in an unccmbined state or as an alloy with another
elementis)
N0 core with a diameter or 47.6 mm recovered irom a drill hole
nugget etiect a result of mineralisation being heterogeneoust distributed through a rock such that a
manageable sample or the rock (2 to 6 kg). when analysed does not edsouetely represent the
true grade. The effect is more common for certain types at gold deposits. including immsive~ [
related, porphyry and low sulphidetion epithennei gold deposits.
Oligocene the youngest epoch oi the Palaeogena. 35.4—23.3 Me
oriented rock sample oriented with reaped to the present horizontal and true nonh
orthogonal at right angles
overprinted superimposition ot a mesoscopic (metre scale) to microscopic (5 pm — 2mm) younger
SINCNI'B an an older one
periodicity how many times something will occur
pet'lrasilnely through the whole rock
petrology the study of all aspects or rocks I
pH pondus Hydrogeni which means potential hydrogen and is the measure of acidity (activity of 1
Hydrogen) ota solution
phyiilc alteration charaderised by pervasive ouenz. ssriche and pyrite ]
PIMA Portable lnirarad Mineral Analyzer is a portable inhared spectrometer that operates in the J
SWIR (short Wave lniraRed) range oithe electromagnetic spednlrn and is used for mineral
exploration, studying the degree oi crystallinlty oi minerals, and mapping alteration systems
pinch and await a repetitive thinning and thickening oi a body or took
Kalimarrtan Gold Corporation Limited !
AIMAdInission Document !
I
l
I
r


E
placer deposit a deposit ionned by madlsnical sedimentary processes such as sorting oi sedimean by ciast
SIZE ar density. Planer deposits am formed along shareﬁnes and rivers.
pleins a broad, extensive expanse attend with ielaiively low reiiei
plate suture e suriace within the lithosphere representing the contact between two plates or mioioplates
poiymetallic a mineral deposit mniaining more than one metal
porphyry 1) an igneous tank with a porphyritio texture - ooniains phenoorysls (large mineral gralrls)
within a inegiained matrix
2) a magmatic — hydrothermal deposit where mineralisation is related to, and hosted by
intrusive deposits and consists oi veins iorming stockwolk oontaining disseminated suttides,
gold and other minerals, Porphyry deposits are associated wiui hydrothermal alteration which
Involves not aqueous iluids interacting with the roots changing the mineralogy and texture oi
the rock.
poet-mineralisation ocoirring alter mineralisation
potassio alteration characterised by K-ieldspar. bictite and quartz replacing piagioclase and malt: minerals
ppm pans per million, unit oi measure oi trace minerals iound In rocks
prs-mineiallsaliori occurring beiore mineralisation
propylitic alternation involves the input oi water, carbon dioxide and sulphur irom meteoric tulds and is
characterised by epidote, chlorite and carbonates (calcite)
prospects any mine womlngs not yet valued; to examine ground ior minerals; an area to be examined
geophysically ior minerals, and an area oontlrmed by geophysical and geological studies to
the degree it can now be tested
pulp a result oi grinding oi the lock sample during preparation fot analysis
pyrite lron sulphide mineral, F§2
quartz silica minaml. SiO’Z
Radarsat a monochmmalic imaga of the surface of the Germ enlist:le by a satellite from a reﬁeaed
beam at known irequeney. Depending on the beam ireguency. the Radarset image may or
may not penetrate vegetation cover.
recovery proportion oi core or cuttings actually recovered from a drillhola, compared to the maximum
theoretical quanﬁty
regional large geographic area
reliei change in the height oithe ground over the area
remote sensing the recording ot images oi parts oi the Earth's suriaoe using the sun as a source oi
electromagnetic radiation and measures the radiation that is reilected by matter on (or near)
the Earth's suriaoe. includes satellite imagery and aerial photography.
r residue characteristic oi pertaining to, or consisting oi residuum — remaining essentially in plaoe aiier
all but the least soluble constituents have been removed oi material eventually resulting lrom
the decomposition oi rock
resistant las susceptible to physical and chemical breakdown
ridge and spur a technique oi soil sampling ridges (spur) to obtain a sample at relatively shallow depths (less !
than 1 metre) which is las likely to have moved signliioantiy irorn source i
ridges a topographical ieature oilong narrow elevation
riit basins structural valleys bound by extensional (normal) ieulls ionned in regions oi mansion where
Dnnﬁnsmal cms1 fractures
rook chip sampling obtaining a sample, generallyior essay, by bmaking chips oil a mck lace
sampling the gathering oi speo'mens oi ore orwali rock ior appraisal oithe ore body l
sandstone sedimentary rod< oi sand sized panicles (0.625 - 2 mm) 
sedimentary basins regions were sediment is accumulating i
sedimentary rock root iormed as a result at consolidation oi loose sediments created by weathering prooesses _
sequeioe package oi sediment deposited during a particular period
sendte a ﬁne grained variety oi musoovlte (white mica)
shafts a vertical excavation (tom the surfaue to provide access to the underground mine workings
shear zone a zone oi dudlle deionnatioh between two undeionnod blocks that have been displaced
sheeted numerous nanow. parallel veins 1
a Kailrrrannen Gold Corporation Limited 1
AIM Admisslon Document


shoots a higher grade lens or pipe afore

silica mineral, Si

siliciied raiarring to racks in which a signiticant proponion oi the original constituent minerals have
been replaced by silica

siliciiication a type or wall rock alteration involving an increase in quartz or cryptoorystaiilne silica in the
altered rock

siltatone sedimentary mck witn silt sized pamcla (0.04— 0.625 mm)

soil auger sampling sampling oi deep soil pmﬁle using a hand operated or power operated bit to recover the
sample

soil creep I slope creep mowemenl ormalariai down slope when the weathered rack and soil is lubricated by water

soil sampling systematic collection of samples at soil at a series oi diiierorrt locations, in order to study the
distribution oi geochemical values of interest

spectral scanning measurement at the intensity oi reﬂected inirared light ironr a rack to measure the microscopic
and sub-microscopic mineral abundance in the sample

aphalerite anc sulphide mineral. zns

standards samples mat are used to calibrate an instniment

ateckworlr a mineral deposit consisting oi a threedimeneionai netwurk of interiodring tabular planar to
irregular veins/lodes closely enough spaced that the whole mass can be mined

stream sediment sampling systematic sampling oi sediments wiurin drainage channels, in order to sludyrne distriburion of
geochemical imiuee oi interest

strike tire direction cl a horizontal atraigin line constructed on an inclined planar surlaoe. at a
direction oi 90' lrorn lire true dlp direction

structure geometric geological iealure

sulphides group oi ore minerals containing lire element sulphur, s and metals

swarm a number oi similar geologic phenomena or features occurring closely within a given period or
place

tectonicaily active margins detonnatlon ooouning at tile edges oi plats

tenane a region of crust with well—deﬁned margins, whicn differs signiﬁcantly in teamic evolution trom
neighbouring regions

Iexlure small scale pcnctrative leature observed in a rock

tonnage the total might oi ore in a deposit measured in mns

topography the shape at Earth-s surlace ortne geometry or landforms in a geographic area

trenching ionn at sampling whereby a trench is dug and a sample is removed trom the bottom of lne
trench

trend diraeion

vein a sheet-like or tabular. discordant. mineralised body ionned by oomplete or pam‘al lnitiling or a
tracture traversing within a lack oldinerent material

vein splays minor veins diverging at acute angles at the extremities at major veins

vein stringers narrow vein or irregular ﬁlament oi mineral traversing a rock mass

volcanic rocks exuusive igneous rock formed by the solidiﬁcation oi lava or pyrordaatic material

volcanic activity volcano eruption

volcanic complex a group oi volcanic rodte

wail rook the rock surrounding a mineral deposit, igneous intrusion or fault

weathering the disintegration and decomposition of rodn and sediment by neai-sudace mechanical and
diernioai prooessas- process of iorming sedimentary rocks

Kalimentan Gold Corponen'cn Limited

AIM Admrsmn Document


Appendix 2: Certiﬁcates of Qualiﬁed Persons
' sax Consulting
onset mg m m
. at rest
Engineers and 83:993er 1 spam Nsw zooo . turrets
i Emai- evaneytasracom so
ween cameo
Tel: 51 2 8624 5300
Fax: 51 2 802A 8388
KGCOD1
Certlﬂcate of Qualiﬁed Person
Competent Person’s Report on the Mineral Exploration Assets of Kalimantan Gold
Corporatlon Limited dated December 2006
(a) 1, Stuart Munroe (Pl-1D. BSc (Hons); are employed as n Princile Consultant (Geology) tor SRK Consulting in
Sydney at Level 6, 44 Market Street. Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia.
(b) I am a memher otthe Austnlasian Institute ofM'lning nnd Metallurgy.
As a result ofmy experience and qualiﬁcations I am a Qualiﬁed Person ns deﬁned in National lnstrrnnent 43-101,
(c) My most recent visitts) to the KSK Cow and Jelai-Mewet project arens was betwem the 13‘“ and 23'“ oprril 2005.
(d) lwas responsible for all sections of the above mentioned report.
(e) 1 am not aware orany material fact or material change with respect tn the subject matter or this technical report that is 
not reﬂected in this report and that the ulnisslon to disclose would melee this report misleading. i
(t) 1 am independent of Knlirnnntan Gold Corporation Limited in accordance with the application of Section 15 of 1
National Instrument 43-101, 1
i
(g) l have had no previous involvement with any or the projects or prospects commented upon in the above mentioned 
report.
i
(h) l have read National Instrument 43-101 and Form 43-1011r1 and this report has been prepared in compliance with
same,
Dated. this 7‘“ day ofDecel-nher 2005.
MW 1
/"" '
Stuart Munroe (PhD, Grad Dlp App Fln lnv, MAuslMM, F Fin) i
Principal Consultant (Geulogy) I
r- ‘axr - x w Steffen Rnbemon and Kirsten (Australasia) Pty Ltd Group omens: Auslulian Ofﬁces:
'elstm   Red No Nari so an 211 12a tat-ire
,r t 4 .. r 4 Trading I: SRK Consulting Aria Brisbane 61 73332 5999
‘r‘ ’KJC', Amalia Maillanﬂ 61 2433415685
“Wit: Europe Sydney 6i 2 9024 5500
W’ North America
WWW/latte! SM, Mm
a Kalirnantan Gold corporation Limited l
AIM Admission Document E
!


Appendix 2 (cont): Certiﬁcates of Qualified Persons '
" SRK Consulting
onsu my ﬁrst; &
. . . a er not
Englneers and 565693333 tyoray usw 2am) Anetta a
Ematf sydney@srkecom on
mean cum all
ITII: 611 SVZQ 8800 
E Fax: 61 2 9024 8383 }
KGCOO1
Certiﬁcate of Qualiﬁed Person
Competent Person‘s Report on the Mineral Exploration Assets of Kalimantan Gold
Corporation Limited dated December 2006
(a) 1, Richard Clayton (MSc. BSc (Hons)), arn employed as a Senior Consultant (it-some Geology) for SRK Consulting
in Sydney at Level 6, 44 Market Street, Sydney, NSW 2000. Australia.
(b) I ant a Fellow orthe Geological Society of London and registered as a Chartered Geologist
As a result ofmy experience and qualiﬁcations, lam a Qualiﬁed Person as deﬁned in Nrrional instrument 43401.
(c) l have not visited the KSK Cow erlelai-Mewet project as part orthis commission.
(d) 1 was responsible for peer review of the above mentioned report
(a) i am not aware orauy material fact or material change with respect In the tuhject matter of this technical report that is
not reﬂected in this report and that the emission to disclose would mire this report misleading.
(t) I am independent or Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited in accordance with the spplication of Section 1.5 or
National instrument 43-101.
(5) l have had no previous involvement with any of the proij or prospects commented upon in the ahove mentioned *
report.
(It) 1 have read National instrument 43401 and Form 43-1011-‘1 and this report has been prepared in compliance with i
same.
Dated. this 7'" dry or neeemher zoos. !
- l
W ‘
. r 11’
\2 Z/ >
Richard Clayton (MSc, BSc (Hons), FGS, CGeol)
Senior Consultant (Resource Geology) I
1
, . . |
'e , Luﬁilﬂf’l Men Robertson and Klrslerl (Auﬂmlull) Pty Ltd Group Ofﬁces: Amman." Ofﬁces: 1
{alst  :3 § 33%;“, Reg No AEN 56 on 211 m A‘ics g
k a Sn’nIIf»:gv-;5 rrndltig as SRK Consulting Asia arishene 61 7 3832 9999 r
3 Aw: » Marita Maltianﬂ 61 24934 5685
2mm Europe Sydney 51 1 sun sac-v I
A“? North Amsﬁcz
Wmexammmy Soulh America ’
Ksllmantan Gold corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


—
let?   a.
Part D - Accounting Information I
I
1. Independent Accountant’s Report 1
l
_ E 51 s v LLP cm {Kél‘ 591-32120 ‘
£51£3~5ra¥0u~c   Wm
plasma Certre l
v.0 Boxmim ;
700 West Georgia Street 1
Vancouver Canada W167 ;
i
4 December 2006 '
The Directors
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
Unit 1 - 15782 Marine Drive
White Rock, BCV4E 1E6
Dear Sirs.
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited i
We report on the ﬁnancial information set out in paga 68 to 80 as at and for each of the years ended 31 l
December 2003, 2004 and 2005. Thls ﬁnancial information has been prepared for Inclusion in the AIM admission
document to be dated 7 December 2006 at Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited on the basis of the accounting
Policies set out in note 2 to the ﬁnancial Information in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepwd Accounted
Principles This report ls required by Schedule Two of the AIM Rules and is given for the purpose of complying
with that schedule and for no other purpose.
Save for any responsibility arising under Schedule Two at the AIM Rules to any person as and to the extent there
provided, to the fullest extent permitted by law we do not assume any responsibility and will not accept any liability
to any other person for any loss sultered by any such other person as a result oi, arising out at, or in connection
with this report or our statement. required by and given solely for the purposes of complying with Schedule Two of
the NM Rules, consenting to its Inclusion In the AIM admission document.
Responsibilities
The Directors of Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited are responsible for preparing the ﬁnancial information on
the basis of preparation set out in note 2 to the ﬁnancial information, i
it is our responsibility to form an opinion as to whether the ﬁnancial infonnatlon. for the purposes of the AIM
admission document. presents lairly, in all material respects, the ﬁnancial position of Kalimantan Gold Corporation
Limited as at the dates stated and the results of its operations and Its cash ﬂows for the years then ended on the
basis of the accounting policies set out in note 2 to the ﬁnancial infonnalicn In accordance with Canadian
Generally Accepted Acoounted Prinu’ples.
Basis of opinion i
We conducted our work In aocordance with Standards for Investment Reporting Issued by the Auditing Practices 1
Board In the United Kingdom. Our work Included an assessment of evidence relevant to the amounts and [
disclosures in the ﬁnancial Information It also included an assessment of signiﬁcant estimates and judgments I
made by those responsible for the preparation of the ﬁnancial information and whether the accounting policies are -
appropriate to the entity's clrwmsmnces. consistently applied and adequately disclosed, i
We planned and performed our work so as to obtain all the Information and explanations which we considered E
necessary in order to provide us with sufﬁcient evidenw to give reasonable assurance that the ﬁnancial
Information Is free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error. i
l
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Lllnlted
AIM Admlsslon Document


all ERNST& YOUNG

Opinion

In our opinion, the ﬁnancial information. fur the purposes at the AIM admission ducument to be dated 7 December

2006, presents lairly, in all material respects. the ﬁnancial position of Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited as at

the dates stated and the results of Its operations and Rs cash ﬂows for the years then ended on the basis of the

accounting policies set out in note 2 In the ﬁnancial information in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted

mounted Principles

Declaration

Far the purposes of Paragraph (a) of Schedule Two of the AIM Rules we are responsible for this report as part of

the AIM admission document and declare that we have taken all reasonable care 10 ensure that the information

contained in this report is, to the best of our knowledge. in aocordanos with the facts and contains no omission

likely to affect Its Impurt. This declaration ls lnduded in the AIM admlsslun document In compliance with Schedule

Two of the AIM Rules.

Yours faithfully

W ‘  MP ..

Ernst & Young LLP

Chartered Accountants

Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
i
l
l
l
l
l

Kallmanian Gold Corporal/DI! Limited i

AIM Admission Document 57 
l


2. 3-Year Historical Financial Information
Ernst & Yuung LLP af Canada (whuse address is set out in the preceding aocounianhe reporl In Secﬂun 1 of mls
Part D of ihe Admission Document) have acted as the statutory audltor uf Kalimanlan Gold Corporation Limited lot
the parlods covered by the hlstorlcal ﬁnancial inlormaﬁon in (his seclion and are regulated for audlt work by and
regismred with the lnsﬁtule of Chartered Accuuntants of British Cnlumbla and the Canadian Public Accountability
Board.
Kallmanlan Gold Corporation Limited 1
(a development stage company)
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS ‘
[See Nature of Operalions ~ Nola 1]
As at December 31 (in United 513195 Dollars)
2005 2004 2003
5 S S

ASSETS
Current
Cash and cash equivalcms 1,252,942 381,469 421,979
Prepaid items and advances 28,255 27,669 55,777

1.281.197 409.138 477,756
Fixed 355m 19,859 25,310 35,266

1,301,056 434,448 513,022
LIABlLlTIES AND SHAREHOLDERS‘ EQUITY
Currant
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 224,734 101,234 207,921
Provisian for unployee service entitlements [71015 6] 36,127 64,378 62.384

260,861 165,612 270.305

Shmholden’ equity
Share  [note 7] 435,737 333,715 294.576
Contributed mrplns [M12 7] 12,434,897 10,676,910 9,433,211
Dcﬂa’t (11,830,439) (10,741,739) (9,485,070)

1,040,195 268,836 242.717

1,301,056 434,448 513,022
See accampanying notes
a Kalimanlan Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


1
Kalimaman Gold Corporatlen leiled }
(a development stage company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF LOSS AND DEFICIT
[See Nature cl Operalions - Note 1]
Year ended December 31 (In Uniled States Dollars)
2005 2004 2003
S S S

EXPENSES
Generll Ind ldministraﬂve
Aceannling and audit [8523 17,790 12,200
Employee defucatIm expense [note 5] — 63,185 _
Amortisz 1,178 236 —
Consultants 88,833 89,759 126,053
Inveslor relations 3,334 18,493 3,465
Legal 9,9115 11,725 10,796
Ofﬁce and administrative services 6512 8,344 4,576
smk compensation expense [note 76] 163,508 236,257 105,000
Telephene and fusiinile 1,910 1,246 888
Tmsfer agent, ﬁling Hid exchange fees 29,213 38.063 27,082
Travel and accomodalion 49,749 27,784 30,000

377,555 513,382 320,060
Explmation [Irate 4] 727,719 741,795 625,810
Imeresl income (11)) (25) (1 0)
Foreign exchange (gain) loss (16,614) 2,503 7
Gain on sale or equipmem — (936) —
Loss for the yen (1,088,650) (1,256,719) (945.860)
DeﬁciL beginning ofyear (10.141539) (9,485,070) (8,539,210)
Deﬂclt, end of period (11,330,439) (10,741,789) (9,435,070)
Ne! 11m per comma]: share - bask: Ind dlluted 0‘03 004 0.04
Weighted avenge number of share: outstanding 36,334,975 31.340.429 26,450,691
See accompanying notes
Kalimanlan Gold Carparaﬂon Limited
AIM Admission Documenl


Kallmanhn Gold Corpomlon lelled
(a development stage company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
[See Nature of Operations - Note 1]
Year ended December 31 (In Uni1ed 513185 Dollars)
I
2005 1004 2003
S S 5
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Loss for the year (1,088,650) (1.256,720) (945,860)
Add chargcs m opmliuns inn involving a
currem payment of cash:
Depreciation and amanizaiian 1 1,997 18,151 19,064
Gain on disposal afcapiml aim: — (936) —
Stock cmensau'on :xpcnse 163,508 236,257 105,000
Changes in nun-cash working capiial hang:
Prepaid 1'me and adwnaa (586) 28,108 (37,771) i
ADcoums payable and accrual liabilities 123,500 (106,687) 167,084
Provision for employee smive eim‘uemenxs (211,251) 1,994 —
Cull used in operlﬁng activities (818,482) (1,079,333) (692.433)
INVESTING ACTIVITIES ‘
Pmecds an 58.1: of ﬁxcd 355615 — 936 7
Purchase of ﬁxed assets (6546) 8,195 —
Purchase ofaquipmcnl — — (15,113)
Cash provided 11y (used in) Investing activities (65%) 9,131 (25,213)
i
FINANCING ACTIVITIES 1
Capiml smck issued for cash: ‘
Proceeds from share ism: 1,708,049 1,060,772 1,110.270 i
Share issue costs (11.548) (14,190) (14,315) ,
Cull provided by ﬁnlnclllg activities 1.696.501 1,046,532 1,085,955 
Ne: Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivllenh 871,473 (40,510) 363,259 ‘
Cash and cash :quivalems, beginning ofynar 3111MB 421,979 53,720 _
Cub md cash equivalents, end ofyeu 1,252,942 331,469 421,979
Supplemtntnry inlormuon
Intcrcst paid _ _ _.
Imam: taxcs paid _— 7 —
See accompanying notes
__—______—.—__—.———
7a Kalimannan Gold Comoralion Limited
AlMAdmission Document


Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited l
(a development stage company) 1
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

December 31. 2005 (In United States Dollars)
1. NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND GOING CONCERN UNCERTAINTY
Nature of operations
Kailmantan Gold Corporation Limited (the "Company') is in the business of acquiring and exploring mineral
properties in Indonesia and has not yet determined whether its properties contain ore reserves that are
economically recoverable. The reooverability oi the amounts spent for mineral properties is dependent upon the
existence of economically recoverable reserves. the ability of the Company to obtain the necessary ﬁnancing to
complete the exploration and development of its properties. and upon future proﬁtable production or proceeds
from the disposition of the properties. The Company will periodically have to raise additional funds to continue
operations and while it has been successful in doing so in the past. there can be no assurance it will be able to do
so in the future.
Going concern uncertainty
These consolidated ﬁnancial statements have been prepared on the basis that the Company is a going concern.
which contemplates the realization of its assets and the settlement of its liabilities in the normal course of
operations. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is uncertain and dependent upon obtaining
the ﬁnancing necessary to meet its ﬁnancial commitments and to complete the development of its properties
and/or realizing proceeds from the sale of one or more of the properties. These consolidated ﬁnandal statements
do not reﬂect any adjustments related to the carrying values and classification of assets and liabilities should the
Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
2. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of preparation of ﬁnancial statements
The Company's ﬁnancial statements are presented in United States dollars in accordance with Canadian
generally accepted accounting principles on the accnial basis using the historical cost concept. The Company's
functional currency is the United States dollar as the majority of the Company‘s transactions are denominated in
this currency.
Cash equivalents
The Company considers term deposits acquired with a remaining maturity at the date of acquisition of three
months or less to be cash equivalents.
Basis of consolidation
The consolidated ﬁnancial statements represent the consolidation of the ﬁnancial statements of the Company and
its subsidiary companies. whim are as follows:

lndokal Ltd. ('lndokal") 100% incorporated in Hong Kong

PT Kallmantan Surya Kencana ("KSK') 75% incorporated in indonasia

FT Pancaran Faringa Kalimantan (‘PPK') 80% incorporated in Indonesia (dormant)
Kalimantan investment Corporation (‘KIC”). the Company's signiﬁcant shareholder, owns 25% of KSK.
Fixed asses and amortization
Fixed assets are recorded at cost of acquisition. less accumulated amortization. Amortization is calculated using
the straight—line basis over the estimated useful lives of assets of four years commencing from the year the assets
are put into service.
—_—____.__—_—_—.——

Kallmantan Gold Corpomiion Limited 71
AIM Admission Document


Kallrnantan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2005 (In United States Dollars)
Z. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont‘d.)
Exploration and development of mineral property Interests
Exploration costs are expensed as incurred. Development costs are expensed until It has been established that a
mineral deposit Is commercially mineable and a production declslon has been made by the Company to
implement a mining plan and develop a mine, at which point the costs subsequently incurred to develop the mine
on the property prior to the start of mining operations are capitalized.
The Company reviews the carrying values of its mineral properties on a regular basis by reterence to the project
economics including any independent feasiblllty studies on a property. the timing of the exploration and/or
development work. the work programs and the exploration results experienced by the Company. The review of the
carrying value of any producing property will be made by reference to the estimated future operating results and
net cash ﬂows. When the arrying value of a property or equipment exceeds Its estimated net recoverable
amount, provision is made for the decline in value.
Asset retirement obligations
The Company adopted CICA Handbook Section 3110. “Asset Retirement Obligations", which established
standards for asset retirement obligations and the associated retirement costs related to site reclamation and
abandonment. The fair value of the liability for an asset retirement obligation ls recorded when it is incurred and
the corresponding Increase to the asset is depreciated over the life of the asset. The liability is increased over time
to reﬂect an accretion element considered in the Initial measurement at fair value. As at June 30. 2006 and
December 31, 2005. the Company has not Incurred any asset retirement obligation related to the exploration and
development of Its mineral properties.
Share capital
The Company records proceeds from share issuances net of issue costs Common shares issued tor
consideration other than cash are valued at the quoted market price over a reasonable period before and alter the
date the agreement to issue the shares was reached and announced.
Foreign currency translation
Transactions in currencies other than United States dollars are translated Into United States dollars at rates of
exchange prevailing at the date of the transeﬂion. Balances of monetary assets and monetary liabilities in
currencies other than United States dollars are translated into United States dollars at rates of exchange
prevailing at the balance sheet date. Non-monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the rates of exchange
prevailing at the date at the transaction. Exchange gains or losses on translations are Included in Income or loss
for the year.
Financial Instruments
[i] Falr Values 7
Carrying amounts of certain of the Company‘s ﬁnanclal Instruments, Including cash and cash equivalents, and
accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values due to their short-ten-n maturity.
[ii] Foreign currency risk
The Company undertakes cenain transadions in Us dollars and Indonesian Rupiah and as such is subject
to rIsk due to fluctuations in exchange rates. Foreign exploration expenditures of the Company denominated
In Us dollars and Rupiah come due In the short-term and accordingly. management of the Company
believes there is not signiﬁcant exposure to foreign currency ﬂuctuations The Company does not use
derivatlve instnrments to hedge exposure to foreign exchange rate risk
f
Karmanran Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2005 (In United States Dollars)
2. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont‘d.)
[III] Credit risk
Financial Instruments that potentially subject the Company to a concentration of credit risk consist primarily of
cash and cash equivalents. The Company limits its exposure to credit loss by placing the majority of its cash
and cash equivalents with high credit quality ﬁnancial institutions.
[iv] Interest rate risk
The Company is not subject to signiﬁcant interest rate risk arising from these ﬁnancial instruments.
l
Stock based compensation plan ‘
The Company uses the fair value based method of accounting for stock option awards granted to employees and
directors. as prescribed by CICA 3870 Stock-based Compensation and Other Stock-based payments. Under this
method. the fair value at the stock options at the date of grant ls amorﬂzed over the vesting period, with the V
offsetting credit to contributed surplus, if the stock options are exercised, the proceeds are credited to share
capital.
income taxes
The liability method of accounting lor income taxes is used, and future Income tax assets and liabilities are
recorded based on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of balance sheet items and their
corresponding tax bases. Future income tax assets also include unused tax losses. subject to a valuation
allowance. to the extent that it is more likely than not that such loss ultimately will be ulililed. This standard also
requires that the future income tax assets and liabilities be measured using the enacted rates and laws that are
expected to apply when these assets or liabilities are either to be realized or settied.
Loss per common share
Basic net earnings (loss) per share are computed using the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding during the periods. The treasury stock method Is used for the calculation of diluted net earnings (loss)
per share Stock options and warrants are dilutive when the average market price of the common shares during
the period exceeds the exercise price of the options and warrants.
As the Company has recorded a net loss in each of the periods presented. basic and diluted net loss per share
are the same since the exercise of warrants or options or the conversion of convertible securities would reduce the
loss per share.
Use of estimates
The preparation of ﬁnancial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disdosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the ﬁnancial
statements and the reported amount of expenses during the reporting period Actual results could differ from those
reported,
3. PREPAID ITEMS AND ADVANCES
During 2004, a former employee misappropriated funds. The Company recorded a defalcation expense at the
2004 US dollar equivalent I71 $63,185,
__—________————-—
Kalimanlan Gold Corporah‘on Limited 73
AIM Admission Document


Kalimanlan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2005 (In United States Dollars)
4. MINERAL PROPERTIES
KSK CoW- Central Kallnlantan
The Company, through Its wholly owned subsidiary indokel, owns 75% of the issued and outstanding shares In PT
Kalimantan Surya Kenoana ('KSK") Which holds the KSK 6‘" generation Contract 07 Work ('KSK COW') with the
Indonesian Government.
4. MINERAL PROPERTIES (conl'd.)
After the application of the second mandatory area relinquishment submitted in May 2006, the KSK Cow will
Dover 94,110 hectare which is subdivided into two blocks. Block A (33,170 hectares) is in the lourih year of
exploration 0' the KSK COW and Block 5 (60,949 hectares) ls itl the thde year 0' exploration of the KSK COW.
Two, one year. extensions may be applied for at the end of the third exploration yeah Following that phase there
is a two year feasibility period, then a three year construction period, then operations for thirty years.
SIPFs - East Kalimantan
On October 14, 2004, Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited, directly applied for two SIPPS (survey permits)
covering additional mineral exploration prospects in northeast Kelimantan. The ﬁrst SIPP application covers
13.870 hectares and includes the Jelai Mewet project and the second SIPP application covers 11,140 hectares
and includes the Sekatak Bikis project.
Cnmnlllive
For III: ym Fnr the year For the yen exploration mm
2005 2004 2MB Inceptian
S S S S
Btploratioll casts assumed {mm a predecessor 2,038,322
Explmﬁull costs during the year:
Community development 36,000 17,072 17,330 35,270
Consultants and contractors 33,303 106,593 — 314,03 3
Contracted drilling — ; a 327,512
Field support 67,016 44,274 33,900 1,022,244
Land lax and dead rent “.135 24.506 38,405 163,456
Salaries, wages and related costs 252,970 253,074 213,236 2,773,482
Sample preparation and analysis 13,818 32,406 32.321 445.614
Supplies and equipment 127,676 158,495 127,365 1,174,379
Transport (including helicopters) 33,795 53,395 — 888,290
Travel and accommodation 23,187 24,065 33,189 439,985
716,900 723.830 606,746 10,677,592
Depreciation 10,819 17,915 19,064 237,420
Current year uploration 727,719 741,795 625.310 10,915,012
Expulsed during year (727,719) (741,795) (625,310) (10,915,012)
Mineral properties, end of year — e 7 —
__d____#__—_-————4—
Ka/lmanlan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31. 2005 (In United States Dollars)
5. FIXED ASSETS
2005 2004 2003
Accumulated Net hank Net book Net book
cm depreciation value value value
S S $ 3 5
Ofﬁce and ﬁeld
equipment 230,742 new 19,35? 25,310 35,266
6. PROVISION FOR EMPLOYEE SERVICE ENTITLEMENTS E
In 2003, the Company started to recognize a provision for lndoneslan employee service entitlements In
accordance with Indonesia’s Labor Law No, 1312003 dated March 25. 2003. The new provision Is estimated using
Company calculations based on Company assumptions in line with applicable regulation, In 2005 the Company
retained an independent actuary to estimate the prior and current year calculations in accordance with
gWemment regulations resulting in an adjustment to this estimated provision, The provision for employee service
entitlements is included in the salary portion of mineral expense.
Movements of provision for employee service entitlemens:
________———3—
Balance January 1. 2003 (1.929)
Less: utilization during the year -
Add: provision during the year (60,455)
Balance December 31. 2003 (62.384)
Less: utilization during the year 5,703
Add: provision during the year (7,697)
Balance December 31, 2004 (64,378)
Less: utilization during the year [5,856
Add: provision during the year (23,483]
Less: actuarial adjustment m estimated provision 35,868
Kahlua December 31, 2005 L (36,127)
'__F__/-”——
Kalimsnran Gold Corporah'on Limited 75
AIM Admission Document


2“:  s" l": 
k"   .3

Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited

(a development stage company)

NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

December 31, 2005 (In United States Dollars)

7. SHARE CAPITAL AND CONTRIBUTED SURPLUS

Authorized:

Authorized share capital $1.000,000 divided into 100,000,000 common shares at a par value of $001 each

[a] Common shares issued and oustandlng:

Total Share
Capital and
Common Shares Share Capital Contributed Contributed
Issued and For Value Surplus Surplus
Outstanding US$001 USS USS

Balance Dbcclnbor 31, 2002 24,240,941 242,410 3,294,422 8,536,832

Private placement 1,800,000 18.000 342,000 (1) 360,000

Private placement 821,500 8,215 156,085 (2) 164,300

Private placunznt 2,255,286 22,551 524,719 (3] 547,270

Share issue costs 7 7 (24,315) (24,315)

Options exercin 240.000 3,400 25.300 (4) 38.700

Shore compensation cost 7 7 105,000 105,000

Balance December 31, 2003 29,457,727 294,576 9,433,211 9,727,787

Private placement 792,213 7,922 310,274 (5) 318,196

Private placement 1,468,569 14,686 414,769 (6) 419,455

Options exercised 385,000 3,350 50,650 (7) 54,500

Warrants exorcism] 1,268,116 12,681 245,941 (8) 258,622

Shari: issue costs — — (14,190] (14,190)

Stock based wmpensaiion 7 7 236,255 236,255

Balance December 31, 2004 33,371,625 333,715 10,676,910 11,010,625

Privaio placement 2,663,435 26,634 406,497 (9) 433,131

Private placement 7,538,842 75,388 1,199,530 (10) 1,274.918

Shareissuc costs e # (11,548) (11,545)

Stock based compensation — — 163.508 163.508

Nuance December 31, 2005 43,573,902 435,737 12,434,897 12,870,634

1. On March 31, 2003 the Company Issued 1,500,000 units in the capital 01 the Company at a price of $0.20
per unit tor gross proceeds of $360,000. less Issue costs of $365. pursuant to a private placement. Each unit
comprised one common share and one-third oi one oommon share purchase warrant. Each whole warrant
will be exercisable for the purchase of one common share at a price of $0.23 per share until they expire on
April 6. 2005.

2, OnrJuly 13. 2003 the Company issued 021.500 units in the capital of the Company at a price of $0.20 per
unit for gross proceeds of $164,300. less issue costs of $934, pursuant to a private placement. Each unit
comprised one common share and one~thlrd 01 one common share purchase warrant Each whole warrant
will be exercisable for the purchase of one common share at a price at $0.23 per share until they expire on
July 21, 2005.

31 On November 26. 2003 the Company Issued 2,255,235 units In the capital of the Company at a price of
$0.25 (CDNSO.32) per unit for gross proceeds of $547,270 (CDN$721,092) less lssue oasis of $4.836
pursuant to a private placement Each unit comprised one common share and one-hall of one common
share purchase warrant. Each whole warrant will be exercisable tor the purchase of one common share at a
price of CDN$0,38 per share until they expire on November 26. 20051 The Company paid a cash ﬂnders’ fee
of $1 8,150.

4. In 2003 the Company issued 340.000 common shares pursuant to the exercise of stock options for gross
proceeds of $38,700.

__—_—________.—___—-

76 Kelimsnmrr Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


Kalimantan Gold Corporatlon Lllnlted

(a development stage company)

NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ’ }

December 31, 2005 (In Unlted States Dollars) 

7. SHARE CAPITAL AND CONTRIBUTED SURPLUS (cont’d.) ‘

5. On May 13 and 21, 2004 the Company Issued 792.213 units in the capital of the Company at a price of
CDN$0.55 per unit for gross proceeds of $318,196 (CDN$435.717), less issue costs of $1.515. Each unit
comprised one common share and one-half of one common share purchase warrant so that the Company
issued 792.213 common shares and 396,107 whole common share purchase warrants. Each warrant is
exercisable for the purchase of one common share at a price of CDN$0.7D per share until they expire on
November 13. 2005 and November 21. 2005. The Company paid a ﬁnders fee 0' CDN$10,180 (US$7.492)
and Issued 30,850 common share purchase warrants exercisable at a price of CDN$0.70 until they expire on
May 13, 2005,

5, On November 23. 2004 the Company Issued 1,463,569 units In the capital of the Company et a price of
CDN$0.35 per unit for gross proceeds of $429,455 (CDN3514,000). less Issue costs OI $5,179. Each unit
comprised one common share and one—half of one common share purdiase warrant so that the Company
Issued 1,468,569 common shares and 734,285 whole common share purchase warrants. Each warrant is
exercisable for the purchase of one common share at a price of CDN$0.45 per share until they expire on
November 18, 20051Allwarrants expired unexercised.

7. In 2004 the Company issued 335,000 common shares pursuant to the exercise or stock options for gross
proceeds of $54,500.

3. In 2004 the Company issued 1,268,116 common shares pursuant to the exercise of common share purchase
warrants for gross proceeds of $258,622.

9. On July 11. 2005 the Company Issued 2,663,435 Units in the capital of the Company at a price of CDN$0.20
per unit for gross proceeds of $433,130 (CDN$532,687), less Issue costs of $4,072. Each Unit comprised
one common share and one—half of one common share purchase warrant so that the Company Issued
2,563,435 common shares and 1,331,718 whole common share purchase Wrranls. Each warrant is
exercisable for the purdnase of one common share at a price of CDN$0.25 per share until they expire on July
10, 2006.

10. On October 11, 2005 the Company Issued 7,533,842 Unlls In the capital of the Company at E price 0'
CDN$020 per unit for gross proceeds of $1,274,918 (CDNS1,507,768), less Issue costs of $7,476. Each
Unit comprised one common share and one—half of one common share purchase warrant so that the
Company issued 7,538,542 common shares and 3,769,417 whole common share purchase warrants. Each
warrant is exercisable for the punmase of one common share at a price 0! CDN$0.25 per share until they
expire on October 10, 2006.

[b] Common share purchase warrants outstanding December 31. 2005:

Number nth-nntx Exercise Price Expiry on:
1,331,718 CdnSOlS July 10, 2006
3,769,417 CdnSOJS October 10, 2006
Common share purchase warrant activity forthe three preceding years is astollows:
Weighted average
Shares exercise price
# S
Balmcc, December 31, 2002 1,101,450 0.20 1
Issued 2,001,474 0.26
Balm/cc, December 31, 2003 3,102,924 0.24
Issued 1,161,242 0.45
Exercised (1.268.116) (010)
Balance, December 31, 2004 2,996,050 0.35
Issued 5,101,135 0.25
Expmd (2,996,050) (0.35)
Balance, December 31, 2005 5,101,135 0.25
Kallmaman Gold Corporztlon Limited
AIM Admission Document 77


Kalimantari Gold Corporation Llinlted
(a development stage company)
NOTES TO CONSOLlDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31. 2005 (In United States Dollars)
7. SHARE CAPITAL AND CONTRIBUTED SURPLUS (cont’d.)
[1:] Options outstanding at December 31, 2005 are as iollows:
Number of Shares Exercise Price Expiry Date
500,000 $0.20 June 3, 2006
450.000 $0.11 August 21, 2007
415,000 Cdn$0.33 November 28, 2000
65,000 Cdn$0.43 November 28. 2008
1.000.000 Cdn$0.55 March 29. 2009
1,170,000 Cdn$0.20 September 15. 2009
At the annual and special meeting held on June 15, 2004 a new stock option plan (the ~2004 Plan") was l
adopted by the shareholders and renewed by the shareholders on May 24, 2006. The 2004 Plan is a 10% l
rolling plan whereby the Corporation may grant options equal to 10% of the issued and outstanding common
shares on a non-diluted basis at the date of any particular grant of optlons. The total number of common
shares available for granting under a rolling plan will Increase or decrease as the number of Issued and
outstanding common shares changes. The options vest and are exercisable immediately upon granting and
terminate 90 days following termination of employment.
Option activity for the three preceding years is as follows:
Weighted avenge
Shares exercise price
#3 5
Outsmnding, December 31, 2002 1,956,000 0.13
Granted 480.000 0.25
Exercised (340,000) 0.11
Cancelled (50.000) 0.1 l
Expired (186,000) (0.45)
Outstanding, December 31, 2003 1,860,000 0.13
Granted 1,000,000 0.55
Exercised (385,000) (0.14)
Expired (45.000) (0.12)
Outstanding, December 31, 2004 2,430,000 0.31
Granted 1,170,000 020
Balance, December 31, 2005 3,600,000 0,27
A non-cash stock compensation expense 0' $163508 ($236,257 in 2004 for the grant of 1,000,000 options;
$105,000 in 2003 for the grant of 480,000 options) was charged to the consolidated loss for the year ended
December 31, 2005 for the grant of 1,170.000 options to directors. ofﬁcers and employees, Contributed
surplus was increased by the same amount.
For the year 2005 2004 2003
Risk-free interest rate 3.50% 3.10% 3.90%
Expected dividend yield a 0 0
Expected stock price Volatility 118% 67% 75%
Expected option life in years 5 s 5
The weighted average fair value oftha options granted during the year ended December 31, 2005 was $0.14
[December 31, 2004 - $0.24; December 31, 2003 - 5022].

[d] Pursuant to a share purchase agreement dated December 22, 1995 between Keiimentan investment
Corporation C‘KiC"), the Compelan controlling shareholder. and Kaiimantan Minerals Ltd. (the predecessor to
the Company). the Company granted KlC a oontingent option to acquire 1,000,000 common shares at us
$130 per share exercisable lor two years after the date that one million ounces of proven and probable gold
reserves have been delineated on KSK COW.

________._.——d———

Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited

(a development stage company)

NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

December 31, 2005 (In United States Dollars)

0. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS i

[a] The company. Doris Meyer, the President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of the Company and Golden Oak ‘
Corporate Services Ltd., a company owned by Doris Meyer, have an agreement The Company pays Golden
Oak an annual retainer in Canadian currency of $96.000 plus Canada's 7% goods and services tax ("GST'),
The Company is not eligible to recapture GST as it does not operate in Canada. however. Golden Oak remlts
the GST collededr In 2005, the Company paid Golden Oak fees and GST translated into U.S. dollars on
payment each month tor the US. dollar equivalent of $86,651 ($54,461 In 2004 and $25,708 in 2003). Either
party may terminate the agreement at any time upon 90 days notice.

[b] During the year ended December 31. 2003 the Company paid or accrued as owing to Rahman Connelly a fee
of $25,500 for his services as Chief Executive Oflicer. In addition a lump sum travel cost reimbursement of
$20,000 was accrued for the year of 2003 for Mr. Connelly. Mr. Connelly pays his own travel costs and ofﬁce
related costs and then estimatﬁ the Companys portion. Mr. Connelly traveled extensively in 2003 on behalf
of the Company‘s fund raising efforls as well as to the property for site visits Mr. Ccnnelly participated In the
July 18. 2003 private placement by purchasing 90,000 units at $020 for $18,000.

[c] Murray Clapham. Chairman of the Board, pays his own travel costs and ofﬁce related costs and then
estimates the Company's portion. Mr. Clapham travelled on behalf of the Company‘s fund raising efforts as
well as to the Falangka Raya ofﬁce in Kalimantan for director meetings and site visits Mr. Clapham was paid
a lump sum travel reimbursement of $10,000 for the year ended 2003. Mr. Clapham participated In the
November 26, 2003 private placement by purchasing 41,562 units at 030.32 for $10,000.

[d] A salary bonus of $18,000 Vims accrued as owing to Mansur Geiger for his extraordinary efforts In 2003. Mr.
Geiger participated in the November 26. 2003 private placement by purchasing 74,812 units at C$O.32 for
$13,000.

9‘ INCOME TAXES

The Company Is a tax exempt Bermuda company with no connection to Canada other than it is a reporting issuer

to certain Canadian securities commissions and its shares are listed for trading on the TSX Venture Exchange

The Company's COW in Indonesia determines the level of Income tax that will eventually become payable If and

when the Company Incurs a profit from mining operations in that country. Profls generated by mining under the

Company's sixth generation COW are taxed at the corpomte rate of 30%, and a withholding tax on dividends of

20% is applied unless there is a tax treaty with the country of residence

10. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS

a) On August 17, 2006 the Company Issued 13,270,890 common shares and 13,270,890 common share
purchase warrants for gross proceeds of CDN$2,654.178 (US$2,351.872) pursuant to a private
placement Each unit sold at CDN$020 consisted of one common share and one common share
purchase mrrant. Each warrant is exercisable for the purchase of one common share at a price 0!
CDN$0.30 per share until August 16, ZODBr A ﬁndefs fee was paid In the form of $187,377 cash and
398.127 ﬁnder‘s warrants, each tinder warrant ls exercisable for the purchase of one common share at a
price of CDN$023 per share until August 16, 2005. The fair value of the 393,127 ﬁnders' warrants was
calculated to be $56,870. The Black-Scholes model was used to fair value these warrants based on a
risk-free interest rate of 41%, a zero expeaed dividend yield, expected stock price volatility of 141% and
an expected life of the warrant of 2 years:

1:) 811.992 shares were issued pursuant to the exercise of share purchase warrants for proceeds of CDN
$202,998 (US$178,638);

_——_—.M

KAI/imaan Gold Corporation Limited

AIMAdmission Document 79


y  e‘yg‘:
@—
»: .r  ,2 a e»
Kalimanlan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2005 (In United States Dollars)
\
c) 4.289,143 share purd‘iase warrants expired unexercised;
:1) 269.000 common shares were issued pursuant to the exercise of stock options for proceeds of 536.426:
5) 27,000 stuck options were granted on June 2, 2006 pursuant to the 2004 Plan at an exercise price of
CDN$025 for a live year term;
0 1.455.000 stock options were granted on August 9. 2006 pursuant to the 2004 Plan at an exercise price _
cl CDN$0t20 for a live year term; and
9) 500,000 stock options expired unexercised.
——_,__—.——_—
m Karimannan Gold Corpomtion Limited
AIM Admission Document


3. Unaudited Interim Accounts for the Half-Year Ended 30 June 2006
n ,  “‘2‘: . 4.x», ‘.  r». e _-- o:  ~I. . _
 '1”? lid.  ' ‘ ~   ﬁxer-h?“ ‘7   .: 
     ' r  ~~  2  l
‘~=  -' r. 1.5.3 “‘ s:    r a e... r .« a  1;: :14; . gr,  a
1,, “my...  =.t,,:;:;”:.3~‘..u.«.  M - an; M , ~.4;.;5132.«-v“ V.  .541  4
«2-? manages; m...'I-""*‘—‘:~«r? 'i‘ll‘éngl‘ra is: ~.~ "  we»; w’vs' 
gages
KALIMANTAN GOLD OORPORATION LIMITED
Interim Financial Statements
(a development stage company)
(unaudited and prepared by Management)
Six months ended June 30, 2006
lece to Reader
These Interim ﬁnancial statements of Kalimantan Gold Corporatlun Limited have been prepared by management
and approved by the Audit Committee and Board of Directors at the Company‘ In acodrdance with National
, instrument 51-102 released by the Canadian Securities Admlnlstrators. the Company discloses that Its external
audlters have not reviewed these interim ﬁnancial statements. notes to ﬁnancial statements and the related
quarterly Management Discusslan and Analysis.
HM
Kelimanl‘an Gold Corponalion Limited
AIM Admission Document 81


KALIMANTAN GOLD CORPORATION LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(a development stage company)
(In United States Dollars)
Asa! Jim 30, 2006 December“, 2005
(unwind) (Audited)
was
Current 35!:
Caé'A and IEQ‘ equivalans $ 335,104 $ 1,252,942
Prepaid ‘mems and advances 58,803 28,255
443,901 1,281,197 1
ﬁnd assas (n01: 4) 15,440 19,859 1
s 462,347 3 1,301.056 ‘
LMELI'H
CUM liabiliues
mums payable and amued liabilMes 5 142,112 $ 224,734
Pmis'on for employee sewioe mm 36,127 36,127
173,230 260,861
S'INEJO LDES EQUITY
31m capital (none 5)
Moria: 100,000,000 mm shares
Rrvalua 30,01 pawsre
Islet! 43,843,902 (2005-43,573,902)§1ares 438,437 435,737
kaibuted sn'plus (Me 5) 12,431,445 12,434,897
Deﬁa'l (1 2,635,714) (11,830,439)
284,108 1, , 95
$ 462,347 $ 1,301,056
Going Concern Note 2
Approved by me Directors:
ls/ Doris Meyer /5/ Rshman Cannelly
Darla Meyer Rahman Connelly
Diredor Dlredor
The accompanying notes form an integral part uffhese consolidated ﬁnancial statements
________—__.—.—-——
Kalimanlan Gold Comarsﬁon Limited
A/M Admission Document


KALIMANTAN GOLD CORPORATION LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF LOSS AND RETAINED EARNINGS/(DEFICIT)
(a development stage company) ‘
(In United States Dollars) ,
Thee Welded Sxmrlhsamded
Rarﬁepadodendect man, 2006 Jme 30, 2005 3111.30.20“ me 30. 2005
m
General and amninmﬁvl:
Amoumlng and audi‘ 5 1,674 5 4.324 3 6,51 1 $ 4,324
Amnniaﬁon 295 295 589 589
Comments 1 13.661 23.396 113,903 44,714
Imam relaﬂons 6,351 697 3.153 5.667
Legal 3,531 4,111 13,091 7,294
00103 and adminisraﬁve sawiess 2,814 3.373 4,063 5.526
301* conpensaﬁon expense 4,652 - 4,652 -
Telephone and facs'mile 2,367 544 2,731 967
Tranéer agent. ﬁling and exchange fees 12,952 8,973 23,334 20,602
Travel and awomodation 26,410 452 23,205 12,340
114,763 0 H . 26,493 02,0

cunent explom‘on (Note 3) 181,380 110,378 551 ,504 250.089
Foreign Mange (gain) Ins (21,692) < (23,062) -
“’5 f” "‘9 psi“ ' v ‘ v '" w
Lossper common share 5 (0.01) s (0.00) s (0.02) 5 [0.01)
Weighted average nunbe! 0f snares

cumming 43,710,306 33,371,625 43,642,521 33.371.625
Deﬁa", beginning of period 3 (12,301,323) 3 (10,936,855) 3 (11 $30,439) 5 (10,741,759)
anfor me pen‘ud (334,451) (157.043) (005.335) (352.120)
Dmd‘e‘dmpe‘i“ ' ' ‘ ' " "' 

The accompanylng notes form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements

____’4___—_—_——4

Ka/Imantan Gold Comanaa'on Limited

AIM Admission Document 83


i
KALIMANTAN GOLD CORPORATION LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(a development siege company)
(In United States Dollars)

Thee mm lemmluulded

 mamzoos June 30. m30,2006 JmeS,
2005 2005

Cad-A pnwided from (usd .
a parsing am
Loslor he pedod 3 (334,451) 3 (157.043) 5 (£05,335) S (352,120)
Md chargesm operations nm invoiving a
current psymmt oicash:
Depreciation 2,808 3.002 5,451 6.808
Sock compenaﬁon expense 4,552 - 4,652 -
cnénges in non—casw working capital iterrs
Repsld Items and advanus (8,783) 14.394 (30,548) 9,704
mm: payable and accrued siabilmes (1oo,s91) 661 (82.522) (3.540)

426.5 
[musing advlﬂes
Purchas of equipmeﬂ 3,709) (542) (4,035) (542)

2- ‘ ' ‘ w

ﬁnanan admins
Capital mock ISJed for cam:
Slare mbsm'ptions - 274,323 - 274.323
S1arei§ms H.596 - 44,596 -
N51 change In as. and cam equlvalems (394.594) 134.795 1351.333) (70,357)
Cam and cash equivalents beginning of
period 119,895 176,307 1,252,942 381.469
Gail and ail equalling and ofpedod S 385,104 $ 311.102 8 385,104 $ 311.102
apuanmrylnlomaﬁon
Interes paid 3 . s . s . s _
Income was paid 8 - $ - 3 - S -

The accompanying notes form an inteng part oftnese consolidated ﬁnancial statements
___—__—_—_—_.—.—.——
u Kallmaman Gold Corporation Limited

NM Admission Document


NOTES TO THE INTERIM CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
For the six month period ending June 30. 2006 and 2005 (U.S$)
Prepared by Management without audit— see Notice to Reader
1. INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ]
These interim ﬁnancial statements follow the same accounting policies and methods of their application as the
most recent annual ﬁnancial statements and should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated ﬁnancial
statements for the year ended December 31. 2005 which may be found on www.sedar.comt
2. NATURE or OPERATIONS AND GOING CONCERN UNCERTAINTY
Nature of operations
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited (the “Company') is In the business of acquiring and exploring mineral
properties in Indonesia and has not yet determined whether its properties contain ore reserves that are
economically recoverable. The recoverability of the amouna spent for mineral properties is dependent upon the
existence of economically recoverable reserves. the ability of the Company to obtain the necessary ﬁnancing to
complete the exploration and development of Its propenies. and upon Iuture proﬁtable production or proceeds
from the disposition of the properties. The Company will periodically have to raise additional funds to continue ,
operations and while it has been successtui in doing so in the past. there can be no assurance itvvill be able to do i
st: In the future. i
Going concom uncertainty i
These consolidated ﬁnancial statements have been prepared on the basis that the Company is a going concern. ‘
which contemplates the realization of its assets and the settlement of Its liabilities in the normal course of
operations. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern Is uncertain and dependent upon obtainan 3
the ﬁnancing necessary to meet its ﬁnancial commitments and to complete the development of Its properties I
and/or realizing proceeds from the sale of one or more of the properties. These consolidated ﬁnancial statements ‘
do not reﬂect any adjustments related to the carrying values and classiﬁcation of assets and liabilities should the l
Company be unable to continue as a going concern. ‘
3. MINERAL PROPERTIES
KSK CoW— Centml Kallrnantan
The Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary Indokal. owns 75% of the issued and outstanding shares in PT
Kallmantan Surya Kencana (‘KSK') which holds the KSK 6" generation Contract Of Work ('KSK COW) with the
Indonesian Government.
After the application of the second mandatory area reiinquishment submitted in May 2006. the KSK COW will
cot/er 94.110 hectares which is subdivided Into two blocks Block A (33,170 hectares) Is In the fourth year of
exploration of the KSK COW and Block B (60.949 hectares) is In the third year oi exploration of the KSK Cow.
Two. one year. extensions may be applied for at the end of the third exploration year. Following that phase there
Is a two year feasibility period. then a three year construction period. then operations tor thirty years.
A portion of the KSK CoW is within a Hutan Lindung (protectedlraerved forest) area. The KSK Cow was granted
prior to the enactment of the 1999 Government of Indonesia Law No. 41 on Forestry which prohibits open pit
mining in Hutan Lindung (protected/reserved Iorest) areas. A subsequent Presidential Decree has conﬁrmed that
when the Company's property ﬁts the necasary criteria It may apply for a permit to explolt that portion of the
properties Within the KSK COW that fall within the Hutan Lindung,
SKlPs — East Kallmantan
On March 23. 2006 the Company Incorporated a 100% beneﬁcially owned domestic Indonesian subsidiary. PT
Jelal Cahaya Minerals (‘F’T Jelai"), PT Jelal applied for and was granted a permit called in short form a SKIP over
5.000 hedares area called the Jelai-Mewet prospect that allows the Company to conduct surtace exploration
including taking samples over the vein system at the Jelal project in East Kalimantan, This Is a preliminary permit
to allow the Company to evaluate the prospect and decide on the total size of the area needed prior to requesting
the Issue of a KP (Kuasa Fertambangan) or mining permit.
_—_—_—_._._—__.————
Ka/Imanlan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


NOTES TO THE INTERIM CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
For the six month period ending June 30, 2006 and 2005 (U.S$)
Prepared by Management without audit — see Notice to Reader
r - » year
For mo a‘x ended Cumlanve
nionlhs ended Decanter 31, explolaﬂm
JMSO. 2006 2005 dnoa incapﬂon
adoration costs earned from a predeceer ‘- - X - ‘- 2,038,32
Baluration oo$ during the period:
Commnitydevdopmmt 18,000 36,000 103,270
Consmants and cum-am 1,109 83,303 815,147
conﬁded drilling 177,008 - 1,004,520
Field support 64,370 67,016 1,086,614
Land iaxand dead rmt 945 24,135 164,401
$laries wagesand related was 172,509 252,970 2,950,991
$mple preparation and analys's 13,829 13,818 459,443
SJpplIes and equipment 3.752 127,676 1,183,131
Transaon ﬁnduding helicopter) 77,476 88,795 965,766
Travel and aooomodeﬁon 13,038 23,187 453,023
547,036 716,90 11,22, :

Current period emloraiion 1, IA ,719 ,66.916
summing l
mera w w -  l
4. FIXED ASSETS
eoemer 1,
wm ‘7 oo eioo
Cog Depredaﬁan value value
Omoe and ﬁeld equipment $ 234,730 $ 216,340 $ 18,440 8 19,359
5. $HARE CAPITAL AND CONTRIBUTED SURPLUS
Amharized:
Authorized share capiial $1,000,000 divided into 100,000,000 common shares at a par value 01 $0.01
each.
_______—.—__-—.—_——
n Kai/mm Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


NOTES TO THE INTERIM CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage oompany)
For the six month period ending June 30. 2006 and 2005 (U.S$)
Prepared by Management wllhout audit — see Notice to Reader
(Se) Common shares Issued and outstanding:
. 7. ~ .. .9
Capital and
Commn sures Combined Contributed
Isled and San Capital Per Surplus snails
cumming Value usom us USS
Mame Dsoenber 31. 2005 43.573.902 435.737 12.434.897 12.870,634
Warranls Wad 70.000 700 15,060 15.760
0 prions 666% 200.000 2.000 26.836 28.336
Fair value options gramed - - 4.652 4.652
(5b) Common share purchase warrants outstanding at June 30. 2006:
Number of Warrants Expiry Date
3.769.417 Cdn 0.25 October 10. 2006
Common share purdiase warrants transactions are summarized as follows
deled Alena.
Bards Hie:
Sara S
=:|;-: bef3 .25 5.10 . - ‘25
Emmised (70.000) Cdn$0.25
Boired (1.264.218) (cansozs)
(Sc) Common share purchase options outstanding at June 30. 2006:
Number of Shares Exercise Price Expiry Date
350,000 .11 August 21, 2007
415.000 Cdn$0.33 November 28. 2008
65.000 Cdn$0.43 November 28. 2008
1.000.000 Cdn$0.55 March 29. 2009
1.070.000 Cdn$0.20 September 15, 2009
27.000 Cdn$0.25 June 1. 2011
Common share purmase options are summarized as follows:
Weighted hung:
Bard: Rice
Saree 5
anus ems.» 1,2 .nu- a ,
Granted 27.000 Cdn$025
Eerdsd (200.000) -0t14
Eoired (500.000) (0.20)
H!
______——_.____—————
Kalimaman Gold Carpomtion Limited
AIM Admission Document 37


NOTES TO THE INTERIM CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited
(a development stage company)
For the six month period ending June 30. 2006 and 2005 (USS)
Prepared by Management without audit — see Notice to Reader
A non—cash stock compensation expense of $4.652. or $0.17 per share. ($nii in 2005) for the grant 0' 27.000
options was charged to the consolidated loss for the six months ended June 30. 2006. Contributed surplus was
increased by the same amount. The Black»Scholes model was used to tair value these options based on a risk-
free interest rate 014.2%. a Ierc expected dividend yield. expected stock price voiatility ot118% and an expected
life of the option of 5 years.
(5d) Pursuant to a share purd'iase agreement dated December 22. 1995 between Kaiimantan investment
Corporation (“KIC'). the Company’s controlling shareholder. and Kaiimantan Minerals Ltd. (the predecessor to the
Company), the Company granted KIC a contingent option to acquire 1.000.000 common shares at US$1.30 per
share exercisable for two years after the date that one million ounces of proven and probable gold reserves have
been delineated on KSK Cow.
5. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS \
The Company pays fees to Golden Oak Corporate Services Ltd. a company owned by Doris Meyer. President
and Chief Executive Ofticer in the amount at CDN$8.000 per month before Canada's goods and services tax.
During the six months ended June 30. 2006. the Company paid Golden Oak $44,939 ($42,531 in 2005). Either
party may terminate the agreement at any time upon 90 days notice.
7. SUESEQUENT EVENTS
(7a) The Company is working towards having its shares admitted for trading on the Alternative investment Maiket
(“AIM”) of the London Stock Exchange as soon as practicable to expand its access to capital and participate in
this natuml resource dominated expanding market for smaller and growing companies, Under the AIM Rules.
the Company is required to appoint and retain a broker and a nominated advisor ('Nomad'), The broker’s role is
to help the Company to raise ﬁnance on the market and to act as the principal interface between the Company
and the Investment community and to advise the Company on Investment conditions. The London Stock
Exchange delegates the task of determining whether an individual company is appropriate for admission onto AIM
to Nomads,
The Company has engaged the ﬁrm of Keith. Hayley. Rogers s Co. Limited (‘KBR'). in London. England as
corporate stockbroker in accordance with the AIM Rules. KBR ls acted as a ﬁnder on the private placement
closed on August 17. 2005. KBR has been paid a fee of 10.000 British Pounds and KER will be paid an additional _
30,000 British Pounds on the Company‘s admission to AIM. KER will thereafter be paid an annual retainer while
engaged by the Company.
The Company has engaged the ﬁrm of RFC Corporate Finance Ltd. (“RFC') of Perth. Australia to act as Nomad.
Aside from being specialists in the mineral resource sector RFC is close to Indonesia and two of the Compaan
directors live in Australia. RFC will be paid staged fees of AUDSZDUJJDD to guide the Company through the
admission process to AIM including preparation and overseeing the Admission Document. The Company has
receipt of regulatory approval to satisfy up to AUD$100.000 of these fees by the issue of 425,000 common shares.
In addition on admission to AIM the Company has regulatory approval to issue RFC 650.000 share pumase
warrants exercisable for two years at a price of CDN$0.27. RFC will thereaﬂer be paid an annual retainer vifnile
engaged by the Company.

(7b) On August 9, 2006 the Directors granted Incentive Stock Options to Directors. employees and
consultants on 1.455.000 shares of the Company‘s capital stock. exercisable for up to ﬁve years at a price of
CDN$0.20 per share. which price Is the last closing price of the Compaan shares prior to the date of grant. The
options granted will be subject to any applicable regulatory hold periods.

(7c) On August 17. 2006 the Company issued 13.270.090 common shares and 13.270890 common share
purchase warrants in the capital of the Company tor gross proceeds of CDN$2.654.173 pursuant to a pr'n/ate
placement announced on July 4. 2006 and July 25. 2006. Each unit sold at CDNSO.20 consisted of one common
share and one common share purchase warrant. Each warrant is exerdsabie for the purchase at one common
share at a price of CDN$0.30 per share until August 16. 2008. A ﬁnders fee was paid in the form of $187,377
cash and 398.127 brokerwarrants. each broker warrant is exercisable for the purchase of one common share at a
price at CDN$0.23 per share until August 16. 2008. The common shares issued. and any common shares issued
pursuant to the exercise ct share purchase warrants prior to December 18. 2006 are restricted from trading until
December 18. 2006.
__—_———_.————-—
Kalllnanten Gold Carpomiion Limited

AIM Admission Document


Our ref: LDD/KSK
Part E — Legal Report on Indonesian Mineral Titles
______—___————
I‘IADIPUTRANTO. HADINOTO & PARTNERS The Jakarta Stock Exchange Building
Tower II. 21“ Floor
Sudinnan Central Business Dietriu
Jl. Jendral Sudinnin Kev 5253
Jakarta 12150, Indonesia
Tel: 452 21 515 emu/meme
Fax: + 52 21 515 women/55
wwwhhpocid
PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
6 December 2006
l
The Directors i
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Limited ‘
Unit 1 — 15.752 Marine Drive
White Rock. B.C, V45 1E6
Canada
The Directors
RFC Corporate Finance Limited
Level B. 0V1 Building
250 St George's Terrace
Perth 6000
Western Australia
LEGAL CONSULTANTS REPORT ON INDONESIAN MINERAL ASSETS
Dear Site.
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Purpose
This Indonesian Legal Consultant's Report (the 'Report‘) was requested by Kalimantan Gold
Corporation Limited ('Kalimantan Gold") and RFC Corporate Finance Limited (‘RFC”) and Is prepared
by Hadiputranto, Hadinotu 8x Partners, Jakarta for Inclusion In an “Admission Document" tor admission
at the ordinary shares of Kalimantan Gold to the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange Pie
C‘Admlsslon').
1.2 Scope
This Report describes the interests 01 Kallmantan Gold In mining rights granted pursuant to the laws of
the Republic of Indonesia and under certain agreements and other instruments that are governed by
such laws. As such. this Report summarizes the review carried out by us on two Indonesian Incorporated
oompenies. Kalimantan Surya Kencana (‘KSK") and PT Jelal Cahaya Minerals (“JCM') with respect to:
(a) an Indonesian mining exploration project of KSK being oonducted pursuant to a Contract of
Work between KSK and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia dated 23 April 1997
€st CoW‘); and
(b) an Indonesian mining exploration project of JCM being conducted pursuant to a Decree of the
Bupatl of Bulungan No. 507IK-Vlil154012006 dated 28 August 2006 on the Granan of the
Mining Business License (Izin Usaha Penambangan — IUP) Mining Authorization (Kuasa
Pertambengan - ‘KP") of General Survey Stage to JCM (‘JCM KP').
We have been advised that Kalimanian Gold holds 100% of the shares in lndokal Limited (“Indokal”)
(although we have not Independentiy veriﬁed the same). As Iurther detailed below, Indokal holds 75% of
the issued share capital in KSK.
Hadiputrantn. Hadinoto & Partners Is a member at Baker 8. MoKenIie International. a Swiss Verein.
_—.——__—e—.’—
Kali/ﬂank" Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO &PARTNERS
As for JCM, Kalimantan Gold has entered Into certain contractual arrangemens with JCM and Its
shareholders. pursuant to which Kaiimantan Gold (either by itself or through a wholly owned mining
services company) has agreed to provide all necessary ﬁnancial. technical and managerial requirements
for the development and operation of a mine within the JCM KP area. and in return JCM has agreed to
pay to Kalimantan Gold (or its subsidiary) the net proceeds of the sale of minerals from the JCM KP area.
These arrangements are further deswibed below.
The scope ofthls Report Is limited to:
- a high level overview of the mining and related regulations applicable to the development of
KSK's and JCM's mining projects In indonesia;
- conﬁrmation of the valid corporate standing of KSK and JCM and their wrrent shareholdings;
- a summary of the mining rights granted to. and associated obligations imposed on KSK l
pursuant to, the KSK CoW:
- a summary of the mining rights gmnted to. and associated obligations imposed on JCM
pursuant to. the JCM KP: and
» a description of the contractual arrangements entered Into between Kallmantan Gold and JCM
relating to the mining operations canted out pursuant to the JCM KP.
This Report is not. and should not be considered to be. a full legal audit of or a full due diligence
on KSK and JCM. Furthermore, we have assumed that what we say about the interests and
mining rights oi KSK and JCM is not in any material way affected by the laws of, or agreements
in. any Jurisdiction other than the Republic of Indonesia. in particular. we make no comment on
the Impact of the heads of agreement that we understand has been entered into (but which we
have not reviewed) between Kalimantan Gold and Oxiana Exploration Pty Ltd in respect of a
proposed joint venture for the KSK Cow.
We have not sought to Investigate any taxation and accounting matters.
1.8 Document: Reviewed
The Information contained in this Report is prepared based on our review of documents made available
to us by the Company, which are listed in Schedule 1 of this Report ("Documents Reviewed").
1.4 Assumptions and Quallﬁcatlons
This report Is subject to the assumptions and qualiﬁcations set out in Schedule 2 of this ReporL
1.5 Public Searches
We have not conducted public searches for any litigation actions which may have been commenced
against the Company. We have. however. reviewed all of the Documents Reviewed to determine
whether any lltlgation actions or disputes have been mentioned.
In Indonesia generally "public" searches can take several weeks (depending on the search and on
location). and the results are often unreliable due to the fact that the majority of records are kept in
manual ﬁling systems. and documents are often lost or misﬁled.
1.6 Statement of Interests
We provide lee based legal services to Kalimantan Gold and its afﬁliates in relation to indonesian law
and will receive a fee for preparing this report. We will not receive any other monetary or other beneﬁt.
either directly or indirectly. for doing so.
1.1 Consent
We consent to the inclusion of this Report In its entirety In the Admission Document provided that the
Admission Document does not comment upon or qualify this Report in any way, We conﬁrm that having
taken all reasonable care to ensure that the information as to indonesian legal matters contained in this
__——____—_._—————-—
m Kailmentan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS
Report is. to the best of our knowledge. and subject to the assumptions and qualiﬁcations set out
elsewhere herein. In accordance with the facts and contains no omissions likely to affect its Import.
Apart from preparing this Report. we have not been involved In the preparation of other parts of the a,
Admission Document and we are not responsible for the contents thereof or omissions contained therein
or for any use made of this Report other than its Inclusion in its entirety in the Admission Document.
This Report may not be copied. circulated. quoted or divulged to. or used by or relied upon by. any other
person or entity. or otherwise referred to for any other purpose than Admission without the prior written
consent of Hadiputranto. Hadinoto & Partners. Jakarta (Reference: Luke Devlne). ‘
2 INDONESIAN MINING AND RELATED REGULATIONS 
2.1 Introduction
The basis for the regulation of the indonesian mining sector derives ultimately from the 1945 Constitution
of the Republic of Indonesia. which stipulates that Indonesia‘s natural resources are to be controlled by
the State and must be used for the maximum beneﬁt of the lndonesian people. The indonesian 1967
Mining Law and its Implementing regulations adopt this fundamental principle. Control has been
interpreted as being equivalent to ownership. Therefore there Is no title to particular mineral deposits
granted by the State to private companies or Individuals. but rather the State will only grant the right to
exploit and sell the mineral deposits.
2.2 Types nfMlnerals
Indonesian mining regulations classify mineral resources into 3 types:
a) Strategic Minerals. (e.g. uranium. oil and gas, coal);
b) Vital Minerals. reg, gold. silver. nickel, bauxite); and
c) Non-strategic and Non-vital Minerals. (e.g. marble. granite).
The mining of ooal and the vital minerals is open for foreign investment.
2.: Investment In mlning
23.1 Foreign Investment in Mining
A sole foreign investor. or a joint venture between foreign Investors and Indonalan investors. may tarry
out mining activities through a Contract of Work granted to an lndonesian foreign investment company
(Perusahaan Penanaman Modal Asirig — ‘PMA'l. A Contract of Walk C'CoW) is signed between the ‘
PMA company established by the foreign Investors (and. if applicable. their Indonesian partners) and the
Government of indonesla (“Got”).
The COW sets out in detail. the rights and obligations of the mining company in relation to the
development and operation of the mining project.
From the initial COWS signed In the 19605 through to the last COWS signed In the late 19905, there have
been a number of revisions to the Cow terms. Each revision is referred to as a new 'generation" of
COW. There have been a total of 7 d'ﬂerent "generations" of COWS signed. The KSK COW is a 6th
Generation Cow.
The regulation of the rights and obligations of a mining company engaged under a Cow are principally
contained In the COW Itself. The CoW will govern all stages of the mine development,
Under Indonesian law. the Cow has the status of "tax specialis" (or “special law“). meaning that it
overrides the Indonesian laws of general application (eg general tax laws) where the relevant subject
matter is speciﬁcally dealt with in the terms of the Cow itself. This treatment is of most importance in
relation to the taxation provisions of the COW. which set out the detailed tax regime applicable on the
relevant mining oompany throughout the life of the Cow. regardless of the changes in Indonesia's tax
regulations from time to time.
Further details of the KSK Cow are provided in Section 3 of this Report.
___—______/
Kaiirriantarr Gold Comoreﬁon Limited 9
AIM Admission Document 1


HADIPUTRAN'TO, HADINO‘TO & PARTNERS
23.2 Domestic Investment in Mining
Domestic investment in mining is conducted through either a Cow or a KP. A KP is In essence a license
issued by the Head of Regency. the Governor and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources.
depending ol the location of the mining area If the mining area delineated by the KP ls located within
one Regency. then the KP will be issued by the Bupati or Head of the Regency. It the mining area
crosses the boundary between two Regencles. then the KP ls issued by the Governor (Head of the
Province). If the mining area crosses the boundary between two Provinces. the authority to issue the KP
lies in the Ministerof Energy and Mineral Resources.
Although the Mining Law contemplates that a KP applicant should have demonstrable capacity to exploit
minerals in its KP area. this is otten not the case, As a result. KP holders on occasion enter into
agreements with foreign mining companies to cause mlnlng activities to be conduded on their behalfr
A KP grants exclusive mining rights wimln the delineated mining area to the holderfor speciﬁed minerals
or metals for a deﬁned stage of mining activity. There are several types oi KP depending on the stage of .
development of the mlning area itself. as follows:
- General Survey KP:
- Explomtlon KP;
- Exploitation KP:
- Transportation and Selling KP; and
- Promsing and Reﬁning KF'.
After carrying out the relevant phase of mine development under one form of KP (e.g. general survey
KP). the KP holder is required to reapply to the relevant issuing authority for the next KP (e.g. exploration
KP). for whid't they have priority over other applicants. provided they have met the relevant obligah'ons.
The righS and obligations of the KP holder will be stated in the decree of the granting of such KP, and
are supplemented by applicable mining regulations.

Unlike a Cow (which has 'iex specialis' status — meaning that its provisions override the general laws

and regulations), a KP is subject to the prevailing laws and regulations of the day. including changes in

tax laws.

Further details of the JCM KP and relevant obligations are provided in Section 3 of this Report.

2.4 Mining and land rights

The granting ot a Cow or KP only grants to the relevant mining company the rights of exploring,

exploiting and selling of the mineral deposits below the surface of the relevant mining area. It does not

give the mining company the rights to the land surface area.

The Indonesian mining regulations and the terms of the CoW provide thatwhen the holder oi the Cow or

KP intends to condud exploitation activities. and the surface land is occupied by indigenous people.

settlers. traditional farmers. or used tor plantations or industrial forest. certain land compensation

arrangements must be entered into:

a) For land ocwpied by indigenous people. settlers or traditional farmers, the holder of the CoW or
KP ls required to identify the owner of the indigenous title to such land. and enter into a land use
and compensation agreement (paying compensation for land and the crops).

to) For land used for plantations, the holder of the CoW or KP is required to enter Into an
agreement with the plantation company to use the land. The agreement would provide for
compensation for trees cut and clearing of the land.

c) For land used for production torest. the holder of the CoW or KP shall enter into an agreement
with the holder of the production forest concession to use the land. The agreement would
provide for compensation for trees cut and clearing of the land.

It is also possible that part or all of the mining area the subject of a Cow or KP ls located in forest

dasslﬁed as 'Proteoted Forest". The Implications of this are discussed below.

_'_d__4._é—————-———
a Kelimantan Gold Corporation Limited
NM Admission Document


I‘IADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO &PARTNERS
Z5 Restricrlons on Open Out Mining in Protected Forest
2.5.1 Introduction of 1999 Forestry Law
Based on Articie 38.4 of the Law Not 41 of 1999 on Forestry (“Forestry Law"). open cut mining in
“Protected Forest" is prohibited General exploration activities. Including drilling, in Protected Forest
areas may also be affected. as dismissed in section 2.5.2 below.
when the Forestry Law was ﬁrst introduced. it created a great deal of uncertainty as to whether mining
companies with mining concessions which pro-dated the Forestry Law were entitled to. In accordance
with the terms of their Contiacts of Work and mining regulations. carry out open cut mining In protected
iorests.
By emergency Government Regulation ("PERPU') No. 1 of 2004. the Go] sﬁ‘pulated that any agreement
and licenses in the mining sector that had been granted prior to the Forestry Law shall remain valid until
their expiry date. Subsequent to the PERPU. through Presidential Decree No. 41 of 2004 ("PD
41l1004“). the Gol authorized 13 mining companies to continue carrying out operations (including open
cut mining) in their Cow Area despite the provisions of the apparently inconsistent Foratry Law. The .
above emergency Government Regulation was later ratiﬁed by the Parliament. and accordingly has the ‘
legal etrect of amending Article 38.4 of the Forestry Law.
A subsequent challenge as to the validity oi the Govemment‘s actions In passing the PERPU was made
to the Constitutional Court. and the Constitutional Court upheld the validity of the Government's actions In
passing the PERPU. Accordingly. the PERFU has. from a regulatory viewpoint. conﬁrmed that the
existing mining company is entitled to carry out open cut mining operations within its mining area as
delineated by Cow. .
2 5. 2 Ministry of Forestry decrees
Following the FD 41/2004. the Minister of Forestry issued Regulation of the Minister of Forestry No.
P.12IlVlenhut-ll/2004 on the Use of Protected Forest Area for Mining Activities ('Reg. P-12"), which
essentially states that the licenses to carry out mining activities In protected lorest (both for exploration
and exploitation stages) shall only be valid for the mining companies included in the list of 13 mining
companies authorized by PD 41/2004 to conduct mining activities.
Based on RegP-iz. those 13 mining companies must obtain a permit to carry out exploration activities
within the Protected Forest from the Head of the Office of Forestry Planology on behalf ofthe Minister of
Forestry in order to be able to conduct the explomlion activities and then they should obtain the license
for exploitation activities (namely a forestry borrow and use license).
We understand from investigations with the Directorate General of Mineral. Coal and Geothermal that
they are currently in discussions with the Ministry 01 Forestry to recommend to the President that the
President issue a luriher Presidential Decree for a second batch of mining companies who are able to
demonstrate that they are developing their prospects.
In June 2006, the Minister of Forestry issued Regulation of the Minister of Forestry Not P.14IMenhut-
"/2006 on Guideline of the Borrow and Use oi Forestry Area (Reg. F-14'), which provides that mining
activities can only be conducted within production forest and protected iorest through a “borrow and use"
mechanism. The regulation however states that open-cut mining In protected forest is not permitted
under and circumstances.
A mining company will ﬁrst have to apply for an in-princlple licence. and lulﬁll the obligations prescribed
by that licence and the Reg. F-14 within 2 years. before it can be granted the permanent borrow and use
permit, One of the material obligations attached to the in—prlnciple licence is the obligation tor the mining
company to provide 'clear and clean" reforested land as compensation for the forest area used for the
mining activities. This replacement land area should be twice the area of the forest area used used ior
mining, and should be located adjacent to the mining area. If the mining company cannot provide the
compensation land within 2 years as of the granting of the ln-prinolple licence. it will be deemed to have
satisﬁed the obligation by Instead paying an additional royalty of 1% oi the proceeds from production
sold.
Upon satisfying the obligations of the in—prlnciple licence. the mining company is granted a borrow and
use permit. valid for 5 years. extendable In 5 year Intervals.
—_—’—_’4—_———————
Kelimennen Gold Corporaﬁon Limited 93
AIM Admission Document


HADIPUTRANTO. manoTo &PARTN'ERS
2.6 Environmean Legislaﬁon
2.6.1 Environmental Impact Studies
Pursuant to the Indonesian environmental laws and regulations and the terms of a Cow. a mining
company should prepare an environmental impact analysis (AMDAL) during the Feasibility Study period
(which is the period following the exploration period which KSK is currently operating within),
Pursuant to Government Regulation No. 27 Year 1999, an environmental feasibility study must be l
approved by the head of the agency having the duty to manage environmental impacts at the central ‘
government level (currently the Minister of Environment) or Governor at the regional level. Since the
Cow area is located within two provinces, Le. Central Kallrnantan and West Kallmantan, the authority to ‘
grant approval on the AMDAL is the Minister of Environment.
KSK is obliged to submit periodic reports on implementation of Its environmental management plan and
environmental monitoring plan to the Ministry of Environment, Directorate General of Mineral. Coal and
Geothermal, the MEMR and the Governor of the relevant area.
Pursuant to the Decree of Minister of Environment No. 45 year 2005 on Guidance on Arranging Report
on Implementation of Environmental Management Plan and Environmental Monitoring Plan, the report
should be submitted periodically in accordance with the terms of the AMDAL itself. If there is no Such
provision stipulated, then it should be submitted at least every six months.
2.6.2 Land Remediation
With respect to remediation of the mining area after completion of mining acﬁvﬂiﬁ under the COW, the
holder of the Cow will be required to provide remediation security an form of deposits with a government
bank or third party guarantees, e.g. government banking or insurance institutions owned by Government
or foreign exchange banks) prior to the commencement of the opemtlng activity.
The amount of the remediation security shall be determined based on the estimated remediation cost
stated in the Annual Environmental Management Plan prepared by the holder of the COW. The
remediation cost shall consist of (i) direct cost, ag. cost of removing mine facilities. replantation costs,
etc and (ii) indirect costs, Including heavy equipment mobilization and demobilization cost. remediation
planning cost. administration and proﬁt or remediation connectors.
To the extent that security has been provided, release at remediation sewrity shall be made in stages. in
accordance with the completion of the remediation work. Any interest accmlng in respect of remediation
cash security posted shall also be released to the mining company.
2.7 Mandatory Payments, Royalties and Income Tax
A holder of mining rights ls required to pay deadrent and royalties. Gwemment Regulation No. 45/2003
speciﬁes the deadrent and royalty obligations of KF' holders. with the obligations for CoW holders set out
In the Cow. Circular Letter of the DEMRIDlrector General of Geology & Mineral Resources No.
008.El84IDJG/2004 provides instructions for calculating payments of deadrent and royalties. Law No.
25/1999 speciﬁes to which level of government KP holders and Cow contractors are to pay royalties and
how such levels of government are to allocate and transfer such funds to other levels of government.
An attachment to Government Regulation No, 45/2003 sets out the deadrent charges based on the
number of hectares covered by a KP and the stage of mining involved. For KPs. dead rent charges
begin at Rp.500 per hectare per year during the General Survey KP and increase to as much as
Rp.25.000 per hectare per year during the Exploitation KP.
Royalties for KP holders are deﬁned as percentages of FOB sales prices tor metals exported as such or
, as contained in exported concentrates. The current deﬁned rates are 4% of sale price for copper. 3.75%
of sale price for gold and 3.25% of Sale price {Dr silver.
Companies holding KPs are also subject to income tax at generally applicable rates (currently 30%) and
are subject to generally applicable tax laws.
——._—J—F
u Kelimsnian Gold Corporation Umiied
AIM Admission Documenr


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO (8: PARTNERS
28 Regional and Provincial Governments
The Indonesian Parliament passed the Regional Autonomy Law In 1999. giving the Regencielelties and
the Provincial Governments oi Indonesia more authority to regulate matters falling within their respective
geographil jurisdictions.
The 1999 law gives the Regency/City and the Provinces very broad authority to essentially regulate all
matters within their respective jurisdictions. except for limited areas reserved for Cenn-al Government
regulation (eg. foreign affairs. security and defense. judicial administration. religion. etc)
The Regencla/Cities and Provinces have since 1999 continued to develop and issue further regulations
to implement the principles of Regional Autonomy Laws. 
3 Continuation of Corpoiate Standing at KSK and JCM 1
3.1 Corporate Matters
3. 1. 1 Company Establishment ’
KSK
KSK was validly established under the laws of the Republic of lndonesis on 2 April 1997. KSK was
established by Indokal and PT Pancaran Cahaya Kahayan (‘PCK'). a limited liability company
established in the Republic of Indonesia. having Its principal place of business at s, Wldjoja Centre. 2"d
Floor, Jalan Jenderal Sudirman No. 71. Jakarta. Indonesia. The principal place of business and
registered ofﬁce of KSK is currently at Jl. Teuku Umsr 32A. Palangkaraye 73112. Central Kaiimantan.
lndonesia.
The Articles of Association contained in the Deed of Establishment of KSK states that KSK‘s purposes
and uhjectives are to engage in mining activities. The scope of work in relation to the purposes and
objectives includes conducting the exploration, evaluation. mining and processing the mineral ores.
metals and result of the minemis in every steps with regard to the environmental and interess of the local
communities: marketing and selling at the results or additional results of the activities mentioned above.
Including to export; Importing all things required by KSK to conduct the mining activities; and establishing
other industry related to the activities of KSK.
JCM
JCM was validly established under the laws of the Republic 01 Indonesia on 23 March 2006 and Its
establishment was approved by the Minister of Law and Human Rights on 31 May 2006. JCM‘s corporate
establishment was registered at the Company Register at the Ofﬁoe of Industry. Trade and Cooperatives
on 15 May 2006.
JCM was atablished by Suyono. an Indonesian citizen, holder of the identity card No.
09.530528117553303 and residing at Jalen Bedlan No. 7. RT 007. RW 002. Kelurahan Cilandak.
Kecametan Cliandsk. Jakarta Selatan. lndonesie ("Suyond"). and Susilowati. an Indonesian citizen.
holder oi the identity card No. 09.5306.470463.0022 and residing at Jalan Pun Mutlare No. 1. RT 004.
RW 001, Kelurahan Cipete. Kecamatan Cilandak, Jakarta Selatan. Indonesia ("Susllowati').
The Articles of Association contained In the Deed of Establishment of JCM states that JCM's purposes
and objectives are to engage in mining. tmding, industry. development. land transportation. and servioe
activities. These objectives are sufﬁcient to authorize JCM to carry out the development of the mine
pursuant to the JCM KP.
3.1.2 Current Shareholders
Under Indonesian law. share ownership is evidenced by a share certiﬁcate. which is registered in the
share register of the company.
_______—__’—————-———
Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


HADxPUTRANTo, HADINOTO <5; PARTNERS
KSK
Based on the Documents Reviewed. KSK has paid up Capital of Rp2.415.000.000 divided into 1,000,000
shares having a par value of $2,415 each. Indokai owns 75% and PCK owns 25% ofthe total shares
issued by KSK.
Also see sections 4.2.12 and 4.2.13 below lor Indonesian participation and assignment ratrictions.
JCM
Based on the Documents Reviewed, JCM has paid up capital of RP. 200.000.000 divided into 2,000
shares having a par value of Rp100.000 eachi Suyono owns 95% and Susllowati owns 5% of the total i
shares Issued by him
3.1.3 Management
KSK
Based on the latest amendment to its Articles of Association the composition of the Board of Directors
and Commissioners are as follows
Board of Directors:
President Director : Rahman Conneiy
Director : Suyono
Director : Giles Andrew Geiger or known as Mansur Geiger
Board of Commissioners:
President Commissioner : Rals Abin
Commissioner : Murray Hallen Clapham
Also see section 4.2.12 below for Indonesian participation requirements.
JCM

Based on the latest amendment to its Articles of Association the composition of the Board of Dlreaors

and Commissioners are as follows:

Board of Directors:

Director : Suyono

Board of Commissioners:

Commissioner : Susiloweti

3.1.4 KSK Joint Venture

A Joint Venture Agreement ("JVA') was entered into between Indokel. PCK and KSK on 12 November

1998.

The following provisions of the JVA are of relevanoe to the KSK COW. and the relationship between

lndokal and PCK in relation to the development of the mine which is subject to the KSK Cow:

(a) 10% of the shares held by FCK in KSK (le currently 25% 01 the KSK Issued shara) are funded
on a free-carried basis by Indokal up until commencement of production. and any such
advanoa made by lndokai pursuant to such free carry shall not be repayeble to lndokaL

(b) The remaining 90% of the shares held by PCK in KSK (is currently 22.5% of the KSK issued
shares) are funded by Indokal on an interest free basis up until the commencement of
production. but will be subject to an interest rate of 2% above LlEOR from the commencement
of production until the outstanding balance is repaid Such loans are to be repaid to lndokal out
of dividends which would othenuise be payable by KSK to FCK.

(c) KSK plans to establish the Foundation for Sustainable Development of Upper Kehayan region,
Kalimantan, Indonesia (the “Foundation’) to promote and maintain the education and welfare of

M!”
Kalimanian Gold Corporation Limlied
AIM Admission Document


HADIPUTRANTO. HADINO'I‘O &PARTNERS
the people in the region. to promote ecological protection and development of the region. and to
promote the establishment and development of sustainable business In the region. Indokal and
FCK have agreed to transfer a collective total of 2% of the issued shares of KSK to the
Foundation. with each of Indokal and PCK to transfer their pro-rala portion of the 2% i
shareholding. The terms of the transfer are: 
(i) a 1% shareholding in KSK shall be transferred to the Foundation for no consideration I
at the commencement of the commercial production: and .
(ii) the remaining 1% shareholding in KSK will be transferred to the Foundation at per i
value (which is Rp.2.415 per share) ten years after the commencement of the i
commercial production. 
Generally. any transfer of shares shall be subject to the approval from the Minister of Energy 
and Mineral Resources. However. If the above transfer of shares were considered as a form of I
divestment under the Article 24 of the KsK Cow. the above approval from the MEMR would not 
be required. l
The JVA constitutes legal. valid. binding and enforceable obligations oi the parties to it and it is in 
appropriate term to be admissible In evidence in the courts ofthe Republic of Indonesia. ‘
I
All actions required under the laws of the Republic of Indonesia to authorize the entry into by KSK. PCK 1
and lndolokal of the JVA. and the performance by each of the parties thereto of its obligations under the i
JVA have been taken and are In full force and effect. i
The choice of laws of indonesia as the governing law of the JVA would be recognised and given effect by I
the courts of the Republic of Indonesia, The submission In the JVA to the jurisdiction of the UNCITRAL 1
Arbitration Rules is a valid submissiunt A foreign arbitration award. which meets the requirements in the
New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Award (the “Convention')
and the requirements set out below should be recognized and enforced In the Republic of Indonesia. ;
The Convention has been ratiﬁed by the Republic of Indonesia pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 34 of I
1981. Under the Convention and Law No. 30/1959 on Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolutions. In 1
order for the foreign arbitral awards to be recognized and enforced within the Jurisdlctlon oi the Republic ‘
of Indonesia. such amrds must satisfy the following requirements:
(i) the award Is rendered by an arbitration body or an arbitrator in a country which is bilaterally ‘
bound to Indonesia or jointiy with indonesla by an international convention on the recognition i
and enforcement of foreign arbitration awards, Its enforcement Is based on the principle of I
reciprocity:
(Ii) the foreign arbitration awards are only limited to awards which. according to Indonesian law. fall
within the scope of its commercial law: .
(ill) the foreign arbitration awards do not contravene the public order; 
(Iv) a foreign arbitration award may be enforced in Indonesia after an exequatur (writ of execution) 
has been obtained from the Chairman of the Central Jakarta District Court. y
3.1.5 JCM KP Cooperation Anangemerlis 
As mentioned above. under Indonesian laws and regulations. foreign entities are not permitted to hold i
shares in companies which hold KPs, Accordingly. Kailmantan Gold is not permitted to acquire shares in 
JCM. ‘
As a result, Kalimantan Gold has entered Into certain commercial agreements with JCM and its i
shareholders which provide for the following: 
I
a) Kalimantan Gold is granted sole and exclusive rights to market all minerals derived from the .
JCM KP: I
b) Kalimantan Gold, through a wholly owned lndonesian company. shall provide all mining services
required for the exploration. construction and operation of the mine. and In return. Kalimantan
Gold will be entitled to all net proceeds from the sale of minerals arising from the JCM KP; l
i
—~___—___——~.___.— l
Kai/inaan Gold Corpomlion Limited 97 l
AIM Admission Document i
l
i
I
I


HADIPUTRANTO, HADLNoTo & PARTNERS
c) Until such time as Kalimanten Gold establishes the Indonesian subsidiary to provide mining
services. Kalimantan Gold shall iund all JCM‘s exploration activitla required in respect of the
JCM KP by way of a direct loan to JCM;
d) JCM is required to maintain all KPs in valid ioroe and effect:
8) Upon requat oi Kallmantan Gold. JCM shall take all required steps necessary to convert the
JCM KP into a Contract of Work with a company in which Kalimantan Gold (or its nominees)
hold 100% of the snarﬁ;
f) Kalimentan Gold holds a power of attorney from JCM to sign any and all documents required to
be signed in the name of JCM relating to the mining activities
To provide further protection to Kalimentan Gold. the shareholders in JCM have granted a pledge over
their shares in JCM to Kalimantan Gold to secure the obligations of JCM under the exploration loan
agreement and related agreements. In addition, the shareholders have provided personal guarantees of
JCM's obligations to Kalimantan Gold. and have granted powers of attorney to Kalimantan Gold
authorizing Kallmantan Gold to exercise all shareholder powers In relation to corporate actions of “EM
The JCM KP Cooperation Agreements constitute legal. valld. binding and enioroeable obligations of the
parties to them and they are in appropriate form to be admissible in evidence In the courts of the
‘ Republic of Indonesia.
No authorizations. approval. actions. conditions and things required by the laws or any regulatory
authority in the Republic of Indonesia need to be taken. fulﬁlled or done (including the obtaining of any
necessary approval. authorization. exemption. lioense or permission and the making of any necessary
ﬁling. recording or registration) in order:
(a) to ensure that the obligations of each of the party under the JCM KP Cooperation Agreements
are legally binding and enforceable under the laws 0' the Republic of Indonesia:
(b) to ensure the validity. enforceability or admissibility In evidence of each oi the JCM KP
. Cooperation Agreements.
The choice of laws of Indonesia as the governing law of the JCM KP Cooperation Agreements would be
recognised and given effect by the courts of the Republic of Indonesia. The submission in the JCM KP
Cooperation (other than the Cooperation and Investment Agreement dated 5 October 2006 between
JCM. Kalimantan Gold, Suyono and Susliowati ("Cooperation and Investment Agreement")) to the
jurisdiction of the Indonesian courts is a valid submission.
The submission in the Cooperation and Investment Agreement to the Jurisdiction of the Arbitration Rules I
of the Singapore lntemationet Arbitration Centre Is a valid submission. I
4 MINING RIGHTS GRANTED UNDER KSK CONTRACT OF WORK I
4.1 KSK COW I
KSK entered into the KSK CoW to conduct gold mining and the mining of other associated minerals in I
Central Kalimantan with the Gel on 28 April 1997 after obtaining the investment approval from the
President of the Republic of Indonesia through 5.143 oonceming the Approval tor 63 Contract of Work in I
the framework of Foreign Investment In the General Mining Sector. The names of the shareholders of
KSK. i.e. Indokal and PCK, were listed in item No. 51 In the Attachment tothe above Praldential Decree. I
Accordingly, based on the prevailing Indonesian Laws and regulations at the signing at the Cow, we can
oonﬁrm that the KSK Cow was validly granted.
The Gol Is entitled to Iawiully terminate the KSK CoW in the circumstances provided for in the KSK COW.
The relevant provisions of the KSK Cow provide that:
—__—_.__.—_.___.— l
Kelimannan Gold Corporation lelled ‘
AIM Admission Document I


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS
Article 20.1.
In the event of default of KSK In respect of any of its obllgatlons under the KSK Cow, the Gol shall give
written notice to KSK to remedy such default within maximum of 180 days after receipt of the notice. It
KSK falls to remedy the default within that period, the Gal may terrnlnate the KSK CoWr
Article 202. ‘
Notwithsmnding the provisions of Article 20.1. in respect of KSK payment defaults. the mire period for
KSK Will be 30 days after receipt of a delault notice from Gol,
Based solely on the Documents Reviewed. we have not seen a default notice Issued by the Gol to KSK
pursuant to Article 20.1. nor has our review highlighted any evidence which would give the Gal grounds
to terminate the KSK COW,
4.2 Rights and Obligations of KSK under KSK Cow
4.21 Payment cfihe Secun'iy Deposit '
Pursuant to Article 7.5. of the KSK Cow, within 30 days as of the signing at the CoW KSK must pay
US$100.000 (less any amount already deposited during the Preliminary Survey or “SlPF” period). as the
Security Deposit. 50% of that Security Deposit Is to be released by the Get aﬂer the completion of the
General Survey stage (as explained further below in the Geneml Survey stage), .
We have sighted the payment otthe uss1oo.ooo security deposit. i
4. 2.2 Stages of Mlne Development
The KSK Cow gives KSK the rights to conduct general explomtion and mining activities within the mining
area delineated in the KSK COW. The KSK COW divides the activities up Into distin stages:
(a) General Survey;
(b) Exploration;
(c) Feasibility Study;
(d) Construction; and I
(e) Operating/Production. E
4.2.3 Mining stages completed or partially completed
General Survey Stage i
l
Not later than 6 months after the signing of the KSK Cow. KSK was required to commence General
Survey activities. General Survey activities consist of investigations and preliminary exploration work
carried out along broad features Oi an area for indications of mineralization, The General Survey stage
commences on the date the geneml survey activities are ﬁrst commenced. and continues for a maximum
period of 12 months. but may be extended with the agreement of the MEMR for a further period of 12 l
months.
The Documents Reviewed show that the extended General Survey period was oompleted on 27 April
1999. indicating that the initial General Survey Period commenced on 27 April 1997.
The KSK Cow requires KSK to spend a minimum of US$140 per square kilometer oi mining area during
the ﬁrst 12 months of the General Survey period. The Documents Reviewed show that this requirement
has been met by KSK.
At the end of the General Survey period. KSK was required to relinquish 25% of the original KSK COW
area, The Initial CoW area or KSK was 121,900 hectares. The Documents Reviewed show that KSK
has met its relinquishment obligations In respect of the General Survey period. however we also note that
at the time of erredan the relinquishment. KSK sought (and received approval for) an increase In the
contract area to 124.200 hectares. The additional area is the former area of PT Pancaran Peringa
Kallmanmn.
With regard to the Security Deposit referred to above. 50% of the US$1OD.DOO deposit was required to be
released by the Gol to KSK after the completion of the General Survey stage The Documents Reviewed
show that 50% was released on 10 October 1999.
Kelimanian Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


it
HADIPUTRANTO, HADINO'I‘O <8: PARTNERS
Exploration Stage
On 23 April 1999. KSK entered into the Exploration stage. At the commencement of this stage. the
remaining contract area was 124.200 hectares.
Subject to the suspension matters referred to below. the Exploration stage is tor a maximum period of 36
months from 28 April 1999. but may be extended twice. each extension for a period of 12 months. with I
the approve! of the MEMR,
KSK is required to submit its annual work program and budget to the MEMR In respect oftl'le Exploration
work to be carried out. In the event that KSK has not spent at least 80% of the budgeted amount for the
ﬁrst year of exploration by the end of that ﬁrst year. the Government may laminate the KSK Cow, The
Documents Reviewed do not provide any Information as to whether KSK fulﬁlled this budget obligation for
the iirst year or Exploration stage. The Documents Reviewed do not. however, indicate any claim or
default notice from the MEMR in respect of any alleged lailure to meet such condition.
Further. during the Exploration stage KSK is required to spend a minimum of ussmoo per km2 or .
contract area. If after 36 months. MEMR determines that KSK has seriously neglected its obligations in
respect or this minimum expenditure requirement, MEMR may require KSK to deposit a bond «or a sum
not exceeding the total remaining minimum spend obligations. if KSK has not met the minimum
expenditure obligations by the end of the Exploration period. the bond may be forfeited to MEMR in
raped of the expenditure obligations remaining unfulﬁlled. Based on Quarterly Report of fourth quarter l
M2005. KSK has met this minimum spend obligation.
Pursuant to Article 3(4) 01 the KSK COW. the Exploration period may be suspended by KSK with the l
approval of the MEMR. The Documents reviewed indicate that the Exploration activities 01 KSK (and I
accordingly. the counting of the Exploration period) were suspended six (6) times from 28 August 1999 1
until 27 August 2004. Accordingly. as of 27 August 2004. the Exploration period had run for 4 months
(from 23 April 1999 until 27 August 1999). leaving a further 32 months remaining in the initial Exploration
stage. The above ls applicable for the original contract area of KSK (or later known as 'Block 3' area). As
tor the 'Block A" area (former area of PT Fahcaran Paringe Kalimahtan). when it was acquired by KSK
as the expansion area of the Cow. according to KSK It was 28 months through its Exploration stage.
leaving 8 months remaining in the Exploration stage, After the acquisition of Block A. KSK continued
operations for a iurthor 4 months (from 23 April 1999 (when acquired) until 27 August 1999). when Block 1
A was again put Into suspension. l
The Exploration stages for both Block A and Block B were reactivated as from 23 August 2004. with the i
Exploration period due to expire 32 months thereafter (27 April 2007) for Block E and 4 months thereaﬂer l
(27 December 2004) for Block A. 
Following the reactivation ot the Exploration stage, KSK relinquished part of the Cow area and sought l
approval to further expand the Cow area. These actions were approved by the MEMR on 22 September I
2005 with retroactive effect as of 22 March 2005. From the time of such approval, the total KSK COW
area was 121,620 hectares. divided into two areas (the 33.170 hectare Block A area which Is In the stage
to! First Extension of the Exploration stage. and the 88.450 hectare Block B area within its original I
Exploration stage). The Approval from the MEMR noted the approval to the ﬁrst extension 01 the I
Exploration stage of Block A. effective as of 28 August 2005 until 27 August 2006. As a result of this.
there is an 8 month period of the exploration of Block A (27 December 2004 until 27 August 2005) which i
falls between the end of the initial 3 year Exploration stage and the start of the ﬁrst extension of the I
Exploration stage. 
l
KSK then received MEMR approval to suspend the mining actlvltles in Block A from 28 August 2005 until i
27 August zoos. KSK has submitted a request to extend this suspension period from 27 August 2006 l
and tar this suspension to apply to the entire Cow (ie both Blocks A and a). X
KSK submitted an application to relinquish a further part of Block E in May 2006. reducing Its area to l
60.949 hectares and the total CoW area to 94.110 hectares. The MEMR has not yet approved this
relinquishment. l
—._____ l
Kalimsnten Gold Corporation Limited 1
AIM Admlesloll Document


HADIPU'X‘RANTO, HADmoTo &PARTNERS
Accordingly. as of the date 0' this Report:
(a) Block A. with a current area of 33.170 hectares remains In a state of suspension at the
beginning of First Extension of Exploration period (1 year) (subject to MEMR approval for ,
continuation of the suspension after 27 August 2006 and with the possibility to extend tor a
second 12 months subject to MEMR approval); and
(b) Block B. with a current area of 50.949 hectares. remains actively in the initial Exploration period
which Is due to expire on 27 April 2007 (subject to approval by the MEMR of a requested
suspension commencing 27 August 2006 and any extension as may be agreed to by the
MEMR. of which two 12 month extensions are possible).
At any time KSK determines that the results of exploration in respect of a particular part of the Cow area
has shown a deposit of an apparent commercial quantity and quality. KSK may proceed into the
Feasibility Study period in respect of that area. vvlthout affecting its rights to continue to explore the
a remaining Cow area.
Once the Exploration periods (and the two allowable extensions each of 12 months) ror Block A and
Block B have expired (taking into account all periods of suspension), KSK will need to either enter Into
the Feasibility period. or abandon the project.
We would point out that the granting of the extensions to the Exploration period are at the discretion of
the MEMR. Similarly. any request by KSK to put the Blocks back into suspension ls subject to the
discretion of the MEMR. Despite this blanket discretion in favour of the Got. the KSK COW does place
some “good faith" type obligations on the Gal in considering extensions, Artide 23 of the KSK COW
provides that at any time during the term of the KSK Cow. upon request by either Party. the Gol and
KSK shall consult with each other on the possibility of an application of extension of any period or stage
referred in the KSK COW. and the Gol may In its discretion grant an extension of such period(s) or
stage(s) without prejudice to the other provision of the COW. The Gol in granting the extension must fully
consider the speciﬁc circumstances of KSK’s request and the program and budget submitted by KSK in
relation to the extension period. The Miniser of Energy and Mineral Rsources will notify within three (3)
months whether or not the application oi the extension ls approved. ‘
Based on past practice with the KSK Cow and with other Cow projects in which we have been Involved.
the Gal does not unreasonably refuse any valid request for an extension where there are reasonable
grounds tor making the request (eigt delays In obtaining forestry approvals, inability to source equipment 1
etc). I
Should KSK proceed to the Feasibility Study period. It must Immediately commence the preparation of a
detailed feasibility study meeting the requirements speciﬁed in the KSK COW, and in addition. the
deadrents payable by KSK would increase. Further relevant obligations oi KSK during the Feasibility
period are speciﬁed below.
4.2.4 Reporting and Payment Obligaﬁons in respect of General Survey and Exploration Periods
The KSK Cow requires KSK to submit regular quarterty reports to the MEMR on the status of the project.
suot'l reports to include details of the exploration work. employment. minimum expenditure obligations
etc. The Documents Reviewed show that there is a complete series of the Quarterly Reports. except for i
the following: I
1. third quarter of 2000:
2, fourth quarter of 2000: and _
3. second quarter of 2004.
During the General Survey and Exploration periods. KSK has the obligation to pay (based on 6 month
semesters) certain dead rent in respect of the mining area. The Dowments Reviewed disclose that KSK
has fulﬁlled Its obligations to pay the deadrent for ﬁrst semester 2006. 2005. 2004. 2003. 2002. 2001. first
semester 1999. 1998. 1997. and SlPP period (1996). We could not locate any documents showing the
payments for the second semester of 1999 and year 2000.-
Further. KSK is required to pay land and building tax during the pre-operetion periods in the same
amount as applicable for deadrent. We have seen from the Documents Reviewed evidence of payment I
“— l
Kalimanﬂan Gold Corporation Limited 1 l
AlMAdmisslon Document 01 i


HADlPUTRAN'TO, I—IADINOTO & PARTNERS , , .
of this tax in respect of the year of 2005 to Regency of Gunung Mas. Regency of Sintang, and Regency
ot Murung Reya and certain other paymens In the previous years. but not all relevant periods We note
that for the 2004 land and building tax payment. there was a payment also for Regency of Buntok. which
is not the case in 2005. According to KSK. the Regency oi Buntok had been split as a result of expansion
of regencies. The site is now located In Regency oi Murung Rays. The site Is also located within the
Regency oi Ketintang. However. there was no response when KSK tried to make payment to this
Regency. Hencei payment of the land and building tax to Regency of Ketintang has not been made.
KSK Is also required to meet any tax or duty paymens as may be stipulated in regional regulations. We
have not included a review of any such regulations or payments in this Report.
4.2.5 Future Mining Stages
" The Feasibility Study. Construction and Operating periods of the mine have not yet commenced. The
rights and obligations of KSK In respect of those periods are described generally as follows:
Feasibility Study Period
Following to the completion of the Exploration stage. KSK will then need to apply for the Feasibility Study
stage. which shall be valid for 12 months and can be extended for a further 12 months (and further
subject to discretionary extension from the MEMR). in this stage. KSK will have to carry out studies to
deterrnlne the feasibility of commercially developing the deposiS in question. and determine the area
which will become the initial commercial production area for the KSK COW. During the Feasibility Study
stage, KSK shall prepare periodical reports on the study results and mine development and operations
costs to the MEMR. At the end of the Feasibility Study stage. KSK must submit the Feasibility Study Final
Report to the MEMR. The report must include the technical and economic calculations and reasoning for
assessing the viability of the mining operations. and be supported by data, pidures, maps. and other
information related to a decision whether or not the mining development should be continued.
At any time during the Feasibility Study stage. KSK may submit an application to move to the
Construction stage. Arter obtaining the approval of the MEMR, KSK will have to prepare tor all facility and
construction designs and submit them to the MEMR for approval, accompanied with estimahed costings
and the construction schedule.
During the Feasibility Study stage. KSK is required to complete the environmental impact study to be
carried out by an independent consultant. which must then be approved by the Gal.
At the end of the Feasibility Study stage. KSK may only retain 25% of the initial KSK COW area,
Construction Period at
The Construction stage shm upon the approval on the dalgns and schedule of the construction 
submitted with KSK'S request to the MEMR to move to the construction stage. The Construction stage ls ‘
for a maximum of 36 months (subject h: discretionary extension from the MEMR). 1
Operating Period i
Not later than 6 months after the completion of the Construction stage, KSK shall start the Operating 
stage (commercial production), which continues for 30 years or such longer time as may be approved by
the MEMR. There is an overriding requirement that. despite all preceding phases of mine development,
the start of the Operating stage must occur not later than 8 years after the start at the General Survey
stage (assuming there have been no extensions or suspensions). Any extensions (and. although the
KSK Cow is silent. In our opinion. on suspensions) to any ofthe mine development phases granted from
time to time by the MEMR will be added to this 8 year window.
Based on the wrrent status of the KSK CoW and assuming all suspensions to date are added to the 8
year window. Block B must start the Operating stage by 28 April 2011 and Block A must start the
Operating stage by 28 August 2011. However, these dates are subject to any further suspensions or
extensions that are applied for and granted. and also subiect to any discretionary extension from the
MEMR.
l
Kalimanran Gold Corporation Limited |
AIM Admission Document I


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS
The KSK OoW does not restrict the type or ore or metal product that is produced and sold (subject to the
matters dlscussed in section 4.27 below) and during the Operation stage. KSK may submit a proposal to
the MEMR for the development of a smelter or reﬁnery.
r
Pursuant to the terms of the KSK Cow. KSK Is granted with all licenses and necessary permits to l
construct and operate of all required facilities. including the mine's processing tacilities. port. aircraft i
landing facilities and transportation. communication. water supply facilities. j
During the Operating Period. KSK will have to submit various reports to the MEMR on Its production and l
reﬁning activities 
42.6 Taxes and Financial Obligations l
The KSK Cow speciﬁes in detail all mandatory payment obligations of KSK in respect of taxes. duties l
and other levies. Article 13 states that KSK shall be liable to pay the following taxes. duties and levies: i
l
a) Deadrent in respect of the Cow Area or the mining area (which. during each year of the possible 
maximum 5 years of the exploration stage are 1st year: US$0.10/hectare, 2nd year: i
US$0.12/hectare. 3rd year: US$0.15/heciare, 4th year: US$0.25llnectare and 5th year. i
US$0.35Ihectare): ‘
l
b) Royalties in respect to the production of minerals at the rate prescribed in the CoW which are. [or l
copper. US$45Itonne of contained copper (where total annual production is below 80.000 tonnes) 
and US$55Itonne lvl/nere total annual production Is at least 80.000 tonnes per year) and for gold. .
US$225/kg of contained gold (where production is below 2.000 kg per year) and US$235/kg l
(where production is at least 2.000 kg per year); l
c) Corporate Income Tax in respect of the income received or accrued at the rates or 10% (for 
taxable income up to Rp25million). 15% (tor taxable income up exceeding Rp25million up to ‘
Rp50million) and 30% (for taxable income exceeding Rp50miilion); l
d) Personal Income Tax In respect of employees; l
e) Withholding tax in respect of payment of dividends. interest. including remuneration due to loan l
payment warranty. rents, royalties. and other Income related to the utilization of property. I
remuneration for technical and management services as well as other services at the following I
rates: i
I) 15% of gross income -in case of payment of dividends. interest. royalties;
ii) 7.5% of gross income - in case of payment of dividend to a non resident rounder
shareholder and individual resident founder shareholder
iii) 15% oi deemed net income on rents and Income related to the use of property. and V
compensation paid for technical. management and other services In accordance with I
article 23 of Income Tax Law 1994 in case of payment to resident tax payer:
Iv) 20% of gross income or such lower rate due to tax treaty in case of Income payment
(article 26 Income Tax Law 1994) to non resident taxpayer.
t) Value Added Tax (VAT) and Sales Tax on Luxury Goods on Import and/or delivery of taxable
goods and services:
9) Stamp duty on documents;
h) Import Duty on goods Imported Into Indonesia:
i) Land and Building Tax In respect ottrre following:
i) The KSK CoW or the mining area;
II) The utilixation of the land and building in the area where the Company construct facilities
for its mining operations:
__h—__h__—__ .
Kallmenlan Gold Corporaﬁon Limited i
AlMAdmission Document 1 “3 r


*r' 2 . t s:
HADIPU’JJRANTO. HADINOTO & PARTNERS .
l
j) Levies. taxes. charges and duties Imposed by Provincial end/or Regency Government which have ‘
been approved by the Gol:
k) General administrative fees and charges for facilities or services rendered and particular rights
granted by the Get (Central Government) to the extent that such fees and charga have been
approved by the Gol (Central Government): and
I) Duty on registration and transfer of ownership of motorized vehicles and ships in Indonesia.
KSK will not have any liability to pay any taxes or duties other than those Ilsted In the KSK COWi
4.2.7 Marketing ofrhe minerals
KSK is given the rights to sell the mlnemls produced from the minlng operation under the Cow. However,
KSK must observe the Indonesian laws and regulations on exports and shall endeavor to meet the
domestic market requirement along with the export sala agreements.
KSK will use its best efforts to maximize the economic return from the operation. taking into account
wortd market conditions and other circumstances at the time of the sale.
The Gol may prohibit the sale or export of the minerals or praducS it such sale or export would be
contrary to the Intematlonal obligations of the Gal or to external political considerations affecting the
national interest of Indonesia
Any sales to KSK‘s afﬁliates shall be conducted on an arm's length basis and In accordance with terms i
and conditions as If the sales are made with a non-afﬁliated partyi KSK then will have to submit to the i
Gol the evidence on correctness of the ﬁgures used In price calculation, metal content determination.
analysis of the shlpped materials and copies of the sales contracts ’
42.8 Currency Exchange '
All remittance shall be made through a foreign investment company‘s account (“PMA Account") opened I
in an Indonesian foreign exchange bank Currency exchange from the PMA Account shall be carried out
through foreign exchange banks. KSK shall have the right to transfer funds offshore for the following
purposes in accordance with prevailing laws and regulations:
a) Net operating protlt of KSK In proportion to the shareholding of any non-Indonesian investor. I
- b) Repayment of principal of loan and the interest thereon and all fees and expenses related thereto.
so long as the loan is part of the investment plan of KSK which have been approved by the Gol;
c) Allowance for depreciation of the capital goods of KsK:
d) Proceeds from the sale of shares: .
e) Expenses of the expatriates employed by KSK together with their families and for training of the |
Indonesian personnel abroad;
7) Debts of KSK denominated in foreign currency. including debts owed to the Contractor and sellers
of the equipment and raw materials. or for commission payments:
g) Technical assistance fees: and
n) License fees.
4.2.9 Special rights of the Government
The following shall require prior written approval from the Gol:
a) amending the Deed of Establishment of KSK;
b) changing the line of business of KSK;
Keiimanten Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


HADIPU'TRANTO, HADINOTO &PARTNERS
c) voluntary liquidation and winding up of KSK;
d) merging or consolidating KSK with another company: and
e) pledging or otherwise using as security the minerals in the Contract Area.
4.2.10 Dispute Resolmlon
The parties to tha KSK Cow may choose to use the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules in case of conciliation.
or UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in the case of arbitration. Both shall use English language and shall be
held in Jakarta or such other location agreed upon by the Parties.
For tax matters, the partla agree to use the Consultative Board of Tax (Majells Pem'mbangan Pajak).
4.2.11 Termination
KSK may at any time, during the life of the CoW. notify to the Gal that it intends to unilaterally terrnlnate
the Cow. The notiﬁcation must be accompanied by the data. maps. documents. plans. working papers.
and other technical data and statements relating to the mining project. Gol must Issue a conﬁrmation 0!
termination within 6 months (failing which termination will be deemed to have occurred regardless).
If the termination occurs during the General Survey or Exploration stage. KSK shall have a six month
period in which to sell. move or otherwise dispose of its assets in Indonesia and surrender to the Gol all
Information on work that has been done by KSK up to the date or the notiﬁcation. l

l
if the termination occurs during the Feasibility Study stage. KSK shall ofier to the Gol. which offer shall I
be valid for 30 days. all oi the movable and immovable assets of KSK within the Contract Area. to be I
Purchased by the Gol at market price within 90 days after the Gal receives the offer. If the Gal does not
accept the offer. KSK may sell these assets to a third party within six months after the end ofthe ctferto
the Gal.
Ii termination occurs during the Construction stage. KSK shall otter to the Gal. which offer shall be valid
for 30 days. all of the movable and immovable assets of KSK within the Contract Area. to be purchased
by the Gol at market price within 90 days aiter the Gol receives the offer. If the So] does not accept the
offer. KSK may sell the assets to another party within 12 months after the expiry of the offer made to the
601. l
4‘ 2t 12 Indonesian Panicipaﬁan I
There Is an obllgatlon on KSK to ensure that. within 15 years of the start of commercial production, at
least 5% of its shares are owned by Indonesians. KSK has. based on its current shareholding
composition. satisﬁed this requirement.
The Indonesian shareholders have an entitlement under the KSK Cow to appoint Commissioners to the
Board of Commissioners of KSK in proportion to their shareholding. provided that to meet Ihls
requirement. nothing shall require KSK to have a Board of Commissioners otgreator than 10 members. I
4. 2. 13 Assignment and Transfer of Shares
The Cow cannot be transferred or assigned (Including for the purpose of ﬁnancing) In whole or in part.
without the prior written consent from the MEMR.
The shareholders ct KSK may not transfer their shares in KSK without the prior written approval of the
MEMR. The approval from the MEMR is not required to be obtained in case of the following:
a) Transfer ot Shara In KSK in the framework of promotion of national interest (divestment): and
I b) Transfer ot shares to an attiliated company,

4.3 Protected Forest Areas within the KSK COW
Based on the map attached to the Cow signed between KSK and the Got (as set out in Sd’ledule 3). a
signiﬁcant portion of the KSW CoW area is located within Protected Forest areas.

Kalimanian Gold Corporation Limited 1 0

AIM Admission Document 5


Eli
HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS
' KSK was not one of the 13 companies listed in PD 41/2004c This Is because KSK was not yet at the
stage that Itcould demonstrate that itwould be proceeding to development of a mining operation.
We should point out that there are conﬂicting maps In relation to the delineation of the Protected Forest
boundaries in relation to KSK‘s Cow, We have attached In Schedule 3 the 3 maps as follows:
(a) the forestry map prepared by the Provincial Government Forestry Ofﬁce (which Is still In the
process of being ﬁnalized):
(b) the forestry map prepared by the Ministry of Forestry (Central Government): and
(c) the forestry map prepared by the Central Government Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources
(i.e. the Central Government) ("MEIR").
We have been informed by KSK that in respect of the three main prospects In the KSK cdw (Beruang
Kanan. Mansur and Barol):
- Beruang Kanan does not fall within Protected Forest on any of the maps:
» Mansur is located Just outside the Protected Forest area on the Provincial Government forestry map.
but is shown as inside the Protected Forest area on the remaining two maps; and
— Baroi is located within Protected Forest area according to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Resourca map and the Provincial Government foratry map. but is shown as outside the Protected
Forest area on the Ministry of Forestry map.
The regulations are unclear as to which map will prevail In the event of Inconsistency. but as a practical
matter, the relevant issuing authority of any pennls to work in Protected Forest will base Its consideration
ofwhether a permit is required or not on its own map ﬁe if KSK ls required to obtain a permit to conduct .
exploration in Protected Forest from Ministry of Forestry. Ministry of Forestry will base their assessment 
on the Ministry of Forestry map). 3
l
Although not one of the 13 listed companies. KSK has applied for a license to carry out exploration work i
In the protected forestry through the Directorate General of Minerals, Coal and Geothermal on 4 October 
2005. which subsequently has applied for the license to the Ofﬁce of the Forestry Planology on 6 ;
December 2005. The Ofﬁce of Forestry Planology has required several documents be submitted to them '
prior to their making a decision on whether they can grant the license. As far as we are aware. to date i
KSK has not received the relevant forestry Ilcenoe. §
The issue or whether KSK. being not one of the 13 mining aompanles listed in PD 41/2004, will be
pennltted to carry out open cut mining in the Protected Forest area. remains an area of legal uncertainty.
In our opinion. the PERFU reafﬁrms the position that. as the KSK COW predates the Forestry Law. KSK
is lawfully entitled to conduct open pit mining operations within the mining area speciﬁed In the KSK I
* Cow, However. as a practical matter and unless KSK was willing to seek court or arbitral afﬁrmation to
this effect. until such time as KSK appears on a Presidential Decree along the lines of PD41I2004. it is
unlikely that KSK will be able to obtain the necessary permits and approvals to carry out such open cut
mining. I
In addition to the above, KSK needs to consider the impact of compliance with Reg. P-14. principally the
additional royalty payable in the event that KSK Is not able to source the required replaoement land for
,. the forest area being used for mining operations. The provisions of Reg. F-14 have been the subject of
much objection from the mining industry, and there are efforts to have its provisions amended orta have
the entire regulation revoked. However at present, It remains In effect.
l
5 MINING RIGHTS GRANTED UNDER JCM KP i
5.1 JCM KP
JCM obtained Its KP based on Decree of the Bupati of Bulungan No. 507/K-Vlli/540/2006 dated 28
August 2006 on the Granting of the Mining Business License (lzin Usaha Pertambangan — IUF') Mining
Authorization of General Survey Stage to JCMl The JCM KP is valid until 28 August 2007.
. l
i
Kalirrrenlen Gold Corpamtiari Limited
AIM Admission Document
5


HADIPUTRANTO. HADINOTO & PARTNERS

JCM ls given the rights to oonduct general survey activities for gold minemls within an area at 5.000

hectares located in Sub-district of Sekatak, Regency of Bulungan. Province of East Kallmentan. General

survey activities consist et preliminary investigations and exploration. including shallow drilling and

surface sampling. carried out along the broad features of an area for indications ot mineralization.

The General Survey KP may be extended for a further year at the discretion of the Bupati. Plot to expiry.

JCM can then apply for an Exploration KP. which Is granted for a maximum of 3 years. and is capable of i

being extended twice. each for a period of one year. An Exploitation KP can subsequently be applied for

and is granted for up to 30 years, and may be extended for further 10 year terms.

5.2 Rights and Obligations under JCM KP

The rights and obligations of JCM as holder of the JCM KP are set out both in the terms of the KP itself.

and supplemented by applicable mining laws and regulations. The obligations speciﬁed in the JCM KP

are as follows:

a) fulﬁll and observe the laws and regulations of the Republic of Indonesia;

b) notify the local government betore starting to condud general survey act'n/ities;

c) pay the deadrent applicable for the General Survey stage (at the rate prescﬁbed by regulation)
and pay the Seriousness Bend (Jamirlan Kesungguhan);

d) provide reports on Work Program and Budget within 3|) days alter the issuance of the JCM KP:

2) provide a report on the completion of boundary signage of the KP area within 60 days after the
Issuance of the KP;

0 submit quarterly reports to the Bupatl ol Buiungan with copy to Head of the Mines and Energy
Ofﬁce of Bulungan;

9) submit a ﬁnal report on the General Survey activities conducted by JCM within 3 months atter the
expiry date of the KP;

h) appoint a Mining Technical Head (Kepala Teknik Tambang) who should be responsible on the
Health. Safety and Environment In general mining.

We note that JCM has not yet notiﬁed the Bupati of its intention to commence General Survey activities.

JCM has made payment of the Seriousness Guarantee to the Mining Ofﬁce of Bulungan Regency on 22

August 2005 in the total amount of Rp 136.350.000 (U533 per hectare times 5.000 hectares).

JCM also has already paid the Deadrent to the Mining Ofﬁce oi the Eulungan Regency on 22 August

2003 in the total amount 0' Rp 2.500.000 (RD 500 per hectare times 5,000 hectares).

JCM has submitted its Work Program and Budget for the period 2006 and 2007 to the Bupati.

If JCM does not fulﬁll its obligations under the KF'. the KP can be revoked by the Bupati of Bulungan

Regency.

53 Settlement of disputes relating to JCM KP

if there is a dispute arising between the Bupatl and JCM out of the .ICM KP, JCM shall have Its legal

domicile at the District Court in Tarakan.

54 Transfer of JCM KP

Any assignment or transfer of the KP shall be subject to the prior written approval from the Bupati of

Bulungan.

___—_._—_—___————
Kallmanian Gold Corporation Limited
AIMAdmission Document 107


HADI‘PUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS
55 Land RighB
As with El COW, a KP does not give the holder rights to the surface land. and aocordlngly. JCM will need
to enter Into compensation or land use agreements with the holders of any land title or concessions (5.9.
lorestry or planhtlun concessions) over the relevant land to be mined.
l
5.5 Forestry i
As the JCM KP was granted after the introduction of the Forestry Law, based on current regulations. if ‘
the mining area provided under the KP ls located within a Protected Forest area. JCM will not be able to
carry out open cut mining, The maps provided by JCM show that the location of the JCM KP area falls
outside any protected forest areas.
Yours faithfully,
momma, HADINO’I'O & PARTNERS
’ W ‘ PW
W ,
____—_,—_—_—.—
Kalimantan Gold Corporation Umlted
AIMAdmissrbn Document


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS l
SCHEDULE 1
LIST OF DOCUMENT REVIEWED

Comorata Documents:

KSK

1. Deed of Establishment N0. 5 dated 2 April 1957 drawn up before Marla Kristiana Suharyo, Notary in
Jakarta. approved by the Minister of Justice under Letter No. C2-2962.HT.0L01.TH.97 dated 23 April
1997. registered In the Company Register of South Jakarta under No. 1336/BH.05-03Nllll1997 dated 25
August 1997, TDP No. 09031225293. published In the State Gazette No. 72. Supplement No. 5173,

2. Deed of Resolution of the Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of PT Kalimantan Surya
Kenoana No. 6 dated 15 July 2002 drawn up before Marla Kristiana Suheryo. Nomry In Jakarta. received
and noted by the Minister of Justice and Human Rights under Lener No. 0-22611 HT.01.04.TH.2002
dated 18 November 2002.

3. Dead of Statement of Meeting Resolution of PT Kalimantan Surya Kenoana No. 17 dated 28 December
2004 drawn up before Erna Pi-iyono. Notary in Jakarta. received and noted by the Minister of Law and
Human Rights under Letter No. C<UM.02.01.2925 dated 3 March 2005.

JCM I

1, Deed of Establishment No. 7 dated 23 March 2006 drawn up betore Erna Priyorio. Notary in Jakarta.
approved by the Minister of Laws and Human Rights under Letter No. 045862 HT.01.01.TH.2006 dated
31 May 2006. registered in the Company Register of Felangkaraya under No. 002631 dated 15 May
2005, TDP No.1506.1.51.00642.

NOTE: We have not received the announcement In the State Gazette. However. this may take
approximately one (1) year.

2. Share Register of JCM.

3, Share Certificate No. 0001.

4. Share Certiﬁcate No. 0002.

Joint Venture Agreement:

Joint Venture Agreement between lndokal Limited. PT Pancaran Cahaya Kahayan and PT Kalimantan Surya

Kencana dated 12 November 1993.

JL‘M KP Cooperation Agreements:

1. Cooperation and Investment Agreement between JCM. Kalimentan Gold. Suyono and Susllowatl dated 5
October 2006:

2. Loan Agreement between Kallmantan Gold and JCM dated 5 October 2006:

3. Pledge of Shares Agreement between Kallmantan Gold. Suyono and Susllewati dated 5 Odober 2006;

4. Power of Attorney trom JCM to Kaiimentan Gold dated 5 October 2003:

5. Power of Attorney from Suyono and Susllowatl to Kalimantan Gold dated 5 October 2006;

6. Spousal Consent for Suyono dated 5 October 2006;

7. Spousal Consent for susllowati dated 5 Odober 2005; and

8. Guarantee Agreement between Kalimantan Gold, Suyono and Susllowati dated 5 oooberzooe.

9. Amendment Letter between JCM. Kalimentan Gold, Suyono and Susilowati dated 22 November 2006.

Mining Documents: ‘

KSK *

. 1. Presidential Approval No. B.143IPres/3l1997 dated 17 March 1997 regarding the Approval for the 68
Contract of Works In the framework of foreign Investment in General Mlnlng sector.

2. Contract of Work dated 28 April 1997 between KSK and the Government of Indonesia.

3. Preliminary Survey LIoense (Surat lzin Penyelldlkan Pendahuluan - SIPF) In the Framework of Foreign
Investment In the General Mining No. 369:7012/DJP/K11996 which granted the approval to conduct
preliminary survey to PT Pancaran Cahaya Kanayan In oooperation with Indokal Limited,

Kalimantan Gold Corporation lelred
AIM Admission Documenr 199


m
j ‘ l

HADIPUTRANTO, HADLNOTO & PARTNERS

4. Decision of the Director General of General Mining No, 448.KlZO.Dt/DJPI1998 dated 7 September 1998
regarding the Extension of the General Survey Period of the Cow of PT Kalimanntan Surya Kencana.

5. - Decision Letter 0' the Director General of General Mining No. 47S.K120r01/DJP/1999 dated 16 August
1999 regarding the Relinquishment l, Expansion | of the Cow Area and the Start of the Exploration
Activities of the Cow of PT Kallmanisn Surya Kenoana.

6. Letter from the Directorate General of General Mining No.2259/20,01IDJP/1599 dated 26 Odober 1999.
regarding the Suspension of the Cow of PT Kallmantan Surya Kenoana lrorn 28 August 1999 until 27
February 2000.

7. Letter from the Directorate General of General Mining No. 690120.01/DJP/2000 dated 13 April 2000
regarding the suspension of the Cow of PT Kalimantan Surya Kencana from 28 Febmary 2000 until 27 ‘

4 August 2000. l

8r Letter from the Directorate General or General Mining No. 1991/20.01/DJP/2000 dated 13 September l
2000 regarding the Suspension oi the CoW of PT Kalimanten Surya Kencana from 28 August 2000 until I
27 August 2001.

_ 9. Letter from the Directorate General 0' Geology and Mineral Resources No. 1485/20r01IDJG/2000 dated
24 October 2001 regarding the Suspension of the COW of PT Kalimantan Surya Kenoana from 23 August
2001 until 27 August 2002,

10 Letter lrom the Directorate General of Geology and Mineral Resources No. 3634/20.01/DJG/2002 dated
3 September 2002 regarding the Suspension of the Cow of PT Kalimantan Surya Kenoana from 20
August 2002 until 27 February 2003.

11, Letter from the Directorate General of Geology and Mineral Resources No. 1321/20rO1IDJG/2003 dated
1 July 2003 regarding the Suspension of the Cow oi PT Kalimantan Surya Kenoans lrom 28 Febniary
2003 until 27 August 2003‘

12. Letter from the Directorate General of Geology and Mineral Resources No. 1768/20r01/DJG/2003 dated
10 September 2003 regarding the 3‘" Suspension otthe CoW of PT Kalimantan Sum Kenoana from 23
August 2003 until 27 August 2007

14, Letter from the Directorate General of Geology and Mineral Resources No. 2222/40.DDIDJGI2004 dated
30 November 2004 regarding the Reactivation oi the Exploration Activities of PT Kallmantan Surya
Kencana as of 28 August 2004i

15. Decree of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resouroes No, 390.K/40.00/DJGI2005 dated 22 September
2005 regarding Rellnqulshment ll. Expansion ll, of the Block E and Extension | of the Exploration Stage
on the Block A of the CoW Area of PT Kallmantan Surya Kencana.

16. Letter from Diredorate General of Geology and Mineral Resources No.1881/40/DJG/2005 dated 11

' October 2005 regarding the Suspension of Blook A from 28 August 2005 until 27 August 2006,

JCM

1. Letter of the Bupati of Bulungsn No. 545/160/DPE-Ill2006 dated 23 March 2006 on the Explanation
Letter on Monitoring Permit.

2, Decree of the Buoati o1 Bulungan No, 507M-Vlll/540/2006 dated 28 August 2006 on the Granting of the
Mining Business License (Izin Usaha Penambangan — IUP) Mining Authorization (Kuasa Ferns/"banger:
- ‘KP') of General Survey stage to PT Jeiai Cahaya Minerals ('JCM").

Forestry Documents:

1, Letter No. 2548/20IDJPI1997 from Director Genelal of General Mining to the Director General of Forestry
Inventory and Utilization of the Department of Forestry dated 24 September 1997 regarding the
Application for Approval of the General Survey Actlvltlﬁ In the COW Area KW.96P00079 within the
Forestry Area or the Central Kallmanian Province under the name of PT Kallmantan Surya Kencsna.

2 Letter from the Directorate of General Mining Engineering No. 216/21/DPTI1993 dated 16 January 1998
regarding the Approval of the General Mining Activities within the Forestry Area in the Regency of North
Barito and Regency at Kapuas. Province of Central Kalimantan.

3. Letter No. 2094/70r01lDJP/1958 from Director General of General Mining to the Director General of
Forestry Inventory and Utilization of the Department of Forestry dated 15 September 1993 regarding the
Application for Extension of the Approval of the General Survey Activities for Gold and its Associated
Mlnerals in the Cow Ares within the Forestry Area in the Regency of Kapuas. Central Kalimantan
Frovinoe under the name of PT Kalimantan Surya Kencana.

4. Letter from the Directorate of General Mining Engineering No, 114/20.D1IDF'T/1999 dated 8 January
1999 regarding the Approval of Extension I of the General Mlnlng Activities within the Forestry Area in
the Regency of North Barito and Regency of Kapuas, Province of Centml Kalimantanr

5. Letter from Forestry and Plantation Fianology Agency to the Director General of General Mining No.
800NIII-KPl2000 dated 25 September 2000 regarding Application for Approval of the Exploration
Activities for Gold and its Associated Minerals within the Forestry Area under the name of PT Kalimanlan
Surya Kencana in the Province of Central Kalimantan and West Kalirnantan.

Karmannan Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Documeni


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS

6. Letter from the Head ol the Forestry Ofﬁce of Central Kalimariian Province to the Governor of Central
Kalimantan No, 522/1]3668/1.03/iX/2005 dated 28 September 2005 regarding the Exploration Activities
within the Forestry Area under the name of PT Kaiirnantan Sum Kencana.

7. Letter from the Governor of Central Kalimantan to KSK No. 540/752I05/Dlstarn dated 27 October 2003
regarding Status of Protected Forest within the CoW Area of PT Kalimantan Surya Kencana.

3. Letter from the Governor of Central Kalimantan to KSK No. 540l234l02IDletam dated 19 November 2005
regarding Temporary License for the Exploration Activities within the Forestry Area

9. Letter from the Director General of Minemi. Coal and Geothermal to the Head of the Forestry Pianology
Agency No. 2804/40/DJG/2005 dated 5 December 2005 regarding the Application for Approval of the
Uullzation of Forestry Area for the Exploration Activities 0! PT Kalirnantan Surya Kencana.

10. Letter from the Forestry Pianology Agency to KSK Nu. S.050Nll/PW\5.21‘2006 dated 16 January 2006
regarding the Application tor Approval to Utilixe the Forwry Area for Exploration Activities of PT
Kalimantan Surya Kencana.

11. Letter from the Mines and Energy Ofﬁce of Central Kalimantan Province No. 540/37IPU dated B Febmary

_ 2006 regarding the Reoommendati‘on for Approval of the Extension of Exploration Activities within the
Protected Forest Area. '

12. Letter from the Governor of Central Kallmantan to the Minister of Forestry No. 503/312/Ek. Dated 23
February 2006 regarding Recommendation or the Extension of Exploration License within the Forestry
Area under the name of PT Kaiimantan Surya Kencanar

SecuﬁryDeposir:

1, Security Deposit of KSiC
a. Letter No. 2758IBB1IDJPI97 dated 20 October 1997 regarding the withdrawal of the Sewnty

Deposit under the name of Director General of General Mining qq Pancra Cahaya Kehayan.

b. Cerﬁﬂcate of Fixed Time Deposit No. 269773 dated 18 July 1996 issued by PT Bank Dagang
Negara (Persero) under the name of Directorate Geneml of General Mining qq PT Panoaran
Cahaya Kahayan In the amountof US$100.000.-.

c. Call Acoourit Statements of KSK at HSEC Jakarta on 5 October 1999 which showed the
credited amount of US$66.754t09 from BDN Account of Directorate General of Geneial Mining.

d. Ofticlal Receipt of KSK No. 9923 dated 5 October 1999 stating receipt from Directorate General
of Mining of an amount of US$66,574.09.

e. Letter from Directorate General of Geology and Mineral Resources No. 1668/87D4/DJGf2001
dated 9 July 2001 regarding Withdravml of the Security Deposit.

i. Certiﬁcate of Fixed Time Deposit No. 308543 dated 30 September 1999 Issued by PT Bank
Dagang Nagara (Fetsero) under the name of Directorate General or General Mining qq PT
Kalimantan Surya Kencana In the amount of US$50,000.-.

9. Ofﬁcial Receipt of KSK No. 0R-21 dated 9 July 2001 stating receipt from Directorate General of
Geneiai Mining qq PT Kalimantan Surya Kencana of an amount of US$54.128.70.

2. Security Deposit of JCM:

Bank Transfer Receipt dated 22 August 2006 showing that JCM has fulﬁlled its obligation of paying the

security deposit to Mining Ofﬁce ofthe Bulungan Regency,

Deadrent Payments:

Bank Transfer for the following deadrent payments of KSK:

1, Semester | oi 2006.

2. Semester l and ii of 2005‘

3. semester I and ll of 2004.

4. Semester l and ii of 2003.

5. Semester | and ii of 2002,

6. Semester | and ii of 2001 .

7. Semester | of 1999

8. Semester l and II 011998.

9. Semester and II of 1997‘

10. SIPP Period in 1996.

Bank Transfer for the loilowing deadrenl payment oi JCM:

1. Year 2006. General Survey KPt

Kallmanian Gold Corporation Lint/ted

AIM Admission Document


r l

HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS

Quarteriy Reports Obligation:

1. Quarter i. II. III. and IV 0(2005

2. Quarter I, ill. and IV Df2004

3. Quarter i. ll. Ill. and IV 0(2003

4. Quarter I. ll. Ill, and IV of 2002

5. Quarter I. II, III. and IV of2001

6. Quarter I. ll of 2000

7. Quarter I. II, III. and IV of1999

3. Quarter I. II. III, and IV 0'1998

9. Quarter ll. Ill, and lVaf1997

Audited Financial Reports:

1. Audited Financial Statement conducted by Coopers & Lybrand (Sldharta. Sldharta & Harsonc) un 31
December 1997.

2. Audited Financial Statement conducted by Ernst & Young (Hanadl. Sarwoko & Sandlaje) on 31
December 1999 for year 1998 and 1999.

3. Audited Finanu'el Statement conducted by Emet 8: Young (Henadi. Sarwoko & Sandjaja) on 31
December 2000 for year 1999 and 2000.

4. Audited Financial Statement conducted by Ernst & Young (Prasetyu, Sarwoko & Sandjaja) ch 31
December 2002 for year 2001 and 2002.

5. Audited Financial Statement conducted by Ernst & Young (Frasetya, Sarwoko 8r Sandjaja) on 31
December 2003 for year 2002 and 2003.

8. Audited Financial Statement conducted by Ernst & Young (Praeetyo, Sarwoku & Sandjaja) on 31
December 20041:” year 2003 and 2004.

7. Brett audited Financial Statement cunducted by Ernst & Young (Prasetyo‘ Sarwcko & Sandjaja) on 31
December 2005 for year 2004 and 2005.

Relinqulshment and Expansion:

Rellnqulshment Report and Expansion Report of the Cow Area made In June 1999.

other Related Documents:

1. Dead of Establishment of PT Pancaran Cehaya Kailayan Na. 27 dated 7 January 1991, drawn up befcre
Arikanti Natakusumah, Notary in Jakarta, approved by the Minister of Justice under Letter No.
CZ.10609.HT.01.01.TH.92 dated 31 December 1992.

2. Deed of Statement of Extra Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of PT Pancaian Cahaya Kaheyan
Nu. 107 dated 30 April 1996.

3. Deed 0f Statement of Extra Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders oi PT Pencaran Cahaya Kehayan
Nu. 108 dated 30 April 1996.

4. Deed of Statement of Extra Ordinary General Meeting at Sharehalders of PT Pancaren Caheya Kahayan
Na. 26 dated 6 March 1998.

5. Deed of Statement of Extra Ordinary General Meeting af Shareholders of PT Pancaran Cahaya Kai-laymn
No. 22 dated 16 Sepember1998.

6. Dead of Statement of Extra Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of PT Fancaran Cahaya Kahayan
No. 29 dated 24 September 1998.

7. Trade Business Licence (Surat lzln Usaha Perdagangan — “SIUP') Small Scale of JCM Nc. 666/15-
05/DAG1/PKN/2006 dated 15 May 2006. This licence will be valid so long as JCM conduct mineral
trading business.

8. Business Location Permit No. SSOI‘SQS/DTK'P/SITU/IVIZOOS dated 8 April 2006. which state that JCM
has the business location at Jl. Teuku Umar No. 32A Palangkaraya. This licence shall be valid for 3
years until 6 April 2009.

Kalimanzan Gold Corpomtiorl Limited

AIM Admission Document


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO .5; PARTNERS
l
' SCHEDULE 2
ASSUMPTIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS
1. Assumptions

We have assumed unless otherwise stated In this Report:

(i) all relevant notices of meetings have been duly and properly given In relation to meetian of
directors and members. the resolutions appearing in the minutes of shareholders and directors
meetings of the KSK provided to us are a full and aoalrate record of all resolutions passed by its
sharehoiders and directors and that all relevant legal requirements have been complied with;

(ii) the genuineness of all signatures. seals and data and the correct identity and legal capacity and
authority of all signatories and corporate ofﬁcers and the due execution and validity of all documents
in accordance with applicable laws:

(III) the authenticity, completeness and factual aowracy of all documents and corporate records
presented as originals and the conformity with the originals of all documents and corporate records
presented as copies:

(iv) any document submitted to us continues unamended and is in full force and effed:

(v) that the original documents still exist and have not been varied. cancelled or superseded by some
other dowment or agreement or action of which we are not aware;

(VI) that where a document was provided to us in dralt form it was executed in the form of that draft;

(vii) all documents required to be stamped have been or will be stamped and are not subject to any
penalty or tine arising out of late or inadequate stamping:

(viii) that all dudunrants constitute Valid and binding and enforceable obligations ofthe parties thereto
under all applicable laws and were entered into by KSK for its corporate beneﬁt.

0x) the due authorisaﬂon. execution and delivery of the Joint Venture Agreement and the JCM KP
Cooperation Agreements and other dbdumenis required to Implement the Joint Venture Agreement
and the JCM KP Cooperation Agreements by the parties thereto and that the performance thereof
is within the capadty and powers of each of the parties thereto;

(x) that all corporate records and other documents inspeded by us are genuine. complete, up—to-date
and accurate and no material documents relevant or related to them have been withheld from us.
whether deliberately or inadvertently:

(xi) the absence of any other arrangemene between any of the parties to the Joint Venture Agreement
and the JCM KP Cooperation Agreements and the Corporate Documents which modify or
supersede any ofthe terms ofthe Joint Venture Agreement and the JCM KP Cooperation
Agreements and the Corporate Documents;

(xii) that all facts stated in the document sent to us on Which we have relied in providing this Report are
and continue to be correct and no relevant matter was withheld from us. whether deliberately or _
Inadvertentim

(xiii) for each document to which a corporation Is a party. that sum party had been, and at all relevant
times. remained duly incorporated and had at all relevant tlm the necessary corporate power. all
corporate authorisations, and all such authorisations had been validly obtained, to enter into such
document. and each such documents was validly executed and was entered Into for that partys
respective corporate beneﬁt and tl'at such party was solvent at the time it entered into such
document: and

(xiv) all conditions precedent In agreements or documents provided to us have been fulﬁlled:

(xv) no laws other than the laws of Indonesia will shed Admission:

(xvi) that none ofthe opinions expressed above will be aflected by the laws (including public policy) of
any Jurisdiction outside the Republic of lndonala;

(xvii) the execution and performance by the parties of the Joint Venture Agreement and the JCM KP
Cooperation Agreements do not and will not oonﬂllx or be inconsistent with. or result in any breach
of any of the terms. conditions. covenants. or provisions of or constitute a default under any

Kalimenien Gold Corporation Limited 113
AIM Admission Document


—
e  .s .
HADIFU‘TRANTO, HADINO’I‘O & PARTNERS
contract, agreements or instruments to which each of the parties is a party or by which any of the
parties or any of its property or assets are bound or may be subject
(xviii) the Issuance of each authorization, approval and consent from any govemmenml authority obtained
by or on behalf of KSK cr JCM and relied upon in this legal opinion. falls within the competence of
such governmental authority. has been duly authorized. executed and delivered and has not been
revoked or terminated; and
(xix) we express no legal opinion as m any laws other than the laws of the Republic of Indonesia as
currently in force and we have essumed that there Is ndhing in any law or other jurisdictions that
affects our legal opinion. In partiwiar. we have made no independent Investigation of such foreign
laws as a basis for the legal opinion stated herein and do not express or imply any legal opinion on
such laws.
The making of each of the above assumptions indicates that we have assumed that the subject of
each assumption is true. correct and complete In every reaped. While we are not aware of any of
the assumptions above being incorrect. we have not made any Inquiry to verify any assumption. No
assumption is limited by any other assumption.
2 Overall Qualiﬁcations and Disclaimers
This Repolt Is subject to the following quaimcati‘cns and disclaimers:
(i) it has been prepared only for Kalimantan Gold and RFC. with rape: to Admission and is not
meant to be relied upon by any other person orfor any other purpose:
(ii) our investigations have only oohcemed, and our Report relates only to. the matters reviewed by us
which are the subled Dfll’lls Report;
(til) we are unable to advise Kaiimantan Gold and RFC that the documents sent to us comprises all of
the Infonnatton and material in existence which may be relevant and we have relied on the
information provided to us in that regard:
(Iv) we have not made any independent investigations or searches other than those spedﬁcally referred
to in this Report on the areas for which we were assigned responsibility. Such records and
registers may not be complete or up to date in that documents might not be ﬁled at the relevant
ofﬁces immediately. might no longer be on ﬁle. might be replaced. or might otherwise not appear on
the ﬁle:
(v) we have not gone beyond the scope of our instruﬁcns and have only performed the legal
documentary review in the manner agreed The statemens made in this Report are speciﬁcally
limited by reference to that scope and manner of performance;
(Vi) our review of the minutes of KSK '5 meetings of shareholders. and the historical matters contained
In the smutcryloorporate records has been limited to the records made available to us as set out In .
Schedule 1. Consequently. references to a review of the stamtorylcorporate records should be read
In this context: ‘
(vii) we have not considered the environment. tax and ﬁnancial audit affairs of Company as part of our l
review. I
(viii) we have not sought to update the Information contained in this Report from the dates stated herein; 1
ﬁx) there may be other information or documents not known to us which would affect the contents of
thls report. A list cfthe documents provided to Hadiputranto, Hadinoto & Partners is anached to this i
Report as Schedule 1: I
(x) save where indicated in the Report. we have not sought independently to verify any ofthe I
documents or lnforrnatlon provided to us: 1
(xi) the term "entoroeable'. where used above, means that the obligations assumed by the relevant
party under the relevant document are of a type which the courts of the Republic of Indonesia
generally enforce; however. enforcement before the court of the Republic of Indonesia will in any
event be sublect to the nature of the remedies available in such courts. the acceptance by such
courts of jurisdiction. to prescription periods and to the availability of defence such as set—oft and
counter-claim. In partiwlar the enforceability ofan obligation may be efieosd by statutes of
limitation. public policy and by laws and regulations aﬂedlng the rights of creditors generally.
inducing those under the lndonesian Bankruptcy Law,
Kelimaritan Gold Corporet'on Limited
_ AIM Admission Document


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINO'I‘O & PARTNERS
(xii) our legal opinion is subject to and limited by the provisions of laws of general application rereting to
or affecting generally the enforcement of parties’ rights and remedies and by the provisions of any
appiicable law relating to bankmptcy, fraudulent transfer or suspension of payments;
(xii) the rights and obligations ofthe parties to the Joint Venture Agreement and the JCM KP
Cooperation Agreements are. to the extent that the laws ufthe Republic of Indonesia are orwould
be deemed applicable. subject to the principle of good faith (itikad baik or is goeder trouw), which I
under Indonesian law govems the relationship between the parties to a contract and which in
certain circumstances may limit or preclude the reliance on. or enforcement of, contractual terms
and provisions 7
(xiv) any provision in any agreement to the effect that cenain calculations. determinations or certiﬁcates i
will be conclusive and binding will not apply W such calculations, determinations or certiﬁcations are ‘
fraudulent or manifestly inaccurate: ‘
(XV) Law No. 24 of 1999 dated 17 May 1999 concerning the Flow of Foreign Exchange System and i
Exchange Rate System provides that a person may freely hold and use foreign cunency in ‘
Indonesia. Including the freedom to convert from Rupiah to another currency orch versa. The
transfer of foreign exchange to and from abroad ls. however. subject to the disclosure and reporting i
obligation to Bank Indonesia by the transferor through the bank where the transfer is conducted as I
stated in the Regulation of Bank Indonesia NO. 1/9/FBI/1999. dabd 28 October 1999 concerning l
the Monitoring on the Flow of Foreign Exchange Activities. as amended, modfied and ‘
supplemented from time to time; 1
(xvi) nothing In this legal opinion should be taken as indicating that the remedies of specific performance I
injunction or prejudgment attachment (being in sortie instances discretionary remedies ofthe court) i
would necessarily be available in any particular instance with respect to any particular provision of l
the Joint Venture Agreement or the JCM KP Cooperation Agreements should the matter be litigated l
in Indonesia: 
(xvii) the award ofdamages and costs in enlorcement proceedings undertaken in Indonesia Is subject to 1
the gench discretion or the courts In respect cfthe award or costs; I
(xvrti) In order to be admissible in evidence hetero an Indonesian court. it might be necessary for a ‘
document to be translated into the Indonesian language An Indonesian court may accept in ‘
evidence certiﬁed translations of dowments prepared by otﬁcial registered translators. However, a r
certiﬁed translation may not always accurater reﬂect the English version and any particular phrase
may beconstrued by an Indonﬁian court quite dirferently than the plain meaning oithe English text
might suggest;
(xix) decisions by an Indonesian court as to matters of Indonesian law are not binding on lower courts or t
on the same court in any subsequent case. Indonesian courtjudgments are not systematically
published and the courts are often unfamiliar with sophisticated commercial or ﬁnance transactions,
leading in practice to a lack of certainty in the interpretation and application of Indonesian legal
principles. lndoneslan court an be found wanting in any proper and complete legal and factual
aralysis of the Issues at hand and at times the courts nray not have determined cases based on
their merits or the legal and factual analysis presented in the proceedings;
(xx) while companla established in the Republic of Jndonesia are required in be registered with the
Company Registry, this registration system Is not reliable for the purposes of obtaining up—todate r
ccrpcmte Informaﬁon such as the complete Arlicies of Association or names of shareholdersv ‘
directors and commissioners. and does not include information relating to encumbrances and I
charges over corporate assets. nor is there any other means of being apprised of such I
encumbrances or charges over moveeble assets or of the appointment of receivers or liquidators; r
and r
(>c<l) claims may become barred under the laws of the Republic of lndonesia Imposing limitation periods r
within which suits. actions or proceedings can be brought or may be or become subject to defences l
at Set-off or counterclaim. 3
All Information In this Report Is made subject to these qualiﬁcations and disclaimers, i
l
l
l
l
l
Kilimannsn Gold Corporan'ori Limited 1
AIM Admission Document m i
l
l
l
l
l
l


HADIPUTRANTO. HADINOTO & PARTNERS ‘
SCHEDULE! 1
FORESTRYMAPS 1
‘
z“ _  ~ 7}  V   : .11; 3,, a 1‘. ,h n.mmmsm.m
    = . ’     4
g ﬁ‘ 1‘: ' ‘5 ‘  f  “ I“  E  5am umm)
  '  g:  v if”  S's-w f “‘2'
 ‘  3r?“ -   :3... ; 2:2“:
<55; 12:. ‘2 . 72:; "  ' as A: ﬁg; mane - mm
 ;‘-’   .3. v   gm?“ : m2:
7    , '3  453‘” 2‘ I:  Maw» = 9mm
 ‘    m ' "‘W'
a    ft; 7 ‘ ;.   .
seal;  r  A .5   o $5"..me
.2. 211, 7‘: ~ .‘ ‘ :.v :~ war: mm
‘s a  at:  $1?  i # mmw
ﬂ  ‘ i :    ~‘ «.53 5 z; a» ‘. #
,_ .,   r ,; ‘3   '   - “m” “m
‘-  3:: ~ '  . 1"! i. i: ’ 4"",  25:
g a   1:; :57 ‘i  ‘    '59  w .
 222‘}. 3.1%;    :;»:..M . r ..
’  x] =-;r- v .   x1:  a»
 ‘73;  5 - 1%.  ﬁg“ iﬁwg .  
      
       I
um mm m”
Kalimanlan Gold Curporalion Limited
“6 AlMAdmlssicn Document


HADIPUTRANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS 1
       Mm...“
 ‘VV   ~   3  j. .  1 V I wmm
 ..  .  :   T~  -  21' '“m‘t‘fau
A.“ s“ ‘.   9:7, 3 w '7. u, ~«er
 w . L": ~:‘:.     ~‘ . "‘ 1.. "  nmmnugmkmn
éw. ‘V '  is“:      WWWW‘M
  4 a.      ' ‘5” .  ya”
I‘ v. 5' 1:  ‘ﬁ. 1“  .3: 2g.  N 3'  '3 “mm
 .er '   .  - < 3;“ Eur-rm
 i' g    ;; ::. . I. 13.2:  ﬂﬁ ; 
.1 aka?    .: r; I z :5 a I; . a» n
 I  s . ¢    ,L  ‘ ‘éﬁ ‘
; i:  £4;  3;    . ’1!  322.} -  mm 1
 .:   v   .  , ms. 4-5, :17: <8 rmimﬁmﬁn‘i’m
  ;  ‘ "L Q   u ~ 1 5:333 . " I» :mmammm
‘ . .  “a  nan“; :j  .   j
 my :21  . f‘ ~x....;.~,.«'<‘gr . — WWW 
,3 i ‘. 5 E’L; J- : g 5. -: :i ‘ '\ .g.‘,e, ‘ mmmm
    , .5      
      ’7   g;
   x     a. mww
:s   2 ;:~:. > .  4“ y  ‘m awn»,
  ‘   '5‘»   . _    it: 
 ' ’5‘ 5% ’   g; 2:55”: i 
nwa “3'1”! ‘ia‘i’fﬁ
, ,
w______—_______.__#_
Kalimanlan Gold Carpursﬁan Limited 1 11
A/MAdmisslon Document


‘ RANTO, HADINOTO & PARTNERS V
7;, a; g; H z.   F?- «g;   7..  3.1 L
     
i          
E           1:
       '1
     
    
L    *
   .  ‘
E  r §i  2  ‘  s V 33%. i g
1 kg: PTMIMANTii’F‘YAKENCJN/I  ‘
   “W ‘ ‘ ‘ t :


Part F — Additional Information I
________—_._————-
1 Corporate Information
The Company is registered in Bermuda under the Bermuda Companies Act as an exempted company limited by
' shares with registration number ECI23943.
The liability of the members of the Company Is limited to the amount (if any) that is unpaid on the shares
respectiver held by them.
The Company was originally incorporated under the laws of the Province of Ontario as Advance Red Lake Gold
Mines Limited on 13 July 1936 by Letters Patent. as supplemented by Supplementary Letters Patent dated 26
May 1953 and 23 June 1965; ms dissolved 5 September 1979: vims revived upon application for revival by order
dated 4 September 1961; changed Its name to Advance Red Lake Gold Mines Inc. effective 11 August 1983:
changed its name to Titan Empire Inc. effective 8 December 1989; changed Its name to AWG American - :
WestJava Gold Corp. etfective 2 November 1994: Continued under the Company Act (British Columbia) by
Certiﬁcate of Continuation issued 4 January 1995; changed its name to AWG American — WestJava Inc. and
continued under the Business Corporation Act (Ontario) effective 28 September 1995 and changed its name to
Kaiimantan Gold Corporation effective 11 March 1996. On 17 April 1997. Kalimantan Gold Corporation
amalgamated with its wholly owned subsidiary, Kalimantan Mlnerals Lid, continuing under the name Kalimanhn
Gold Corporation.
The Company applied for oonsent to continue the Company in Bermuda and the Bermudian Minister of Finance
issued his consent to the continuation ofthe Company in Bermuda on 6 October 1997 (“Minister's Consent”). The
Company was continued in Bermuda as an exempted company on 7 October 1997.
The Compaan principal place of business Is Its Executive Ofﬁce in Canada at the address and telephone number
set out in the Corporate Directory on page 5 of this Admission Document. its registered ofﬁce is also set out In the
Corporate Directory. The Company also conducts business from its Exploration Ofﬁce in Kallmentan. whose
address is also set out in the Corporate Directory.
The Company Is the holding company of the Group. Its corporate and asset stnicture is set out in Section z of
Part A of this Admission Document (which also Includes the interests of KIC, which is not a subsidiary of the
Company, to provide a better appreciation of the outside equity interests).
The material corporate details tor KSK (Miloh Is a 75% owned subsidiary of the Company) and JCM (the holder of
the .Ieiai-Mewet KP. but which is not a subsidiary of the Company) are set out in HHF's Indonesian legal report in
Part E of this Admission Document.
The Companys only other subsidiary is Indokal Lirnted. Indokal is a private limited liability oompany incorporated
in Hong Kong with Company Number 171969. Indokal's registered ofﬁce address is at Level 23. Three Paciﬁc
Place, 1 Queen's Road East, Hong Kong. Indokal has 100 issued shares which are held by the Company.
Indokai has two directors, Rahman Connelly and Murray Ciapham.
2 The Bermuda Companies Act
The Company is registered under and is obliged to comply with the Bermuda Companies Act and the other
applicable laws of Bermuda. It is also obliged to comply with speciﬁc obligations arising from other laws that relate
to its activities in the venous regions that it operates.
As an "exempted company'. the Company Is authorised to carry on business outside Bermuda from a place of
business in Bermuda but may not, without a speciﬁc licence granted by the Minister of Finance, or in certain
circumstances permitted by the Bermuda Companies Act, conduct business within Bermuda. The Company is
therefore permitted to establish a place of business in Bermuda to conduct business outside Bermuda.
The Company has been classiﬁed as non-raident of Bermuda for exchange control purposes by the Bermuda
Monetary Authority (BMA). As such, the Company may deal in and convert currency (other than Bermuda
currency) held for Its account to any other currency without restricﬁon.
3 The City Code, Takeover Regulation and Relevant Canadian Securities Laws
The Company is registered in Bermuda and is managed and controlled outside the UK. For those reasons the
City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (“City Code“) does not apply to the Company. It is emphasised that,
although the Ordinary Shares will trade on AIM, the Company will not be subject to takeover regulation in the UK.
it follows that Shareholders are not entitled to the protections afforded by the City Code. Whilst there are no no
similar protections under Bermuda law, the Company is a 'reporting issue!” (as deﬁned under the relevant laws) in
_____—___——___———
Kallmantan Gold Corporation Limited 1‘9
AlMAdmission Document


sevemi provinca In Canada (the principal such jurisdiction being British Columbia) and is therefore subject to
provisions regulating takeovers under the securities legislation in those provinces.

Under the securities laws of British Columbia when any person (“an offeror‘). except pursuant to a formal take
over bid. acquires beneﬁcial ownership of, or the power to exercise control or discretion over. or securities
convertible into, voting or equity securities or any class of a reporting issuer that. together with such offerofs
securities would constitute 10 per cent or more of the outstanding securities of that class. the ofteror must
Immediately issue an tile a press release announcing the acquisition. and ﬁle a report of such acquisition with the
applicable securities regulatory authorities within two business days thereafter. Certain institutional investors may
sled an alternate reporting system. Once an oiferor has tiled such report. the offeror is required to Issue further
press releases and ﬁle further reports each time that the offeror acquires beneﬁcial ownership of. or the power to
exercise control or direction over. or securities convertible into. an additional 2 per cent or more of the outstanding
securities of the applicable class.

In British Columbia. a takeover bid is generally deﬁned as an offer to acquire outstanding voting or equity
securities of a class made to any holder in British Columbia of securlﬂas subject to the otter to acquire, it the
securities subject to such otter. together with securities held by the oﬁeror and any person acting in concert with
the oﬂeror, constitute in aggregate 20 per cent or more of the outstanding securities of that class of securities at
the date of the offer to acquire. Subject to limited exemptions. a takeover bid must be made to all holders of
securities of the class that Is subject to the bid who are In British Columbia and must allow such security holders
35 days to deposit securities pursuant to the bid. The offeror must deliver to the security holders a takeover bid
cirwlar which describa the terms of the takeover bid and the directors of the reporting issuer must deliver a
dlrectors' circular within ﬁfteen days of the date ofthe bid. making a recommendation to security holders to accept
or reject the bid.

It should also be noted that pursuant to applicable Canadian securities laws. if the Company distributes securities i
In Canada pursuant to a private placement. the subscribers will generally not be entitled to sell such securities for
a period of four months and one day from the date of closing of such private placement. In the event that a private
placement is completed with subscribers resident outside of Canada. the Company must take steps to ensure that
such statutory hold period Is not circumvented. for instance by instructing the Compaan transfer agent not to
register the subject securities in the name of any Canadian resident for a period of (our months and one day from
the date of completion of the private placement and/or by issuing the subject securities under a separate ISIN
number.

4 Share Capital

The Shares. Warrants and Options that the Company will have on issue at Admission are detailed in Section 10 of
Part A of this Admission Document. The terms of the Warrants and Options are summarised in Section 5 of this
Part F.

Application for Admission is being made in respect of all of the Shares. All Shares on issue rank pari passu in all
respects. The Shares have already been admitted ior trading and will continue to trade after Admission on the
TSX Venture Exchange under the symbol KLG. Other than set out in the foregoing. the Shares have not been
admitted to dealing on any recognised Investment exchange. no application for such admission has been made
and there are no other intended arrangements for dealings in the Shares.

The Shares are In registered form and have been created under the Bermuda Companies Act. The International
Securities Identiﬁcation Number (lSIN) tor the Shares ls “4334061042.

The Company was continued in Bermuda with a minimum share capital of US$12.000 and an authorised share
capital of US$1,0D0.000 divided into 100.000.000 common shares with a parvalue of US$0.0t each.

The Company‘s primary register of members (Shareholders) is kept at its registered ofﬁce. As a company which
is listed on an ‘approved stock exchange” (under the Bermuda Companies Act). the Company may keep one or
more branch registers outside Bermuda. and maintains a branch register in Canada.

Intomiatlon on changes in the Company's share capital. Warrants. Options and other acquisition rights and/or
obligations over authorised but unissued capital or an undertaking to increase capital:

- for the 6 month period ending 30 June 2006. is set out in Note 5 of the Interim accounts contained in Section ‘

2 of Part D of this Admission Document; and
- tor the period from 1January 2003 until 31 December 2005. Is set out in Note 7 to the Independent
Accountant's Report contained in Section 1 of Part D Ofmls Admission Dowment,
As at 31 December 2005 (the date of the most recent audited balance sheet of the Company). the Company did
not hold (either legally or beneﬁcially) any shares in itself. nor were there any shares in the Company not
representing capital. During the year ended 3i December 2005 no more than 10% of the Company's share
capital was paid for with amts other than cash.
_—.—,——____————
Kalimenten Gold Corpomﬁon Limited
AIM Admission Document


Save as disclosed in this document:

- no share or loan capital of the Company has been Issued or is proposed to be Issued:

- no person has any preferential subscdption rights for any share capital of the Company: and

i - no share or loan capital oi the Company Is under option or agreed conditionally or unconditionally to be put
under option, i

5 Terms and Conditions of Warrants 1

A summary of the material terms and conditions of the Warrants in issue or to be issued, as set out in the table In ,

section 10 ot Part A of this Admission Document. Is as follows:

a) The Warrants are exercisable in whole or In part at any time on or before 4pm (Vancouver time) on their
‘Explry Date“ (as set out In Section 10 of Part A) by delivery of the Warrant certiﬁcate and a completed and -
exeouted exercise form to the Company's executive otﬁce in Canada together with the payment of the
‘Exercise Price" (as set out In Section 10 ot Part A) In cleared funds. Warrants not exercised by such time
will lapse. ‘

b) The Warrant Holder is entitled on exercise (In accordance with (a) above) to be allotted one Share for each
Warrant exercised (sublect to possible adjustments referred to below).

c) The Company will allot and deliver the new Shares within ﬁve days after receipt of the Wanant exercise
documents. and where only part of a holding at Warrants under a certain Warrant certiﬁcate are exercised. a
new Warrant certiﬁcate for the number of Warrants that are not exercised at such time and have not
othent-lise expired.

d) The Company will not apply to AIM or the TSXV tor admission of the Warrants. The Company will make
application for admission to AIM and the TSXV of all new Shares allotted on exercise of the Warrants
Those Shares will be fully paid and non-assessable. tree of all liens. charges and encumbrances and
participate equally in all respects with existing Shares. and in particular new Shares allotted on exercise of
the Warrants will quality tor dividends declared alter the date of their allotment,

e) The Wanants shall not entitle the holder to any rights as a Shareholder in the Company. Including without
limitation. voting rights.

/ f) Warrants may not be transferred and may only be exercised by the Warrant Holden

g) the Warrants shall not be exercisable by the Warrant Holder, In whole or in part. and the Company shall not
ghie eﬁect to any such exercise. it. after giving effect to such exercise. the Warrant Holder. together with any
person or company acting Jointly or in concert with the Warrant Holder (the “Joint Actors') would in the
aggregate beneﬁcially own. or exercise control or direction over that number of voting securities at the
Company which is twenty percent (20%) or greater at the total issued and ouﬁtandlng voting securities at the
Company, immediately after giving effect n: such exercise.

h) The Exercise Price and/or number at Shares to be issued on the exercise of each Warrant shall be adjusted
in the event of any: share split or consolidation: stock dividend; rights issue at a price that is less than 95% of
the current market price of the Shares on the TSXV; any in specie distribution of Investments (indudlng other
securities In the Company or any other securities), assets or debt Instruments. other than dividends paid out
of proﬁts in the ordinary course at business; and any reorganisation of the Issued capital of the Company.
The speciﬁed adtustments for these situations are in accordance with generally aocepted principles for TSXV
listed companies and are dalgned to protect the effective economic position of the Warrant Holders.

i) The Warrants are governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province at British
Columbia. Canada.

6 Stock Option Plan

The Options currently in issue and expected to he in lane as at Admission are set out In the table in section 10 of

PartA of this Admission Document. These Options are issued under the Company's stock option plan (the '2004

Plan") which was adopted by Shareholders at the Companis annual and special meeting held on 15 June 2004

and approved by the Shareholders most recently on 24 May 2006.

Kallmanten Gold Corporation Limited
AIMAdIm‘ssl'on Document 121


The 2004 Plan Is a 10% rolling plan whereby the Corporation may grant Options equal to 10% of the issued and
outstanding Shares on a non-diluted basis at the date of any particular grant of Options. The Options may only be
issued to directors. employees and other service providersvas a means of rewarding positive performance and
providing incentlve to efiectively manage the aﬂairs of the Company. The total number of Shares available for
granting under a rolling plan will increase or decrease as the number of issued and outstanding Shares changes.
Options granted under the 2004 Plan are subject to the following provisions:

(a) the Option is non-assignable and non-tmnsierable other than by will or the laws of descent and disb'ibuiion;

(b) for Options granted to employees or other service providers (including management company employees).
the Company Is required to represent that the proposed Option Holder Is a bone tide employee or service
provider, as the case may be. oi the Company or of any of its afﬁliates; ‘

, (c) it an Option Holder ceases to be employed by the Company (other than as a result of termination with cause) ‘
or ceases to act as a director or ofﬁcer of the Company or a subsidiary of the Company. any Option held by ‘
such Option Holder may be exercised within 90 days aiter the date such Option Holder ceases to be .
employed as an ofﬁcer or director or. as the case may be. or within 30 days it the Option Holder is engaged
in investor relations activities and ceases to be employed to provide Investor relations activities;

(d) in the event of the death of an Option Holder. the Option Holders heirs or administrators may exerdse any
portion of the outstanding Option up to a period of one year from the date of the Option Holders death or the
termination date of the Option. whichever is earlier;

(e) the term of an Option cannot exceed ﬁve years from the date of grant:

(0 the Options vvili be vested on a basis to be determined by the Diredors and may be vested immediately upon
granting:

(g) the maximum number of Shares that may be granted to an Option Holder within a one year period may not
exceed 5% of the issued Shares at the time of grant;

(h) eny Shares subject to an Option which for any reason is cancelled or terminated without halving been
exercised shall again be available for grant under the 2004 Plan:

(i) the Issuance to any consultant. within a one-year period. of a number of Shares may not exceed 2% of the
issued Shares.

Other than where they are in conilict with the above provisions of the 2004 Plan. the Options are also subject to

the general terms and conditions for the Warrants (adjustments etc). as set out In Section 5 of this Part F above.

other than paragraph (g) of that Section.

7 Rights Attaching to Shares and Powers of the Company

The rights attaching to Shares are set out in the Company's ‘Bye-Laws" and "Merrvorandum of Continuance".

applicable Bermuda statutes regarding companies, including the Bermuda Companies Act. and general law. in

addition. the Company is subject to the rules of the TSX Venture Exchange. the sewrities laws of British

Columbia. Ontario and Athena (as a ‘reporting issuer in those Canadian prim/Inca) and will be subject to the AIM

Rules upon Admission. The powers and objects of the Company are summarised under paragraph (a) below and

set out in full in clause 6F of the Memorandum of Continuance, Bye-Laws contain. Inter alla. provisions

summarised under all other headings below. The Bye-Laws and Memorandum of Continuance of the Company
may be Inspected during normal business hours at the registered ofﬁce at the Company. The Bye-Laws may be
amended from time to time in the manner provided for in the Bermuda Companies Act.

Following Is a summary of the more signiﬁcant rights of the holders of Shares of the Company. This summary is

not exhaustive nor does it constitute a deﬁnitive statement of the rights and Ilabllitles of the Company’s members.

a) Powers and Objects of the Company

The Company's Memorandum of Continuance. which Incorporates some general provisions of the Bermuda

Companies Act. provides that the Companys has very broad objects. which Include to carry on all or any of the

business of mineral explorers. miners. mine owners, metal workers producers. reﬁners. importers and exporters.

engineers, farming activities. conducting research and to buy. sell. manufacture, design. transport and deal In
goods or property (as relevant) of all kinds.

The Company, being incorporated in Bermuda has the power to sue and be sued. It has the powers set out in the

Kalimaritan Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


First Schedule to the Bermuda Companies Act and a broad and comprehensive list of additional powers which

oomplement Its objects. These include the powerto:

i) borrow and raise money and semire or discharge any debt or obligation in any manner:

ii) enter into any guamntee, contract or indemnity or suretyship (including the granting of security over the
Company's assets or uncalled capital);

iii) create or deal with instruments and securities. whether negotiable or otherwise; ‘

iv) deal with or dispose of all or any part of undertaking, property or assets of the Company.

v) issue and allot securities In the Company for any purpose;

vl) grant pensions. annuities. or other allowances to any directors, ofﬁcers or employees (future. present or
past) of the Company or its subsidiaries or holding companies; .

vii) issue preference shares which are liable to be redeemed at the option of the holder. and

viii) purchase Its own shares

b) Voting rights ,

Save where a greater majority is required by the Bermuda Companies Act or the Bye-Laws. any question

proposed for consideration at any general meeting shall be decided on by a simple majority of votes cast. At any

general meeting. a 'Resolution" put to the vote of the meeting shall be decided on a show of hands unless a poll is

demanded. On a poll. votes may be cast either personally or by proxy and each Shareholder ls entitled to one

vote for each Share hold.

A poll may be demanded by the chairman of the meeting. by at least three Shareholders present in person or

represented by proxy. by any one or more Shareholders present in person or by proxy who are together entitled to

not less than 10% of the total voting rights of all Shareholders having the right to vote at such meetings. or by one

or more Shareholders present In person or represented by proxy who together hold Shares conferring the right to

vote at such meeting. being Shares on which an aggregate sum has been paid up equal to not less than 10% of

the total sum paid up on all such Shares oonferring such right.

No Shareholder shall. unless the Board otherwise determines, be entitin to vote at any general meeting unless all

calls or other sums presently payable by him in respect of shares in the Company have been paid. In the case of

an equality of votes at a general meeting. whether on a show of hands or on a poll. the chairman of such meeting

shall not be entitled to a second or casting vote. A person entitled to more than one vote on a poll need not use

all his votes or cast all the votes he uses in the same way. In the case of joint holders of a Share. the vote of the

senior who tenders a vote. whether In person or by proxy, shall be acoepted to the exclusion of the votes of the

otherjoint holders. and for this purpose seniority shall be determined by the order in which the names stand in the

share register in respect of the Joint holding.

c) Dividends

The Board may from time to tlme dedare cash dividends or distributions out of contributed Surplus to be paid to

the Shareholders Including such interim dividends as appear to the Board to be Justiﬁed by the position of the

Company. Subject to the righs of any members holding shares with special dividend rights (of which there are

presently none). all dividends in respect of shares (including the shares) are to be declared and paid

proportionater to the amount paid up or credited as paid up on the shares (of which all are currently fully paid).

Any dividend or distribution out of contributed surplus that is unclaimed for a period of six yeras from the date of

declaration shall be forfeited and revert to the Company.

(I) Transfer

Generally. the Shares are freely transferable. subiect to formal regulatory requirements and to such other

requirements as may be applicable and to the registration of the transfer not resulting in a contravention of or

failure to observe the provisions of applicable Bermuda Companies Act

Bermuda Monetary Authority (“BMA”) consent ls required for all new Issues of shares in a Bermuda exempted

company Including all Issues to persons who are non-resident of Bermuda for exchange control purposes. The

BMA's consent is also required for subsequent transactions In issued shares between persons regarded as non-

resident of Bermuda for exchange control purposes. if a general consent has not been granted The BMA has

provided a general consent which allows for the issue and free transferability of Shares to and between any non

(Bermuda) residents without the prior approval of the BMA so long as the subied Shares are listed on an

"Appointed Stock Exchange'. which Includes AIM and TSXV.

Kallmanran Gold Corpomlion Limited

AIMAdmIssIon Document 123


  


Subject to the Bermuda Companies Act and to such of the restrictions contained in the Bye-Laws as may be

applicable. any shareholder may transfer all or any of his shares by an instrument of transfer In the usual common

form or In any other form which the Board may approve, which includes transfers of the Depositary Interests on

CREST.

e) Issue of Further Shares

The unissued shares of the Company shall be at the disposal of the Board. which may offer. allot. grant options

over or otherwise dispose of them to such persons. at such times and for such consideration and upon such terms

and conditions as the Board may determine (subject to the Bye<Laws).

Subject to any special rights conferred on the holders 01 any share or class of shares. any share in the Company

may be issued with or have attached thereto Such preferred. deferred. qualiﬁed or other speclal rights or such

restrictions. whether in regard to dividend. voting. return of capiml or otherwise. as the Company may by

Resolution determine or. If there has not been any such determination or so far as the same shall not make

speciﬁc provision, as the Board may detennlne.

1') Variation of rights

Subject to me Bermuda Companies Act. all or any of the special rights for the ﬂme being attached to any class of

shares for the time being issued may from time to time be altered or abrogated with the consent In writing of the

holders of not less than seventy ﬁve percent of the Issued shares ofthat class or with the sanction of a resolution
of the holders of such Shara voting In person or by proxy.

The special rights conferred upon the holders of any shares or class of shares shall not. unless otherwise

expressly provided In the rights attaching to or the terms of issue oi sudn shores. be deemed to be altered by the

creation or issue ofiurther shares ranking pari passu therewith.

9) Changes in share capital

The Company may from time to time increase its capital by such sum to be divided into shares of such par value

as the Company by rmlution shall prescribe. The Company may. by the Resolution Increasing the capital, direct

that the new shares or any of them shall be oﬂered in the ﬁrst instance either at par value or at a premium or

(subject to the provisions of the Bermuda Companles Ad) at a discount to all the holders for the time being 01

shares of any class or dasses In proportion to the number of such shares held by them respectively or make any

other provision as to the Issue of the new shares. ‘

The Company may from time to time by Resolution: I

i) divide its shares into several classes and attach thereto respeuively any preferential. deferred. qualiﬁed or i
special rights, privileges or conditions; .

ll) consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of larger par value than its existing shares;

Ill) subdivide its shares or any of them Into shares of smaller par value than is ﬁxed by its memorandum;

Iv) make provision for the issue and allotment of shares which do not carry any voting rights;

v) cancel shares which. at the date of the passing of the resolution in that behalf. have not been taken or
agreed to be taken by any person. and diminish the amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares
so cancelled: and

vi) change the currency denominations of its share capimi.

h) Powers of the Board

Subject to the provisions of the Bermuda Companies Act and these Bye-Laws and to any directions given by the

Company by Resolution. the Board shall manage the business of the Company and may pay all expenses

incurred in promoting and Incorporating the Company and may exercise all the powers of the Company.

The Board may exercise all the powers of the Company to borrow money and to mortgage or charge all or any

part of the undertaking, property and assets (present and future) and uncalled capital of the Company and to Issue

debentures and other securities. whether outright or as collateral security for any debt. liability or obligation of the

Company or of any other persons.

The Board may delegate its powers and authorities to any person, attorney or committee (with powers not

exceeding those vested in or eXerclsable by the Board under the Eye-Laws). It may from time to time appoint one

or more of its body to be a managing director. Joint managing director or an assistant managing diretxor or to hold
any other employment or executive office with the Company.

Kalimanhn Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


l) Appointment of Directors and Term of Ofﬁce
The number of Directors shall be such number not las than two as the Company by resolution may from time to
time determine and. subjed to the Bermuda Companies Act and the Byeiaws. shall serve until the end of the
next annual general meeting (but may be re-elected at that meeting). The Company‘s present Directors were all
,I'riOSi recentiy reeleded at the last annual general meeting held on 24 May 2006.
The Company shall at the Annual General Meeting and may by Resolution determine the minimum and the
maximum number of Directors and may by Resolution determine that one or more vacancies in the Board shall be
deemed casual vacancies for the purposes of the Bye-Laws. M the last annual general meeting of the Company
the number of directors was set at 5. which included one casual vacancy. Without prejudice to the power of the
Company by resolution in pursuance of any of the provisions of the Bye-Laws to appoint any person to be a
Director, the Board. so long as a quorum of Directors remains in office. shall have power at any time and from time
to time to appoint any individual to be a Director so as to ﬁll a casual vacancy.
The Company may in a special general meeting called for that purpose remove a Director provided notice of any
such meeting shall be served upon the Director concemed not less than 14 days before the meeting and he shall
be entitled to be heard at that meeting.
The ofﬁce of a Director shall be vacated upon the happening of any of the ioilowing events:
l) lfthe Director resigns;
ll) lfthe Director becomes of unsound mind or a patient for any purpose of any statute or applicable law relating
to mental health and the Board resolves that the Director’s ofﬁce is vacated;
iii) if the Director becomes bankrupt or compounds with his creditors; '
iv) if the Director is prohibited by law from being a Director:
v) lithe Director ceases to be a Director by virtue ofthe Companies Acts or ls removed from ofﬁce pursuant to
these Bye—Laws. :
1) Director’s Fees 5 Additional Remuneration
The amount if any. of Directors' fees shall from time to time be determined by the Company by resolution In
general meeting and in the absence of a detenninatlon to the contrary in geneml meeting. such fees shall be
deemed to accrue from day to day.
Any Director who. by request goes or resides abroad for any purpose of the Company or who periorms sen/ices
which in the opinion of the Board go beyond the ordinary duties of a Director may be paid such extra remuneration
(whether by way of salary, commission. participation ln proﬁts or otherwise) as the Board may determine.
k) indomnities
Subject to the proviso below. every Director. ofﬁcer of the Company and member of a committee (constituted for
the purpose of exercising powers delegated to it by the Board) shall be indemniﬁed out of the funds of the
Company against all civil liabilities. loss. damage or expense (Including all reasonable legal and other costs and
expenses property payable) incurred or suﬁered by him as such Director. ofﬁcer or committee member provided
always that the indemnity shall not extend to any matter which would render it void pursuant to the Bermuda
Companies Ad. This indemnity extends to any person acting as a Director. ofﬁcer or committee member in the
reasonable belief that he has been so appointed or elected notwithstanding any defect in such appointment or
election.
Every Director. ofﬁcer and committee member shall be Indemniﬁed out of the funds or the Company against all
liabilities incurred by him as such Director. officer or committee member in defending any proceedings. whether
civil or criminal. in which judgement is given in his favour. or in which he Is acquitted. or in connection w'nh any
application under the Bermuda Companies Act in which relief from liability is granted to him by the court.
l) General Meetings
The Board shall convene and the Company shall hold an annual general meeting of members at such time and
place as the Board shall appoint. The Board may. whenever itthinks ﬁt. and shall. when required by the Bermuda
Companies Act. convene general meetings other than annual general meetings which shall be called special
general meetings.
A geneml meeting shall be called by not less than ﬁve days notice In writing. Shorter notice is permitted with the
agreement of all shareholders entliied to vote at the meeting in the case of an annual general meeting or a
majority of shareholders holding at least 95% of the voting rights for a special general meeting.
Kslimalrﬂan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


 . 'j'ZSéﬁJ z

Except in the case of the removal of auditors and directors, anything which may be done by Resolution of the

Company in general meeting or by resolution of a meeting of any class of the shareholders of the Company may.

without a meeting and without any previous notice being required, he done by resolution in writing, signed by all of

the shareholders or their proxies, or in the case of a shareholder that is a corporation, on behalf of each

shareholder. being all of the shareholders of the Company who at the date of the resolution in writing would be

entitled to attend a meeting and vote on the resolution.

There are no provisions In the Bye-Laws which impose conditions on he admission of persons to the Company's

general meetings.

in) Reports and Notices

The Bermuda Companies Act requires that at IeastIlve (5) days' notice of every general meeting shall be given to i

all shareholders unless the Eye-Laws or terms of issue of the Shara provide otherwise. The Eye-laws do not l

currentiy provide otherwise. The Bermuda Companlﬁ Act requires that the notice of general meeting shall ‘

specify the place, day and hour of the meeting and. in the case of a special general meeting, the general nature of

the business to be considered. The Bermuda Companies Act requires that, unless otherwise unanimously agreed

by all Shareholders and all oi the Directors, the Board shall ensure that the following be laid before the Company

in general meeting: -

I The Compaan ﬁnancial statements, which shall include a statement of mults of operations for the period, a
Statement of retained eamings or deficit, a balance sheet at the end of such period, a statement of changes
in ﬁnancial position or cash flows for the period. notes to the ﬁnancial statements (which, in addition to any
other Information contained therein, must indicate which jurisdiction‘s generally accepted accounting
principles have been utilised). and such further information as may be required by the Bermuda Companies
Act. the Company's Memorandum of Continuance or the Byelaws: and

I The Auditol’s report.

n) Reserves 8- Capihiisation of Proﬁts

The Board may. before recommending or declaring any dividend or distribution out of contributed suplus, set aside

such sums as it thinks proper as reserves which shall, at the discretion of the Board. be applicable for any purpose

of the Company and pending such application, may also at such discretion, either be employed in the business of

the Company or be InVﬁ'ted In such investments as the Board may from time to time think ﬁt. The Board may

also without placing the same to reserve carry ionivard any sums which it may think it pmdent not to distribute.

The Company may. upon the recommendation of the Board, at any time and from time to time pass a resolution to

the effect that it is desirable to capitalize all or any part or any amount for the time being standing to the credit of

any reserve or fund which Is available for distribution or to the credit of any share premium account or any capital

redemption reserve fund and accordingly that such amount be set free for distribution amongst the shareholders

or any class of shareholders who would be entitled thereto If distributed by way of dividend.

o) Winding Up

If the Company shall be wound up, the liquidator may, with the sanction of a resolution of the Company and any

other sanction required by the Bermuda Companies Act, divide amongst the shareholders In specie or kind the

whole or any part of the assets of the Company and may for such purposes set such values as the Ilquldator

deems fair upon any propertyto be divided as aforesaid and may determine how such division shall be carried out

as between the shareholders or different classes of shareholders. No shareholder shall be compelled to accept

any shares or otherassets upon which there is any liability.

p) Major Shareholders

Nothing in the Bye-Laws confers on major shareholders In the Company any voting rights which are different to

those conferred on the holders of Shares.

q) Pre-emptlon Right:

Vlﬁth the exception of shares following an increase in capital (see paragraph (g) above). nothing In the Bye-Laws

writers any pre-emption rights arising either In respect of an issue or sale of shares or on any other basis. It

should be noted. however. that Options and Warrants currently on issue or to be issued do give certain rights to

the holders of such securities to subscribe for Shares in accordance with the terms of those securities.

r) Redemption and Conversion Rights

There are no redemption or conversion rights in respect of the shares of the Company presently on issue.

Kalimanran Gold Gonzo/anon Limited

AIM Admission Document


s) Shareholder Disclosure Obligation I
I

There is no obligation on a shareholder to disclose its shareholding in the Company either under the laws of

Bermuda or the Eye-Laws.

3 Directors’ Holdings and Other Interests

a) Directors' Interests

I) Interests In share capital

The Interests (all of which are beneﬁcial interests save as otherwise stated) oi the Directors and or the persons

connected with them (within the meaning of section 346 of the Companies Act) in the Shares. Options and

Warrants' oi the Company as at the date of Admission are as follows:

«I -‘ la»  r c s   = "‘zmlu  ‘

9' 2:55: " -  ‘   e  i .i%¥@.€§i%l r

Murray Claphamz 3.109.895 5.4% 470.000 3.579.395 4.7%

Rahman Connelly“ 2.368.790 4.1% 635,000 3.003.790 3.9%

Doris Meyer‘ 97.571 0.2% 631,000 728.571 1.0%

Peter Bojtos5 140.500 0.2% 320.000 460.500 0.3%

The key terms of Options held by each director are as follows:

3mg? «:    Em” gs  Die-51340535 : ’7  v

Eév'rYiEﬁ‘e :  f. ; ,.1?ﬂ7ei§3,§"§§':§3 ﬁﬁ-NW-‘Es 9?.   :‘rgisw-ﬂarziﬁtAHsI-11-r; :Tml

          i  '.

Murray Clapham - 65.000 - 100.000 150,000 155.000 470.000

Rahman Conneliy - 30.000 - 200.000 120,000 235.000 635.000

Doris Meyer 31.000 -- 65.000 100.000 250.000 185.000 631.000

Peter Bojtos - 65.000 - 100.000 - 155.000 320.000

'> None of the directors hold an interest in any Warrants.

2' 2,659,895 of these Shares end all of the Options are held directly by Mr Claplram. with the remaining 250,000

shares held by his spouse.

3' All held directly by Mr Connelly.

1’ All the Shares are held by Golden Oak Corporate Services Ltd, a company owned 100% by Mrs Meyer. The

Options are held directly by Mrs Meyer:

5 All held directly by Mr Bojtas.

In addition. Murray Clapham holds 197.000 shares in KIC (representlng 2.5% or KIC'S issued capital) and Rahman

Connelly holds 366,081 shares In KIC (repraentlng 4.7% of KIC's issued capital) and they are also both directors

of KIC. As set out in Section 4 and 10 of Part A of this Admission Document. KIC has a shareholding of

approximately 20% in Kallmantan Gold. 1 million US$1.30 exeroise price contingent Options as well as a 25%

carried interest in the KSK Cow Project (through its subsidiary FCK). KIC‘s largest shareholders are an

Indonﬁlan company and two United States I Indonesian “charitable' based foundations. which are independent of

Kalirnantan Gold and Its Directors.

Also. as discussed In Section 2 of Part A of this Admission Document. pursuant to the Oxlana Heads of

Agreement. in order to help facilitate the proposed eam-ln by Oxiana Into the Project. the Company is to use its

reasonable commercial endeavours to negotiate a restructuring of the ownership structure for the KSK Cow

Project with KIC, Whilst no current proposal has been made to KIC. It Is possible that any such restnlcture may

result in the exact nature of Mr Connelle and Mr Clepham's interest in KIC and the Company changing.

Save as set out above. none of the Directors have any Interest in the share capital of any company in the Group.

II) Transactlons, assets, contracts or arrangements

other than as described below or elsewhere in this Admission Document. no Director has. or has had, any direct

or Indlrem Interest in any:

Kalimentan Gold Corpamt'on Limited

AIM Admission Document ‘27


E
r l
- transaction which is or was unusual in its nature or conditions or signlﬂcant to the business of the Group
taken as a whole and whlch has been effected in the current or immediately preceding ﬁnancial period or
was effected during any earlier ﬁnancial period and remains in any respect outstanding or unperforrned;
I asset whlch has been acqulred or dlsposed of by. or leased to, any member of the Group or which is
proposed to be so acquired, disposed of, or leased: or
- contract or arrangement existing at the date of this Admission Document Which Is signiﬁcant to the business
of the Group.
iii) Directors'service agreements and remuneration
Remuneration has been and will continue to be set on the basis which reﬂects both the state of the market and
appropriate incentives based upon the overall performance cfthe Company.
The Company. Doris Meyer (the Chief Financial Ofﬁcer of the Company) and Golden Oak Corporate Services Ltd
(“Golden Oak"). a company owned by Doris Meyer. have an agreement in relation to the provision of Mrs Meyer’s
executive services to the Company. The Company pays Golden Oak an annual retainer of 0396.000 plus
Canada's 7% goods and services tax (‘GST't The Company is not eligible to recapture SST as it does not
operate in Canada. however, Golden Oak remits the GST collected. in the six months ended 30 June 2006. the
Company paid consulting tees oi ussusse to Golden Oak and In the year ended 31 December 2005 the
Company paid Golden Oak fees and GST equivalent of US$86.651. Either party may terminate the agreement at
any time upon 90 days notice.
Effective irom 1 July 2006, Rahrnan Connelly, the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer cfthe Company Is to receive a monthly
fee of $3.000 per month commensurate with his increased level of executive duties. This arrangement may be
reviewed at any time by the Company. Mr Connelly did not receive any cash fees from the Company for his
executive services during 2005.
The non-executive Directors. Murray Clapham and Peter Bojtos. will be paid diredors fees of US$12.000 per
annum each for the year effective from 1 January 2006, Mr Connelly Is also to be paid a directors fee of
US$12,DOD per annum In respect of the 6 month period from 1 January 2006 to 30 June.2006 in which he was a
non-executive Director,
The Dlrectois also receive remuneration in the form of Options issued in accordance with the Company’s stock
option plan as described in Section 6 ct this Part F of the Admission Document. The number. grant date and
terms of the Options granted to Directors since 2002 are set out in the table in subsection (l) above.
Other than as set out above, there are no service contracts with the Directors of management which provide for
beneﬁts upon termination of employment.
b) Additional dlrectorshlpslpannershlps
In addition to their directorships of the Company, the Directors hold or have held at some time during the 5 years
precedlng the date of thls Admlsslon Dowment the following directorshipe or are or have been at some time in the
5 years preceding the date of this Admission Document partners in the following businesses:
Name I 'r  ” Cyrieiiﬁ‘tltﬂeﬁli‘lhetﬁmefnhiné é-EEPIst digimbinsi Panuenhllie ’
Murray Clapham Kallmantan Investment Corporation FT s WldjoiD
Tondano Investments
lndokal Ltd
» PT Kalimantan Surya Kencana
Rahman Connolly Kalimantan Investment Corporation Hlllslde Settlement Pty Ltd
Tarmal Pty Limited
tndokal Ltd
F'T Kallmantan Surya Kencana
PT Pancaran Cahaya Kahayan
Doris Meyer Sunndge Gold Corp -
Queenstake Resources Ltd
Golden Oak Corporate Services Ltd
Kaiimannan Gold Corporeﬁon Limited
AIM Admission Document


l
_ l
 
Peter Editos Falkland Gold and Minerals Limited Asian Minerals Resources Limited
Queenstake Resources Ltd Birim Goldﬁelds lrlc
Sage Gold Inc GMD Resources Corp
Toumigan Gold Corporation Desert Sun Mining Corp
US Gold Corporation Gossan Resources Limited
Vaaldiam Resources Limited Link Mineral Ventures Inc
Vault Minerals Inc LMX Rauurces Ltd
Fischer-Watt Gold Co Inc
Apolo Gold is Energy Inc
Apogee Minerals Limited

c) Directors‘ background

Save as disclosed below. no Director has:

- any unspent convictions in reiation to indictable offences;

- ever been declared bankrupt or been the subject of an Individual voluntary arrangement; .

- ever been a director ot a company which. while he was a director or within 12 months after his ceasing to be
a director. had a receiver appointed, entered into liquidation. entered into administration, entered into a
voluntary arrangement. or made any composition or arrangement with its creditors generally, or with any
class of its creditors;

- ever been a partner in a partnership which, while he was a partner or within 12 months atter his ceasing to
be a partner, entered Into compulsory liquidation. administration or a partnership voluntary arrangement;

- owned, or been a partner in a partnership which owned. any asset which. while he owned that asset, or while
he was a partner or within 12 months after his ceasing to be a partner In the partnership which owned that
asset. entered into receivership;

- been the subject of any public criticism by any statutory or regulatory authority (including recognised
professional bodies): or

- been disqualiﬁed by a court from acting as a director of a company or from acting In the management or
conduct of the affairs of any company.

Peter Bojtos is a director of Sage Gold Inc (previously named Sahelian Goldﬁelds inc.) which ﬁled a proposal to

its creditors under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act of Canada in July 2001i As a result. the creditors were

stayed from taking action and the company was not placed into bankmptc'y. The proposal by Sage was approved
by the courts in September 2001. which resulted in the company being reorganised.

In June 2000, the Ontario Securities Commission ordered that certain members of management and Insiders of

Link Mineral Ventures Limited be prohibited from hating In securities of Lan Mr Bojtos. along with three others,

was listed as a person subject to the order. The Commission’s order resulted from the company‘s failure to tile Its

annual ﬁnancial statements for the year ended 31 December 1999 by 19 May 2000 as required by Ontario
securities law. In a statement issued, following the making of the order regarding Link's securities, the

Commission did not necessarily ascribe fault to the respondents.

d) Beneﬁts

Save as disclosed below or elsewhere In this Admission Document, no person. directiy or indirectly. In the last 12

months has received or is contractually entitled to receive, directly or Indirectly, from the Company on or after

Admission (excluding in either case persons who are trade suppliers. professional advisers or otherwise as

disclosed In this Admission Document) any payment or beneﬁt from the Company or securities In the Company to

the value of £10,000 or more or entered Into any contmctual arrangements to receive the same from the Company
at the date of Admission.

In relation to the private placement completed by the Company in August 2006. Keith Hayley Rogers, the Broker

to the Company. received commissions totalling C$187,377 and 398.127 Warrants expiring 16 August 2008 with

an exercise price of Cdn$0.23. Out of this commission. Keith Beyley Rogers paid commissions of cszsasr and

63.418 Warrants to Hoodless Brennan pic of 40 Marsh Wall, Docklands, London E14 9TP.

Kslirrlannan Gold Corporation Limited 129

NM Admission Document


I
I
I

e) Shareholders ‘

The details at all Shareholders who had a beneﬁcial interest In at least 3% of the issued share capital of the ‘

Company as at 20 November 2006. insofar as is known to the Directors. is set out in the table in Section 10 of

Part A of this Admission Document.

Save as described in that table. the Directors are not amre of any person who Is Interested. directly at Indlrec’dy.

in 3% or more of the issued share capital or the Company or of any other person who. directly or indirectly. jointly

or severally. couid exercise control over the Company.

There are no arrangements. known to the Directors, which will. at a subsequent date. result in a change of control

of the Company.

9 Material Contracts

This section contains summaries ot the more Important provisions of contracts to which Kallmantan Gold Is a party

which have not been summarised elsewhere in this Admission Document and which are or may be material in

terms of the Offer or the operations of Kallmantan Gold or otherwise are or may be material to an investor who is

contemplating this Offer.

It should be noted that most of the material contracts relating to the Company's mineral project interests in

Indonesia are under Indonesian law and their material provisions are set out in HHP's Indonesian legal repon in

Part E of this Admission Document.

a) Oxiana Heads of Agreement

The Oxiarla Heads of Agreement is dated 5 Odober 2006 and its principle terms are set out in Sections 4 and 2 of

Part A of this Admission Document (under the heading ‘The Oxlana Heads of Agreement' in the case of Section

4). Whilst the Oxiane Heads of Agreement is a binding agreement, it remains subject to formal documentation as

discussed further In paragraph (Ix) below. Other material terms of the Oxlana Heads of Agreement are:

i) Oxiana will earn its percentage interest in the oompany that holds the KSK Cow or a company or companies
holding the shares in such company. as agreed by the parties. Oxlana requires and KGC will ensure that
such company or companies hold no other assets or interesm other than the KSK CoW and have no
liabilities (other than commitments in relation to the KSK COW). Oxlarla will conduct due diligence on these
companies during the Initial Period (as deﬁned In Part A) with a view to the parties reaching agreement on
the manner of eem in by the expiration of that period.

II) Oxiana may withdraw at any time during the Sole Funding Period (as deﬁned in Part A) by notice in writing to
the Company. The Company will have an option to acquire the interest held by Oxiena at the time of
Withdrawal for 50% of the total expenditure to the date of withdrawal less the amount expended during the
Initial Period (being a minimum of US$25 million). It the Company does not exercise this option to acquire
within 60 days. Oxiana will be free to sell its interest to a third party.

lii) Oxlana will contribute $20,000 per month during the initial Period to the administration overheads of KSK In
Indonesia. If the “Joint Venture' proceeds to the Soie Funding Period. the parties will agree on a continuing
contribution by Oxiana to overheads of KSK it and to the extent that Oxiana continues to use KSK as a
vehicle for payment of expenditure and KSK continues to provide administrative support to Oxiane through
the Sole Funding Period, All such sums so contributed by Oxlana will form part of the expenditure by Oxlana
to earn its interest.

iv) KSK will continue to fund its community development activities through YTS during the Initial Period. If the
Joint Venture proceeds to the Sole Funding Period. Oxiana will fund all community relations associated with
the KSK CoW and the Joint Venture adlvltles which will, subject to satisfactory due diligence. include
continuation and funding of YTS on programs agreed by the management committee of the Joint Venture.

V) During the Initial Period and. if Oxiana elects to proceed to the Sole Funding Period. oxlana must ensure ‘
that the minimum expenditure commitments and other minimum obligations relating to the KSK Cow are ‘
satisﬁed in full. ;

VI) The Joint Venture agreement will contain all other terms usually contained [n agreements of this nature 1
Including (but not limited to): ‘
> Oxiana will be manager during the Initial Period and the Sole Funding Period and otherwise for so long i

as it holds a majority interest In the Joint Venture (subject to any right of the Company to take over as I

I

—— I
Kallmantan Gold Corporaﬁon Limited 1
AIM Admission Document ‘

I

I


manager). Oxiana will not be entitled to any remuneration for penonning Its function as manager and
acknowledges it is the intention of both parties to work and interact together.

> All budgets and work programs must be submitted to a management committee for approval.

> Management committee decisions will be made by majority decision with each party having voting
rights In proportion to its interest In the Joint Venture. provided that Oxiana shall be deemed to hold a
majority interest during the Initial Period and the Sole Funding Period.

> Each party will have a first right of refusal over any sale or tmnsfer of the other partys Interest.

> In respect of the company or companies In which Oxlana earns an interest - so long as the Company
has an interest in the Joint Venture it will be entitled to appoint nominees to board of each company In
proportion to its Interest in the Joint Venture. Oxlana will be entitled to appoint directors to the boards
of such companies with Oxiana holding a majority vote on the boards and at shareholder meetings
during the Sole Funding Period and tar so long as It holds the majority interest in the Joint Venture.

> A Party's interest will be diluted If It ceases to fund Its share of Expenditure (after the Sole Funding
Period).

> Standard force majeure and confidentiality provisions.

vii) Subject to due dlllgence and Identlflcatlon of the area of the prospect. Oxlana agrees in principle. to
relinquishment of an area known as the Liang Bulau diamond prospect from the north of the KSK Cow as
and when requested by the Company and PCK and for the prospect to be subsequently acquired by the
Company or it’s nominee.

viii) Oxiana acknowledges that it will obtain valuable information from the Company regarding the prospective
nature of the area covered by the KSK Cow and its surrounding areas. To this end. during the term of the
Joint Venture. Oxi‘ana (and its related entities) shall not stake. lease or otherwise acquire any Interest In a
mineral pmspect within ﬁfteen (15) kilometres of the boundaries of the KSK COW unless it does so using
KSK as the vehicle.

ix) The formation of the Joint Venture shall he Slejed to due diligence by Oxlana In relation to the Company,
KIC and the subsidiaries of the Company and KIC and the KSK COW and to formal documentation of the
terms of the Joint Venture in a joint venture agreement. To this end. the partla agree to negotiate in good
faith the terms of a formal Joint Venture agreement that is consistent with the terms of the HOA. This is
currently in process.

x) 0n and from signing of the Oxiana Heads of Agrement. Oxiana shall have the exctuslve right to earn an
Interest In the KSK COW and the Company will not invite expressions of interest, enter into negotiations. offer
any interest in. sell. transfer. encumber or otherwise deal with Its Interest In the KSK Cow or the companies
which hold an Interest In the KSK COW (direct or indirect). In the event that Oxi’ana gives notice to the
Company on condusion of Oxiana's due diligence that It does not wish to continue with the Joint Venture.
Oxlana's exclusivity shall cease and the Company shall be released from its obligation.

xi) The Company will give Oxiana full access to all areas held under the KSK COW and all data related to
exploration on the KSK Cow to date. to allow a full and detailed assessment of areas to be undertaken.
Such information will. however, be subject to standard conﬁdentiality restrictions.

xii) This agreement will be governed by the laws of the State of Western Australia. Australia.

b) Nomad Engagement Agreement

Under an agreement dated 26 July 2006 between the Company and RFC. the Company appointed RFC as Its

Nominated Adviser tor the purposes or the AIM Rules. which will continue until terminated by either the Company

or RFC giving the other party 2 months written notice (the engagement may also be terminated In certaln other

circumstances).

Under the terms of the agreement. the Company agreed to pay RFC fees of AS200.000 In respect of Admission

(and subject to regulatory approval and necessary adjustments. up to A5100.000 0! these fees may be satisﬁed

by the issue of 425.000 Shares) and an annual fee of A5603th payable quarterty In advance from Admission To

date. A$37.500 of the fee In relation to Admission has been paid to RFC. The Company also agreed to issue RFC
on Admission. 0.65 million share purchase warrants exercisable at C5027 each any time within 2 years aﬂer

Admission.

RFC agrees to provide services required by the Company In relation to the Admission and the Company accepts

certain obligations including. amongst other things to advise and consult with RFC in relation to certain matters.

The Company also agrees to indemnify RFC in relation to any loss or damage suffered by RFC that Is In any way

related to the engagement except In certain rﬁtrlcted circumstances

Kalimanran Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


c) Broker Engagement Agreement a ‘
Under an agreement dated 11 May 2006 between the Company and Keith Bayley Rogers the Company appointed
Keith Bayley Rogers as its Broker for the purposes oithe AIM Rules. The agreement may be terminated by either i
the Company or Keith Bayley Rogers giving the other pany 30 days written notice. 
Under the terms of the agreement. the Company agreed to pay KBR a fee of 230.000 (plus VAT) upon Admission 
and an annual retainer of £20.00!) payable quanerly in advance from Admission. If the Company terminates the .
agreement at any time during the year following its Admission. It shall be liable to pay Keith Bayley Rogers the i
balance outstanding on the retainer as if the agreement had been laminated 1 year alter the date of Admission. 1
The Company also agreed to pay Kelth aniey Rogers in respect of any placing: a commission of 3% on all
monies raised: a further 2% on all monies raised through Keith Bayley Rogers; and Issue Keith Bayiey Rogers
Warrants to subscribe for 3% oi the number of shares Issued under the placing. exercisable at the placing price at .
any time over 2 years from issue. I
The agreement also provided for Keith Hayley Rogers to act as corporate stockbrokerv and to use its reasonable
endeavours to raise funds tor the private placement completed in August 2006 for which they were paid
(3187.377 and were issued 398.127 Warrants exercisable at 050.23 per share by 16 August 2008,
KBR agrees to provide services required by the Company and the Company accepts certain obligations including.
amongst other things to provide Keith Bayley Rogers with certain inionnation and access and to consult with
and/or seek Keith Bayley Roger’s approval in relation to financial promotions and announcements, The Company
also agrees to indemnify Keith Hayley Rogers and certain other persons associated with Keith Bayley Rogers In
relation to any loss or damage suflered by Keith Bayley Rogers or those other persons because of or in relation to
certain matters connected with the agreement. except In certain restricted circumstances.
10 Taxation Implications for UK Residents or Investing In the company
The following statements are of a general and non—exhaustive nature based on the Directors understanding of
the current tax legislation and practice of the tax authorities In Bermuda and the United Kingdom and may not
apply to certain Shareholders In the Company. such as Shareholders Wno do not hold their shares as capital
assets. dealers In securities. Shareholders who own (directly or Indirectly) 10% or more of the Company.
insurance companies and collective investment schemes. They relate to persons who are resident. ordinarily
resident and domiciled in the United Kingdom for tax purposes. who are beneﬁcial owners of Shares and who
hold their Shares as an investment.
An Investment in the Company involves a number of complex tax considerations. Changes in tax legislation in
any of the countries In which the Company will have investments or in Bermuda. Canada or the United Kingdom
or in Indonesia (or in any other country in which a subsidiary of the Company through which investments are
made. is located). or changes In tax treaties negotiated by those countries. could adversely affect the returns from
the Company to investors.
Prospective Investors should consult and rely upon the advice of their professional advisch on the
potential tax consequences of subscribing for, purchasing, holding, convening or selling Shares under
the laws of their country and/or state of citizenship. domicile or residence.
Bermuda taxation
Geneml
In Bermuda there are no taxes on proﬁts. income or dividends. nor Is there any capital gains tax, estate duty or
death duty. Proﬁts can be accumulated and It Is not obligatory for a company to pay dividends. Each company ls
required to pay an annual government fee. which is determined on a sliding scale by reference to the amount of
the compaan authorised share capital and share premium account.
Pursuant to existing legislation the Minister of Finance is authorised to give an assurance to an exempted
company (currently for the period ending on 28 March 2016) that. in the event of there being enacted In Bermuda
any leglslatlon Imposing tax computed on proﬁts or income or computed on any capital asset. gain or appreciation.
then the imposition of any such tax shall not be applicable to such entities or any oi their operations. In addition.
there may be included an assurance that any such tax or any tax in the nature of estate duty or Inheritance tax.
shall not be applicable to the Shares, debentures or other obligations of such entities. On 20 November 1997 the
Company was granted such an assurance until 28 March 2016.
Kaiimannan Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


Sramp duty

Shamp duty is not chargeable in respect of the incorpolation. registration or licensing of an exempted company.
nor. subject to certain minor exceptions. on Its bansacticns including those involving its share capital.

UK taxation of dividends and distributions

The Company will not be required to withhold UK tax from dividends paid on the Shares. A Shareholder who is
resident or ordinarin resident and domiciled for tax purposes in the UK. or a Shareholder who Is carrying on a
trade. profession or vocation in the UK through a branch or agency (or, in the case of a company. through a
permanent establishment) in connection with which the shares are held will. depending upon the Shareholders
particular circumstances. be subject to UK income tax or corporation tax as the case may be on the amount of
any dividends paid by the Company. An Individual Shareholder who is resident In the UK for tax purposes and
who receives a dividend from the Company will be taxable at the dividend ordinary rate (10% in 2006-07) and/or l
(depending on the amount of the holders overall taxable income) at the dividend upper rate (32.5% in 200607). A ‘
Shareholder resident outside the UK may also be subject to foreign taxation on dividend income under local law

If the dividend has been subject to non-UK withholding tax ('WH1"). the amount of the dividend received plus the l
WHT will be included in the assessable Income of the UK resident or ordinarily resident Shareholder. In these i
circumstances the Shareholder should be entitled to a credit for the foreign tax paid, The credit would be limited l
to the lesser of the WHT or the UK tax payable on the combined amounts of the dividend plus WHT. If the WHT
exceeds the UK tax payable on the dividend. the excess is neither creditable nor repayable.

Dividends paid to a UK resident company Shareholder will be assessable income 0' the Shareholder. It the
dividend has been subject to WHT it will be treated as described above.

UK resident or ordinarily resident Shareholders who are not domiciled in the UK may only be subject to UK
income tax on dividends paid by the Company when the dividend is. or is deemed to be. remitted to the UK.
provided that the Company's share register is situated outside the UK. Currently. the Company has a primary
register in Bermuda and a branch register In Canada There is no guarantee that the Company's share register
will however remain outside the UK.

UK taxation of chargeable gains

A disposal. or deemed disposal. of Shares in the Company by a Shareholder who is either resident or ordinarily
resident for tax purposes in the UK will. depending on the Shareholders circumstances and subject to any
available exemption or relief. give rise to a chargeable gain or allowable loss for the purposes of the taxation of
chargeable gains in the UK. Broadly. Shareholders who are not resident or ordinarily resident for tax purposes in
the UK will not be liable for UK tax on capital gains realised on the disposal of their Shares unless such Shares
are used. held or acquired for the purposes of a trade. profession or vocation carried on in the UK through a
branch or agency or for the purpose of such branch or agency or. in the case of companies. through a UK
permanent establishment Such Shareholders may be subject to foreign taxation on any gain under local law.

A Shareholder who is an individual and who has. on or after 17 March 1393. temporarily ceased to be resident or
ordinarily resident for tax purposes in the UK for a period of less than ﬁve complete tax years and who disposes of
the Shares during that period may also be liable to UK taxation of chargeable gains (subject to any available
exemption or relief) as if. broadly. the disposal was made in such shareholder‘s year of return no the UK

UK stamp duty and stamp duty reserve tax (“solar”)

Issue

No stamp duty. or SDRT, will be payable on the allotment or issue of the Shares. provided that they are not Issued
to a nominee or agent whose business Includes the provision of clearance services or the Issuance of depository
receipts.

Transfer

Transfers of Shares outside the CREST system will generally be liable to stamp duty on the Instrument of transfer
at a rate of (currently) 0.5 per cent ofthe amount or value of the consideration given for the Shares (rounded up to
the nearest £5). but only if the instrument of transfer ls executed in the UK or. it executed outside the UK. It is
brought into the UK for registration upon a register maintained by the Company in the UK Stamp duty is normally
paid by the transteree of the relevant shares or securltla. if the Shares are registered on a register maintained in
the UK. an agreement to transfer them will generally be subject to SDRT at a rate or (currently) 0.5 per cent of the
agreed consideration If, however, the agreement ls subsequently perfected by an instrument oitlansfer which is
duly stamped before the expiry of six years from the date of the agreement (or. It later. the date upon which it
becomes unconditional) any SDRT will be cancelled or. to the extent already paid. will. upon a claim being made.
be repaid. SDRT ls normally the liability of the person to whom the shares will be transferred under the
agreement.

Kalimarli‘an Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


l

Entry into CREST
No stamp duty or SDRT should arise on the transfer of the Shares to a group company of the UK Registrar. to
hold in its capacity as depository, nor on the subsequent issue by the depository to that transferor of depositary
inierﬁ'ts representing the underlying Shares in uncertlﬁceted form (which are eligible for settlement through
CREST).
Transfers Mth/‘ri CREST
Depository Interese representing Shares may be tmnsferred In a paperless form within CREST. Special rules
apply to these uncertiticated depository arrangements. The depository arrangements to be put in place by the
Company shouid sadsfy the criteria for SDRT exempt depository Interests. Any such transfer of the depository
Interests should therefore not be subject to stamp duty or SDRT. provided the Shares are not registered on a
register which is kept in the UK, they continue to be listed on a recognised stock exchange, such as the TSX
Venture Exchange. and so long as such depository interests are only capable of settlement in CREST.
UK Inheritance tax
The Shares will not be assets situated in the UK for UK inheritance tax purposes unless they are registered on the
UK branch register. A gift of such assets by. or the death of. an Individual holder who is domiciled. or is deemed
to be domiciled under certain rules relating to long residence or previous domicile. may (subiect to certain
exemptions and reliefs) give rise to a liability to UK inheritance tax. For inheritance tax purposes a transfer of V
assets at less than market value may be treated as a gift and particular mles may appiy where the donor reserves
or retains some beneﬁt.
It the Company establishes a UK branch register. any Shares registered on that register will be regarded as
situated in the UK tor these purposes.
Non-UK Residents
Persons who are note resident or ordinarily resident (or, if resident or ordinarily resident are not domiciled] In the
UK, Includan those Individuals and companies which trade In the UK through a branch. agency or permanent
establishment and who subscribe for the Shares in the course of that trade. are recommended to seek the advice
of profaslonal advisers In relation to their taxation obligations In both the UK and any other jurisdiction in which
they may be liable to tax.
The above statements are intended as a geneml guide only to the current taxation regime In the United
Kingdom and are not exhaustive. It Is the responsibility of all persons to sallsfy themselves of the
particular taxation treatment that applies to them by consulting their own professional tax advisers before
Investing In Shares. Taxatlon consequences will depend on particular circumstances.
Neither the Company nor any of Its officers. employees. agents and advisers accepts any liability or
responsibility in respect of taxation consequences connected with an Investment In Shares in the
Company.
11 Working Capital
The Directors. having made due and careful enquiry. . are of the opinion that the working capital available to the
Company and the Group will, from the time or the Company's Admission. be sufﬁcient for the requirements of the
Group for at least 12 months from the date of Admission
12 Corporate Governance
The Directors acknowledge the importance of the guidelines set out In the revised Combined Code on Corporate
Governance published In June 2006 ("Combined Code“). They therefore intend to comply with the Combined
Code so far as is appropriate having regard to Kalimantan Gold size and nature as a Junior exploration company
The following is a summary of Kallmantan Gold’s approach to corporate govemancet
Role and Responsiblllties of the Board of Directors
The Companys corporate govemanoe policies take Into account characteristics speciﬁc to a Junior exploration
company. The Board has general responsibility for the control. supervision and management of the affairs of the
company with the object'we of enhancing shareholder value. The Bye-laws provide that the Board shall manage
the business of the Company and may pay all expenses Incurred in promoting and Incorporating the Company.
The Board is authorised to exercise all the powers of the Company on the Company's behalf.
The Board fulﬁlls Its mandate directly and through its committees at regularly scheduled meetings or as required,
Kelimantan Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


The frequency of meetings may be Increased and the nature of the agenda items may be changed depending
upon the state of the Company's arrairs and In light or opportunities or risks which the Company faces. The
directors are kept informed of the Company's operations at these meetings as well as through reports and
discussions with management on matters within their particular areas Di expertise.

The Board of Directors of Kalimantan Gold is comprised offour directors. Peter Bojtos and Murray Clapham
(other than in relation to matters regarding KIC, of which he is a director) are considered by the Company to be
independent (although they may not be considered Independent under the Combined Codei Rahman Conneily,
as Chairman of KIC and also as a member of management is not, and Doris Meyer as a member of management
is not. In determining whether a director is independent. the Board chiefly considers whether the director has a
relationship which could, or could be perceived to, interfere with the director‘s ability to objectively assess the
performance of managemenL

The Brd is responsible for approving long-term strategic plans and annual operating plans and budgets
recommended by management and ensuring adequate internal controls are established and maintained, Board
consideration and approval is also required for material contracts and business transactions, and all debt and
equity ﬁnancing transactions

The Board delegates to management responsibility for meeting dellned corporate objectives. implementing
approved strategic and operating plans. carrying on the Company’s business in the ordinary course. managing the
Company's cash ﬂow. evaluating new business opportunities. recruiting staff and complying with applicable
regulatory requirements. The Board also looks to management to fumish recommendations respecting corporate
objectives, Iong-temi sizateglc plans and annual operating plans.

Potentlal Conﬂch oflriiierest

Any Director who had a potential oonilict of interest would not participate in the taking of decisions where such
conﬂict might exist. As noted in Section 2 of Part A, as part of the Oxiana Heads of Agreement it is contemplated
that the current ownership structure of KSK may be renegotiated. and the Board recognises and will endeavour to
mitigate the potential ooniiict of Interest held by Mr Connolly and Mr Clapliam (as directors and shareholders of
KIC) in any such negotiations by having Mrs Meyer and Mr Boltos acting as a sub—committee for such
negotiations.

Ethical Buslrless Conduct

The Board monitors the ethical conduct of Kalirnantan Gold and ensures that It complies with applicable legal and
regulatory requirements. such as those of relevant securities commissions and stock exdrianges. The Board has
found that the ﬁduciary duties placed on individual directors by the Company‘s governing corporate legislation and
the common law. as well as the ratrlctions placed by applicable corporate legislation on the Individual director‘s
participation in decisions of the Board in which the director has an Interest. have been sufﬁcient to ensure that the
Board operates independently of management, ethically and in the best interests of the Company.

Nomlnation of Directors 1
The Board considers the appropriateness of its size and composition on an ongoing basis, If it is considered,
given the existing mix of skills and experience of the Board and the strategic demands of the Company, that the
Board would beneﬁt from the services of a new director. then a search for a suitable candidate would be
undertaken. The Board has not appointed a nominating committee because the Board fulﬁlls these functions.
Compensation l
The Board of Directors ls responsible for determining all forms of compensation to be granted to the Chief l
Executive Ofﬁcer of the Company and the directors, and for reviewing the Chief Executive Ofﬁceﬂ i
recommendations respecting compensation of the other senior executives of the Company. to ensure such
arrangements reﬂect the responsibilities and risks associated with each position. When determining the
compensation of Its executive ofﬁcers. the Board considers the following issues: i) rewiting and retaining
executives critical to the success of the Company and the enhancement 01 shareholder value: II) providing fair and I
compeﬂtlve compensation; iii) balancing the Interests of management and Kalimanlan Gold‘s shareholders; and iv)
rewarding performance. both on an individual basis and with respect to operations in general. In order to achieve
these objectives. the compensation paid to the Compaan executive ofﬁcers consists of a base salary and long-
terrn incentive In the form of stock options.

Kaiimanran Gold Corporation Limited

AIM Admission Document


Committees of me Board ofDirectors V
The Board has appolnted an Audit Committee and no others. The Audit Committee is comprised of Doris Meyer,
Peter Bojtos and Murray Claphamt While the Board may recommend a Chairman for the Audit Committee, the '
Audit Committee shall have the discretion to appoint the Chairman from amongst its members, and there is
currently no permanent Chairman. At least one (1) member of the Audit Committee shall be Independent and the
Board and the Audit Committee shall endeavour to appoint a maiority of independent directors to the Audit
Committee, who in the opinion of the Board, would be free from a relationship which would interfere with the
exercise of the Audit Committee members’ Independent Judgment. The primary function of the Audit Committee is
to assist the Board in fulﬁlling Its oversight responsibilities related to the quality and Integrity ofﬂnanclal reporting,
the system of internal control and management of ﬁnancial risks, the audit process, and the Compaan process
for monitoring compliance with laws and regulations and contractual obligations.
Assessments
The Board has not adopted formal procedures for assessing the effectiveness of the Board, its Audit Committee or
individual directors,
Share Dealing Code
The Board has adopted a share dealing code which sets out the procedures and restrictions on dealings by
Directors and senior management in the Company's securities and is consistent with the AIM Rules and the miss
of the TSX Venture Exchange In respect of such dealings. In particular. it prohibits any such dealings at any time
whilst they or the Company are in possession of non-public price sensitive information and during any 'Close
Period” as deﬁned In the AIM Rules. It also requires the Chairman of the Board to be notiﬁed before any such
dealings and for any such dealings to be Immediately reported to the Company’s Nomad, the AIM market and the
TSX Venture Exchange.
13 General
a) Expenses
The estimated expenses of or incidental to the Admission that are payable by the Company are set out in
Section 9 of Part A of this Admission Document.
b) Financial position
Save as disclosed in this Admission Document there has been no signiﬁcant change In the ﬁnancial or trading
position of Kalimentan Gold since 30 June 2006.
c) Litigation and arbitration
There are no governmental, legal or arbitration proceedings (including any proceedings which are pending or
threatened) of which the Company is aware, which may have or have had during the 12 months immediately
preceding the date of mls Admission Document. El signiﬁcant effect on the ﬁnancial posltlon or profitability of the
Company or the Group.
d) Exceptional factors
Save as disclosed in this Admission Document, the Directors are unaware of any exceptional factors which have
Influenced Kalimantan Gold‘s recent activitia.
e) Investments In progress
Save as disclosed in this Admission Document, there are no signiﬁcant investments in progress The Company
continuously evaluates new investment opportunities. However, no signiﬁcant investment commitments in relation
to any such opponunltles have been made by the Company as at the date of this Admission Document
7) Dependence on licences, contracts etc
Kallmantan Gold does not depend on any patents or other Intellectual property rights, licences or particular
industry, commercial or ﬁnancial contmcis or new manufactuan processes save as disclosed In this Admission
Document.
Kalimanian Gold Corporation Limited
AIM Admission Document


e) Related party transactions 
Save as disclosed In this Admission Document, there are no related party transactions which are, as a single
transaction or In their entirety. material to the Issuer which have been entered Into from 1 December 2003 (ie the
date from which the historical ﬁnancial information in Part D of this Admission Document relates) up to the date of
this Admission Document
g) Consents
SRK has given their written consent to being named as the Competent Person in this Admission Document1 to the
inclusion in Part C of this Admission Document of their Competent Person‘s Report and to all statements referring
to that report In the form and context in which they appear and have not withdrawn such consent before the date
of this Admission Dowment,

Ernst & Young LLP have given their written consent to the inclusion in Section 1 of Pan D of this Admission
Document of their independent accountants report and to all statements referring to that report in the form and
context in which they appeart

Hadiputramo. Hadinoto & Partners have given their written consent to being named as solicitors to the Company
(In Indonesia — regarding titles), to the inclusion in Part E 0' this Admission Document of their indonesian legal
report and to all statements referring to that report in the form and context In which they appear and have not
withdrawn such oonsent before the date of this Admission Document,

The following persons have given and not withdrawn their written consent to being named in this Admission
Documertt but have not made any statements that are Included In this Admission Document or statements
identiﬁed in this Admission Document as being based on any statements made by those persons: ‘

- RFC as Nominated Advisor: and

. Keith Bayley Rogers as Broker.

Other than as speciﬁed above, to the maximum extent permitted by law. each oi the persons referred to above
expressly disclaims and takes no responsibility for any part of this Admission Document other than the references
to their name.

14 Availability of Admission Document

Copies of the Admission Document will be available during normal business hours on any business day free of
charge to the public at the ofﬁces of Keith Bayley Rogers and on the Compenye website (www.kalimentan.oom)
for a period of one month from the date of Admission.

Dated: 7 December 2006

Kalimsntan Gold Corpomﬁon Limited

AIM Admission Document 1 37

