
Corporate Governance Statement
This Corporate Governance Statement reports the governance processes and procedures in place at Berkut Minerals 
Limited as at 1 July 2016 and has been approved by the board of the Company as at 20 July 2016. This Corporate 
Governance Statement is also provided on our website at www.berkutminerals.com.au, together with copies of our 
Board and Board Committee Charters and some of the Company’s key policies.
Commitment to Good Governance
The directors of Berkut Minerals Limited (“Berkut” or the “Company”) believe that effective corporate governance 
improves company performance, enhances corporate social responsibility and benefits all stakeholders. Governance 
practices are not a static set of principles and the company will assess its governance practices on an annual basis. 
Changes and improvements are made in a substance over form manner, which appropriately reflect the changing 
circumstances of the company as it grows and evolves. Accordingly, the Board has established a number of practices 
and policies to ensure that these intentions are met and that all shareholders are fully informed about the affairs of 
the Company.
The  Company  has  a  corporate  governance  section  on  the  website  at  www.berkutminerals.com.au.  The  section 
includes details on the company’s governance arrangements and copies of relevant policies and charters.
ASX Corporate Governance Council’s Principles and Recommendations (3nd Edition)
Berkut  will  review  all  of  its  corporate  governance  practices  and  policies  on  an  annual  basis  to  ensure  they  are 
appropriate  for  the  Company’s  current  stage  of  development.  The  establishment  of  the  corporate  governance 
practices and policies was made with consideration to the new ASX Corporate Governance Council’s Principles and 
Recommendations (third edition) (‘CGRs’).
The following table outlines which of the ASX recommendations the Company has not complied with.  Reasons for 
non-compliance are explained in this report.
ASX Recommendation
Description
1.5
A listed entity should: 
a)  have a diversity policy which includes requirements for the board or a relevant 
committee  of  the  board  to  set  measurable  objectives  for  achieving  gender 
diversity and to assess annually both the objectives and the entity’s progress in 
achieving them;
b)  disclose the policy or a summary of it; and 
c)  disclose  as  at  the  end  of  each  reporting  period  the  measurable  objectives  for 
achieving gender diversity set by the board or a relevant committee of the board 
in accordance with the entity’s diversity policy and its progress towards achieving 
them, and either: 
1.
the  respective  proportions  of  men  and  women  on  the  board,  in  senior 
executive  positions  and  across  the  whole  organisation  (including  how  the 
entity has defined “senior executive” for these purposes); or
if the entity is a “relevant employer” under the Workplace Gender Equality Act, the 
entity’s most recent “Gender Equality Indicators”, as defined in and published under 
that Act.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 1 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
PRINCIPLE 1 - LAY SOLID FOUNDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT BY THE BOARD
Recommendation 1.1
A listed entity should disclose: 
(a) the respective roles and responsibilities of its board and management; and 
(b) those matters expressly reserved to the board and those delegated to management.
The Board of Directors is collectively responsible for the success of the Company. In order to achieve this objective, 
the  Board  must  promote  and  protect  the  interests  of  shareholders  and  other  stakeholders.  The  Board  must  also 
ensure that the Company complies with all of its contractual, statutory and legal obligations.
The conduct of the Board, as well as being governed by federal and state legislation, the ASX Listing Rules and the 
Common Law, is also regulated by the Company’s constitution, Code of Conduct and other Company policies.
The roles and responsibilities of the Board and the Senior Management (“Executive’s”) are set out in the Company’s 
Board and Executive Charter, of which a copy is available on the Company’s website at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
The Board and Executive Charter provides that the Board has the following key responsibilities:
  leading and setting the strategic direction/objectives of the Company; 
  appointing the Chairman of the Board; 
  appointing, and when necessary replacing, the Managing Director or CEO (Collectively referred to as Managing
Director);
  approving the appointment, and when necessary replacement, of Executives and the Company Secretary; 
  overseeing  the  Executive’s  implementation  of  the  Company’s  strategic  objectives  and  the  Executive’s
performance generally;
  approving operating budgets, major capital expenditure and significant acquisitions and divestitures; 
  overseeing the integrity of the Company’s accounting and corporate reporting systems, including the external 
audit,  satisfying itself financial statements released to the market fairly and accurately reflect the Company’s 
financial position and performance;
  overseeing the Company’s processes and procedures for making timely and balanced disclosure of all material 
information  that  a  reasonable  person  would  expect  to  have  a  material  effect  on  the  price  or  value  of  the 
Company’s securities;
  reviewing, ratifying and monitoring the effectiveness of the Company’s risk management framework, corporate
governance policies and systems designed to ensure legal compliance; and
  approving the Company’s remuneration framework.
The Board has delegated responsibility for the day to day management of the Company to the Managing Director 
who is supported by the Executives. However, the Board remains ultimately responsible for the strategic direction of 
the Company.
The Board and Executive Charter provides that the Managing Director has the following key responsibilities:
  overseeing the day-to-day operations and administration of the Company; 
  leading and supervising the Executive’s; and 
  keeping the Board informed of any material issues or developments within the Company;
The charter also states that the Managing Director receives support from the Executive’s in respect of:
  implementing the strategic direction/objectives provided by the Board; 
  supplying the Board with required information in a timely and clear manner; 
  developing  control  and  accountability  systems  in  respect  of  compliance,  risk  management  and  corporate
governance;
  operating within the risk appetite set by the Board; and 
  maintaining accurate financial and other reports.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 2 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
Recommendation 1.2
A listed entity should: 
a)  undertake appropriate checks before appointing a person, or putting forward to security holders a candidate for
election, as a director; and
b)  provide security holders with all material information in its possession relevant to a decision on whether or not
to elect or re-elect a director.
As stipulated in the New CGRs, background checks are now carried out on all new directors prior to their submission 
to security holders for election. These checks include: gaining character references; confirming the experience and 
education of the new director; and checking that the new Director has not been bankrupt.
The Company ensures that all material information in its possession relevant to a shareholder’s decision whether to 
elect or re-elect a director, including the information referred to in Recommendation 1.2, is provided to shareholders 
in the Company’s Notice of Annual General Meeting.
Recommendation 1.3
A listed entity should have a written agreement with each director and senior executive setting out the terms of 
their appointment.
Each director and Executive of the Company has an agreement in writing with the Company which sets out the key 
terms  and  conditions  of  their  appointment  including  their  duties,  rights  and  responsibilities  and  (to  the  extent 
applicable) the matters referred to in the commentary to Recommendation 1.3.
Recommendation 1.4
The  company  secretary  of  a  listed  entity  should  be  accountable  directly  to  the  board,  through  the  chair,  on  all 
matters to do with the proper functioning of the board.
The Company Secretary has a direct line of reporting to the Chairman and is responsible for:  

advising  and  supporting  the  Chairman  and  the  Board  and  its  committees  to  manage  the  day  to  day 
governance framework of the Company; 
assisting  with  Board  effectiveness  by  monitoring  whether  applicable  Board  and  committee  policies, 
procedures and charters are followed and coordinating timely completion and despatch of Board agendas 
and papers; and 
assisting with all matters to do with the proper functioning of the Board including advising on governance 
matters and assisting with induction and  professional development of directors.


The  responsibilities  of  the  Company  Secretary  are  set  out  in  the  Board  and  Executive  Charter  located  at: 
www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Recommendation 1.5
A listed entity should: 
a)
b) 
c)
have a diversity policy which includes requirements for the board or a relevant committee of the board to set 
measurable  objectives  for  achieving  gender  diversity  and  to  assess  annually  both  the  objectives  and  the 
entity’s progress in achieving them; 
disclose the policy or a summary of it; and 
disclose as at the end of each reporting period the measurable objectives for achieving gender diversity set 
by the board or a relevant committee of the board in accordance with the entity’s diversity policy and its 
progress towards achieving them, and either: 
1.
the respective proportions of men and women on the board, in senior executive positions and across 
the whole organisation (including how the entity has defined “senior executive” for these purposes); or 
if the entity is a “relevant employer” under the Workplace Gender Equality Act, the entity’s most recent 
“Gender Equality Indicators”, as defined in and published under that Act.
2.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 3 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
The Company is committed to workplace diversity through acting in fairness and without prejudice. The Company 
believes that decision-making is enhanced through diversity and supports and encourages diversity at all levels of 
the  organisation 
located  at 
www.berkutminerals.com.au.
in  accordance  with  the  Company’s  Diversity  Policy,  a  copy  of  which
is
Under  the  principles  outlined  in  the  Company’s  Nomination  and  Remuneration  Committee  Charter  the  Board  is 
responsible  for  setting  measurable  objectives  for  achieving  gender  diversity  and  annually  reviewing  any  such 
objectives  and  the  Company’s  progress  towards  achieving  them.  A  copy  of  the  Nomination  and  Remuneration 
Committee Charter is available at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Given the size of the Company the Directors do not consider it appropriate to set measurable objectives in relation 
to diversity.  Notwithstanding this the Company strives to provide the best possible opportunities for current and 
prospective employees of all backgrounds in such a manner that best adds to overall shareholder value and which 
reflects the values, principles and spirit of the Company’s Diversity Policy.
As at 1 July 2016 the Company had a total of 1 women employee out of a total of 2 employees, with one women in 
a senior management position and no women on the board.
Recommendation 1.6
A listed entity should:
a)  have and disclose a process for periodically evaluating the performance of the board, its committees and
individual directors; and
a)  disclose,  in  relation  to  each  reporting  period,  whether  a  performance  evaluation  was  undertaken  in  the
reporting period in accordance with that process.
The Board and Executive Charter provides that the Board’s performance shall be evaluated in such a manner as the 
Board deems appropriate. A copy of this Charter is available on the Company’s website.
In the coming year, each Director performance will be discussed informally, whereby the performance of individual 
members and the performance of the Board as a whole, will be assessed. A standalone board performance review 
may be conducted.
Recommendation 1.7
A listed entity should: 
a)  have and disclose a process for periodically evaluating the performance of senior executives; and 
b)  disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether a performance evaluation was undertaken in the reporting
period in accordance with that process.
The Company’s process for evaluating the performance of the Executive’s is stated in the Board and Executive 
Charter, a copy of which is available on the Company’s website.
The evaluation is required to include:
  assessment of performance against the requirements of the Board and Executive Charter;  
  measurement of performance against previously agreed key performance indicators (‘KPIs’); and 
  setting new KPIs.
A review of the performance of Executive’s will be carried out annually. The review will be conducted by the Chairman 
or Managing Director.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 4 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
PRINCIPLE 2 - STRUCTURE THE BOARD TO ADD VALUE
Recommendation 2.1
The board of a listed entity should: 
a)  have a nomination committee which:
1.  has at least three members, a majority of whom are independent directors; and 
2.
is chaired by an independent director,
and disclose: 
3. 
4. 
5.  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of times the committee met throughout the period and
the charter of the committee; 
the members of the committee; and
the individual attendance of the members at those meetings; or
b)  if it does not have a nomination committee, disclose that fact and the processes it employs to address board 
succession issues and to ensure that the board has the appropriate balance of skills, knowledge, experience, 
independence and diversity to enable it to discharge its duties and responsibilities effectively.
Given the size of the board it has been decided that there are no efficiencies to be gained from forming a separate 
nomination committee. The current board members carry out the roles that would otherwise be undertaken by a 
nomination committee and each director excludes himself from matters in which he has a personal interest.
The roles and responsibilities conducted by the full board to address board succession issues and to ensure that the 
board  has  the  appropriate  balance  of  skills,  knowledge,  experience,  independence  and  diversity  to  enable  it  to 
discharge its duties and responsibilities effectively include: 
  considering the size and composition of the Board; 
  assessing and determining the independent status of each director; 
  regularly determine whether each director has enough time to commit to carry out his or her responsibilities; 
  implementing a plan for identifying, assessing and enhancing director competencies; 
  developing and implementing processes to identify suitable candidates for nomination or appointment to the
Board;
  developing and implementing induction procedures for new directors; 
  developing,  implementing  and  reviewing  the  Company's  succession  plans  in  place  for  membership  of  the
Board and the Executives;
  developing and implementing processes for evaluating the performance of the Board and individual directors;
When deciding to appoint a new director or renew an existing director’s tenure, the Board takes into account: the 
number of directors necessary to add value to the Company; the specific skills sets or experience required by the 
Company at its current stage of growth; the decision-making and judgment skills a director might bring to the Board; 
and a director’s capacity to commit adequate time to the role.
Recommendation 2.2
A listed entity should have and disclose a board skills matrix setting out the mix of skills and diversity that the board 
currently has or is looking to achieve in its membership.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 5 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
As detailed on the Company website, the directors are all professionals with a wealth of experience in different areas 
relevant to Berkut’s business. Berkut is committed to ensuring the Board is comprised of directors who possess the 
appropriate mix of skills, expertise and diversity to adequately discharge its responsibilities and duties.
In the coming year, through the use of a board skills matrix, the Board will assess the need for additional or new 
directors and the value the current directors bring to the Board. The mix of skills comprised in the current Board, and 
that the Board would look to maintain and to build on, includes:
  resource sector experience; 
  technical expertise (including accounting, legal, exploration and mining operations); 
  governance and risk management; 
  debt and equity fundraising experience; 
  high level of business acumen; and 
  appropriate team orientated behavioural characteristics.
In saying that, the Board structure and composition will be reviewed as and when the company’s strategic direction 
and activities  change. The Company will only recommend the appointment of additional directors to your board 
where it believes the expertise and value added outweighs the additional cost.
Recommendation 2.3
A listed entity should disclose: 
a)  the names of the directors considered by the board to be independent directors; 
b)  if a director has an interest, position, association or relationship of the type described in Box 2.3 but the board 
is of the opinion that it does not compromise the independence of the director, the nature of the interest, 
position, association or relationship in question and an explanation of why the board is of that opinion; and
c)  the length of service of each director.
Director
Role
Profession
Non-
Executive
Independent
Mr Michael Bohm
Non-Executive Chairman  Mining  Professional  and
Yes
Mr Paul Payne
Director
Mr Justin Tremain
Director
Engineer
Mining  Professional  and 
Geologist
Executive  Director  and 
Investment Banker
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
office
In 
(years)
Less than 1
Less than 1
Less than 1
Recommendation 2.4
A majority of the board of a listed entity should be independent directors.
The Board is comprised of a majority of independent directors and has an independent Chairman.  The independent 
directors comprise Michael Bohm and Paul Payne.
The Company considers an independent director to be a non-executive director who:
  is not a substantial shareholder of the Company (as defined in section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth); 
  within the last 3 years has not been employed in an executive capacity by the Company; 
  within the last 3 years been a partner, director or senior employee of a provider of material professional services
or material consultant to the Company;
  is not a material supplier or customer of the Company; 
  has no material contractual relationship with the Company other than as a director of the Company; 
  has no close family ties with any person who falls within any of the categories above; and 
  has  not  been  a  director  of  the  Company  for  such  a  period  that  his  or  her  independence  may  have  been
compromised.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 6 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
The assessment of whether a director is considered independent (both from the perspective of the Company and 
the director) is based on the following materiality thresholds:
  payments made by the Company to the director or any of his associated entities for the provision of goods
and/or services does not exceed 2% of the annual gross expenditure of the Company; or
  payments received by the director for the provision of goods and/or services to the Company does not exceed
25% of the annual income or business turnover of the director or his associated entities.
To assist the directors of the Board with their independent decision making, the Board collectively, and each Director, 
has,  subject  to  prior  consultation  with  the  Chairman,  the  right  to  seek  independent  professional  advice  at  the 
Company’s expense.  A copy of such advice is required to be made available to all members of the Board.
Recommendation 2.5
The chair of the board of a listed entity should be an independent director and, in particular, should not be the 
same person as the Managing Director of the entity.
The Board is comprised of a majority of independent directors and has an independent chairman. As recommended 
by the CGRs and stipulated in the Company’s Board and Executive Charter, the Chairman and Managing Director are 
not the same individual. A copy of the Board and Executive Charter is available at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Recommendation 2.6
A  listed  entity  should  have  a  program  for  inducting  new  directors  and  provide  appropriate  professional 
development opportunities for directors to develop and maintain the skills and knowledge needed to perform their 
role as directors effectively.
In order for the new director to participate fully and actively in board decision-making at the earliest opportunity, an 
induction process is carried out immediately after appointment. This induction is facilitated by the Company Secretary 
and  involves  meeting  with  other  members  of  the  Board,  the  Managing  Director  and  the  Executives;  and  being 
provided with a pack of relevant documents and information.
All  directors  are  expected  to  maintain  skills  required  to  effectively  discharge  their  obligations  to  the  Company. 
Directors are encouraged to undertake continuing professional education which is paid for by the Company where 
appropriate.
PRINCIPLE 3 - PROMOTE ETHICAL AND RESPONSIBLE DECISION MAKING
Recommendation 3.1
A listed entity should: 
a)  have a code of conduct for its directors, senior executives and employees; and 
b)  disclose that code or a summary of it.
The Company has a Code of Conduct, Continuous Disclosure Policy, Diversity Policy and Security Trading Policy which 
set  out  the  standards  of  behaviour  expected  of  all  its  employees,  directors,  officers,  contractors  and  consultants. 
Copies of these documents are located at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 7 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
PRINCIPLE 4 - SAFEGUARD INTEGRITY IN FINANCIAL REPORTING
Recommendation 4.1
The board of a listed entity should: 
a)
have an audit committee which: 
1.  has  at  least  three  members,  all  of  whom  are  non-executive  directors  and  a  majority  of  whom  are
independent directors; and 
is chaired by an independent director, who is not the chair of the board,
2.
and disclose: 
3. 
4. 
5.
the charter of the committee; 
the relevant qualifications and experience of the members of the committee; and 
in relation to each reporting period, the number of times the committee met throughout the period and 
the individual attendances of the members of those meetings; or
if it does not have an audit committee, disclose the fact and the process it employs that independently verify 
and safeguard the integrity of its corporate reporting, including the processes for the appointment and removal 
of the external auditor and the rotation of the audit engagement partner.
b)
The Company does not have a separate Audit Committee. Given the size of the board it has been decided that there 
are no efficiencies to be gained from forming a separate audit committee. The current board members carry out the 
roles that would otherwise be undertaken by an Audit Committee.
The procedures detailed in the Audit and Risk Management Committee Charter continue to be relevant and outlines 
the process employed by the board of directors to independently verify and safeguard the integrity of its corporate 
reporting, including the processes for the appointment and removal of the external auditor and the rotation of the 
audit engagement partner, a copy of which is available at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Recommendation 4.2
The board of a listed entity should, before it approves the entity’s financial statements for a financial period, received 
from its Managing Director and CFO a declaration that, in their opinion, the financial records of the entity have been 
properly maintained and that the financial statements comply with the appropriate accounting standards and give 
a true and fair view of the entity and that the opinion has been formed on the basis of a sound system  of risk 
management and internal control which is operating effectively.
The  Managing  Director  and  CFO  will  provide  the  Board  with  a  declaration  in  accordance  with  S295A  of  the 
Corporations Act that all financial statements that will be lodged throughout the reporting period are founded on a 
sound system of risk management and internal compliance.
Recommendation 4.3
A listed entity that has an AGM should ensure that its external auditor attends its AGM and is available to answer 
questions from security holders relevant to the audit.
Representatives from the Company’s external auditor, Grant Thornton, will attend each AGM and will be available to 
answer questions from security holders relevant to the audit of the Company.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 8 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
PRINCIPLE 5 - MAKE TIMELY AND BALANCED DISCLOSURE
Recommendation 5.1
A listed entity should: 
a)  have a written policy for complying with its continuous disclosure obligations under the Listing Rules; and 
b)  disclose that policy or a summary of it.
The Company has a Continuous Disclosure Policy.  This policy outlines the disclosure obligations of the Company and 
its subsidiaries as required under the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (the “Corporations Act”) and the ASX Listing Rules.  
This  policy  is  designed  to  ensure  that  Berkut  complies  with  its  continuous  disclosure  obligations  under  the 
Corporations Act and the ASX Listing Rules such that:
  all investors have equal and timely access to material information; and  
  Berkut announcements are factual and presented in a clear and balanced manner.
All Berkut Group directors, officers and employees should observe the requirements set out in this policy.
The purpose of the policy is to:
  summarise the Company’s disclosure obligations in accordance with the Listing Rules and the Corporations
Act 2011 (Cth);
  explain what type of information needs to be disclosed; 
  identify who is responsible for disclosure; and 
  explain how individuals at the Company can contribute.
The Company Secretary is responsible for ensuring disclosure of information to the ASX. 
 
A copy of the Continuous Disclosure Policy is available from the corporate governance section of the company’s 
website at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
PRINCIPLE 6 - RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF SHAREHOLDERS
Recommendation 6.1
A listed entity should provide information about itself and its governance to investors via its website.
Information about the Company and its operations is located at: www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Information about the Company’s corporate governance (including links to the Company’s corporate governance 
policies and charters) is located on the Company’s website.
Recommendation 6.2
A  listed  entity  should  design  and  implement  an  investor  relations  program  to  facilitate  effective  two-way 
communication with investors.
The Company respects the rights of its shareholders and is committed to communicating effectively with them. The 
Company  has  a  Continuous  Disclosure  Policy  and  a  Shareholder  Communications  Policy 
located  at 
www.berkutminerals.com.au.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 9 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
The Chairman, the Managing Director and the Company Secretary have the primary responsibility for communication 
with shareholders. Information is communicated through:
  continuous disclosure to relevant security exchanges of all material information; 
  periodic disclosure through the annual, half year and quarterly financial reports; 
  notices of meetings and explanatory material; 
  investor presentations; 
  the annual general meeting; and 
  the Company’s website.
The Company also makes available a telephone number and email address for shareholders to make enquiries.
The Company’s website is updated with material announcements released to the ASX as soon as practicable after 
confirmation of release, by the ASX. In addition, shareholders’ can be notified by email of all material announcements 
by subscribing to the Company’s mailing list (this is done via the Company’s website).
Berkut shareholders are also provided an opportunity to ask questions at the Company’s AGM, which is also attended 
by the Company’s external auditor (who can answer questions about the annual audit).
Recommendation 6.3
A listed entity should disclose the policies and processes it has in place to facilitate and encourage participation at 
meetings of security holders.
The Company’s Shareholder Communication Policy sets out how the Company communicates with shareholders 
and the market effectively and is designed to promote a two-way dialogue, a copy of which is located at 
www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Recommendation 6.4
A listed entity should give security holders the option to receive communications from, and send communications 
to, the entity and its security registry electronically.
The  Company  welcomes  electronic  communications  from  its  Shareholders  via  its  publicised  email  address 
admin@berkutminerals.com.au.
Upon admission onto the Company’s share register the Company’s security registry provides shareholders with the 
option to receive communications from, and send communications to, the Company’s security registry electronically 
including the Annual Report and Notice of Meeting and electronic voting.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 10 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
PRINCIPLE 7 - RECOGNISE AND MANAGE RISK
Recommendation 7.1
The board of a listed entity should: 
a)  have a committee or committees to oversee risk, each of which:
is chaired by an independent director,
1.  has at least three members, a majority of whom are independent directors; and 
2. 
3.  and disclose: 
4. 
5. 
6.  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of times the committee met throughout the period
the charter of the committee; 
the members of the committee; and
b)
and the individual attendances of the members at those meetings; or
if it does not have a risk committee or committees that satisfy (a) above, disclose that fact and the processes 
it employs for overseeing the entity’s risk management framework.
The Company does not have a separate Risk Management Committee. Given the current size of the Company and 
board, the directors believe there are no efficiencies in forming a separate committee and the  board as a whole 
performs this role.
However  the  Company  does  have  an  Audit  and  Risk  Management  Charter  which  is  available  on  the  Company’s 
website at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
The Company does not have a single specific risk management policy, but rather, financial and operating risks are 
addressed through individual approved policies and procedures covering financial, contract management, safety and 
environmental activities of the company.
The Company also engages an insurance broking firm as part of the company’s annual assessment of the coverage 
for insured assets and risks. The results of all the various reviews and insurances are reported to the board at least 
annually.
The integrity of Berkut’s financial reporting relies upon a sound system of risk management and control. Accordingly, 
the Managing Director and Chief Financial Officer, to ensure management accountability, are required to provide a 
statement in writing to the board that the financial reports of Berkut are based upon a sound risk management policy.
The  board  believes  that  it  has  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  Company’s  key  risks  and  is  managing  them 
appropriately.
Recommendation 7.2
The board or a committee of the board should: 
a)
review the entity’s risk management framework at least annually to satisfy itself that it continues to be sounds; 
and
b)  disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether such a review has taken place.
Reporting on Company risk management occurs on an ongoing basis and reported to the Board of Directors (by the 
MD  and  CFO).  Risk  management  workshops  are  not  held,  but  business  risk  will  be  continually  assessed  (at  least 
annually) by the Board in accordance with the Company’s risk management and internal compliance and control 
policy.
Recommendation 7.3
A listed entity should disclose: 
a) 
b)
if it has an internal audit function, how the function is structured and what role it performs; or 
if it does not have an internal audit function, that fact and the processes it employs for evaluating and continually 
improving the effectiveness of its risk management and internal control processes.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 11 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
Given the Company’s current size and level of activity, the Board does not deem it appropriate to create an internal 
audit  function  or  engage  an  external  advisor  to  complete  this  function.  Through  external  audit  procedures  and 
internal risk management policies and procedures the Board considers there to be sufficient processes in place for 
evaluating and continually improving the effectiveness of its risk management and internal control processes. Copies 
of  the  Company’s  Audit  and  Risk  Management  Committee  Charter  are  available  on  the  Company’s  website  at 
www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Recommendation 7.4
A  listed  entity  should  disclose  whether  it  has  any  material  exposure  to  economic,  environmental  and  social 
sustainability risks and, if it does, how it manages or intends to manage those risks.
The Company, as a gold exploration company, faces inherent risks in its activities, including economic, environmental 
and  social  sustainability  risks,  which  may  materially  impact  the  Company’s  ability  to  create  or  preserve  value  for 
security holders over the short, medium or long term.
The Company has in place procedures in place for reporting on significant risks (as described above at 7.2), which 
are continually being developed and updated to help manage these risks. The board also believes that it has a 
thorough understanding of the Company’s key risks and is managing them appropriately.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 12 of 13
Corporate Governance Statement
PRINCIPLE 8 - REMUNERATE FAIRLY AND RESPONSIBLY
Recommendation 8.1
The board of a listed entity should: 
a)  have a remuneration committee which:
1.  has at least  three members, a majority of whom are independent directors; and 
2.
is chaired by an independent director,
and disclose: 
3. 
4. 
5.  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of times the committee met throughout the period
the charter of the committee; 
the members of the committee; and
and the individual attendances of the members at those meetings; or
if it does not have a remuneration committee, disclose that fact and the processes it employs for setting the 
level and composition of remuneration for directors and senior executives and ensuring that such remuneration 
is appropriate and not excessive.
b)
The Company has not established a separate remuneration committee. Given the current size of the company and 
board, the directors believe there are no efficiencies in forming a separate committee and the  board as a whole 
performs this role. The board of directors reviews and approves recommendations in terms of compensation and 
incentive  plan  arrangements  for  directors  and  senior  executives,  having  regard  to  market  conditions  and  the 
performance of individuals and the consolidated entity.
The procedures detailed in the Nomination and Remuneration Committee Charter outlines the process employed by 
the board of directors for setting the level and composition of remuneration for directors and senior executives and 
ensuring that such remuneration is appropriate and not excessive. A copy of this policy is available from the corporate 
governance section of the company’s website at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Recommendation 8.2
A listed entity should separately disclose its policies and practices regarding the remuneration of non-executive 
directors and the remuneration of executive directors and other senior executives.
The Company’s policies and practices regarding the remuneration of non-executive directors and the remuneration 
of  executive  directors  and  other  senior  executives  is  set  out  in  the  Company’s  Nomination  and  Remuneration 
Committee  Charter  and  in  the  Remuneration  Report.  The  Nomination  and  Remuneration  Committee  Charter  is 
available from the corporate governance section of the Company’s website at www.berkutminerals.com.au.
Recommendation 8.3
A listed entity which has an equity-based remuneration scheme should: 
a)  have a policy on whether participants are permitted to enter into transactions (whether through the use of
derivatives or otherwise) which limit economic risk of participating in the scheme; and
b)  disclose that policy or a summary of it.
The  Company  has  an  equity-based  remuneration  scheme.  The  Company  has  an  internal  policy  on  director  and 
employee incentive hedging which imposes securities trading restrictions on Berkut employees. Under the policy, 
employees who have been issued Incentives are strictly prohibited from entering into any transaction which would 
have the effect of hedging or otherwise transferring to any other person the risk of any fluctuation in the value of any 
unvested scheme entitlement.
www.berkutminerals.com.au
Page 13 of 13