
S-3/A 1 este-s3a_20150724.htm FORM S-3/A este-corresp_20150724.htm
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 29, 2015
Registration No. 333-205466
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
__________
PRE-EFFECTIVE
AMENDMENT NO. 1
TO
FORM S-3
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
__________
*
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization) (I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
84-0592823
1400 Woodloch Forest Drive, Suite 300
The Woodlands, Texas 77380
(281) 298-4246
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s
principal executive offices)
__________
Frank A. Lodzinski, Chief Executive Officer
1400 Woodloch Forest Drive, Suite 300
The Woodlands, Texas 77380
(281) 298-4246
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for
service)
__________
The Commission is requested to send copies of all communications to:
Reid A. Godbolt, Esq.
Jones & Keller, P.C.
1999 Broadway, Suite 3150
Denver, Colorado 80202
Telephone: (303) 573-1600
Facsimile: (303) 573-8133
__________
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public:  From time to time after this
Registration Statement becomes effective.
If the only securities being registered on this Form are being offered pursuant to dividend or
interest reinvestment plans, please check the following box. q
If any of the securities registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis
pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, other than securities offered only in
connection with dividend or interest reinvestment plans, check the following box. þ
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under
the Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration
statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. q
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. q
If this Form is a registration statement pursuant to General Instruction I.D. or a post-effective
amendment thereto that shall become effective upon filing with the Commission pursuant to Rule
462(e) under the Securities Act, check the following box. q
If this Form is a post-effective amendment to a registration statement filed pursuant to General
Instruction I.D. filed to register additional securities or additional classes of securities pursuant to
Rule 413(b) under the Securities Act, check, the following box. q
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a small reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated
filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
(Check one):
Large accelerated
filer
Non-accelerated filer q
q 
(Do not check if a smaller reporting
company)
Accelerated filer
q
Smaller reporting companyþ
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of
Securities to be
Registered(1)
 
 Debt Securities
 Common Stock
 Preferred Stock
 Rights(4)
 Warrants(5)
 Units(6)
Guarantee of Debt
 
Securities
 Total
Amount to
be
Registered
  
(2)
Proposed
Maximum
Proposed
Maximum
Offering Price
Aggregate
Per Security(2)
Offering Price(2)
Amount of
Registration
Fee(3)
$300,000,000
$34,860
(1)Not specified as to each class of securities to be registered pursuant to Form S-3 General
Instruction II.D.
(2)The Registrant is registering an indeterminate aggregate principal amount and number of
securities of each identified class of securities up to a proposed aggregate offering price of
$300,000,000, which may be offered from time to time in unspecified numbers and at
indeterminate prices, and as may be issuable upon conversion, redemption, repurchase,
exchange, or exercise of any securities registered hereunder, including under any applicable
anti-dilution provisions. In addition, pursuant to Rule 416 under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended (the “Securities Act”), the shares being registered hereunder include such
indeterminate number of shares of common stock and preferred stock as may be issuable with
respect to the shares being registered hereunder as a result of stock splits, stock dividends or
similar transaction.
(3)The registration fee is calculated in accordance with Rule 457(o) under the Securities Act.
(4)Each right will represent rights to purchase shares of common stock or other securities
covered by this registration statement.
(5)Warrants may represent rights to purchase debt securities, common stock, preferred stock or
other securities registered hereunder.
(6)Each Unit may consist of any combination of two or more of the securities being registered
hereby.
The registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be
necessary to delay its effective date until the registrant shall file a further amendment which
specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in
accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or until this Registration
Statement shall become effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said
Section 8(a), may determine.
*ADDITIONAL SUBSIDIARY GUARANTOR REGISTRANTS
Exact Name of Additional Registrant as Specified in its
Charter(1)
 
Sabine River Energy, LLC
 
Earthstone Operating, LLC
 
EF Non-Op, LLC
State or Other
Jurisdiction of
Incorporation
of
Organization
  
 Texas
  
 Texas
  
 Texas
I.R.S.
Employee
Identification
No.
  
 90-0725037
  
 45-2620826
  
 27-4299952
Basic Petroleum Services, Inc.
__________________
Texas
84-0730935
(1)Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, for each subsidiary
is:
1400 Woodloch Forest Drive, Suite 300
The Woodlands, Texas 77380
(281) 298-4246
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell the
securities until the Registration Statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, of
which this prospectus is a part, is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities
and is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any state where the offer or sale is not
permitted.
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED JULY 29, 2015
PROSPECTUS
Debt Securities
Common Stock
Preferred Stock
Rights
Warrants
Units
__________________________
Guarantee of Debt Securities of Earthstone Energy, Inc. by:
Sabine River Energy, LLC
Earthstone Operating, LLC
EF Non-Op, LLC
Basic Petroleum Services, Inc.
We may offer and sell the securities listed above from time to time in one or more classes or
series and in amounts, at prices and on terms that we will determine at the time of the offering for
total gross proceeds of up to $300,000,000. Any debt securities we issue under this prospectus
may be guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries.
This prospectus provides you with a general description of the securities that may be offered.
Each time securities are offered, we will provide a prospectus supplement and attach it to this
prospectus. The prospectus supplement will contain more specific information about the offering
and the terms of the securities being offered, including any guarantees by our subsidiary. The
supplements may also add, update or change information contained in this prospectus. This
prospectus may not be used to offer or sell securities without a prospectus supplement
describing the method and terms of the offering.
We may sell these securities directly or through agents, underwriters or dealers, or through a
combination of these methods. See “Plan of Distribution.” The prospectus supplement will list
any agents, underwriters or dealers that may be involved and the compensation they will receive.
The prospectus supplement will also show you the total amount of money that we will receive
from selling the securities being offered, after the expenses of the offering.
You should carefully read this prospectus and any accompanying prospectus supplement,
together with the documents we incorporate by reference, before you invest in any of our
securities.
Investing in our securities involves risk. Please see “Risk Factors” for a discussion of certain risks
that you should consider in connection with an investment in the securities.
Our common stock is listed on the NYSE MKT under the symbol “ESTE.”  If we decide to seek a
listing of any debt securities, preferred stock, warrants or units offered by this prospectus, the
related prospectus supplement will disclose the exchange or market on which the securities will
be listed, if any, or where we have made an application for listing, if any.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has
approved or disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is truthful or
complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
This prospectus is dated July 29, 2015.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
 
 1
About this Prospectus
 1
The Company
 1
About the Subsidiary Guarantors
Where You Can Find More Information
 1
Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Statements 2
Risk Factors
 4
 4
Use of Proceeds
 5
Description of Capital Stock
Description of Debt Securities
 8
Description of Rights
20
Description of Rights
Description of Warrants
Description of Units
Plan of Distribution
Experts
Legal Matters
Incorporation of Certain Information by Reference
20
 20
 20
 22
 23
 23
 24
____________________________________________
You should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus
and any prospectus supplement. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with additional
or different information. If anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information, you
should not rely on it. This prospectus and any prospectus supplement are not an offer to sell or
the solicitation of an offer to buy any securities other than the securities to which they relate and
are not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any
person to whom it is unlawful to make an offer or solicitation in that jurisdiction. You should not
assume that the information in this prospectus or any prospectus supplement or in any document
incorporated by reference in this prospectus or any prospectus supplement is accurate as of any
date other than the date of the document containing the information.
i
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, which we refer to as the “SEC,” utilizing a shelf registration process. Under this
shelf registration process, we may, from time to time, offer and sell any combination of the
securities described in this prospectus in one or more offerings. This prospectus provides you
with a general description of the securities we may offer. Each time we sell securities, we will
provide a prospectus supplement that will contain specific information about the terms of the
offering and the offered securities. The prospectus supplement may also add, update or change
information contained in this prospectus. Any statement that we make in this prospectus will be
modified or superseded by any inconsistent statement made by us in a prospectus supplement.
You should read both this prospectus and any prospectus supplement together with additional
information described under the heading “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Unless the context requires otherwise or unless otherwise noted, all references in this prospectus
or any prospectus supplement to “Earthstone,” “we” or “our” are to Earthstone Energy, Inc., a
Delaware corporation and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, unless otherwise indicated or
the context otherwise requires.
THE COMPANY
Earthstone Energy, Inc., a Delaware corporation, is an independent oil and gas company
engaged in the acquisition, development, exploration and production of onshore, oil and natural
gas reserves. As further discussed in this prospectus, future growth in assets, earnings, cash
flows and share values will be dependent upon our ability to acquire, discover and develop
commercial quantities of oil and natural gas reserves that can be produced at a profit, and
assemble an oil and natural gas reserve base with a market value exceeding its acquisition,
development and production costs.
Our principal executive offices are located at 1400 Woodloch Forest Drive, Suite 300, The
Woodlands, Texas 77380, and our telephone number is (281) 298-4246. Our website is located
at http://www.earthstoneenergy.com. We make our periodic reports and other information filed
with or furnished to the SEC available, free of charge, through our website, as soon as
reasonably practicable. Information contained on our website is not incorporated by reference
into this prospectus and you should not consider information contained on our website as part of
this prospectus.
ABOUT THE SUBSIDIARY GUARANTORS
If specified in an accompanying prospectus supplement respecting a series of debt securities,
Sabine River Energy, LLC, Earthstone Operating, LLC, EF Non-Op, LLC and Basic Petroleum
Services, Inc. and any other of our future subsidiaries specified in the prospectus supplement
(the “Subsidiary Guarantors”) may jointly and severally, fully, irrevocably and unconditionally
guarantee our payment obligations under any series of debt securities offered by this prospectus.
Financial information concerning our Subsidiary Guarantors and non-guarantor subsidiaries, if
any, will be included in our consolidated financial statements filed as a part of our periodic
reports filed pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”),
to the extent required by the rules and regulations of the SEC.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We are subject to the information and periodic reporting requirements of the Exchange Act and,
in accordance with the Exchange Act, file periodic reports, proxy statements and other
information with the SEC. The periodic reports, proxy statements and other information filed by us
are available for inspection and copying at prescribed rates at the SEC’s Public Reference Room
at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for
further information about the operation of the SEC’s Public Reference Room. The SEC also
maintains an Internet site that contains all reports, proxy statements and other information that we
file electronically with the SEC. The address of that website is www.sec.gov.
1
CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this prospectus may contain “forward-looking statements” within
the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). All
statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this prospectus are forward-
looking statements. These forward-looking statements can generally be identified by the use of
words such as “may,” “will,” “could,” “should,” “project,” “intends,” “plans,” “pursue,” “target,”
“continue,” “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “estimates,” “predicts,” or “potential,” the negative
of such terms or variations thereon, or other comparable terminology. Statements that describe
our future plans, strategies, intentions, expectations, objectives, goals or prospects are also
forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these
forward-looking statements. Readers should consider carefully the risks described under the
“Risk Factors” section of this prospectus and other sections of this prospectus which describe
factors that could cause our actual results to differ from those anticipated in forward-looking
statements, including, but not limited to, the following factors:
·volatility and weakness in commodity prices for oil and natural gas and the effect of prices set or
influenced by action of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting countries (“OPEC”);
·changes in estimates of our proved reserves;
·our ability to replace our oil and natural gas reserves;
·declines in the values of our oil and natural gas reserves;
·the potential for production decline rates for our wells to be greater than we expect;
·the timing and extent of our success in discovering, acquiring, developing and producing oil and
natural gas reserves; 
·our ability to acquire leases, supplies and services on a timely basis and at reasonable prices;
·the cost and availability of goods and services, such as drilling rigs and completion equipment;
·risks in connection with potential acquisitions and the integration of significant acquisitions;
·risks in connection with potential acquisitions and the integration of significant acquisitions;
·the possibility that acquisitions and divestitures may involve unexpected costs or delays, and
that acquisitions may not achieve intended benefits and will divert management’s time and
energy;
·the possibility that anticipated divestitures may be delayed or may not occur or could be
burdened with unforeseen costs;
·reductions in the borrowing base under our credit facility;
·risks incident to the drilling and operation of oil and natural gas wells;
·the presence or recoverability of estimated oil and natural gas reserves and the actual future
production rates and associated costs;
·the availability of sufficient pipeline and other transportation facilities to carry our production and
the impact of these facilities on prices;
·significant competition for acreage and acquisitions, including competition which may be intense
in resources play areas pending adequate commodity prices and reserve potential;
·the effect of existing and future laws, governmental regulations and the political and economic
climates of the United States;
·our ability to attract and retain key members of senior management and key technical
employees;
·changes in environmental laws and the regulation and enforcement related to those laws;
·the identification of and severity of environmental events and governmental responses to these
or other environmental events;
·legislative or regulatory changes, including retroactive royalty or production tax regimes,
hydraulic-fracturing regulations, derivatives reform, and changes in state, and federal income
taxes;
·general economic conditions, whether internationally, nationally or in the regional and local
market areas in which we conduct business, may be less favorable than expected, including the
possibility that economic conditions in the United States will worsen and that capital markets will
be disrupted, which could adversely affect demand for oil and natural gas and make it difficult to
access capital;
2
·social unrest, political instability or armed conflict in major oil and natural gas producing regions
outside the United States, such as Africa, the Middle East, and armed conflict or acts of terrorism
or sabotage;
·the insurance coverage we maintain may not adequately cover all losses that may be sustained
in connection with our business activities;
·other economic, competitive, governmental, regulatory, legislative, including federal, state and
tribal regulations and laws, geopolitical and technological factors that may negatively impact our
business, operations or oil and natural gas prices;
·the effect of our oil and natural gas derivative activities; and
·title to the properties in which we have an interest may be impaired by title defects; and our
dependency on the skill, ability and decisions of third party operators of oil and natural gas
properties in which we have a non-operated working interest.
All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary
statements in this paragraph and elsewhere in this prospectus. Other than as required under the
securities laws, we do not assume a duty to update these forward-looking statements, whether as
a result of new information, subsequent events or circumstances, changes in expectations or
otherwise.
For further information regarding these and other factors, risks and uncertainties affecting us, see
“Risk Factors” of this prospectus.
3
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our securities involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the
risk factors and all of the other information included in, or incorporated by reference into, this
prospectus, including those included in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K, in our
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and in our Current Reports on Form 8-K, in evaluating an
investment in our securities. If any of these risks were to occur, our business, financial condition
or results of operations could be adversely affected. In that case, the trading price of our
securities could decline and you could lose all or part of your investment. When we offer and sell
any securities pursuant to a prospectus supplement, we may include additional risk factors
relevant to such securities in the prospectus supplement.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Except as may be stated in the applicable prospectus supplement, we intend to use the net
proceeds we receive from any sales of securities by us under this prospectus and any
accompanying prospectus supplement for general corporate purposes, which may include,
among other things:
·reduction or refinancing of debt or other corporate obligations;
·additions to our working capital;
·capital expenditures associated with  our oil and gas projects; and
·potential future acquisitions, including but not limited to acquisitions of undeveloped acreage,
producing properties or corporate entities.
Any specific allocation of the net proceeds of an offering of securities to a specific purpose will be
determined at the time of the offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement.
4
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
Set forth below is a description of the material terms of our capital stock. However, this
description is not complete and is qualified by reference to Earthstone’s certificate of
incorporation and bylaws. Copies of Earthstone’s certificate of incorporation and bylaws have
been filed with the SEC and are incorporated by reference into this registration statement and
prospectus. Please read “Where You Can Find More Information” and “Incorporation of Certain
Information by Reference.” You should also be aware that the summary below does not give full
effect to the provisions of statutory or common law that may affect your rights as an Earthstone
stockholder.
Common Stock
Earthstone is authorized to issue 100,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value per
share. As of June 30, 2015, Earthstone had 13,835,128 shares of common stock outstanding of
which 15,414 shares were held as treasury stock. There were no options to purchase Earthstone
shares of common stock outstanding as of June 30, 2015.
The following summary describes certain provisions of Earthstone’s common stock, but does not
purport to be complete and is subject to and qualified in its entirety by the applicable provisions
of the Delaware General Corporation Law and Earthstone’s certificate of incorporation and
bylaws.
Earthstone has one class of common stock. Holders of its common stock are entitled to one vote
per share on all matters to be voted upon by stockholders. Holders of shares of common stock
are entitled to receive on a pro rata basis such dividends, if any, as may be declared from time to
time by the Earthstone board of directors in its discretion from funds legally available for that use.
They are also entitled to share on a pro rata basis in any distribution to stockholders upon
Earthstone’s liquidation, dissolution or winding up. Common stockholders do not have
preemptive rights to subscribe to any additional stock issuances by Earthstone, and neither the
common stockholders nor Earthstone have the right to require the redemption of their shares or
the conversion of their shares into any other class of Earthstone stock.
Preferred Stock
Earthstone is authorized to issue 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock, $0.001 par value per
share. As of June 30, 2015, there were no shares of Earthstone’s preferred stock outstanding and
no options to purchase shares of preferred stock were outstanding.
Earthstone’s board of directors has the authority to issue shares of preferred stock in one or more
series and to fix the rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions of each series, which may
include dividend rights, conversion rights, voting rights, terms of redemption, redemption prices,
liquidation preferences, sinking fund terms and the number of shares that constitute any series.
The board of directors may exercise this authority without any further action by Earthstone’s
stockholders.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for Earthstone common stock is Direct Transfer Corporation, 500
Perimeter Park Drive, Suite D, Morrisville, North Carolina 27560. Its telephone number is (919)
744-2722
Listing
Earthstone’s common stock trades on the NYSE MKT under the symbol “ESTE”.
Anti-Takeover Provisions of our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws
Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws. Certain provisions in our certificate of incorporation and
bylaws summarized below may be deemed to have an anti-takeover effect and may delay, deter,
or prevent a tender offer or takeover attempt that a stockholder might consider to be in its best
interests, including attempts that might result in a premium being paid over the market price for
the shares held by stockholders.
5
Our certificate of incorporation and bylaws contain provisions that (unless, as a general matter, a
preferred stock designation provides otherwise for that series of preferred stock):
·permit us to issue, without any further vote or action by the stockholders, shares of preferred
stock in one or more series and, with respect to each such series, to fix the number of shares
constituting the series and the designation of the series, the voting powers (if any) of the shares
of the series, and the preferences and relative, participating, optional, and other special rights, if
any, and any qualification, limitations or restrictions of the shares of such series;
·require special meetings of the stockholders to be called by an officer of the corporation upon the
written request of a majority of the board of directors; and
·the board of directors of Earthstone be classified into three classes: Class I, Class II, and Class
III, each class having a three-year term of office. Under Delaware law, stockholders of a
corporation with a classified board of directors may only remove a director “for cause” unless the
certificate of incorporation provides otherwise. Earthstone’s certificate of incorporation does not
so provide and, accordingly, stockholders may only remove a director “for cause”. The likely
effect of the classification of the board of directors is an increase in the time required for the
stockholders to change the composition of the board of directors. For example, because only
approximately one-third of the directors may be replaced by stockholder vote at each annual
meeting of stockholders, stockholders seeking to replace a majority of the members of the
Earthstone board of directors will need at least two annual meetings of stockholders to effect this
change.
Delaware Law:
We are subject to the provisions of Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law. In
general, Section 203 prohibits a publicly held Delaware corporation from engaging in a
“business combination” with an “interested stockholder” for a three-year period following the time
that this stockholder becomes an interested stockholder, unless the business combination is
approved in the manner, summarized below. A “business combination” includes, among other
things, a merger, asset or stock sale or other transaction resulting in a financial benefit to the
interested stockholder. An “interested stockholder” is a person who, together with affiliates and
associates, owns, or did own within three years prior to the determination of interested
stockholder status, 15% or more of the corporation’s voting stock. Under Section 203, a business
combination between a corporation and an interested stockholder is prohibited unless it satisfies
one of the following conditions:
·before the stockholder became an interested stockholder, the board of directors approved either
the business combination or the transaction which resulted in the stockholder becoming an
interested stockholder;
·upon consummation of the transaction which resulted in the stockholder becoming an interested
stockholder, the interested stockholder owned at least 85% of the voting stock of the corporation
outstanding at the time the transaction commenced, excluding for purposes of determining the 
voting stock outstanding, shares owned by persons who are directors and also officers, and
employee stock plans, in some instances; or
·at or after the time the stockholder became an interested stockholder, the business combination
was approved by the board of directors of the corporation and authorized at an annual or special
meeting of the stockholders by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the outstanding voting
stock which is not owned by the interested stockholder.
The existence of this provision may have an anti-takeover effect with respect to transactions our
board of directors does not approve in advance. Section 203 may also discourage attempts that
might result in a premium over the market price for our shares of common stock held by
stockholders.
These provisions of Delaware law and the certificate of incorporation could have the effect of
discouraging others from attempting hostile takeovers and, as a consequence, they may also
inhibit temporary fluctuations in the market price of our common stock that often result from actual
or rumored hostile takeover attempts. These provisions may also have the effect of preventing
changes in our management. It is possible that these provisions
6
could make it more difficult to accomplish transactions that stockholders may otherwise deem to
be in their best interest.
The provisions of Section 203 do not apply to a corporation if, subject to certain requirements, the
certificate of incorporation or bylaws of the corporation contain a provision expressly electing not
to be governed by the provisions of the statute or the corporation does not have voting stock
listed on a national securities exchange or held of record by more than 2,000 stockholders.
Because Earthstone’s certificate of incorporation and bylaws do not include any provision to “opt-
out” of Section 203, the statute will apply to business combinations involving Earthstone.
7
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
The Debt Securities may be either our senior debt securities (“Senior Debt Securities”) or our
subordinated debt securities (“Subordinated Debt Securities”). The Senior Debt Securities and
the Subordinated Debt Securities will be issued under separate indentures among us, the
Subsidiary Guarantors of such Debt Securities, if any, and a trustee to be determined (the
“Trustee”). Senior Debt Securities will be issued under a “Senior Indenture” and Subordinated
Debt Securities will be issued under a “Subordinated Indenture.” Together, the Senior Indenture
and the Subordinated Indenture are called “Indentures.”
The Debt Securities may be issued from time to time in one or more series. The particular terms
of each series that are offered by a prospectus supplement will be described in such prospectus
supplement.
Unless the Debt Securities are guaranteed by our subsidiaries as described below, the rights of
Earthstone Energy, Inc. and our creditors, including holders of the Debt Securities, to participate
in the assets of any subsidiary upon the latter’s liquidation or reorganization, will be subject to the
prior claims of the subsidiary’s creditors, except to the extent that we may ourselves be a creditor
with recognized claims against such subsidiary.
We have summarized selected provisions of the Indentures below. The summary is not complete.
The form of each Indenture has been filed with the SEC as an exhibit to the registration statement
of which this prospectus is a part, and you should read the Indentures for provisions that may be
important to you. Capitalized terms used in the summary that are otherwise not defined shall
have the meanings specified in the Indentures.
General
The Indentures provide that Debt Securities in separate series may be issued thereunder from
time to time. We will specify a maximum aggregate principal amount for the Debt Securities of
any series. We will determine the specific terms and conditions of the Debt Securities, including
the maturity, principal and interest, but those terms must be consistent with the Indenture. The
Debt Securities will be our unsecured obligations. The Subordinated Debt Securities will be
subordinated in right of payment to the prior payment in full of all of our Senior Debt (as defined)
as described under “—Subordination of Subordinated Debt Securities” and in the prospectus
supplement applicable to any Subordinated Debt Securities. If the prospectus supplement so
indicates, the Debt Securities will be convertible into our common stock.
If specified in the prospectus supplement respecting a particular series of Debt Securities,
Sabine River Energy, LLC, Earthstone Operating, LLC, EF Non-Op, LLC and Basic Petroleum
Services, Inc. and any other of our future subsidiaries specified in the prospectus supplement
(each a “Subsidiary Guarantor”) will fully and unconditionally guarantee (the “Subsidiary
Guarantee”) that series as described under “—Subsidiary Guarantee” and in the prospectus
supplement. Each Subsidiary Guarantee will be an unsecured obligation of the Subsidiary
Guarantor. A Subsidiary Guarantee of Subordinated Debt Securities will be subordinated to the
Senior Debt of the Subsidiary Guarantor on the same basis as the Subordinated Debt Securities
are subordinated to our Senior Debt.
The Subsidiary Guarantors are wholly-owned by the Company, either directly or indirectly, and
any guarantee by the Subsidiary Guarantors will be full and unconditional. There are certain
restrictions in the credit agreement, to which our principal subsidiary is a party, upon the ability of
the Subsidiary Guarantors to distribute or upstream funds to the Company.
The applicable prospectus supplement will set forth the price or prices at which the Debt
Securities to be issued will be offered for sale and will describe the following terms of such Debt
Securities:
(1)the title of the Debt Securities;
(2)whether the Debt Securities are Senior Debt Securities or Subordinated Debt Securities and, if
Subordinated Debt Securities, the related subordination terms;
(3)whether any Subsidiary Guarantor will provide a Subsidiary Guarantee of the Debt Securities;
(4)the aggregate principal amount of the Debt Securities;
(5)each date on which the principal of the Debt Securities will be payable;
8
(6)the interest rate that the Debt Securities will bear and the interest payment dates for the Debt
Securities;
(7)each place where payments on the Debt Securities will be payable;
(8)any terms upon which the Debt Securities may be redeemed, in whole or in part, at our option;
(9)any sinking fund or other provisions that would obligate us to redeem or otherwise repurchase
the Debt Securities;
(10)the portion of the principal amount, if less than all, of the Debt Securities that will be payable
upon declaration of acceleration of the Maturity of the Debt Securities;
(11)whether the Debt Securities are defeasible;
(12)any addition to or change in the Events of Default;
(13)whether the Debt Securities are convertible into our common stock and, if so, the terms and
conditions upon which conversion will be effected,  including the conversion price, the
conversion period, provisions as to whether conversion will be at the option of the holders of
such series of Debt Securities or at our option, the events requiring an adjustment of the
conversion price and provisions affecting conversion in the event of the redemption of such
series of Debt Securities;
(14)any addition to or change in the covenants in the Indenture applicable to the Debt Securities;
and
(15)any other terms of the Debt Securities not inconsistent with the provisions of the Indenture.
Debt Securities, including any Debt Securities that provide for an amount less than the principal
amount thereof to be due and payable upon a declaration of acceleration of the Maturity thereof
(“Original Issue Discount Securities”), may be sold at a substantial discount below their principal
amount. Special United States federal income tax considerations applicable to Debt Securities
sold at an original issue discount may be described in the applicable prospectus supplement. In
addition, special United States federal income tax or other considerations applicable to any Debt
Securities that are denominated in a currency or currency unit other than United States dollars
may be described in the applicable prospectus supplement.
Subordination of Subordinated Debt Securities
The indebtedness evidenced by the Subordinated Debt Securities will, to the extent set forth in
the Subordinated Indenture with respect to each series of Subordinated Debt Securities, be
subordinated in right of payment to the prior payment in full of all of our Senior Debt, including the
Senior Debt Securities, and it may also be senior in right of payment to all of our Subordinated
Debt. The prospectus supplement relating to any Subordinated Debt Securities will summarize
the subordination provisions of the Subordinated Indenture applicable to that series including:
·the applicability and effect of such provisions upon any payment or distribution respecting that
series following any liquidation, dissolution or other winding-up, or any assignment for the
benefit of creditors or other marshalling of assets or any bankruptcy, insolvency or similar
proceedings;
·the applicability and effect of such provisions in the event of specified defaults with respect to
any Senior Debt, including the circumstances under which and the periods during which we will
be prohibited from making payments on the Subordinated Debt Securities; and
·the definition of Senior Debt applicable to the Subordinated Debt Securities of that series and, if
the series is issued on a senior subordinated basis, the definition of Subordinated Debt
applicable to that series.
The prospectus supplement will also describe as of a recent date the approximate amount of
Senior Debt to which the Subordinated Debt Securities of that series will be subordinated.
9
The failure to make any payment on any of the Subordinated Debt Securities by reason of the
subordination provisions of the Subordinated Indenture described in the prospectus supplement
will not be construed as preventing the occurrence of an Event of Default with respect to the
Subordinated Debt Securities arising from any such failure to make payment.
The subordination provisions described above will not be applicable to payments in respect of
the Subordinated Debt Securities from a defeasance trust established in connection with any
legal defeasance or covenant defeasance of the Subordinated Debt Securities as described
below under “—Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance.”
Subsidiary Guarantee
If specified in the prospectus supplement, one or more of the Subsidiary Guarantors will
guarantee the Debt Securities of a series. Unless otherwise indicated in the prospectus
supplement, the following provisions will apply to the Subsidiary Guarantee of the Subsidiary
Guarantors.
Subject to the limitations described below and in the prospectus supplement, one or more of the
Subsidiary Guarantors will jointly and severally, fully and unconditionally guarantee the punctual
payment when due, whether at Stated Maturity, by acceleration or otherwise, of all of our
payment obligations under the Indentures and the Debt Securities of a series, whether for
principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the Debt Securities or otherwise (all such obligations
guaranteed by a Subsidiary Guarantor being herein called the “Guaranteed Obligations”). The
Subsidiary Guarantors will also pay all expenses (including reasonable counsel fees and
expenses) incurred by the applicable Trustee in enforcing any rights under a Subsidiary
Guarantee with respect to a Subsidiary Guarantor.
In the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, a Subsidiary Guarantor’s Subsidiary Guarantee will
be subordinated in right of payment to the Senior Debt of such Subsidiary Guarantor on the same
basis as the Subordinated Debt Securities are subordinated to our Senior Debt. No payment will
be made by any Subsidiary Guarantor under its Subsidiary Guarantee during any period in which
payments by us on the Subordinated Debt Securities are suspended by the subordination
provisions of the Subordinated Indenture.
Each Subsidiary Guarantee will be limited in amount to an amount not to exceed the maximum
amount that can be guaranteed by the relevant Subsidiary Guarantor without rendering such
Subsidiary Guarantee voidable under applicable law relating to fraudulent conveyance or
fraudulent transfer or similar laws affecting the rights of creditors generally.
Each Subsidiary Guarantee will be a continuing guarantee and will:
(1)remain in full force and effect until either (a) payment in full of all the applicable Debt
Securities (or such Debt Securities are otherwise satisfied and discharged in accordance with
the provisions of the applicable Indenture) or (b) released as described in the following
paragraph;
(2)be binding upon each Subsidiary Guarantor; and
(3)inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the applicable Trustee, the Holders and their
successors, transferees and assigns.
In the event that (a) a Subsidiary Guarantor ceases to be a Subsidiary, (b) either legal
defeasance or covenant defeasance occurs with respect to the series or (c) all or substantially all
of the assets or all of the Capital Stock of such Subsidiary Guarantor is sold, including by way of
sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, such Subsidiary Guarantor will be released and
discharged of its obligations under its Subsidiary Guarantee without any further action required
on the part of the Trustee or any Holder, and no other person acquiring or owning the assets or
Capital Stock of such Subsidiary Guarantor will be required to enter into a Subsidiary Guarantee.
In addition, the prospectus supplement may specify additional circumstances under which a
Subsidiary Guarantor can be released from its Subsidiary Guarantee.
10
Form, Exchange and Transfer
The Debt Securities of each series will be issuable only in fully registered form, without coupons,
and, unless otherwise specified in the applicable prospectus supplement, only in denominations
of $1,000 and integral multiples thereof.
At the option of the Holder, subject to the terms of the applicable Indenture and the limitations
applicable to Global Securities (see below), Debt Securities of each series will be exchangeable
for other Debt Securities of the same series of any authorized denomination and of a like tenor
and aggregate principal amount.
Subject to the terms of the applicable Indenture and the limitations applicable to Global
Securities, Debt Securities may be presented for exchange as provided above or for registration
of transfer (duly endorsed or with the form of transfer endorsed thereon duly executed) at the
office of the Security Registrar or at the office of any transfer agent designated by us for such
purpose. No service charge will be made for any registration of transfer or exchange of Debt
Securities, but we may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental
charge payable in that connection. Such transfer or exchange will be effected upon the Security
Registrar or such transfer agent, as the case may be, being satisfied with the documents of title
and identity of the person making the request. The Security Registrar and any other transfer
agent initially designated by us for any Debt Securities will be named in the applicable
prospectus supplement. We may at any time designate additional transfer agents or rescind the
designation of any transfer agent or approve a change in the office through which any transfer
agent acts, except that we will be required to maintain a transfer agent in each Place of Payment
for the Debt Securities of each series.
If the Debt Securities of any series (or of any series and specified tenor) are to be redeemed in
part, we will not be required to (1) issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Debt Security of
that series (or of that series and specified tenor, as the case may be) during a period beginning at
the opening of business 15 days before the day of mailing of a notice of redemption of any such
Debt Security that may be selected for redemption and ending at the close of business on the day
of such mailing or (2) register the transfer of or exchange any Debt Security so selected for
redemption, in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of any such Debt Security being
redeemed in part.
Global Securities
Some or all of the Debt Securities of any series may be represented, in whole or in part, by one or
more Global Securities that will have an aggregate principal amount equal to that of the Debt
Securities they represent. Each Global Security will be registered in the name of a Depositary or
its nominee identified in the applicable prospectus supplement, will be deposited with such
Depositary or nominee or its custodian and will bear a legend regarding the restrictions on
exchanges and registration of transfer thereof referred to below and any such other matters as
may be provided for pursuant to the applicable Indenture.
Notwithstanding any provision of the Indentures or any Debt Security described in this
prospectus, no Global Security may be exchanged in whole or in part for Debt Securities
registered, and no transfer of a Global Security in whole or in part may be registered, in the name
of any Person other than the Depositary for such Global Security or any nominee of such
Depositary unless:
(1)the Depositary has notified us that it is unwilling or unable to continue as Depositary for such
Global Security or has ceased to be qualified to act as such as required by the applicable
Indenture, and in either case we fail to appoint a successor Depositary within 90 days;
(2)an Event of Default with respect to the Debt Securities represented by such Global Security
has occurred and is continuing and the Trustee has received a written request from the
Depositary to issue certificated Debt Securities;
(3)subject to the rules of the Depositary, we shall have elected to terminate the book-entry system
through the Depositary; or
(4)other circumstances exist, in addition to or in lieu of those described above, as may be
described in the applicable prospectus supplement.
11
All certificated Debt Securities issued in exchange for a Global Security or any portion thereof
will be registered in such names as the Depositary may direct.
As long as the Depositary, or its nominee, is the registered holder of a Global Security, the
Depositary or such nominee, as the case may be, will be considered the sole owner and Holder
of such Global Security and the Debt Securities that it represents for all purposes under the Debt
Securities and the applicable Indenture. Except in the limited circumstances referred to above,
owners of beneficial interests in a Global Security will not be entitled to have such Global
Security or any Debt Securities that it represents registered in their names, will not receive or be
entitled to receive physical delivery of certificated Debt Securities in exchange for those interests
and will not be considered to be the owners or Holders of such Global Security or any Debt
Securities that is represents for any purpose under the Debt Securities or the applicable
Indenture. All payments on a Global Security will be made to the Depositary or its nominee, as
the case may be, as the Holder of the security. The laws of some jurisdictions may require that
some purchasers of Debt Securities take physical delivery of such Debt Securities in certificated
form. These laws may impair the ability to transfer beneficial interests in a Global Security.
Ownership of beneficial interests in a Global Security will be limited to institutions that have
accounts with the Depositary or its nominee (“participants”) and to persons that may hold
beneficial interests through participants. In connection with the issuance of any Global Security,
the Depositary will credit, on its book-entry registration and transfer system, the respective
principal amounts of Debt Securities represented by the Global Security to the accounts of its
participants. Ownership of beneficial interests in a Global Security will be shown only on, and the
transfer of those ownership interests will be effected only through, records maintained by the
Depositary (with respect to participants’ interests) or any such participant (with respect to
interests of Persons held by such participants on their behalf). Payments, transfers, exchanges
and other matters relating to beneficial interests in a Global Security may be subject to various
policies and procedures adopted by the Depositary from time to time. None of us, the Subsidiary
Guarantors, the Trustees or the agents of us, the Subsidiary Guarantors or the Trustees will have
any responsibility or liability for any aspect of the Depositary’s or any participant’s records
relating to, or for payments made on account of, beneficial interests in a Global Security, or for
maintaining, supervising or reviewing any records relating to such beneficial interests.
Payment and Paying Agents
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, payment of interest on a
Debt Security on any Interest Payment Date will be made to the Person in whose name such
Debt Security (or one or more Predecessor Securities) is registered at the close of business on
the Regular Record Date for such interest.
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, principal of and any
premium and interest on the Debt Securities of a particular series will be payable at the office of
such Paying Agent or Paying Agents as we may designate for such purpose from time to time,
except that at our option payment of any interest on Debt Securities in certificated form may be
made by check mailed to the address of the Person entitled thereto as such address appears in
the Security Register. Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, the
corporate trust office of the Trustee under the Senior Indenture in The City of New York will be
designated as sole Paying Agent for payments with respect to Senior Debt Securities of each
series, and the corporate trust office of the Trustee under the Subordinated Indenture in The City
of New York will be designated as the sole Paying Agent for payment with respect to
Subordinated Debt Securities of each series. Any other Paying Agents initially designated by us
for the Debt Securities of a particular series will be named in the applicable prospectus
supplement. We may at any time designate additional Paying Agents or rescind the designation
of any Paying Agent or approve a change in the office through which any Paying Agent acts,
except that we will be required to maintain a Paying Agent in each Place of Payment for the Debt
Securities of a particular series.
All money paid by us to a Paying Agent for the payment of the principal of or any premium or
interest on any Debt Security which remains unclaimed at the end of two years after such
principal, premium or interest has become due and payable will be repaid to us, and the Holder
of such Debt Security thereafter may look only to us for payment.
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets
Unless otherwise specified in the prospectus supplement, we may not consolidate with or merge
into, or transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets to, any Person
(a “Successor Person”), and may not permit any Person to consolidate with or merge into us,
unless:
12
(1)the Successor Person (if not us) is a corporation, partnership, trust or other entity organized
and validly existing under the laws of any domestic jurisdiction and assumes our obligations
on the Debt Securities and under the Indentures;
(2)immediately before and after giving pro forma effect to the transaction, no Event of Default, and
no event which, after notice or lapse of time or both, would become an Event of Default, has
occurred and is continuing; and
(3)several other conditions, including any additional conditions with respect to any particular
(3)several other conditions, including any additional conditions with respect to any particular
Debt Securities specified in the applicable prospectus supplement, are met.
The Successor Person (if not us) will be substituted for us under the applicable Indenture with the
same effect as if it had been an original party to such Indenture, and, except in the case of a
lease, we will be relieved from any further obligations under such Indenture and the Debt
Securities.
Events of Default
Unless otherwise specified in the prospectus supplement, each of the following will constitute an
Event of Default under the applicable Indenture with respect to Debt Securities of any series:
(1)failure to pay principal of or any premium on any Debt Security of that series when due,
whether or not, in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, such payment is prohibited by the
subordination provisions of the Subordinated Indenture;
(2)failure to pay any interest on any Debt Securities of that series when due, continued for 30
days, whether or not, in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, such payment is prohibited
by the subordination provisions of the Subordinated Indenture;
(3)failure to deposit any sinking fund payment, when due, in respect of any Debt Security of that
series, whether or not, in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, such deposit is prohibited
by the subordination provisions of the Subordinated Indenture;
(4)failure to perform or comply with the provisions described under “—Consolidation, Merger and
Sale of Assets”;
(5)failure to perform any of our other covenants in such Indenture (other than a covenant included
in such Indenture solely for the benefit of a series other than that series), continued for 60 days
after written notice has been given by the applicable Trustee, or the Holders of at least 25% in
principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of that series, as provided in such
Indenture;
(6)any Debt of ourself, any Significant Subsidiary or, if a Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed
(6)any Debt of ourself, any Significant Subsidiary or, if a Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed
the series, such Subsidiary Guarantor, is not paid within any applicable grace period after final
maturity or is accelerated by its holders because of a default and the total amount of such Debt
unpaid or accelerated exceeds $25.0 million;
(7)any judgment or decree for the payment of money in excess of $25.0 million is entered against
us, any Significant Subsidiary or, if a Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed the series, such
Subsidiary Guarantor, remains outstanding for a period of 60 consecutive days following entry
of such judgment and is not discharged, waived or stayed;
(8)certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization affecting us, any Significant
Subsidiary or, if a Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed the series, such Subsidiary
Guarantor; and
(9)if any Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed such series, the Subsidiary Guarantee of any
such Subsidiary Guarantor is held by a final non-appealable order or judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable or invalid or ceases for any reason to be in full
force and effect (other than in accordance with the terms of the applicable Indenture) or any
Subsidiary Guarantor or any Person acting on behalf of any Subsidiary Guarantor denies or
disaffirms such Subsidiary
13
Guarantor’s obligations under its Subsidiary Guarantee (other than by reason of a release of
such Subsidiary Guarantor from its Subsidiary Guarantee in accordance with the terms of the
applicable Indenture).
If an Event of Default (other than an Event of Default with respect to Earthstone Energy, Inc.
described in clause (8) above) with respect to the Debt Securities of any series at the time
Outstanding occurs and is continuing, either the applicable Trustee or the Holders of at least 25%
in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of that series by notice as provided in the
Indenture may declare the principal amount of the Debt Securities of that series (or, in the case of
any Debt Security that is an Original Issue Discount Debt Security, such portion of the principal
amount of such Debt Security as may be specified in the terms of such Debt Security) to be due
and payable immediately, together with any accrued and unpaid interest thereon. If an Event of
Default with respect to Earthstone Energy, Inc. described in clause (8) above with respect to the
Debt Securities of any series at the time Outstanding occurs, the principal amount of all the Debt
Securities of that series (or, in the case of any such Original Issue Discount Security, such
specified amount) will automatically, and without any action by the applicable Trustee or any
Holder, become immediately due and payable, together with any accrued and unpaid interest
thereon. After any such acceleration and its consequences, but before a judgment or decree
based on acceleration, the Holders of a majority in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt
Securities of that series may, under certain circumstances, rescind and annul such acceleration if
all Events of Default with respect to that series, other than the non-payment of accelerated
principal (or other specified amount), have been cured or waived as provided in the applicable
Indenture. For information as to waiver of defaults, see “—Modification and Waiver” below.
Subject to the provisions of the Indentures relating to the duties of the Trustees in case an Event
of Default has occurred and is continuing, no Trustee will be under any obligation to exercise any
of its rights or powers under the applicable Indenture at the request or direction of any of the
Holders, unless such Holders have offered to such Trustee reasonable security or indemnity.
Subject to such provisions for the indemnification of the Trustees, the Holders of a majority in
principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of any series will have the right to direct the
time, method and place of conducting any proceeding for any remedy available to the Trustee or
exercising any trust or power conferred on the Trustee with respect to the Debt Securities of that
series.
No Holder of a Debt Security of any series will have any right to institute any proceeding with
respect to the applicable Indenture, or for the appointment of a receiver or a trustee, or for any
other remedy thereunder, unless:
(1)such Holder has previously given to the Trustee under the applicable Indenture written notice
of a continuing Event of Default with respect to the Debt Securities of that series;
(2)the Holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of that
series have made written request, and such Holder or Holders have offered reasonable
security or indemnity, to the Trustee to institute such proceeding as trustee; and
(3)the Trustee has failed to institute such proceeding, and has not received from the Holders of a
majority in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of that series a direction
inconsistent with such request, within 60 days after such notice, request and offer.
However, such limitations do not apply to a suit instituted by a Holder of a Debt Security for the
enforcement of payment of the principal of or any premium or interest on such Debt Security on or
after the applicable due date specified in such Debt Security or, if applicable, to convert such
Debt Security.
We will be required to furnish to each Trustee annually a statement by certain of our officers, to
their knowledge, as to whether or not we are in default in the performance or observance of any
of the terms, provisions and conditions of the applicable Indenture and, if so, specifying all such
known defaults.
Modification and Waiver
We may modify or amend an Indenture without the consent of any holders of the Debt Securities
in certain circumstances, including:
14
(1)to evidence the succession under the Indenture of another Person to us or any Subsidiary
Guarantor and to provide for its assumption of our or such Subsidiary Guarantor’s obligations
to holders of Debt Securities;
(2)to make any changes that would add any additional covenants of us or the Subsidiary
Guarantors for the benefit of the holders of Debt Securities or that do not adversely affect the
rights under the Indenture of the Holders of Debt Securities in any material respect;
(3)to add any additional Events of Default;
(4)to provide for uncertificated notes in addition to or in place of certificated notes;
(5)to secure the Debt Securities;
(6)to establish the form or terms of any series of Debt Securities;
(7)to evidence and provide for the acceptance of appointment under the Indenture of a successor
Trustee;
(8)to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
(9)to add Subsidiary Guarantors; or
(10)in the case of any Subordinated Debt Security, to make any change in the subordination
provisions that limits or terminates the benefits applicable to any Holder of Senior Debt.
Other modifications and amendments of an Indenture may be made by us, the Subsidiary
Guarantors, if applicable, and the applicable Trustee with the consent of the Holders of a majority
in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of each series affected by such
modification or amendment; provided, however, that no such modification or amendment may,
without the consent of the Holder of each Outstanding Debt Security affected thereby:
(1)change the Stated Maturity of the principal of, or any installment of principal of or interest on,
any Debt Security;
(2)reduce the principal amount of, or any premium or interest on, any Debt Security;
(3)reduce the amount of principal of an Original Issue Discount Security or any other Debt
Security payable upon acceleration of the Maturity thereof;
(4)change the place or currency of payment of principal of, or any premium or interest on, any
Debt Security;
(5)impair the right to institute suit for the enforcement of any payment due on or any conversion
right with respect to any Debt Security;
(6)modify the subordination provisions in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, or modify any
conversion provisions, in either case in a manner adverse to the Holders of the Subordinated
Debt Securities;
(7)except as provided in the applicable Indenture, release the Subsidiary Guarantee of a
(7)except as provided in the applicable Indenture, release the Subsidiary Guarantee of a
Subsidiary Guarantor;
(8)reduce the percentage in principal amount of Outstanding Debt Securities of any series, the
consent of whose Holders is required for modification or amendment of the Indenture;
(9)reduce the percentage in principal amount of Outstanding Debt Securities of any series
necessary for waiver of compliance with certain provisions of the Indenture or for waiver of
certain defaults;
15
(10)modify such provisions with respect to modification, amendment or waiver; or
(11)following the making of an offer to purchase Debt Securities from any Holder that has been
made pursuant to a covenant in such Indenture, modify such covenant in a manner adverse
to such Holder.
The Holders of a majority in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of any series
may waive compliance by us with certain restrictive provisions of the applicable Indenture. The
Holders of a majority in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of any series may
waive any past default under the applicable Indenture, except a default in the payment of
principal, premium or interest and certain covenants and provisions of the Indenture which
cannot be amended without the consent of the Holder of each Outstanding Debt Security of such
series.
Each of the Indentures provides that in determining whether the Holders of the requisite principal
amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities have given or taken any direction, notice, consent,
waiver or other action under such Indenture as of any date:
(1)the principal amount of an Original Issue Discount Security that will be deemed to be
Outstanding will be the amount of the principal that would be due and payable as of such date
upon acceleration of Maturity to such date;
(2)if, as of such date, the principal amount payable at the Stated Maturity of a Debt Security is not
determinable (for example, because it is based on an index), the principal amount of such
Debt Security deemed to be Outstanding as of such date will be an amount determined in the
manner prescribed for such Debt Security;
(3)the principal amount of a Debt Security denominated in one or more foreign currencies or
currency units that will be deemed to be Outstanding will be the United States-dollar
equivalent, determined as of such date in the manner prescribed for such Debt Security, of the
principal amount of such Debt Security (or, in the case of a Debt Security described in clause
(1) or (2) above, of the amount described in such clause); and
(4)certain Debt Securities, including those owned by us, any Subsidiary Guarantor or any of our
other Affiliates, will not be deemed to be Outstanding.
Except in certain limited circumstances, we will be entitled to set any day as a record date for the
purpose of determining the Holders of Outstanding Debt Securities of any series entitled to give
or take any direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action under the applicable Indenture, in
the manner and subject to the limitations provided in the Indenture. In certain limited
circumstances, the Trustee will be entitled to set a record date for action by Holders. If a record
date is set for any action to be taken by Holders of a particular series, only persons who are
Holders of Outstanding Debt Securities of that series on the record date may take such action. To
be effective, such action must be taken by Holders of the requisite principal amount of such Debt
Securities within a specified period following the record date. For any particular record date, this
period will be 180 days or such other period as may be specified by us (or the Trustee, if it set the
record date), and may be shortened or lengthened (but not beyond 180 days) from time to time.
Satisfaction and Discharge
Each Indenture will be discharged and will cease to be of further effect as to all outstanding Debt
Securities of any series issued thereunder, when:
(1)either:
(a)all outstanding Debt Securities of that series that have been authenticated (except lost, stolen
or destroyed Debt Securities that have been replaced or paid and Debt Securities for whose
payment money has theretofore been deposited in trust and thereafter repaid to us) have been
delivered to the Trustee for cancellation; or
16
(b)all outstanding Debt Securities of that series that have been not delivered to the Trustee for
cancellation have become due and payable or will become due and payable at their Stated
Maturity within one year or are to be called for redemption within one year under arrangements
satisfactory to the Trustee and in any case we have irrevocably deposited with the Trustee as
trust funds money in an amount sufficient, without consideration of any reinvestment of
interest, to pay the entire indebtedness of such Debt Securities not delivered to the Trustee for
cancellation, for principal, premium, if any, and accrued interest to the Stated Maturity or
redemption date;
(2)we have paid or caused to be paid all other sums payable by us under the Indenture with
respect to the Debt Securities of that series; and
(3)we have delivered an officers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel to the Trustee stating that
all conditions precedent to satisfaction and discharge of the Indenture with respect to the Debt
Securities of that series have been satisfied.
Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance
To the extent indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, we may elect, at our option at
any time, to have our obligations discharged under provisions relating to defeasance and
discharge of indebtedness, which we call “legal defeasance,” or relating to defeasance of certain
restrictive covenants applied to the Debt Securities of any series, or to any specified part of a
series, which we call “covenant defeasance”.
Legal Defeasance. The Indentures provide that, upon our exercise of our option (if any) to have
the legal defeasance provisions applied to any series of Debt Securities, we and, if applicable,
each Subsidiary Guarantor will be discharged from all our obligations, and, if such Debt
Securities are Subordinated Debt Securities, the provisions of the Subordinated Indenture
relating to subordination will cease to be effective, with respect to such Debt Securities (except
for certain obligations to convert, exchange or register the transfer of Debt Securities, to replace
stolen, lost or mutilated Debt Securities, to maintain paying agencies and to hold moneys for
payment in trust) upon the deposit in trust for the benefit of the Holders of such Debt Securities of
money or U.S. Government Obligations, or both, which, through the payment of principal and
interest in respect thereof in accordance with their terms, will provide money in an amount
sufficient (in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants) to pay
the principal of and any premium and interest on such Debt Securities on the respective Stated
Maturities in accordance with the terms of the applicable Indenture and such Debt Securities.
Such defeasance or discharge may occur only if, among other things:
(1)we have delivered to the applicable Trustee an opinion of counsel to the effect that we have
received from, or there has been published by, the Internal Revenue Service a ruling, or there
has been a change in tax law, in either case to the effect that Holders of such Debt Securities
will not recognize gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a result of such deposit and
legal defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the same amount, in the same
manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such deposit and legal
defeasance were not to occur;
(2)no Event of Default or event that with the passing of time or the giving of notice, or both, shall
constitute an Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time of such
deposit or, with respect to any Event of Default described in clause (8) under “—Events of
Default,” at any time until 121 days after such deposit;
(3)such deposit and legal defeasance will not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a
default under, any agreement or instrument (other than the applicable Indenture) to which we
are a party or by which we are bound;
(4)in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, at the time of such deposit, no default in the
payment of all or a portion of principal of (or premium, if any) or interest on any Senior Debt
shall have occurred and be continuing, no event of default shall have resulted in the
acceleration of any Senior Debt and no other event of default with respect to any Senior Debt
shall have occurred and be continuing permitting after notice or the lapse of time, or both, the
acceleration thereof; and
17
(5)we have delivered to the Trustee an Opinion of Counsel to the effect that such deposit shall
not cause the Trustee or the trust so created to be subject to the Investment Company Act of
1940.
Covenant Defeasance. The Indentures provide that, upon our exercise of our option (if any) to
have the covenant defeasance provisions applied to any Debt Securities, we may fail to comply
with certain restrictive covenants (but not with respect to conversion, if applicable), including
those that may be described in the applicable prospectus supplement, and the occurrence of
certain Events of Default, which are described above in clause (5) (with respect to such restrictive
covenants) and clauses (6), (7) and (9) under “Events of Default” and any that may be described
in the applicable prospectus supplement, will not be deemed to either be or result in an Event of
Default and, if such Debt Securities are Subordinated Debt Securities, the provisions of the
Subordinated Indenture relating to subordination will cease to be effective, in each case with
respect to such Debt Securities. In order to exercise such option, we must deposit, in trust for the
benefit of the Holders of such Debt Securities, money or U.S. Government Obligations, or both,
which, through the payment of principal and interest in respect thereof in accordance with their
terms, will provide money in an amount sufficient (in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of
independent public accountants) to pay the principal of and any premium and interest on such
Debt Securities on the respective Stated Maturities in accordance with the terms of the applicable
Indenture and such Debt Securities. Such covenant defeasance may occur only if we have
delivered to the applicable Trustee an Opinion of Counsel to the effect that Holders of such Debt
Securities will not recognize gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a result of such
deposit and covenant defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the same amount,
in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such deposit and
covenant defeasance were not to occur, and the requirements set forth in clauses (2), (3), (4) and
(5) above are satisfied. If we exercise this option with respect to any series of Debt Securities and
such Debt Securities were declared due and payable because of the occurrence of any Event of
Default, the amount of money and U.S. Government Obligations so deposited in trust would be
sufficient to pay amounts due on such Debt Securities at the time of their respective Stated
Maturities but may not be sufficient to pay amounts due on such Debt Securities upon any
acceleration resulting from such Event of Default. In such case, we would remain liable for such
payments.
If we exercise either our legal defeasance or covenant defeasance option, any Subsidiary
Guarantee will terminate.
No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees and Stockholders
No director, officer, employee, incorporator, stockholder, member, partner or trustee of the
Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor, as such, shall have any liability for any obligations of the
Company or any Subsidiary Guarantor under the Debt Securities, the Indentures or any
Subsidiary Guarantees or for any claim based on, in respect of, or by reason of, such obligations
or their creation. By accepting a Debt Security, each Holder shall be deemed to have waived and
released all such liability. The waiver and release shall be a part of the consideration for the
issue of the Debt Securities. The waiver may not be effective to waive liabilities under the federal
securities laws, and it is the view of the SEC that such a waiver is against public policy.
Notices
Notices to Holders of Debt Securities will be given by mail to the addresses of such Holders as
they may appear in the Security Register.
Title
We, the Subsidiary Guarantors, the Trustees and any agent of us, the Subsidiary Guarantors or a
Trustee may treat the Person in whose name a Debt Security is registered as the absolute owner
of the Debt Security (whether or not such Debt Security may be overdue) for the purpose of
making payment and for all other purposes.
Governing Law
The Indentures and the Debt Securities will be governed by, and construed in accordance with,
the laws of the State of New York.
18
The Trustee
We will enter into the Indentures with a Trustee that is qualified to act under the Trust Indenture
Act of 1939, as amended (the “Trust Indenture Act”), and with any other Trustees chosen by us
and appointed in a supplemental indenture for a particular series of Debt Securities. We may
maintain a banking relationship in the ordinary course of business with our Trustee and one or
more of its affiliates.
Resignation or Removal of Trustee. If the Trustee has or acquires a conflicting interest within the
meaning of the Trust Indenture Act, the Trustee must either eliminate its conflicting interest or
resign, to the extent and in the manner provided by, and subject to the provisions of, the Trust
Indenture Act and the applicable Indenture. Any resignation will require the appointment of a
successor Trustee under the applicable Indenture in accordance with the terms and conditions of
such Indenture.
The Trustee may resign or be removed by us with respect to one or more series of Debt
Securities and a successor Trustee may be appointed to act with respect to any such series. The
holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the Debt Securities of any series may
remove the Trustee with respect to the Debt Securities of such series.
Limitations on Trustee if it is Our Creditor. Each Indenture will contain certain limitations on the
right of the Trustee, in the event that it becomes our creditor, to obtain payment of claims in
certain cases, or to realize on certain property received in respect of any such claim as security or
otherwise.
Certificates and Opinions to Be Furnished to Trustee. Each Indenture will provide that, in addition
to other certificates or opinions that may be specifically required by other provisions of an
Indenture, every application by us for action by the Trustee must be accompanied by an officers’
certificate and an opinion of counsel stating that, in the opinion of the signers, all conditions
precedent to such action have been complied with by us.
19
DESCRIPTION OF RIGHTS
Each right granted by us in the future will represent rights to purchase shares of our common
stock or other securities covered by this prospectus and the terms and conditions governing any
such rights will be described in an applicable prospectus supplement.
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
We may issue warrants for the purchase of our common stock and/or preferred stock. Warrants
may be issued independently or together with debt securities, preferred stock or common stock
offered by any prospectus supplement. Each series of warrants will be issued under a separate
warrant agreement to be entered into between us and a bank or trust company, as warrant agent,
all as set forth in the prospectus supplement relating to the particular issue of warrants. The
warrant agent will act solely as our agent in connection with the warrants and will not assume
any obligation or relationship of agency or trust for or with any holders of warrants or beneficial
owners of warrants. The following summary of certain provisions of the warrants does not purport
to be complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, all provisions of
the warrant agreements.
You should refer to the prospectus supplement relating to a particular issue of warrants for the
terms of and information relating to the warrants, including, where applicable:
(1)the number of shares of common stock or preferred stock purchasable upon exercise of the
warrants and the price at which such number of shares of common stock or preferred stock
may be purchased upon exercise of the warrants;
(2)the date on which the right to exercise the warrants commences and the date on which such
right expires (the “Expiration Date”);
(3)United States federal income tax consequences applicable to the warrants;
(4)the amount of the warrants outstanding as of the most recent practicable date; and
(5)any other terms of the warrants.
Warrants will be offered and exercisable for United States dollars only. Warrants will be issued in
registered form only. Each warrant will entitle its holder to purchase such number of shares of
common stock or preferred stock at such exercise price as is in each case set forth in, or
calculable from, the prospectus supplement relating to the warrants. The exercise price may be
subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of events described in such prospectus supplement.
After the close of business on the Expiration Date (or such later date to which we may extend
such Expiration Date), unexercised warrants will become void. The place or places where, and
the manner in which, warrants may be exercised will be specified in the prospectus supplement
relating to such warrants.
Prior to the exercise of any warrants, holders of the warrants will not have any of the rights of
holders of common stock, including the right to receive payments of any dividends on the
common stock purchasable upon exercise of the warrants, or to exercise any applicable right to
vote.
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
We may issue units consisting of any combination of the other types of securities offered under
this prospectus in one or more series. We may evidence such series of units by unit certificates
that we may issue under a separate agreement. We may enter into unit agreements with a unit
agent. Each unit agent, if any, may be a bank or trust company that we select. We will indicate
the name and address of the unit agent, if any, in the applicable prospectus supplement relating
to a particular series of units. Specific unit agreements, if any, will contain additional important
terms and provisions. We will file as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this
prospectus is a part, or will incorporate by reference from a current report that we file with the
SEC, the form of unit and the form of each unit agreement, if any, relating to units offered under
this prospectus.
20
If we offer any units, certain terms of that series of units will be described in the applicable
prospectus supplement, including, without limitation, the following, as applicable:
·the title of the series of units;
·identification and description of the separate constituent securities comprising the units;
·the price or prices at which the units will be issued;
·the date, if any, on and after which the constituent securities comprising the units will be
separately transferable;
·a discussion of certain United States federal income tax consideration applicable to the units;
and
·any other material terms of the units and their constituent securities.
21
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We may sell securities described in this prospectus and any prospectus supplement through
underwriters, through broker-dealers, through agents, or directly to one or more investors.
We will prepare a prospectus supplement for each offering that will disclose the terms of the
offering, including the name or names of any underwriters, dealers, or agents, the purchase price
of the securities and the proceeds to us from the sale, any underwriting discounts, and other
items constituting compensation to underwriters, dealers, or agents.
We will fix a price or prices of our securities at:
·market prices prevailing at the time of any sale under this registration statement;
·prices related to market prices; or
·negotiated prices.
We may change the price of the securities offered from time to time.
If we use underwriters or dealers in the sale, they will acquire the securities for their own account,
and they may resell these securities from time to time in one or more transactions, including
negotiated transactions, at a fixed public offering price, or at varying prices determined at the time
of sale. The securities may be offered to the public either through underwriting syndicates
represented by one or more managing underwriters or directly by one or more of such firms.
Unless otherwise disclosed in the prospectus supplement, the obligations of the underwriters to
purchase securities will be subject to certain conditions precedent, and the underwriters will be
obligated to purchase all of the securities offered by the prospectus supplement if any of the
securities are purchased. Any public offering price and any discounts or concessions allowed or
re-allowed or paid to dealers may be changed from time to time.
We may sell the securities through agents designated by us from time to time. We will name any
agent involved in the offering and sale of the securities for which this prospectus is delivered, and
disclose any commission’s payable by us to the agent or the method by which the commissions
can be determined, in the prospectus supplement. Unless otherwise indicated in the prospectus
supplement, any agent will be acting on a best efforts basis for the period of its appointment.
Offers to purchase securities may be solicited directly by us and the sale thereof may be made by
us directly to institutional investors or others, who may be deemed to be underwriters within the
meaning of the Securities Act with respect to any resale thereof. The terms of any such sales will
be described in the prospectus supplement relating thereto. We may use electronic media,
including the internet, to sell offered securities directly.
We may offer our common stock into an existing trading market on the terms described in the
prospectus supplement relating thereto. Underwriters, dealers, and agents who participate in any
at-the-market offerings will be described in the prospectus supplement relating thereto.
We may agree to indemnify underwriters, dealers, and agents who participate in the distribution
of our securities against certain liabilities to which they may become subject in connection with
the sale of the securities, including liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
Certain of the underwriters and their affiliates may be customers of, may engage in transactions
with and may perform services for us or our affiliates in the ordinary course of business.
A prospectus and prospectus supplement in electronic form may be made available on the
websites maintained by the underwriters. The underwriters may agree to allocate a number of
securities for sale to their online brokerage account holders. Such allocations of securities for
internet distributions will be made on the same basis as other allocations. In addition, securities
may be sold by the underwriters to securities dealers who resell securities to online brokerage
account holders.
22
The aggregate maximum compensation the underwriters will receive in connection with the sale
of any securities under this prospectus and the registration statement of which it forms a part will
not exceed 10% of the gross proceeds from the sale.
To the extent required, this prospectus may be amended or supplemented from time to time to
describe a specific plan of distribution. The place and time of delivery for the securities in respect
of which this prospectus is delivered will be set forth in such prospectus supplement.
In connection with offerings of securities under the registration statement of which this prospectus
forms a part and in compliance with applicable law, underwriters, brokers, or dealers may
engage in transactions that stabilize or maintain the market price of the securities at levels above
those that might otherwise prevail in the open market. Specifically, underwriters, brokers, or
dealers may over-allot in connection with offerings, creating a short position in the securities for
their own accounts. For the purpose of covering a syndicate short position or stabilizing the price
of the securities, the underwriters, brokers, or dealers may place bids for the securities or effect
purchases of the securities in the open market. Finally, the underwriters may impose a penalty
whereby selling concessions allowed to syndicate members or other brokers or dealers for
distribution of the securities in offerings may be reclaimed by the syndicate if the syndicate
repurchases previously distributed securities in transactions to cover short positions, in
stabilization transactions or otherwise. These activities may stabilize, maintain, or otherwise
affect the market price of the securities, which may be higher than the price that might otherwise
prevail in the open market, and, if commenced, may be discontinued at any time.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements for Earthstone Energy, Inc. (formerly Oak Valley
Resources, LLC) as of December 31, 2014 and 2013, and for each of the three fiscal years in the
period ended December 31, 2014, incorporated by reference in this prospectus have been
audited by Weaver and Tidwell, L.L.P., an independent registered public accounting firm, as set
forth in their report and have been so incorporated in reliance on such report of Weaver and
Tidwell, L.L.P. given upon their authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
Information about the estimated net proved reserves and the future net cash flows attributable to
the oil and natural gas reserves of Earthstone Energy, Inc. (formerly Oak Valley Resources, LLC)
as of December 31, 2014 and for the two years ended December 31, 2014 and incorporated by
reference in this prospectus were prepared by Cawley, Gillespie and Associates, Inc. an
independent reserve engineering firm, and is incorporated herein in reliance upon their authority
as experts in reserves and present values.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the securities being offered from time to time under this prospectus will be passed
upon for us by Jones & Keller, P.C., Reid A. Godbolt, a member of Jones & Keller, P.C.,
beneficially owns indirectly 0.186% of Oak Valley Resources, LLC, owner of record of 66.0% of
our common stock as of the date of this prospectus, through a limited liability company he owns
jointly with his spouse.
23
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN INFORMATION BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” information into this prospectus. This means
that we can disclose important information to you by referring you to another document filed
separately with the SEC. The information incorporated by reference is considered to be part of
this prospectus and any prospectus supplement, except for any information that is superseded by
information that is included directly in this document.
This prospectus incorporates by reference the documents listed below that we have previously
filed with the SEC and that are not included in or delivered with this document, excluding any
information furnished under Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of any Current Report on Form 8-K and
exhibits filed on such form that are related to such items.
·Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014 filed with the
SEC on March 27, 2015, and Amendment No. 1 on Form 10-K/A filed with the SEC on April 28,
2015;
·Our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015, filed with the SEC on
May 14, 2015;
·Our Current Report on Form 8-K/A filed with the SEC on March 6, 2015;
·Our Current Report on Form 8-K/A filed with the SEC on April 8, 2015;
·Our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on June 10, 2015; and
·Our Form 8-A filed with the SEC on January 24, 2011 with respect to our common stock.
All documents filed by us pursuant to Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act on or
after the date of this prospectus and prior to the termination of our offering of securities shall be
deemed to be incorporated by reference herein and to be a part of this prospectus from the date
of filing of such documents, excluding any information furnished under Item 2.02 or 7.01 of any
Current Report on Form 8-K and exhibits filed on such form that are related to such items. In
addition, all filings filed by us pursuant to the Exchange Act after the date of our initial registration
statement filed on July 2, 2015, and its effectiveness, shall be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into this prospectus excluding any information furnished under Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of
any Current Report on Form 8-K and related exhibits filed on such form.  Any statement
contained in a document incorporated by reference herein shall be deemed to be modified or
superseded for purposes of this prospectus to the extent that a statement contained herein or in
any other subsequently filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated by
reference herein modifies or supersedes such statement. Any statement so modified or
superseded shall not be deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this
prospectus.
You can obtain any of the documents incorporated by reference in this prospectus from us
without charge, excluding any exhibits to those documents unless the exhibit is specifically
incorporated by reference as an exhibit to this document. You can obtain documents
incorporated by reference in this prospectus, at no cost, by requesting them in writing or by
telephone from us at:
Earthstone Energy, Inc.
Attention: Chief Executive Officer
1400 Woodloch Forest Drive, Suite 300
The Woodlands, Texas 77380
Telephone: (281) 298-4246
We have not authorized anyone to give any information or make any representation about us that
is different from, or in addition to, that contained in this prospectus or in any of the materials that
we have incorporated by reference into this document. Therefore, if anyone does give you
information of this sort, you should not rely on it. If you are in a jurisdiction where offers to sell, or
solicitations of offers to purchase, the securities offered by this document are unlawful, or if you
are a person to whom it is unlawful to direct these types of activities, then the offer presented in
this document does not extend to you.
24
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 14.Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
The following table sets forth the expenses to be paid by us, other than underwriting discounts
and commissions, in connection with the offering of securities described in this registration
statement.
Securities and Exchange Commission registration fee $$34,860 
NYSE MKT listing fee and expenses
 
 
Printing and engraving expenses
 
Legal fees and expenses
Accounting fees and expenses
 
 
Engineering fees and expenses
 
Transfer agent and registrar fees
Miscellaneous expenses
 
 
Total
$
__________________
*The above expenses cannot currently be estimated because we have not yet determined the
terms or amounts of any securities to be offered and sold under this registration statement or the
number of offerings that will be made under this registration statement.
Item 15.Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Article 8 of our certificate of incorporation provides for indemnification of our officers and
directors, as well as our employees and agents, to the extent authorized by the Delaware
General Corporation Law (“DGCL”). Pursuant to Section 145 of the DGCL, we generally have the
power to indemnify our current and former directors, officers, employees and agents against
expenses and liabilities that they incur in connection with any suit to which they are, or are
threatened to be made, a party by reason of their serving in such positions so long as they acted
in good faith and in a manner they reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to, our  best
interests, and with respect to any criminal action, they had no reasonable cause to believe their
conduct was unlawful. The statute expressly provides that the power to indemnify or advance
expenses authorized thereby is not exclusive of any rights granted under any charter provision,
bylaw, agreement, vote of stockholders or disinterested directors, or otherwise, both as to actions
in such person’s official capacity and as to action in another capacity while holding such office.
We also have the power to purchase and maintain insurance for such directors and officers.
Section 145 of the DGCL authorizes a corporation to purchase and maintain insurance on behalf
of any person who is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was
serving at the request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another
corporation or enterprise, against any liability asserted against him and incurred by him in any
such capacity, or arising out of his status as such, whether or not the corporation would otherwise
have the power to indemnify him. Earthstone has obtained directors’ and officers’ liability
insurance with respect to liabilities arising out of certain matters, including matters arising under
the Securities Act of 1933 as amended (“Securities Act”).
We have also entered into individual indemnification agreements with our directors and
executive officers. These agreements indemnify those directors and officers to the fullest extent
permitted by law against inordinate risks of claims and actions against them arising out of their
service to and activities on our behalf.
Organizational Documents of each of Sabine River Energy, LLC, Earthstone Operating, LLC, EF
Non-Op, LLC and Basic Petroleum Services, Inc. provide for indemnification of the respective
officers and members to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law. Applicable law permits
indemnification for all matters (including those
II-1
asserted in derivative actions) except for those determined by a court to have constituted willful
misconduct or recklessness.
With respect to the Guarantor Subsidiaries organized under Texas law, the company may
indemnify a person who was, is, or is threatened to be made a named defendant or respondent in
a proceeding because the person is or was an officer or director only if it is determined that the
person:
(1)conducted himself in good faith;
(2)reasonably believed:
(a)in the case of conduct in his official capacity as a director of the corporation, that his conduct
(a)in the case of conduct in his official capacity as a director of the corporation, that his conduct
was in the corporation’s best interests; and
(b)in all other cases, that his conduct was at least not opposed to the corporation’s best interests;
and
(3)in the case of any criminal proceeding, has no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was
unlawful.
We have also entered into individual indemnification agreements with our directors and
executive officers. These agreements indemnify those directors and officers to the fullest extent
permitted by law against inordinate risks of claims and actions against them arising out of their
service to and activities on behalf of Earthstone and its Guarantor Subsidiaries.
II-2
Item 16.Exhibits.
Exhibit
Number Description of Document
 
3.1
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
February 26, 2010 (previously filed by the registrant on March 3, 2010 as Exhibit 3(i) to
the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by reference).
  
 Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
December 20, 2010 (previously filed by the registrant on January 4, 2011 as Exhibit 3(i)
to the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by reference).
  
 Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
December 19, 2014 (previously filed by the registrant on December 29, 2014 as Exhibit
3.1 to the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by
reference).
  
 Amended and Restated Bylaws of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated February 26, 2010
(previously filed by the registrant on March 10, 2010 as Exhibit 3(ii) to the registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by reference).
3.1(a)
3.1(b)
3.2
First Amendment to the Amended and Restated Bylaws of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
November 22, 2011 (previously filed by the registrant on November 23, 2011 as Exhibit
3(ii)(c) to the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by
reference).
  
Form of Senior Indenture (previously filed by the registrant on July 2, 2015 as Exhibit 4.6
to the registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-205466),
 
and incorporated herein by reference).
  
Form of Subordinated Indenture (previously filed by the registrant on July 2, 2015 as
Exhibit 4.7 to the registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-
 
205466), and incorporated herein by reference).
  
 Form of Warrant Agreement.*
  
 Form of Warrant Certificate.*
  
 Form of Unit Certificate.*
  
 Form of Debt Guarantee.*
  
 Opinion of Jones & Keller, P.C.**
  
 Consent of Weaver and Tidwell, L.L.P.**
  
 Consent of Cawley, Gillespie and Associates, Inc.**
  
 Consent of Jones & Keller, P.C. (included in Exhibit 5.1).**
  
Power of Attorney (included on the Signature Pages of the Registration Statement on
Form S-3 filed on July 3, 2015 (Registration No. 333-205466) and incorporated herein
 
by reference).
  
Form T-1 Statement of Eligibility and Qualification under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939
 
respecting the Senior Indenture.*
  
Form T-1 Statement of Eligibility and Qualification under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939
 
respecting the Subordinated Indenture.*
3.2(a)
4.6
4.7
4.8
 
4.9
 
4.10
 
4.11
 
5.1
 
23.1
 
23.2
 
23.3
 
24.1
25.1
25.2
*To be filed, if applicable, subsequent to the effectiveness of this registration statement (1) by an
amendment to this registration statement or (2) as an exhibit to a Current Report on Form 8-K
and incorporated herein by reference.
**Filed with this registration statement.
II-3
Item 17.Undertakings.
(a)The undersigned registration hereby undertakes:
(1)To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment
to this registration statement:
(i)To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act;
(ii)To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration
statement; notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in the volume of securities
offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered)
and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be
reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant
to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20
percent change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of
Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement; and
(iii)To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the
registration statement; provided, however, that paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii) and (a)(1)(iii) do not
apply if the information required to be included in a post-effective amendment by those
paragraphs is contained in reports filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange
Commission by the registrant pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 that are incorporated by reference in the registration statement, or is contained in a form of
prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) that is part of the registration statement.
(2)That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each such post-
effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial
bona fide offering thereof.
(3)To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4)That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act to any purchaser:
(i)Each prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) shall be deemed to be part of
the registration statement as of the date the filed prospectus was deemed part of and included in
the registration statement; and
(ii)Each prospectus required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2), (b)(5), or (b)(7) as part of a
registration statement in reliance on Rule 430B relating to an offering made pursuant to Rule
415(a)(1)(i), (vii), or (x) for the purpose of providing the information required by Section 10(a) of
the Securities Act shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of
the earlier of the date such form of prospectus is first used after effectiveness or the date of the
first contract of sale of securities in the offering described in the prospectus. As provided in Rule
430B, for liability purposes of the issuer and any person that is at that date an underwriter, such
date shall be deemed to be a new effective date of the registration statement relating to the
securities in the registration statement to which that prospectus relates, and the offering of such
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof; provided,
however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the
registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference
into the registration statement or prospectus that is a part of the registration statement will, as to a
purchaser with a time of contract sale prior to such effective date, supersede or modify any
statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was a part of the
registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such effective date.
II-4
(5)That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act to any
purchaser in the initial distribution of securities, the undersigned registrant undertakes that in a
primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration statement,
regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities
are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the
undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such
securities to such purchaser:
(i)Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii)Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned
registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant;
(iii)The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrant; and
(iv)Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to
the purchaser.
(b)The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining any liability
under the Securities Act, each filing of the registrant’s annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and (and, where applicable, each filing of an
employee benefit plan’s annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934) that is incorporated by reference in the registration statement shall be deemed to be a
new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(c)Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to
directors, officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or
otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange
Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and
is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities
(other than the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or
controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is
asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being
registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by
controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such
indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be
governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
(d)The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to file an application for the purposes of
determining the eligibility of the trustee to act under subsection (a) of section 310 of the Trust
Indenture Act in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Commission under
Section 305(b)2 of the Securities Act.
II-5
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has
duly caused this Pre-effective registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of The Woodlands, State of Texas, on July
29, 2015.
EARTHSTONE ENERGY, INC.
By:/s/ Frank A. Lodzinski
   Frank A. Lodzinski
   President and Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ Frank A.
Lodzinski
Title
Date
Chairman of the Board of Directors, President and Chief Executive
Officer and Principal Executive Officer
July 29,
2015
Frank A. Lodzinski
/s/ G. Bret Wonson
Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer
G. Bret Wonson
*
 
Jay F. Joliat
Director
*
Ray Singleton
Director
July 29,
2015
July 29,
2015
July 29,
2015
Ray Singleton
*
Douglas E.
Swanson
*
Brad A.
Thielemann
*
 
Zachary G. Urban
*
Robert L. Zorich
*By:    /s/ Frank A.
Lodzinski
Director
Director
Director
Director
July 29,
2015
July 29,
2015
July 29,
2015
 July 29,
2015
Frank A.
Lodzinski
Attorney-in-
fact
II-6
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has
duly caused this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to the registration statement to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of The Woodlands, State of
Texas, on July 29, 2015.
SABINE RIVER ENERGY, LLC
By: /s/ Frank A. Lodzinski
Frank A. Lodzinski
Frank A. Lodzinski
Manager
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears
below constitutes and appoints, jointly and severally, Frank A. Lodzinski and G. Bret Wonson,
and each of them, his true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution,
for him and in his name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments (including pre-effective amendments and post-effective amendments) to this
registration statement on Form S-3, and to sign any registration statement for the same offering
covered by this registration statement that is to be effective upon filing pursuant to Rule 462(b)
promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, and all post-effective amendments thereto, and to
file the same and all prospectus supplements, with all exhibits thereto and all documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto said
attorneys-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and
thing requisite and necessary to be done in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and
purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or his or their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully
do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to
the Registration Statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ Frank A.
Lodzinski
Title
Date
Sole Manager and Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive
Officer)
July 29,
2015
Frank A. Lodzinski
/s/ G. Bret Wonson
Principal Accounting Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
G. Bret Wonson
July 29,
2015
II-7
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has
duly caused this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to the registration statement to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of The Woodlands, State of
Texas, on July 29, 2015.
EARTHSTONE OPERATING, LLC
By: /s/ Frank A. Lodzinski
Frank A. Lodzinski
Manager
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears
below constitutes and appoints, jointly and severally, Frank A. Lodzinski and G. Bret Wonson,
and each of them, his true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution,
for him and in his name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments (including pre-effective amendments and post-effective amendments) to this
registration statement on Form S-3, and to sign any registration statement for the same offering
covered by this registration statement that is to be effective upon filing pursuant to Rule 462(b)
promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, and all post-effective amendments thereto, and to
file the same and all prospectus supplements, with all exhibits thereto and all documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto said
attorneys-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and
thing requisite and necessary to be done in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and
purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or his or their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully
do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to
the Registration Statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/s/ Frank A.
Lodzinski
Sole Manager and Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive
Officer)
July 29,
2015
Frank A. Lodzinski
/s/ G. Bret Wonson
Chief Accounting Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
G. Bret Wonson
July 29,
2015
II-8
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has
duly caused this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to the registration statement to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of The Woodlands, State of
Texas, on July 29, 2015.
EF NON-OP, LLC
By:/s/ Frank A. Lodzinski
   Frank A. Lodzinski
Manager
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears
below constitutes and appoints, jointly and severally, Frank A. Lodzinski and G. Bret Wonson,
and each of them, his true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution,
for him and in his name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments (including pre-effective amendments and post-effective amendments) to this
registration statement on Form S-3, and to sign any registration statement for the same offering
covered by this registration statement that is to be effective upon filing pursuant to Rule 462(b)
promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, and all post-effective amendments thereto, and to
file the same and all prospectus supplements, with all exhibits thereto and all documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto said
attorneys-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and
thing requisite and necessary to be done in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and
purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or his or their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully
do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to
the Registration Statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ Frank A.
Lodzinski
Title
Date
Sole Manager and Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive
Officer)
July 29,
2015
Frank A. Lodzinski
/s/ G. Bret Wonson
Chief Accounting Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
G. Bret Wonson
July 29,
2015
II-9
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has
duly caused this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to the registration statement to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of The Woodlands,, State of
Texas, on July 29, 2015.
BASIC PETROLEUM SERVICES, INC.
By:
/s/ Frank A. Lodzinski
Frank A. Lodzinski
Chief Executive Officer
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears
below constitutes and appoints, jointly and severally, Frank A. Lodzinski and G. Bret Wonson,,
and each of them, his true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution,
for him and in his name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all
amendments (including pre-effective amendments and post-effective amendments) to this
registration statement on Form S-3, and to sign any registration statement for the same offering
covered by this registration statement that is to be effective upon filing pursuant to Rule 462(b)
promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, and all post-effective amendments thereto, and to
file the same and all prospectus supplements, with all exhibits thereto and all documents in
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto said
attorneys-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and
thing requisite and necessary to be done in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and
purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or his or their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully
do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Pre-effective Amendment No. 1 to
the Registration Statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/s/ Frank A. Lodzinski
Sole Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer)
July 29, 2015
Frank A. Lodzinski
/s/ G. Bret Wonson
Chief Accounting Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
July 29, 2015
G. Bret Wonson
II-10
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Exhibit
Number Description
 
3.1
3.1(a)
3.1(b)
3.2
3.2(a)
4.6
4.7
4.8
 
4.9
 
4.10
 
4.11
 
5.1
23.1
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
February 26, 2010 (previously filed by the registrant on March 3, 2010 as Exhibit 3(i) to
the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by reference).
  
 Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
December 20, 2010 (previously filed by the registrant on January 4, 2011 as Exhibit 3(i)
to the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by reference).
  
 Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
December 19, 2014 (previously filed by the registrant on December 29, 2014 as Exhibit
3.1 to the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by
reference).
  
 Amended and Restated Bylaws of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated February 26, 2010
(previously filed by the registrant on March 10, 2010 as Exhibit 3(ii) to the registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by reference).
  
 First Amendment to the Amended and Restated Bylaws of Earthstone Energy, Inc. dated
November 22, 2011 (previously filed by the registrant on November 23, 2011 as Exhibit
3(ii)(c) to the registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, and incorporated herein by
reference).
  
Form of Senior Indenture (previously filed by the registrant on July 2, 2015 as Exhibit 4.6
to the registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-205466),
 
and incorporated herein by reference).
  
Form of Subordinated Indenture (previously filed by the registrant on July 2, 2015 as
Exhibit 4.7 to the registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-
 
205466), and incorporated herein by reference).
  
 Form of Warrant Agreement.*
  
 Form of Warrant Certificate.*
  
 Form of Unit Certificate.*
  
 Form of Debt Guarantee.*
  
 Opinion of Jones & Keller, P.C.**
Consent of Weaver and Tidwell, L.L.P.**
Consent of Weaver and Tidwell, L.L.P.**
  
 Consent of Cawley, Gillespie and Associates, Inc.**
  
 Consent of Jones & Keller, P.C. (included in Exhibit 5.1).**
  
Power of Attorney (included on the Signature Pages of the Registration Statement on
Form S-3 filed on July 3, 2015 (Registration No. 333-205466) and incorporated herein
 
by reference).
  
Form T-1 Statement of Eligibility and Qualification under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939
 
respecting the Senior Indenture.*
  
Form T-1 Statement of Eligibility and Qualification under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939
 
respecting the Subordinated Indenture.*
23.1
 
23.2
 
23.3
 
24.1
25.1
25.2
*To be filed, if applicable, subsequent to the effectiveness of this registration statement (1) by an
amendment to this registration statement or (2) as an exhibit to a Current Report on Form 8-K
and incorporated herein by reference.
**Filed with this registration statement.