
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2011
OR
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from              to
Commission file number: 000-52372
BLACK TUSK MINERALS INC.
 
  
  
  
   
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
Nevada
(State of other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
20-3366333
V6P 5T2 
(Zip Code)
7425 Arbutus Street
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
(Address of principal executive offices)
(778) 999-2575
(Registrant’s Telephone Number, including Area Code)
SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OF THE ACT:   None 
 
SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(g) OF THE ACT:
Common Stock, $0.001 par value
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. 
Yes   No 
(Title of Class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) 
of the Act.  Yes   No 
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been 
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.  Yes   No 
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and had posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive 
Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months 
(or such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes   No 
Indicate by checkmark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (229.405)  is not contained herein, and will not 
be contained, to the best of the registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this 
Form 10-K or any amendment to the Form 10-K. 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting 
company.  See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,”  “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange 
Act (Check one):
Large Accelerated Filer   
Non-Accelerated Filer 
Accelerated Filer 
Smaller Reporting Company   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).  Yes   No 
State the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates computed by reference to the price at 
which  the  common  equity  was  last  sold,  or  the  average  bid  and  asked  price  of  such  common  equity,  as  of  the  last  business  day  of  the 
registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter: 
 
$495,945 as of November 30, 2010, based on a last sale price on the OTCBB of $0.74.
The number of shares of the Registrant’s Common Stock outstanding as of August 26, 2011 was 6,970,176
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
  
  
PART I 
  
  
  
ITEM 1. 
BUSINESS 
  
  
ITEM 1A. 
RISK FACTORS. 
  
  
ITEM 1B.  UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. 
  
  
ITEM 2. 
PROPERTIES. 
  
  
ITEM 3. 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. 
  
  
ITEM 4. 
[REMOVED AND RESERVED.] 
  
  
PART II 
  
  
  
ITEM 5. 
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND 
ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
  
  
ITEM 6. 
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA. 
  
  
ITEM 7. 
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF 
OPERATIONS. 
  
  
ITEM 7A.  QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MATERIAL RISK. 
  
  
ITEM 8. 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA.
  
  
ITEM 9. 
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL 
DISCLOSURE. 
  
  
ITEM 9A. 
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES. 
  
  
ITEM 9B.  OTHER INFORMATION. 
  
  
PART III 
  
  
  
ITEM 10. 
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICES AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE.
  
  
ITEM 11. 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION. 
  
  
ITEM 12. 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND 
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS.
  
  
ITEM 13. 
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE.
  
  
ITEM 14. 
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES.
  
  
PART IV 
  
  
  
ITEM 15. 
EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES.
  
  
SIGNATURES
i
1
2
2
6
14
14
18
18
19
19
22
22
27
28
29
29
30
30
30
33
36
38
39
40
40
42
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
our failure to obtain additional financing;
our inability to continue as a going concern;
environmental, health and safety laws in Peru;
the inherent dangers involved in mineral exploration;
governmental regulations and processing licenses in Peru;
uncertainty as to the termination and renewal of our Peruvian mining concessions;
the unique difficulties and uncertainties inherent in the mineral exploration business;
our officer’s inability or unwillingness to devote a sufficient amount of time to our business operations;
This annual report on Form  10-K and the exhibits attached hereto contain “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of the Private 
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements concern our anticipated results and developments in our operations 
in future periods, planned exploration and development of our properties, plans related to our business and matters that may occur in the future. 
These  statements  relate  to  analyses  and  other  information  that  are  based  on  forecasts  of  future  results,  estimates  of  amounts  not  yet 
determinable and assumptions of management. We use words like “expects,” “believes,” “intends,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “targets,” “projects” 
or “estimates” in this annual report. When used, these words and other, similar words and phrases or statements that an event, action or result 
“will,”  “may,”  “could,”  or  “should”  result,  occur,  be  taken  or  be  achieved,  identify  “forward-looking”  statements.  Such  forward-looking 
statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, both known and unknown, and assumptions, including, without limitation, risks related 
to: 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
The preceding bullets outline some of the risks and uncertainties that may affect our forward-looking statements. For a full description of risks 
and  uncertainties,  see  the  sections  elsewhere  in  this  Form  10-K  entitled  “Risk  Factors”,  “Description of  the  Business”  and  “Management's 
Discussion and Analysis”. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, 
actual results may vary materially from those anticipated, believed, estimated or expected. 
  
Our management has included projections and estimates in this annual report, which are based primarily on management's experience in the 
industry,  assessments  of  our results of operations, discussions  and  negotiations  with  third parties  and  a  review of  information  filed  by our 
competitors with the Securities and Exchange Commission or otherwise publicly available. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on 
any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made. We disclaim any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-
looking  statements  to  reflect  events  or  circumstances  after  the  date  of  such  statements  or  to  reflect  the  occurrence  of  anticipated  or 
unanticipated events, except as required by law. 
  
We qualify all the forward-looking statements contained in this annual report by the foregoing cautionary statements.
our drilling and exploration program and Banking Feasibility Study;
Peruvian economic and political conditions;
our development projects in Peru;
natural hazards in Peru; and
native land claims in Peru;
the Peruvian legal system;
•
•
•
our common stock.

PART I
Item 1.  Business  
 
As used in this annual report, and unless otherwise indicated, the terms “we,” “us,” “our,” “Black Tusk” and the “Company” refer to Black 
Tusk Minerals Inc. All dollar amounts in this annual report are expressed in U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated. 
  
We have never declared bankruptcy, have never been in receivership, and have never been involved in any legal action or proceedings. 
 
Business Development 
  
Our  corporate  contact  information  is  7425  Arbutus  Street,  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada  V6P  5T2,  (778)  999-2575.  We  were 
incorporated on August 8, 2005 in the State of Nevada with the intention of acquiring mineral exploration projects. Effective September 21, 
2007, the Company incorporated a wholly-owned subsidiary, Black Tusk Minerals Peru SAC (“Black Tusk Peru”), in Peru. 
  
Business of Issuer 
  
We are an Exploration Stage Company, as defined by Statement of Financial Accounting Standard (“SFAS”) No.915 “ Development Stage 
Entities  ”.  Our  principal  business  is  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  mineral  resources.  We  have  not  presently  determined  whether  our 
properties contain mineral reserves that are economically recoverable. 
  
On August 24, 2006, we entered into a sale and acquisition agreement whereby we acquired a 100% interest in one unpatented mineral claim, 
representing 440.8066 hectares, or 17.63 mineral units, known as the GOLDEN BEAR Claim. The GOLDEN BEAR Claim is located on the 
east shore of Harrison Lake in the New Westminster Mining District, British Columbia, Canada. On December 31, 2007, the Company allowed 
the GOLDEN BEAR claim to lapse. 
  
On August 13, 2007, we entered into a term sheet with Leonard Raymond De Melt, an individual, and Marlene Ore Lamilla, an individual, 
detailing  the  principal  terms  of  our  proposed  acquisition  of  certain  mining  concessions  and  pediments  located  in  the  District  of  Huanza, 
Province of Huarochiri, Department of Lima (the “Peru Properties”) owned by Marlene Ore Lamilla. 
  
On  December  5,  2007,  we  entered  into  a  master  purchase  agreement  with  Black  Tusk  Peru,  a  Peru  corporation  and  our  newly-formed 
subsidiary, Leonard Raymond De Melt, and Marlene Ore Lamilla (“Master Purchase Agreement”), pursuant to which we agreed to issue an 
aggregate  of  400,000  split-adjusted  common  shares,  par  value  $0.001  per  share,  of  the  Company  to  Ms. Lamilla  and  her  designees  in 
consideration for the transfer by Ms. Lamilla to Black Tusk Peru of the Peru Properties. As additional consideration for the transfer of the Peru 
Properties, Black Tusk Peru agreed to grant to Marlene Ore Lamilla (or her designee) a 1% royalty on the net smelter returns upon commercial 
production on the Peru Properties (the “NSR Royalty”). 
  
Concurrently  with  the  execution  of  the  Master  Purchase  Agreement,  Marlene  Ore  Lamilla  and  Black  Tusk  Peru  entered  into  a  mining 
concessions  and  claims  transfer  agreement,  dated  as  of  December  5,  2007  (the  “Peru  Transfer  Agreement”),  to  govern  the  transfer  and 
registration of the Peru Properties under Peruvian law. 
  
On April  24, 2008  (the  “Closing  Date”),  we  consummated  the  transactions  contemplated  by  the  Master  Purchase  Agreement  and  the  Peru 
Transfer Agreement. Our consummation of the Master Purchase Agreement and the Peru Transfer Agreement was contingent upon, among 
other things, the formalization of the Peru Transfer Agreement into a public deed before a Peruvian notary public, recordation of the Peru 
Transfer Agreement with the appropriate Peruvian governmental entity and registration of the Peru Properties in the name of “Black Tusk 
Minerals Peru SAC” with the appropriate Peruvian registries. All of the Peru Properties have been registered with the appropriate Peruvian 
registries.
2
On August 31, 2009, a Canadian National Instrument 43-101 (“NI 43-101”) compliant technical report relating to the Peru Properties entitled 
“Geological Evaluation of the Huanza Property” dated August 28, 2009 (the “2009 Technical Report”) was published and filed on SEDAR at 
www.sedar.com.  The  report  was  prepared  and  authored  by  Glen  MacDonald  P.Geo.,  a  “qualified  person”  as  defined  in  NI  43-101,  at  the 
request  of  Robert  Krause,  a  mineral  geologist  for  the  Company.  The  2009  Technical  Report  is  based  on  information  collected  by  Mr. 
MacDonald during a site visit to the Peru Properties performed in August 2009, with additional information provided by the Company. Other 
information was obtained from sources within the public domain. 
  
On October 11, 2010, the Company completed a 1 for 50 reverse stock split, whereby 50 pre-split shares were exchanged for one post split 
share of common stock of the Company, $0.001 par value per share.  As a result of the share split, the issued and outstanding shares of the 
Company was reduced from 200,000,000 to 4,000,000. 
 
On December 7, 2010, the Peru Transfer Agreement was amended to eliminate the NSR Royalty whereby the NSR Royalty reverted to Black 
Tusk Peru and was terminated. The amendment to the Peru Transfer Agreement is registered with the appropriate Peruvian authority. 
  
On February 8, 2011, Kurt Bordian was appointed to the Board of Directors of the Company. 
  
On  February  8,  2011,  the  Company  closed  a  private  placement  of  units.  Under  the  terms  of  the  private  placement,  the  Company  issued 
5,559,713 units at a price of $0.05 per unit. Magellan Management Company (“Magellan”), a company solely owned and controlled by Gavin 
Roy,  President  and  a  director  of  the  Company,  acquired  5,163,313  units  in  consideration  of  the  cancellation  of  debt  (the  “Magellan 
Placement”). Each unit consists of one share of common stock of the Company and one full purchase warrant, which may be converted to one 
share of common stock in the Company at an exercise price of $0.05 until February 8, 2016. Portions of this placement, 2,703,509 and 266,667 
(2,970,176 in the aggregate) units, were rescinded on March 30, 2011 and April 14, 2011, respectively. 
  
On  February  8,  2011,  the  Company  and  Magellan  entered  into  a  Section  16  Disgorgement  and  Settlement  Agreement  (the  “Disgorgement 
Agreement”).  As  part  of  a  private  placement  that  occurred  on  February  8,  2011,  the  Company  issued  5,163,313  units  to  Magellan  in  the 
Magellan Placement, in order to pay off the $261,302 of debt owed to the Magellan (“Magellan Debt”) as a result of cash advances made by 
the Magellan to the Company. As a result of this issuance of units, Magellan was subject to disgorgement under Section 16(b) of the United 
States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) due to sales of shares made by Magellan on August 13 and August 
23, 2010. Magellan was required to disgorge $2,866 in profits. Under the terms of the Disgorgement Agreement, Magellan disgorged $2,866 by 
forgiving that amount of the Magellan Debt. 
 
The Company determined that it may have improperly effected a share consolidation and that the Company may not have sufficient authorized 
capital  to  satisfy  the  Company’s  business  objectives  and  obligations.  On  March  30,  2011  and  April  14,  2011,  the  Company  entered  into 
rescission and conditional purchase agreements with Magellan (the “Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements”) whereby Magellan 
and the Company agreed to rescind a portion of the Magellan Placement by rescinding and cancelling 2,703,509 and 266,667 (2,970,176 in the 
aggregate)  shares  of  common  stock  and  2,703,509  and  266,667  (2,970,176  in  the  aggregate)  share  purchase  warrants  (collectively,  the 
“Rescinded Units”) in consideration for the Company’s acknowledgement of the debt obligation in the amount of $135,176 owed to Magellan 
in connection with the rescission of a portion of the Magellan Placement. The Company and Magellan also agreed that the Company would use 
commercially reasonable efforts to amend the Articles of Incorporation to increase the authorized capital of the Company, including obtaining 
shareholder approval for the amendment by a majority of the shareholders of the Company and a majority of the disinterested shareholders of 
the  Company  (shareholders  excluding  Magellan  and  Gavin  Roy),  and  upon  the  increase  in  the  authorized  shares  of  common  stock  of  the 
Company,  the Company  will  permit  Magellan  to  purchase  the  Rescinded  Units  under the  Rescission  and  Conditional  Purchase Agreement 
under the same terms as the Magellan Placement. 
 
James Bordian was appointed by the board of directors of the Company as the Chief Financial Officer of the Company effective March 30, 
2011.
3
On April 4, 2011, the Company filed the technical report entitled “Geological Evaluation of the Huanza Property” dated February 2011 (the 
“Huanza Technical Report”) with the securities regulatory authorities in Canada, pursuant to Canadian securities laws. The Huanza Technical 
Report was prepared in accordance with NI 43-101 by Glen MacDonald, P.Geo., who is a Qualified Person as defined by NI 43-101.  The 
Huanza  Technical  Report  was  prepared  by  Mr.  MacDonald  at  the  request  of  Robert  Krause,  a  Company  geologist.  The  Huanza  Technical 
Report is based on information collected by Mr. MacDonald during a site visit to the Company’s properties in the Huanza District of Peru in 
August  2009, with  additional  information  collected  through  publicly  available  sources  and provided  by  the  Company.  The 2009  Technical 
Report and the Huanza Technical Report form the basis for much of the information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K regarding the Peru 
Properties. Readers are encouraged to review the technical reports for more information regarding the Peru Properties. 
 
On April 29, 2011 shareholders of the Company passed by written consent amendments to the Bylaws of the Company and an amendment to 
the Certificate of Incorporation of the Company to increase the authorized share capital of the Company from 4,000,000 to 100,000,000. The 
amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation was effective June 9, 2011. Additional information can be found in the definitive 14C filed with 
the SEC on May 3, 2011 and on the 8-K filed with the SEC on June 13, 2011. 
 
Robert Krause and Mark White joined the board of directors of the Company and the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment with the 
Nevada Secretary of State to increase the authorized share capital of the Company from 4,000,000 shares of common stock to 100,000,000 
shares of common stock, effective on June 9, 2011. 
 
On June 13, 2011, in accordance with the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements, the Company issued to Magellan, 2,970,176 units 
consisting of 2,970,176 shares of common stock of the Company and 2,970,176 common share purchase warrants of the Company which may 
be converted into shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001, at a conversion price of $0.05 per warrant share, until February 8, 
2016. 
 
Business Strategy 
  
Our  business  strategy  to  date  has  been  focused  on  acquiring  and  developing  advanced  stage  and  past  producing  properties  throughout  the 
Americas.   To that end, in 2008, we acquired the Peruvian Properties. Our objective is to increase value of our shares through the exploration, 
development and extraction of mineral deposits, beginning with our Peruvian Properties. The development and extraction may be performed by 
us or may be performed by potential partners or independent contractors. 
  
Competition 
  
The mineral exploration industry, in general, is intensively competitive and even if commercial quantities of ore are discovered, a ready market 
may not exist for the sale of the ore. Numerous factors beyond our control may affect the marketability of any substances discovered. These 
factors include market fluctuations, the proximity and capacity of natural resource markets and processing equipment, government regulations, 
including  regulations  relating  to  prices,  taxes,  royalties,  land  tenure,  land  use,  importing  and  exporting  of  minerals  and  environmental 
protection. The exact effect of these factors cannot be accurately predicted, but the combination of these factors may result in our not receiving 
an adequate return on invested capital. 
 
Seasonality 
  
The climate in the project area is typical of the Peruvian Andes with both wet and dry seasons. The wet season is from December to March, 
during which limited periods of electrical storm activity can develop with hail, rain and occasionally snow above 5,000 meters. Individual 
rainfall events can be severe, with over an inch falling in an hour. Dense fog is common during the rainy season and temperatures rarely reach 
above 15°C. The dry season is from April to November, during which the coldest temperatures can fall below 0°C and highest temperatures 
may exceed 25°C. Rainfall is very rare in the dry season.
4
Government Regulations 
  
Peruvian Environmental, Health and Safety Laws 
  
Our exploration and mining activities are subject to a number of Peruvian laws and regulations, including environmental laws and regulations, 
as well as certain industry technical standards, permits, licenses and authorizations. Additional matters subject to regulation include, but are not 
limited to, concession fees and penalties, transportation, production, water use and discharge, power use and generation, use and storage of 
explosives,  controlled  chemical  supplies,  surface  rights,  community  and  stakeholders’  participation  and  involvement,  plant  and  facilities’ 
construction approval, housing and other facilities for workers, reclamation, taxation, labor standards, mine safety and occupational health. 
  
Environmental regulations and sustainable development standards in Peru have become increasingly stringent over the last decade, which may 
require  us  to  dedicate  a  substantial  amount  of  time  and  money  to  compliance  and  remediation  activities.  We  expect  additional  laws  and 
regulations  will  be  enacted  over  time  with  respect  to  environmental,  social  and  sustainable  development  matters.  Recently,  Peruvian 
environmental laws have been enacted imposing closure and remediation obligations on the mining industry. 
  
The development of more stringent environmental protection programs in Peru and in relevant trade agreements could impose constraints and 
additional costs on our operations and require us to make significant capital expenditures in the future. Future legislative, regulatory or trade 
developments may have an adverse effect on our business, properties, results of operations, financial condition or prospects. 
  
Peruvian Licensing and Regulation 
  
Governmental  approvals,  licenses  and  permits  are,  as  a  practical  matter,  subject  to  the  discretion  of  the  applicable  governments  or 
governmental offices in Peru. We must comply with known standards, existing laws and regulations that may entail greater or lesser costs and 
delays depending on the nature of the activity to be permitted and the interpretation of the laws and regulations implemented by the permitting 
authority. 
  
New laws and regulations, amendments to existing laws and regulations, or more stringent enforcement of existing laws and regulations, could 
have a material adverse impact on our results of operations, financial condition and prospects. Exploration, mining and processing activities are 
dependent upon the grant of appropriate licenses, concessions, leases, permits, approvals, certificates and regulatory consents which may be 
withdrawn or made subject to limitations. There can also be no assurance that they will be granted or renewed or, if so, on what terms. 
  
Certain  licenses  contain  a  range of past,  current  and future obligations,  including  minimum  expenditure  requirements.  In  some  cases  there 
could be adverse consequences of breach of these obligations, ranging from penalties to, in extreme cases, suspension or termination of the 
licenses or related contracts. 
  
The level of any royalties or taxes payable to the Peruvian government or any other governmental authority in respect of the production of 
precious or base metals or minerals may be varied at any time as a result of changing legislation. 
 
Peruvian Mining Concessions 
  
Under  the  laws  of  Peru,  mineral  resources  belong  to  the  state  and  government  concessions  are  required  to  explore  for  or  exploit  mineral 
reserves. In Peru, our mineral rights derive from concessions from the Peruvian Ministry of Energy and Mines for exploration, exploitation, 
extraction,  transportation  and/or  production  operations.  Mining  concessions  in  Peru  may  be  terminated  if  the  requirements  of  the 
concessionaire are not satisfied. 
  
According to the General Mining Law of Peru, “Validity Fees” are payable annually at a cost of US$ 3.00 per hectare and must be paid by the 
30th  of  June.  Should  payment  of  Validity  Fees  not  be  made  for  two  consecutive  years,  mining  pediments  or  concessions  will  be 
cancelled.  After pediments or concessions are held by a party for 6 years annual fees change according to the following framework:
5
“Holders of mining concessions are obliged to achieve a minimum production equivalent to US$100.00 per hectare per year, within 
six years following the year in which the respective mining concession title is granted. If this minimum production is not reached, as 
of the first semester of the 7th year after the concession title has been granted, the holder of the concession should pay a US$ 6.00 
penalty per hectare per year. If such minimum production is not obtained until the end of the 11th year after obtaining the concession 
title, the penalty to be paid as of the 12th year increases to US$ 20.00 per hectare per year.”
Following the same principle established in connection with the validity fee, evidence of compliance with the requested minimum production 
or  investment  or,  in  its  defect,  payment  of  the  corresponding  penalty  can  only  be  missed  for one  year.  Non-compliance  with  any of  these 
possibilities for two consecutive years, results in the cancellation of the mining concession. 
  
Peruvian Native Land Claims 
  
We are unaware of any outstanding native land claims on the Peru Properties. However, it is possible that a native land claim could be made in 
the  future.  Should  we  encounter  a  situation  where  a  native  person  or  group  claims  an  interest  in  our  claims,  we  may  be  able  to  provide 
compensation  to  the  affected  party  in  order  to  continue  with  our  exploration  work,  or  if  such  an  option  is  not  available,  we  may  have  to 
relinquish our interest in these claims. In either case, the costs and/or losses could be greater than our financial capacity and our business would 
fail.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  we  currently  have  a  ten  year  term  agreement  with  the  Peasant  Community  of  Huanza,  which  is  the 
registered titleholder of the land in which our Peru Properties are located, for the use of their land to conduct mining exploration activities. This 
agreement has been recorded with the public registry in order to ensure enforceability against the State and third parties with regards to all of 
the Peru Properties, except for the properties designated “Altococha Mine 14,” “Altococha Mine 15,” “Altococha Mine 16,” “Black Tusk 1,” 
“Black  Tusk  2,”  “Black  Tusk  3”  and  “Black  Tusk  4.”   We  hope  to  record  the  agreement  with  the  public  registry  with  regards  to  these 
properties as soon as possible. 
  
Employees 
  
Gavin  Roy  and  James  Bordian  are  the  Company’s  sole  employees.  We  hire  independent  contractors  to  assist  with  general  administrative 
matters from time-to-time. 
  
Item 1A.  Risk Factors. 
  
Much of the information included in this annual report includes or is based upon estimates, projections or other forward-looking statements. 
Such  forward-looking  statements  include  any  projections  or  estimates  made  by  us  and  our  management  in  connection  with  our  business 
operations. While these forward-looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith and reflect our 
current judgment regarding the direction of our business, actual results will almost always vary, sometimes materially, from any estimates, 
predictions, projections, assumptions or other future performance suggested herein. 
  
Such  estimates,  projections  or  other  forward-looking  statements  involve  various  risks  and  uncertainties  as  outlined  below.  We  caution  the 
reader that important factors in some cases have affected and, in the future, could materially affect actual results and cause actual results to 
differ materially from the results expressed in any such estimates, projections or other forward-looking statements. Prospective investors should 
consider carefully the risk factors set out below.
6
Risks Relating to the Company 
  
If we do not obtain additional financing, our business will fail. 
  
As of May 31, 2011, we had no cash and a working capital deficit in the amount of $319,337. We currently do not have any operations and we 
have no revenue from operations. Our business plan calls for expenses in connection with the technical review and exploration of the Peru 
Properties. Our current operating funds will not be sufficient to carry out our planned exploration program on the Peru Properties. In addition, 
we will require additional financing to provide funds for anticipated operating overhead, professional fees and regulatory filing fees. We will 
need to obtain additional financing to complete our planned programs and to sustain our business operations. If our exploration programs are 
successful in discovering ore of commercial tonnage and grade, we will require additional funds in order to place the Peru Properties into 
commercial production, if warranted. The Company’s plans for the next twelve months are to focus on the exploration of the Peru Properties 
and  to  fund  our  working  capital  deficit.  We  estimate  that  cash  requirements  of  approximately  $900,000  or  more  will  be  required  for 
exploration, administration, and working capital costs for the fiscal year ending May 31, 2012. However, we do not have any commitments to 
fund these costs. Therefore, we need to raise an additional $900,000 or more in the next twelve months. We believe that such funds, if raised, 
will be sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements through May 31, 2012. We are exploring joint ventures, options and other arrangements, 
which will fund exploration and development of our properties. We have not entered into any such arrangements and such arrangements may 
not be available on acceptable terms, if at all. Failure to raise needed financing or enter into arrangements to fund exploration, development and 
maintenance of our properties could result in our having to discontinue our mining exploration and development business. 
 
Since May, 31, 2010, we obtained proceeds in the amount of: (1) $16,500 through a private placement of units consisting of shares of common 
stock and share purchase warrants, 330,000 units were issued at $0.05 per unit; (2) $43,500 through a private placement of 7% convertible 
debentures;  and  (3)  proceeds  in  the  amount  of  $20,000  through  a  private  placement  of  our  common  shares  by  issuing  266,667  shares  of 
common  stock  at  $0.075  per  share.  The  private  placements  funded  immediate  cash  requirements  but  did  not  resolve  our  working  capital 
deficiencies. 
  
We may be unable to continue as a going concern. 
 
As discussed by the auditors in Note 1 to our financial statements contained elsewhere in this annual report, we have not generated any revenue 
or profitable operations since inception and will need to obtain equity financing and profitable operations to continue as a going concern. Also, 
we have a working capital deficit. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We are in the process 
of seeking sufficient financing to implement our business strategy. Because we will need additional financing to fund our extensive exploration 
activities there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. 
 
We have incurred a net loss since of $3,003,384 for the period from August 8, 2005 (date of inception) to May 31, 2011. We estimate that we 
will be required to raise at least $900,000 during the fiscal year ending May 31, 2012 to satisfy our planned technical review and exploration 
activities for the Peru Properties and general working capital requirements for general administrative and other expenses. However, we do not 
have any commitments to fund these costs. We are exploring joint ventures, options and other arrangements, which will fund exploration and 
development of our properties. We have not entered into any such arrangements and such arrangements may not be available on acceptable 
terms, if at all. Therefore, we have to raise an additional $900,000 in the next twelve months or enter into an arrangement to fund exploration 
and development of our properties. These factors raise substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern. 
 
Because of the unique difficulties and uncertainties inherent in the mineral exploration business, we face a high risk of business failure. 
 
Potential investors should be aware of the difficulties normally encountered by new mineral exploration companies and the high rate of failure 
of such enterprises. The likelihood of success must be considered in light of the problems, expenses, difficulties, complications and delays 
encountered in connection with the exploration of the mineral properties that we plan to undertake. These potential problems include, but are 
not  limited  to,  unanticipated  problems  relating  to  exploration,  and  additional  costs  and  expenses  that  may  exceed  current  estimates.  The 
expenditures to be made by us in the exploration of the mineral claims may not result in the discovery of mineral deposits. Problems such as 
unusual or unexpected formations and other conditions are involved in mineral exploration and often result in unsuccessful exploration efforts.
7
Because of the inherent dangers involved in mineral exploration, there is a risk that we may incur liability or damages as we conduct our 
business. 
 
The  search  for  valuable  minerals  involves  numerous  hazards.  As  a  result,  we  may  become  subject  to  liability  for  such  hazards,  including 
pollution, cave-ins and other hazards against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure. At the present time we have 
no coverage to insure against these hazards. The payment of such liabilities may have a material adverse effect on our financial position. 
 
Increased costs could affect our financial condition. 
  
We anticipate that costs at our projects that we may explore or develop, will frequently be subject to variation from one year to the next due to 
a number of factors, such as changing ore grade, metallurgy and revisions to mine plans, if any, in response to the physical shape and location 
of the ore body.  In addition, costs are affected by the price of commodities such as fuel, rubber and electricity.  Such commodities are at times 
subject to volatile price movements, including increases that could make production at certain operations less profitable. A material increase in 
costs at any significant location could have a significant effect on our profitability. 
 
A shortage of equipment and supplies could adversely affect our ability to operate our business. 
 
We  are  dependent  on  various  supplies  and  equipment  to  carry  out  our  mine  and  development  operations.  The  shortage  of  such  supplies, 
equipment and parts could have a material adverse effect on our ability to carry out our operations and therefore limit or increase the cost of 
production. 
 
Recent market events and conditions 
 
Since  2007,  the  U.S.  credit  markets  have  experienced  serious  disruption  due  to  a  deterioration  in  residential  property  values,  defaults  and 
delinquencies  in  the  residential  mortgage  market  (particularly,  sub-prime  and  non-prime  mortgages)  and  a  decline  in  the  credit  quality  of 
mortgage  backed  securities.  These  problems  led  to  a  slow-down  in  residential  housing  market  transactions,  declining  housing  prices, 
delinquencies in non-mortgage consumer credit and a general decline in consumer confidence. These conditions continued and worsened in 
2008, causing a loss of confidence in the broader U.S. and global credit and financial markets and resulting in the collapse of, and government 
intervention in, major banks, financial institutions and insurers and creating a climate of greater volatility, less liquidity, widening of credit 
spreads,  a  lack  of  price  transparency,  increased  credit  losses  and  tighter  credit  conditions  that  still  exist  in  2011.  Notwithstanding  various 
actions  by  the  U.S.  and  foreign  governments,  concerns  about  the  general  condition  of  the  capital  markets,  financial  instruments,  banks, 
investment banks, insurers and other financial institutions caused the broader credit markets to further deteriorate and stock markets to decline 
substantially. In addition, general economic indicators have deteriorated, including declining consumer sentiment, increased unemployment and 
declining economic growth and uncertainty about corporate earnings and the loss of the United States’ AAA credit rating by the Standard and 
Poor’s. 
 
These unprecedented disruptions in the current credit and financial markets have had a significant material adverse impact on a number of 
financial institutions and have limited access to capital and credit for many companies. These disruptions could, among other things, make it 
more difficult for us to obtain, or increase its cost of obtaining, capital and financing for its operations.  The Company’s access to additional 
capital may not be available on terms acceptable to it or at all.
8
General economic conditions 
 
The recent unprecedented events in global financial markets have had a profound impact on the global economy. Many industries, including the 
gold and base metal mining industry, are impacted by these market conditions. Some of the key impacts of the current financial market turmoil 
include contraction in credit markets resulting in a widening of credit risk, devaluations and high volatility in global equity, commodity, foreign 
exchange and precious metal markets, and a lack of market liquidity. A continued or worsened slowdown in the financial markets or other 
economic conditions, including but not limited to, consumer spending, employment rates, business conditions, inflation, fuel and energy costs, 
consumer debt levels, lack of available credit, the state of the financial markets, interest rates, and tax rates may adversely affect our growth 
and profitability.  Specifically:
  The global credit/liquidity crisis could impact the cost and availability of financing and our overall liquidity;
volatile energy prices, commodity and consumables prices and currency exchange rates impact potential production costs; and
the devaluation and volatility of global stock markets impacts the valuation of our equity securities, which may impact our ability 
to raise funds through the issuance of equity.
the volatility of ore prices may impact our future revenues, profits and cash flow;



These factors could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. 
 
Because our President and Secretary has only agreed to provide services on a part-time basis, he may not be able or willing to devote a 
sufficient amount of time to our business operations, causing our business to fail. 
 
Gavin Roy, our President and Secretary currently devotes approximately thirty hours per week to our business affairs. If the demands of our 
business require it, Mr. Roy is prepared to adjust his timetable to devote more time to our business. However, Mr. Roy may not be able to 
devote more time to our affairs when needed. It is possible that the demands of his other interests will increase, with the result that he would no 
longer be able to devote sufficient time to the management of our business. Competing demands on his time may lead to a divergence between 
his interests and the interests of other shareholders. 
 
Risks Associated with Doing Business in Peru 
 
Environmental, health and safety laws and other regulations may increase our costs of doing business, restrict our operations or result in 
operational delays. 
 
Our exploration and mining activities are subject to a number of Peruvian laws and regulations, including environmental laws and regulations, 
as well as certain industry technical standards, permits, licenses and authorizations. Additional matters subject to regulation include, but are not 
limited to, concession fees and penalties, transportation, production, water use and discharge, power use and generation, use and storage of 
explosives,  controlled  chemical  supplies,  surface  rights,  community  and  stakeholders’  participation  and  involvement,  plant  and  facilities’ 
construction approval, housing and other facilities for workers, reclamation, taxation, labor standards, mine safety and occupational health. 
 
Environmental regulations and sustainable development standards in Peru have become increasingly stringent over the last decade, which may 
require  us  to  dedicate  a  substantial  amount  of  time  and  money  to  compliance  and  remediation  activities.  We  expect  additional  laws  and 
regulations  will  be  enacted  over  time  with  respect  to  environmental,  social  and  sustainable  development  matters.  Recently,  Peruvian 
environmental laws have been enacted imposing closure and remediation obligations on the mining industry. 
  
The development of more stringent environmental protection programs in Peru and in relevant trade agreements could impose constraints and 
additional  costs  on  our  operations  and  require  us  to  make  significant  capital  expenditures  in  the  future.  We  cannot  assure  you  that  future 
legislative,  regulatory  or  trade  developments  will  not  have  an  adverse  effect  on  our  business,  properties,  results  of  operations,  financial 
condition or prospects.
9
Governmental regulations and processing licenses. 
  
Governmental  approvals,  licenses  and  permits  are,  as  a  practical  matter,  subject  to  the  discretion  of  the  applicable  governments  or 
governmental offices. We must comply with known standards, existing laws and regulations that may entail greater or lesser costs and delays 
depending  on  the  nature  of  the  activity  to  be  permitted  and  the  interpretation  of  the  laws  and  regulations  implemented  by  the  permitting 
authority. 
  
New laws and regulations, amendments to existing laws and regulations, or more stringent enforcement of existing laws and regulations, could 
have a material adverse impact on our results of operations, financial condition and prospects. Exploration, mining and processing activities are 
dependent upon the grant of appropriate licenses, concessions, leases, permits, approvals, certificates and regulatory consents which may be 
withdrawn or made subject to limitations. There can also be no assurance that they will be granted or renewed or, if so, on what terms. 
  
Certain  licenses  contain  a  range of past,  current  and future obligations,  including  minimum  expenditure  requirements.  In  some  cases  there 
could be adverse consequences of breach of these obligations, ranging from penalties to, in extreme cases, suspension or termination of the 
licenses or related contracts. 
  
The level of any royalties or taxes payable to the Peruvian government or any other governmental authority in respect of the production of 
precious or base metals or minerals may be varied at any time as a result of changing legislation. 
  
There is uncertainty as to the termination and renewal of our mining concessions. 
  
Under  the  laws  of  Peru,  mineral  resources  belong  to  the  state  and  government  concessions  are  required  to  explore  for  or  exploit  mineral 
reserves. In Peru, our mineral rights derive from concessions from the Peruvian Ministry of Energy and Mines for exploration, exploitation, 
extraction,  transportation  and/or  production  operations.  Mining  concessions  in  Peru  may  be  terminated  if  the  requirements  of  the 
concessionaire are not satisfied. 
  
In order to maintain our mining concessions in good standing in Peru, we are obligated to pay annual fees and to reach minimum production 
levels  after  the  first  six  years  after  the  concession  title  has  been  granted.  If  said  minimum  production  is  not  reached,  the  holder  of  the 
concession would have to pay a US$6.00 penalty per hectare per year. It is possible to avoid payment of the penalty if evidence is provided to 
the mining authorities that an amount equivalent to not less than ten times the applicable penalty has been invested. Therefore, if it is proven 
that an investment of US$60.00 per hectare per year has been made in the concession, there will be no obligation to pay the penalty (US$20.00 
per hectare as of the twelfth year). 
  
Following the same principle established in connection with the validity fee, evidence of compliance with the requested minimum production 
or  investment  or,  in  its  defect,  payment  of  the  corresponding  penalty  can  only  be  missed  for one  year.  Non-compliance  with  any of  these 
possibilities for two consecutive years, results in the cancellation of the mining concession. 
  
Any termination or unfavorable modification of the terms of one or more of our concessions, or failure to obtain renewals of such concessions 
subject to renewal or extensions, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and prospects. 
 
Drilling and Exploration Program and Banking Feasibility Study (BFS). 
  
As with any significant undertaking or effort, the completion of a drilling and exploration program and BFS involves various uncertainties, 
including availability of materials and labor, labor relations issues, inclement weather, unforeseen engineering, environmental or geological 
issues,  and  unanticipated  difficulties  in  obtaining  any  of  the  requisite  licenses  or  permits,  any  of  which  could  give  rise  to  delays  or  cost 
overruns or cause the results of the drilling and exploration program and BFS to be less than expected levels. In addition, during perforation 
and construction of the development tunnels, the contractors could encounter unexpected sub-surface conditions or other difficulties, which 
could delay or even prevent us from generating or receiving revenues.
10
Development projects. 
  
The development of new mining operations, which generally result from identifying potentially economically recoverable volumes of minerals 
or metals, have no operating history upon which to base estimates of future cash operating costs. For such development projects, estimates of 
proven and probable reserves and cash operating costs are, to a large extent, based upon the interpretation of geological data obtained from drill 
holes and other sampling techniques and feasibility studies which derive estimates of cash operating costs based upon anticipated tonnage and 
grades  of  ore  to  be  mined  and  processed,  the  configuration  of  the  ore  body,  expected  recovery  rates,  comparable  facility  and  equipment 
operating costs, anticipated climatic conditions and other factors. As a result, it is possible that actual cash operating costs and economic returns 
may differ from those estimated. 
  
Peruvian economic and political conditions may have an adverse impact on our business. 
  
As of the date of this report, our operations are conducted solely in Peru. Accordingly, our business, financial condition or results of operations 
could be affected by changes in economic or other policies of the Peruvian government or other political, regulatory or economic developments 
in Peru. During the past several decades, Peru has had a history of political instability that has included military coups and a succession of 
regimes  with  differing  policies  and  programs.  Past  governments  have  frequently  intervened  in  the  nation’s  economy  and  social  structure. 
Among other actions, past governments have imposed controls on prices, exchange rates and local and foreign investment as well as limitations 
on imports, have restricted the ability of companies to dismiss employees, have expropriated private sector assets (including mining companies) 
and have prohibited the remittance of profits to foreign investors. 
   
There is a risk of terrorism in Peru relating to Sendero Luminoso and the Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru, which were particularly 
active  in  the  1980s  and  early  1990s.  We  cannot  guarantee  that  acts  by  these  or  other  terrorist  organizations  will  not  adversely  affect  our 
operations in the future. 
  
Because, as of the date of this report, we operate solely in Peru, we cannot provide any assurance that political developments in Peru will not 
have a material adverse effect on market conditions, prices of our securities, our ability to obtain financing, and our results of operations and 
financial condition. 
  
Legal system in Peru. 
  
Peru may have a less developed legal system than more established economies which could result in risks such as (i) effective legal redress in 
the courts of such jurisdictions, whether in respect of a breach of law or regulation, or in an ownership dispute, being more difficult to obtain; 
(ii) a higher degree of discretion on the part of governmental authorities; (iii) the lack of judicial or administrative guidance on interpreting 
applicable rules and regulations; (iv) inconsistencies or conflicts between and within various laws, regulations, decrees, orders and resolutions; 
or (v) relative inexperience of the judiciary and courts in such matters. Peruvian business people, government officials and agencies and the 
judicial system’s commitment to abide by legal requirements and negotiated agreements may be more uncertain, creating particular concerns 
with respect to the licenses and agreements for business. 
  
There can be no assurance that joint ventures, licenses, license applications or other legal arrangements will not be adversely affected by the 
actions of government authorities or others and the effectiveness and enforcement of such arrangements in Peru cannot be guaranteed.
11
Native land claims might affect our title to the Peru Properties and our business plan may fail. 
  
We are unaware of any outstanding native land claims on the Peru Properties. However, it is possible that a native land claim could be made in 
the  future.  Should  we  encounter  a  situation  where  a  native  person  or  group  claims  an  interest  in  our  claims,  we  may  be  able  to  provide 
compensation  to  the  affected  party  in  order  to  continue  with  our  exploration  work,  or  if  such  an  option  is  not  available,  we  may  have  to 
relinquish our interest in these claims. In either case, the costs and/or losses could be greater than our financial capacity and our business would 
fail.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  we  currently  have  a  ten  year  term  agreement  with  the  Peasant  Community  of  Huanza,  which  is  the 
registered titleholder of the land in which our Peru Properties are located, for the use of their land to conduct mining exploration activities. This 
agreement has been recorded with the public registry in order to ensure enforceability against the State and third parties with regards to all of 
the Peru Properties, except for the properties designated “Altococha Mine 14,” “Altococha Mine 15,” “Altococha Mine 16,” “Black Tusk 1,” 
“Black  Tusk  2,”  “Black  Tusk  3”  and  “Black  Tusk  4.”   We  hope  to  record  the  agreement  with  the  public  registry  with  regards  to  these 
properties as soon as possible. 
  
Natural hazards may have an adverse impact on our business. 
  
Fires,  earthquakes,  floods,  volcanic  eruptions  or  other  similar  catastrophic  events  could  cause  personal  injury,  loss  of  life,  damage  or 
destruction  to  the  project  or  suspension  of  operations.  Although  we  may  maintain  insurance  to  protect  ourselves  against  certain  risks,  the 
proceeds of such insurance may not be adequate to cover reduced revenues, increased expenses or other liabilities arising from the occurrence 
of  any  of  the  events  described  above.  Moreover,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  insurance  coverage  will  be  available  in  the  future  at 
commercially reasonable rates or that the amounts for which we will be insured will cover all losses. 
  
Risks Relating to Our Common Stock 
  
Our common stock has a limited trading history and has experienced price volatility. 
  
Our common stock trades on the OTC Bulletin Board. The volume of trading in our common stock varies greatly and may often be light, 
resulting in what is known as a "thinly-traded" stock. Until a larger secondary market for our common stock develops, the price of our common 
stock may fluctuate substantially. The price of our common stock may also be impacted by any of the following, some of which may have little 
or no relation to our company or industry: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
In addition, the stock market in general and the market for mineral exploration companies in particular have experienced price and volume 
fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating results or asset values of those companies. These broad market 
and industry factors may seriously impact the market price and trading volume of our common shares regardless of our actual operating 
performance. 
  
We  anticipate  that  we  will  raise  additional  capital  through  equity  financing,  which  may  cause  substantial  dilution  to  our  existing 
shareholders. 
  
We may require additional equity financing to be raised in the future.  We may issue securities on less than favorable terms to raise sufficient 
capital to fund our business plan.  Any transaction involving the issuance of equity securities or securities convertible into common shares 
would result in dilution, possibly substantial, to present and prospective holders of common shares.
the breadth of our stockholder base and extent to which securities professionals follow our common stock; 
investor perception of our Company and the mining industry, including industry trends;
domestic and international economic and capital market conditions, including fluctuations in commodity prices;
responses to quarter-to-quarter variations in our results of operations;
announcements of significant acquisitions, strategic alliances, joint ventures or capital commitments by us or our competitors;
additions or departures of key personnel; 
sales or purchases of our common stock by large stockholders or our insiders;
accounting pronouncements or changes in accounting rules that affect our financial reporting; and 
changes in legal and regulatory compliance unrelated to our performance.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
12
We have not paid cash dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate paying any dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable 
future. 
  
We do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Payment of future cash dividends, if any, will be at 
the  discretion  of  our  board  of  directors  and  will  depend  on  our  financial  condition,  results  of  operations,  contractual  restrictions,  capital 
requirements, business prospects and other factors that our board of directors considers relevant. Accordingly, investors may only see a return 
on their investment if the value of our securities appreciates. 
  
A decline in the price of our common stock could affect our ability to raise further working capital and adversely impact our operations. 
  
A prolonged decline in the price of our common stock could result in a reduction in the liquidity of our common stock and a reduction in our 
ability to raise capital. Because our operations have been primarily financed through the sale of equity securities, a decline in the price of our 
common stock could be especially detrimental to our liquidity and our continued operations. Any reduction in our ability to raise equity capital 
in the future would force us to reallocate funds from other planned uses and would have a significant negative effect on our business plans and 
operations, including our ability to explore and develop new properties and continue our exploration and development of our current property 
interests. If our stock price declines, we may not be able to raise additional capital or generate funds from operations sufficient to meet our 
obligations. 
  
Our stock is a penny stock. Trading of our stock may be restricted by the Securities and Exchange Commission's penny stock regulations 
which may limit a stockholder's ability to buy and sell our stock. 
  
Our stock is a penny stock. The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted Rule 15g-9 which generally defines "penny stock" to be any 
equity security that has a market price (as defined) less than $5.00 per share or an exercise price of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain 
exceptions. Our securities are covered by the penny stock rules, which impose additional sales practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell 
to  persons  other  than  established  customers  and  "accredited  investors".  The  term  "accredited  investor"  refers  generally  to  institutions  with 
assets in excess of $5,000,000 or individuals with a net worth in excess of $1,000,000 or annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 
jointly with their spouse. The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from the 
rules,  to  deliver  a  standardized  risk  disclosure  document  in  a  form  prepared  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  which  provides 
information about penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market. The broker-dealer also must provide the customer 
with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock, the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction and 
monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock held in the customer's account. The bid and offer quotations, and the 
broker-dealer and salesperson compensation information, must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior to effecting the transaction 
and must be given to the customer in writing before or with the customer's confirmation. In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to 
a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from these rules, the broker-dealer must make a special written determination that the 
penny  stock  is  a  suitable  investment  for  the  purchaser  and  receive  the  purchaser's  written  agreement  to  the  transaction.  These  disclosure 
requirements may have the effect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary market for the stock that is subject to these penny 
stock rules. Consequently, these penny stock rules may affect the ability of broker-dealers to trade our securities. We believe that the penny 
stock rules discourage investor interest in and limit the marketability of our common stock. 
  
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA, has adopted sales practice requirements which may also limit a stockholder's 
ability to buy and sell our stock. 
  
In  addition  to  the  "penny  stock"  rules  described  above,  FINRA  has  adopted  rules  that  require  that  in  recommending  an  investment  to  a 
customer, a broker-dealer must have reasonable grounds for believing that the investment is suitable for that customer. Prior to recommending 
speculative low priced securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must make reasonable efforts to obtain information about 
the customer's financial status, tax status, investment objectives and other information. Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes 
that there is a high probability that speculative low priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers. FINRA requirements make 
it more difficult for broker-dealers to recommend that their customers buy our common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our 
stock and have an adverse effect on the market for our shares.
13
Properties.
Item 1B.  Unresolved Staff Comments. 
  
Not Applicable. 
 
Item 2. 
 
Corporate Headquarters, Vancouver, British Columbia 
  
Our  corporate  headquarters  are  located  at  7425  Arbutus  Street,  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada  V6P  5T2.  Our  current  premises  are 
adequate for our existing operations. 
  
Real Estate Investments 
  
We do not currently maintain any investments in real estate, real estate mortgages or securities of persons primarily engaged in real estate 
activities, nor do we expect to do so in the foreseeable future. 
  
Peru Properties 
  
On August 31, 2009, a NI 43-101 compliant Technical Report relating to the Peru Properties entitled “Geological Evaluation of the Huanza 
Property” dated August 28, 2009 was published and filed on SEDAR at www.sedar.com. 
  
On April 4, 2011, the Company filed the NI 43-101 compliant Huanza Technical Report with the securities regulatory authorities in Canada, 
pursuant to Canadian securities laws. The Huanza Technical Report was prepared in accordance with Canadian National Instrument. Readers 
are encouraged to review the Technical Report in its entirety on SEDAR (www.sedar.com) or EDGAR (www.sec.gov) for more information 
regarding the Peru Properties.   
 
Acquisition, Location and Description 
  
On  December  5,  2007,  we  entered  into  the  Master  Purchase  Agreement  with  Black  Tusk  Peru,  a  Peru  corporation  and  a  newly-formed 
subsidiary  of  the  Company,  Leonard  Raymond  De  Melt,  and  Marlene Ore  Lamilla,  pursuant  to  which  we  agreed  to  issue  an  aggregate  of 
400,000 split-adjusted common shares, par value $0.001 per share, of the Company to Ms. Lamilla and her designees in consideration for the 
transfer by Ms. Lamilla to Black Tusk Peru of the Peru Properties. As additional consideration for the transfer of the Peru Properties, Black 
Tusk Peru agreed to grant to Marlene Ore Lamilla (or her designee) a 1% royalty on the net smelter returns upon commercial production on the 
Peru Properties. 
  
Concurrently with the execution of the Master Purchase Agreement, Marlene Ore Lamilla and Black Tusk Peru entered into the Peru Transfer 
Agreement, to govern the transfer and registration of the Peru Properties under Peruvian law. 
  
On the Closing Date, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Master Purchase Agreement and the Peru Transfer Agreement. 
Our  consummation  of  the  Master  Purchase  Agreement  and  the  Peru  Transfer  Agreement  was  contingent  upon,  among  other  things,  the 
formalization of the Peru Transfer Agreement into a public deed before a Peruvian notary public, recordation of the Peru Transfer Agreement 
with the appropriate Peruvian governmental entity and registration of the Peru Properties in the name of “Black Tusk Minerals Peru SAC” with 
the  appropriate  Peruvian  registries.  As  of  the  Closing  Date,  all  of  the  Peru  Properties  have  been  registered  with  the  appropriate  Peruvian 
registries. 
  
On December 7, 2010, the Peru Transfer Agreement was amended to eliminate the NSR Royalty whereby the NSR Royalty reverted to Black 
Tusk Peru and was terminated. The amendment to the Peru Transfer Agreement is registered with the appropriate Peruvian authority.
14
N°
CONCESSION
The Peru Properties cover an area of 8066.51 hectares in the Republic of Peru and consist of 19 registered claims.  The corner coordinates for 
the claims boundaries are registered with the Instituto Geológico Minero y Metalúrgico (INGAMMET) Avenida Las Artes Sur 220, San Borja, 
Lima.  The Peru Properties are located approximately 120 kilometers northeast of the capital, Lima, in the long hydrothermal alteration trend 
known as the Central Polymetallic Belt. This area is situated in the rugged Western Andean range at an average elevation of 4,200 meters, an 
area with a long history of successful production. 
  
The  Peru  Properties  consist  of  the  following  mining  claims  and  pediments  located  in  the  District  of  Huanza,  Province  of  Huarochiri, 
Department of Lima, Peru:  
 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
 
Access, Climate, Local Resources, Infrastructure and Physiography
INGEMMET 
 
  Resolution N° 3423 INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N°002242-2007-INACC/J 
  Resolution N° 002666-2007-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N°000071-2007-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 002099-2007-INACC/J 
  Resolution N° 000310-2007-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 002425-2007-INACC/J 
  Resolution N° 002458-2007-INACC/J 
  Resolution N° 002100-2007-INACC/J 
  Resolution N° 002579-2007-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 000402-2007-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 001448-2007-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 004169-2008-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 001890-2008-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 001705-2008-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N°4919-2009- INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N°0209-2010- INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
  Resolution N° 0367-2010-INGEMMET/PCD/PM 
   Resolution N° 0045-2010-INGEMMET/PCD/PM
ALTACOCHA MINE 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 1 
   ALTOCOCHA  MINE 2 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 3 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 4 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 5 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 7 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 8 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 9 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 10 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 11 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 12 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 14 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 15 
   ALTOCOCHA MINE 16 
   BLACK TUSK 1 
   BLACK TUSK 2 
   BLACK TUSK 3 
    BLACK TUSK 4
0101292-07
 
0101324-07
 
0101325-07
 
0101326-07
 
0101327-07
 
0101328-07
 
0101598-07
 
0101597-07
 
0101664-07
 
0101665-07
 
0101666-07
 
0101667-07
 
0104158-07
 
0106330-07
 
0106329-07
 
0102020-09
 
0102019-09
 
 
0102018-09
   0102021-09
PUBLIC REGISTRY
12125438
12089171
12134767
12089882
12089359
12189875
12089522
12089420
12089424
12135392
12089535
12089549
12359543
12359721
12359751
12477466
12477470
12477475
12477483
CODE
Access  to  the  project  area  from  Lima  is  via  the  Carterra  Central  highway  to  the  towns  of  Chosica  70  (kilometers)  or  San  Mateo  (100 
kilometers) then continuing via unpaved road, a further 50 kilometers from Chosica or San Mateo, traversing mountainous terrain. Driving time 
from Lima is approximately 5 hours.  The elevation of the mine gate is about 4,100 meters above sea level
15
The climate in the project area is typical of the Peruvian Andes with both wet and dry seasons. The wet season is from December to March, 
during which limited periods of electrical storm activity can develop with hail, rain and occasionally snow above 5,000 meters. Individual 
rainfall events can be severe, with over an inch falling in an hour. Dense fog is common during the rainy season and temperatures rarely reach 
above 15°C. The dry season is from April to November, during which the coldest temperatures can fall below 0°C and highest temperatures 
may exceed 25°C. Rainfall is very rare in the dry season. 
  
The Peru Properties are located in an area of high altitude between 4,000 and 4,800 meters above sea level. The mountain slopes are steep to 
occasionally vertical where local topography is defined by fault planes. Valley floors and gently dipping terrain below 4,500 meters is covered 
with short grasses and small bushes near drainages and the upper terrain is covered with barren rock. Subsistence farming is variably developed 
in the valleys and alpacas, llamas and goats are herded at higher elevations. 
  
The town of San Mateo, with approximately 4,500 inhabitants, is the only population center in the immediate vicinity of the Property and is 
located along the Central Highway approximately two hours from Lima. 
 
The western cordillera has a long history of mining and exploration, experienced Peruvian labor can be found in many towns including Chosica 
and San Mateo, the more local mountain village of Huanza (10 kilometers) is also likely to have a ready work force. The Village of Hunaza is 
supplied  with  hydroelectricity  and  is  the  closest  electrical  supply  to  the  project  area.  Electricity  pylons,  that  once  carried  electricity  to  the 
Finlandia mine and mill, stand within the project concessions, power cables however have been removed. Water flows year-round in mountain 
streams. 
 
The unpaved roads between the Carterra Central Highway and project area cross an operating freight rail road between Lima and La Oroya. 
The nearest airport to the Peru Properties is Jorge Chavez International Airport in Lima (120 kilometers). A few derelict buildings stand within 
the concession boundaries, ownership of these buildings is not known.
16
As  an  international  mining  centre  Peru  (and  Lima  in-particular)  has  a  good  supply  of  world-class  mining  and  exploration  related  services 
including;  drilling  companies,  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  accredited  assay  laboratories,  surveying  companies,  specialist  tool  and  equipment 
suppliers. 
 
Operational History 
  
Gold mining in the Lima region of Peru dates back to the early colonial days, when the Spaniards are reported to have mined the polymetallic 
veins located in the Huanza area. 
 
More recent exploration and mining in the Huanza area started in the mid 1950s.  Commercial production from the Nueva Condor mine, which 
the Altochocha properties surround, commenced in 1956. Based on information published prior to the completion of the Company’s Technical 
Report, it is reported that from 1956 to 1991, Compania Minera Huampar S.A., produced about 25,000 ounces of gold and about 15 million 
ounces of silver. 2.5 million tons averaging   1.6 g/t Au, 5.4 oz/ton Ag, 3.8% Pb and 5.0% Zn was reported to have been milled. 
 
The mine, however, was shut down in 1991 due to a terrorist event which destroyed a major power plant, hence stopping part of the power 
supply to the city of Lima and also to the Nueva Condor mine.  
 
Peruvian General Mining Law 
 
According to the General Mining Law of Peru, Validity Fees are payable annually at a cost of US$ 3.00 per hectare and must be paid by the 
30th  of  June.  Should  payment  of  Validity  Fees  not  be  made  for  two  consecutive  years,  mining  pediments  or  concessions  will  be 
cancelled.  After pediments or concessions are held by a party for 6 years annual fees change according to the following framework:
“Holders of mining concessions are obliged to achieve a minimum production equivalent to US$100.00 per hectare per year, within 
six years following the year in which the respective mining concession title is granted. If this minimum production is not reached, as 
of the first semester of the 7th year after the concession title has been granted, the holder of the concession should pay a US$ 6.00 
penalty per hectare per year. If such minimum production is not obtained until the end of the 11th year after obtaining the concession 
title, the penalty to be paid as of the 12th year increases to US$ 20.00 per hectare per year.”
Following the same principle established in connection with the validity fee, evidence of compliance with the requested minimum production 
or  investment  or,  in  its  defect,  payment  of  the  corresponding  penalty  can  only  be  missed  for one  year.  Non-compliance  with  any of  these 
possibilities for two consecutive years, results in the cancellation of the mining concession. 
 
No  permits  are  required  for  exploration  work  although  an  affidavit  must  be  signed.  An  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  (EIA)  must  be 
completed prior to any drilling. 
 
Present Condition 
 
On April 4, 2011, the Company filed the NI 43-101 compliant Huanza Technical Report with the securities regulatory authorities in Canada, 
pursuant to Canadian securities laws. The Huanza Technical Report was prepared in accordance with Canadian National Instrument. Readers 
are encouraged to review the Technical Report in its entirety on SEDAR (www.sedar.com) or EDGAR (www.sec.gov) for more information 
regarding the Peru Properties.   
  
The total cost for the acquisition of the Peru Properties was $1,330,000.  During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company incurred $23,197 
of mineral property costs related to the Peru Properties. The Company has made no improvements on the Peru Properties and they contain no 
physical plant, equipment, or other structures.  The Company has neither improved the present condition of, nor undertaken any work on, the 
Peru Properties aside from road construction.
17
The Company’s anticipates using diesel generators as the exclusive power source for the Peru Properties. 
  
As  of  May  31,  2011,  the  Company  does  not  know  of  any  environmental  issues  specific  to  the  Peru  Properties.  The  Company  intends  to 
undertake an extensive environmental due diligence program on the entire site. 
  
Geological Setting and Deposit Types 
 
On April 4, 2011, the Company filed the NI 43-101 compliant Huanza Technical Report with the securities regulatory authorities in Canada, 
pursuant to Canadian securities laws. The Huanza Technical Report was prepared in accordance with Canadian National Instrument. Readers 
are encouraged to review the Technical Report in its entirety on SEDAR (www.sedar.com) or EDGAR (www.sec.gov) for more information 
regarding the Peru Properties.   
 
As of May 31, 2011 we have performed very limited exploration and sampling of the Peru Properties. The Technical Report does not contain a 
mineral resources or mineral reserves estimate for the Peru Properties. 
  
Recommended Program 
  
On April 4, 2011, the Company filed the NI 43-101 compliant Huanza Technical Report with the securities regulatory authorities in Canada, 
pursuant to Canadian securities laws. The Huanza Technical Report was prepared in accordance with Canadian National Instrument. Readers 
are encouraged to review the Technical Report in its entirety on SEDAR (www.sedar.com) or EDGAR (www.sec.gov) for more information 
regarding the Peru Properties.   
 
The Technical Report recommends the following: 
 
Satellite Imagery 
Airborne geophysical survey (500 km @ $200/km) 
Ground follow-up (geology, soil geochemistry, rock sampling)
 
A drilling decision will be made following a review of results of this initial exploration work. 
 
Capital Expenditures 
  
As  of  May  31,  2011  the  Company  is  in  the  exploration  phase  of  its  planned  operations  for  the  Peru  Properties.  Consequently,  we  do  not 
anticipate making any capital expenditures for the fiscal year ending May 31, 2012. The only expenses we anticipate accruing prior to May 31, 
2012 are those relating to operations, exploration, and technical review. The Company is exploring joint ventures, option arrangements, earn-
ins or other arrangements which will fund maintenance, explorations and development of our properties, although none have been negotiated. 
 
Item 3.  Legal Proceedings. 
  
 We  know  of  no  material,  existing  or  pending  legal  proceedings  against  the  Company,  nor  are  we  involved  as  a  plaintiff  in  any  material 
proceeding or pending litigation. There are no proceedings in which any of our directors, officers or affiliates, or any registered or beneficial 
shareholder, is an adverse party or has a material interest adverse to our interest. 
  
Item 4.
[Removed and Reserved.]
$  
  $
  $
25,000 
100,000 
100,000
18
PART II
Item 5.  Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
  
Market Information 
  
Our common stock is quoted on the Over The Counter Bulletin Board (“OTCBB”), which is sponsored by the Financial Industry Regulatory 
Authority (“FINRA”). The OTCBB is a network of security dealers who buy and sell stock. The dealers are connected by a computer network, 
which  provides  information  on  current  “bids”  and  “asks”  as  well  as  volume  information.  The  OTCBB  is  not  considered  a  “national 
exchange.”  Our symbol is “BKTK.” 
  
Our  common  stock  began  trading  on  the  OTCBB  on  February  1,  2008.  Accordingly,  there  is  only  a  very  limited  trading  history  for  our 
common  stock.  Further,  the  market  for  shares  in  our  common  stock  is  limited  because only  a  small  number  of  our  outstanding  shares  are 
available for trading in the public market. 
  
The high and low bid quotations of our common stock on the OTCBB as reported by the OTC Markets were as follows:
FINRA OTC Bulletin Board (1)(2)
Quarter Ended
May 31, 2011
February 28, 2011
November 30, 2010
August 31, 2010
May 31, 2010
February 28, 2010
November 30, 2009
August 31, 2009
High 
($)
0.26       
        
1.00       
        
0.75       
        
0.725       
        
10.5     $ 
        
9.5     $ 
        
5.50     $ 
        
13.75     $
$
   
  $
   
  $
   
  $
Low 
($)
0.07 
  
0.1 
  
0.15 
  
0.175 
  
0.56 
  
2.75 
  
2.50 
  
4.00
(1)
Over-the-counter market quotations reflect inter-dealer prices without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission, and may 
not represent actual transactions.
(2)
The pricing gives effect to the 50-1 reverse stock split that was effective on October 8, 2010.
Holders 
  
Our common shares are issued in registered form.   Colonial Stock Transfer Company, Inc. , 66 Exchange Place, Suite 100, Salt Lake City, 
Utah 84111 (801) 355-5740 (phone), (801) 355-6505 (fax) is the registrar and transfer agent for our common shares. On August 26, 2011, the 
shareholders' list of our common shares showed 6,970,176 shares outstanding and 61 shareholders of record.
19
Dividend Policy 
  
We have not paid any cash dividends on our common stock and we have no intention of paying any dividends on our shares of common stock 
in the near future. Our current policy is to retain earnings, if any, for use in our operations and in the development of our business. Our future 
dividend policy will be determined from time to time by our board of directors. 
  
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans 
  
On August  24,  2009,  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  adopted  the Black  Tusk  Minerals  Inc. 2009 Nonqualified  Stock Option Plan  (the 
“2009 Plan”).  The 2009 Plan was approved by the Company’s shareholders became effective on November 16, 2009. 
 
Pursuant to the 2009 Plan, stock options may be granted to any person who is performing or who has been engaged to perform services of 
special importance to management of the Company in the operation, development and growth of the Company.  The maximum number of 
shares with respect to which stock options may be granted under the 2009 Plan may not exceed 100,000 split adjusted shares.  All stock options 
granted under the 2009 Plan shall be nonqualified stock options and shall be evidenced by agreements, which shall be subject to the applicable 
provisions of the 2009 Plan.  The foregoing description of the 2009 Plan is qualified in its entirety by reference to the 2009 Plan, a copy of 
which is filed as Exhibit 10.1 to Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on August 29, 2009. 
  
The Committee (as defined in the 2009 Plan) and the Company’s Board of Directors authorized and approved the grant of stock options  on the 
dates and exercise prices as follows, which were the closing prices of the Company’s common shares on the OTC Bulletin Board on the trading 
day immediately prior to the date of grant. 
  
On August 25, 2009, granted 80,000 split-adjusted stock options at an exercise price of $5.00 per share; 
  
On September 1, 2009, granted 4,000 split-adjusted stock options at an exercise price of $5.50 per share; 
  
On September 7, 2009, granted  4,000 split-adjusted stock options  at an exercise price of $5.00 per share; and 
  
On January 4, 2010, granted 12,000 split-adjusted stock options at an exercise price of $5.00 per share. 
  
On March 17, 2011, the Company’s Board of Directors adopted the Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 2011 Nonqualified Stock Option Plan (the “2011 
Plan”).  The 2011 Plan was ratified by the shareholders by written consent on April 29, 2011. 
 
Pursuant to the 2011 Plan, stock options may be granted to any person who is performing or who has been engaged to perform services of 
special importance to management of the Company in the operation, development and growth of the Company.  The maximum number of 
shares with respect to which stock options may be granted under the 2011 Plan may not exceed 650,000.  All stock options granted under the 
2011 Plan shall be nonqualified stock options and shall be evidenced by agreements, which shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the 
2011 Plan.  The foregoing description of the 2011 Plan is qualified in its entirety by reference to the 2011 Plan, a copy of which was filed as 
Exhibit 99.1 to a Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on March 23, 2011. 
 
The  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  authorized,  approved  and  ratified  the  grants  of  stock  options  on  August  11,  2011  and  the  grants  and 
exercise prices as follows, which were the closing prices of the Company’s common shares on the OTC Bulletin Board on the trading day 
immediately prior to the date of grant. 
 
On March 18, 2011,  granted 550,000 stock options at an exercise price of $0.12 per share; and 
 
On April 6, 2011, granted 100,000 stock options at an exercise price of $0.12 per share 
  
For more information regarding the grants of stock option see “Item 11. Executive Compensation – Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year 
End.”
20
The following summary information is presented in aggregate for the 2009 Plan and the 2011 Plan as of May 31, 2011.
Number of Securities to 
be Issued Upon Exercise 
of Outstanding Options
(a)
750,000(2)
Weighted Average 
Exercise Price of 
Outstanding Options,
(b)
$0.53
Plan Category 
Equity Compensation 
Plans Approved By 
Security Holders (1) 
Equity Compensation 
Plans Not Approved By 
Security Holders
Number of Securities
Remaining Available for 
Future Issuance Under 
Equity Compensation 
Securities Reflected in
Plans (Excluding
Column (a)
(c)
40,000
Not Applicable
by the consenting stockholders on April 29, 2011.
(1)  The 2009 Plan was approved by the Company’s shareholders became effective on November 16, 2009; the 2011 Plan was approved 
(2)  20,000  split  adjusted  stock  options  at  an  exercise  price  of  $5.00  per  share  (split-adjusted)  were  cancelled  effective  as  of  the 
resignation  of  Michael  McIsaac  from  his  positions  as  director,  secretary  and  treasurer;  20,000  split  adjusted  stock  options  at  an 
exercise price of $5.00 per share (split-adjusted) were cancelled effective June 1, 2010.
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
During the year ended May 31, 2011, we have offered and sold the following securities in unregistered transactions pursuant to exemptions 
under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). 
  
On  February  8,  2011,  the  Company  closed  a  private  placement  of  units.  Under  the  terms  of  the  private  placement,  the  Company  issued 
5,559,713 units at a price of $0.05 per unit. Magellan acquired 5,163,313 units in consideration of the cancellation of debt. Each unit consists of 
one share of common stock of the Company and one full purchase warrant, which may be converted to one share of common stock in the 
Company at an exercise price of $0.05 until February 8, 2016, a portion of this placement, 2,703,509 and 266,667 (2,970,176 in the aggregate) 
units,  were  rescinded  on  March  30,  2011  and  April  14,  2011  (See  below  for  additional  details  regarding  this  private  placement  and  the 
subsequent Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreement). 
  
On February 8, 2011, the Company issued 7% convertible debentures in the total amount of $33,500. The debentures are due and payable on 
March 1, 2016, with interest accruing on the unpaid principal amount, compounded annually. The debentures are convertible at the option of 
the holder into units.  Each unit consists of one share of common stock of the Company, par value of $0.001, and one share purchase warrant, 
at a conversion price of $0.05 per unit.  Each warrant is exercisable to acquire one share of common stock of the Company at an exercise price 
of $0.05 per share until February 8, 2016. 
  
On February 10, 2011, the Company issued 7% convertible debentures in the total amount of $10,000. The debentures are due and payable on 
March 1, 2016, with interest accruing on the unpaid principal amount, compounded annually. The debentures are convertible at the option of 
the holder into units.  Each unit consists of one share of common stock of the Company, par value of $0.001, and one share purchase warrant, 
at a conversion price of $0.05 per unit. Each warrant is exercisable to acquire one share of common stock of the Company at an exercise price 
of $0.05 per share until February 10, 2016. 
  
On March 9, 2011, the Company closed a private placement of common shares.  Under the terms of the private placement, the Company issued 
200,000 common shares at a price of $0.075 per unit and raised $15,000. 
  
On March 14, 2011, the Company closed a private placement of common shares.  Under the terms of the private placement, the Company 
issued 66,667 common shares at a price of $0.075 per unit and raised $5,000. 
  
On March 31, 2011, the Company issued 200,000 split-adjusted shares of common stock upon the conversion of the notes in the principal 
amount of $10,000.
21
On June 13, 2011, in accordance with the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements, the Company issued to Magellan, 2,970,176 units 
consisting of 2,970,176 shares of common stock of the Company and 2,970,176 common share purchase warrants of the Company which may 
be converted into shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001, at a conversion price of $0.05 per warrant share, until February 8, 
2016. 
  
The units, shares and convertible debentures were offered by the Company in a non-brokered private placement to non-U.S. persons outside of 
the United States in off-shore transactions. The units, convertible debentures, shares, warrants and underlying shares of the private placement 
were not registered under the Securities Act of 1933, or the laws of any state, and are “restricted securities” (as defined in Rule 144(a)(3) of the 
Securities  Act).  The  securities  may  not  be  offered  or  sold  in  the  United  States  absent  registration  or  an  applicable  exemption  from  the 
registration requirements. The shares, warrants and underlying securities were placed pursuant to exclusions from registration requirements by 
Rule 903 of Regulation S of the Securities Act, such exclusions being available based on information obtained from the investors to the private 
placement. 
  
 Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers 
  
During the period covered by this annual report, neither us nor any of our affiliates repurchased common shares of the Company registered 
under section 12 of the Exchange Act, except as listed in this annual report on 10-K. 
  
On February 8, 2011, the Company and Magellan entered into the Disgorgement Agreement. Magellan is wholly owned and controlled by 
Gavin Roy, the President and a director of the Company. As part of a private placement that occurred on February 8, 2011, the Company issued 
5,163,313  units  to  Magellan  in  the  Magellan  Placement,  in  order  to  pay  off  the  Magellan  Debt  as  a  result  of  cash  advances  made  by  the 
Magellan to the Company. As a result of this issuance of units, Magellan was subject to disgorgement under Section 16(b) of the Exchange 
Act, due to sales of shares made by Magellan on August 13 and August 23, 2010. Magellan was required to disgorge $2,866 in profits. Under 
the terms of the Disgorgement Agreement, Magellan disgorged $2,866 by forgiving that amount of the Magellan Debt. 
 
The Company determined that it may have improperly effected a share consolidation and that the Company may not have sufficient authorized 
capital  to  satisfy  the  Company’s business objectives  and  obligations. On  March  30,  2011  and April  14,  2011,  the  Company  and  Magellan 
entered the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements whereby Magellan and the Company agreed to rescind a portion of the Magellan 
Placement by rescinding and cancelling the Rescinded Units in consideration for the Company’s acknowledgement of the debt obligation in the 
amount of $135,176 owed to Magellan in connection with the rescission of a portion of the Magellan Placement. The Company and Magellan 
also agreed that the Company would use commercially reasonable efforts to amend the Articles of Incorporation to increase the authorized 
capital of the Company, including obtaining shareholder approval for the amendment by a majority of the shareholders of the Company and a 
majority of the disinterested shareholders of the Company (shareholders excluding Magellan and Gavin Roy), and upon the increase in the 
authorized shares of common stock of the Company, the Company will permit Magellan to purchase the Rescinded Units under the Rescission 
and Conditional Purchase Agreement under the same terms as the Magellan Placement. 
 
On June 13, 2011, in accordance with the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements, the Company issued to Magellan, 2,970,176 units 
consisting of 2,970,176 shares of common stock of the Company and 2,970,176 common share purchase warrants of the Company which may 
be converted into shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001, at a conversion price of $0.05 per warrant share, until February 8, 
2016. 
  
Item 6. 
 
Not Applicable. 
 
Item 7.  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 
 
You  should  read  the  following  discussion  and  analysis  of  our  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations  together  with  our  financial 
statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this annual report.  This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that 
involve  risks,  uncertainties  and  assumptions.  Our  actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated  in  these  forward-looking 
statements  as  a  result  of  many  factors,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  those  set  forth  under  “Risk  Factors”  and  elsewhere  in  this  annual 
report.  See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Selected Financial Data.
22
Plan of Operation 
  
Peru Properties 
  
The Company’s plans for the next twelve months are to focus on the exploration of the Peru Properties and estimates that cash requirements of 
approximately  $900,000  will  be  required  for  exploration  and  administration  costs  and  to  fund  working  capital.  We  do  not  have  any 
commitments to fund these costs. Therefore, we need to raise an additional $900,000 in debt or equity financing in the next twelve months. We 
believe that such funds, if raised, will be sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements through May 31, 2012. However, we do not have any 
commitments to fund such costs during the next twelve months.  Since May, 31, 2010, we obtained proceeds in the amount of: (1) $16,500 
through a private placement of units consisting of shares of common stock and share purchase warrants, 330,000 units were issued at $0.05 per 
unit;  (2) $43,500  through  a private  placement  of  7% convertible debentures;  and (3) proceeds  in  the  amount of $20,000  through  a  private 
placement of our common shares by issuing 266,667 shares of common stock at $0.075 per share. 
  
We anticipate that we will incur the following expenses over the next 12 months as of May 31, 2012:
(1)  $350,000  for  operating  expenses,  including  general,  legal,  accounting  and  administrative  expenses  associated  with  our  reporting
obligations under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and general working capital expenditures;
23
(2)  $550,000 for expenses related to the technical review and exploration of the Peru Properties, including, but not limited to, satellite
imagery, the airborne geophysical survey, and geology, soil geochemistry, and rock sampling.
Failure to raise needed financing could result in our having to discontinue our mining exploration and development business. 
 
On August 31, 2009, a NI 43-101 compliant Technical Report relating to the Peru Properties entitled “Geological Evaluation of the Huanza 
Property” dated August 28, 2009 was published and filed on SEDAR at www.sedar.com .  Readers are encouraged to review the Technical 
Report in its entirety for more information regarding the Peru Properties and the recommended program for exploration and development of the 
Peru Properties..    
 
On April 4, 2011, the Company filed the NI 43-101 compliant Huanza Technical Report with the securities regulatory authorities in Canada, 
pursuant to Canadian securities laws. The Huanza Technical Report was prepared in accordance with Canadian National Instrument. Readers 
are encouraged to review the Technical Report in its entirety on SEDAR (www.sedar.com) or EDGAR (www.sec.gov) for more information 
regarding the Peru Properties.   
 
Limited Operating History; Need for Additional Capital 
  
In Note 1 to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements as of May 31, 2011, included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the Company 
included an explanatory paragraph stating that, because the Company had a working capital deficiency of $319,337 as of May 31, 2011, and 
had incurred accumulated losses of $3,003,384 for the period from August 8, 2005 (inception) to May 31, 2011, there was substantial doubt 
about its ability to continue as a going concern.
There is limited historical financial information about the Company upon which to base an evaluation of its performance. The Company is a 
development stage enterprise and has not generated any revenues from operations. The Company cannot guarantee it will be successful in its 
business operations. The Company’s business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new mineral exploration company, including 
limited capital resources, unanticipated problems relating to exploration and additional costs and expenses that may exceed current estimates.  
To become profitable and competitive, the Company will implement its plan of operation as detailed above. 
  
The Company will be required to raise funds to complete the technical review of the Peru Properties, to conduct the recommended exploration 
program  on  the  Peru  Properties  and  for  general  working  capital  purposes.  Such  financing  activities  could  include  issuing  debt  or  equity 
securities in the Company and could result in a dilution of the Company’s existing share capital. The Company can give no assurance that 
future financing will be available to it on acceptable terms or at all. If financing is not available on satisfactory terms, the Company may be 
unable to continue, develop or expand its operations. 
  
Results of Operations 
  
We did not earn any revenues from May 31, 2010 to May 31, 2011. We do not anticipate earning revenues until such time as we have entered 
into  commercial  production  of  our  mineral  properties.  We  are  presently  in  the  exploration  stage  of  our  business  and  we  can  provide  no 
assurance that we will discover commercially exploitable levels of mineral resources on our properties, or if such resources are discovered, that 
we will enter into commercial production of our mineral properties.   
  
We incurred operating expenses in the amount of $265,279 for the period from May 31, 2010 to May 31, 2011 compared to $820,510 for the 
period  from  May  31,  2009  to  May  31,  2010.  These  operating  expenses  included:  (a)  professional  fees  in  connection  with  our  corporate 
organization of $86,982 (2010:$113,862); (b) donated office rent of $3,000 (2010: $3,000); (c) donated management services of $6,000 (2010: 
$6,000);  (d)  impairment  of  mineral  property  costs  of  $Nil  (2010:  $21,958);  and  (e)  general  and  administrative  costs  of  $145,662  (2010: 
$633,547). 
  
We incurred a net loss in the amount of $278,079 for the period from May 31, 2010 to May 31, 2011 compared to $841,814 for the period from 
May  31,  2009  to  May  31,  2010.  The  smaller  loss  was  attributable  to  less  general  and  administrative  fees,  professional  fees  and  property 
impairment costs. 
  
Liquidity and Capital Resources 
  
There is limited financial information about the Company upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. We are an exploration stage 
company and have not generated any revenues from operations. 
  
As at May 31, 2011, we had cash of $2 (2010: $257), a working capital deficit of $319,337 (2010: $270,436) and an accumulated deficit of 
$3,003,384 (2010: $2,725,305).  The increase in working capital deficit was due to decrease in monies due to related parties from $224,734 as 
at May 31, 2010 to $151,673 as at May 31, 2011 which is offset by increase in accounts payable by $52,589 since May 31, 2010 and increase 
in current portion of convertible notes and interest from $Nil (May 31, 2010) to $60,168 at May 31, 2011. 
  
Our continued existence and plans for future growth depend on our ability to obtain the capital necessary to operate by the sale of equity shares. 
We will need to raise additional capital to fund normal operating costs and exploration efforts. We anticipate that we will need $900,000 or 
more to fund our capital requirements through May 31, 2012. We do not have any commitments to fund these costs. Therefore, we need to raise 
an additional $900,000 or more in debt or equity financing in the next twelve months. We believe that such funds, if raised, will be sufficient to 
meet our liquidity requirements through May 31, 2012. However, we do not have any commitments to fund such costs. If we are not able to 
generate sufficient revenues and cash flows or obtain additional or alternative funding, we will be unable to continue as a going concern. Our 
recurring losses and negative cash flow from operations raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.  Subsequent to 
May, 31, 2010, we obtained proceeds in the amount of: (1) $16,500 through a private placement of units consisting of shares of common stock 
and  share  purchase  warrants,  330,000  units  were  issued  at  $0.05  per  unit;  (2)  $43,500  through  a  private  placement  of  7%  convertible 
debentures;  and  (3)  proceeds  in  the  amount  of  $20,000  through  a  private  placement  of  our  common  shares  by  issuing  266,667  shares  of 
common stock at $0.075 per share. These proceeds funded our immediate cash requirements but did not resolve our working capital deficit or 
our need to raise additional capital.
24
The Company may enter into joint venture agreements, option arrangements, earn-in arrangements or other arrangements with third parties in 
order to  fund exploration, development and maintenance of its properties or to provide funding to meet the Company’s capital requirements 
through May 31, 2012. 
  
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies that the Company will continue 
to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has never generated revenues since inception 
and has never paid any dividends and is unlikely to pay dividends or generate earnings in the immediate or foreseeable future. The continuation 
of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon the continued financial support from its shareholders, the ability of the Company to 
obtain  necessary  equity  financing  to  continue  operations,  and  the  attainment  of  profitable  operations.  The  Company’s  working  capital 
deficiency  of  $319,337  and  accumulated  losses  of  $3,003,304  since  inception  raise  substantial  doubt  regarding  the  Company’s  ability  to 
continue as a going concern. 
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements 
  
We have no off-balance sheet transactions. 
  
Critical Accounting Policies 
  
Basis of Presentation 
  
These  consolidated financial  statements  and  related  notes  are presented  in  accordance  with  accounting principles generally  accepted  in  the 
United States, and are expressed in US dollars. These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-
owned  Peruvian  subsidiary,  Black  Tusk  Minerals  Peru  SAC.  All  inter-company  accounts  and  transactions  have  been  eliminated.  The 
Company’s fiscal year-end is May 31. 
  
Use of Estimates 
  
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  United  States  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires 
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements 
and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the reporting period. The Company regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions related 
to impairment of its mineral properties, valuation of donated capital and deferred income tax asset valuations. The Company bases its estimates 
and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the 
results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses 
that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by the Company may differ materially and adversely from the 
Company’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will 
be affected. 
  
Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Share 
  
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, " Earnings per Share ". ASC 260 requires presentation of 
both basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS) on the face of the income statement. Basic EPS is computed by dividing net income (loss) 
available to common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the period. Diluted 
EPS  gives  effect  to  all  dilutive  potential  common  shares  outstanding  during  the  period  using  the  treasury  stock  method  and  convertible 
preferred stock using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the 
number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants. Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential shares if 
their effect is anti - dilutive.  Shares underlying these securities totalled 4,204,989 as at May 31, 2011 (115,452 - May 31, 2010). 
  
Comprehensive Loss 
  
ASC  220,  “Comprehensive  Income,”  establishes  standards  for  the  reporting  and  display  of  comprehensive  loss  and  its  components  in  the 
financial statements. As at May 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company has no items that represent a comprehensive loss and, therefore, has not 
included  a  schedule  of  comprehensive  loss  in  the  financial  statements.  The  Company’s  Peruvian  subsidiary  uses  the  US  dollar  for  its 
transactions and accounts for its operations in US dollars, which does not give rise to comprehensive income or loss.
25
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
  
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments with maturity of three months or less at the time of issuance to be cash equivalents. 
  
Mineral Property Costs 
  
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its inception on August 8, 2005 and has not yet realized any revenues from its planned 
operations. It is primarily engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as 
incurred. Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized when incurred. The Company assesses the carrying costs for impairment 
under  ASC  360,  Property,  Plant  and  Equipment  at  each  fiscal  quarter  end.  When  it  has  been  determined  that  a  mineral  property  can  be 
economically  developed  as  a  result  of  establishing  proven  and  probable  reserves,  the  costs  then  incurred  to  develop  such  property,  are 
capitalized.  Such  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-production  method  over  the  estimated  life  of  the  probable  reserve.  If  mineral 
properties are subsequently abandoned or impaired, any capitalized costs will be charged to operations. 
  
Long-Lived Assets 
  
In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant and Equipment, the Company tests long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability when 
events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review 
include, but are not limited to: significant decreases in the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal 
factors; accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset; current 
period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; 
and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. 
  
Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value which is generally determined based on the sum of the 
undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and the eventual disposal of the asset, as well as specific appraisal in certain instances. 
An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value. 
  
Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measures 
  
 The Company’s financial instruments consist principally of cash, accounts payable, amounts due to related parties and convertible notes. 
Pursuant to ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures and ASC 825, Financial Instruments the fair value of the Company’s cash 
equivalents is determined based on “Level 1” inputs, which consist of quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. The Company’s 
convertible notes are recorded using the amortized cost basis, with the discount amortized to interest expense over the term of the notes. The 
fair value of convertible notes is determined using "Level 2" inputs and approximate carrying value. The Company believes that the recorded 
values of all of the Company’s other financial instruments approximate their current fair values because of their nature and respective relatively 
short maturity dates or durations. 
  
The Company’s operations are in Canada and Peru, which results in exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates. The 
financial risk is the risk to the Company’s operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these 
rates. Currently, the Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk. 
  
Income Taxes 
  
Potential benefits of income tax losses are not recognized in the accounts until realization is more likely than not. The Company has adopted 
ASC 740 “Income Taxes ” as of its inception. Pursuant to ASC 740 the Company is required to compute tax asset benefits for net operating 
losses carried forward. Potential benefit of net operating losses have not been recognized in these financial statements because the Company 
cannot be assured it is more likely than not it will utilize the net operating losses carried forward in future years.
26
Foreign Currency Translation 
  
 The Company’s functional and reporting currency is the United States dollar. The Company’s Peruvian subsidiary uses the US dollar for its 
transactions and accounts for its operations in US dollars. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated in 
accordance with ASC 830 “Foreign Currency Translation Matters”, using the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date. Gains and 
losses arising on settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of income. Foreign 
currency transactions are primarily undertaken in Canadian dollars. The Company has not, to the date of these financials statements, entered 
into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations. 
  
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements 
  
In  June  2009,  the  FASB  issued  guidance  now  codified  as  ASC  105,  Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles  as  the  single  source  of 
authoritative  accounting  principles  recognized  by  the  FASB  to  be  applied  by  nongovernmental  entities  in  the  preparation  of  financial 
statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, aside from those issued by the SEC. ASC 105 does not change current U.S. GAAP, but is intended 
to simplify user access to all authoritative U.S. GAAP by providing all authoritative literature related to a particular topic in one place. The 
adoption of ASC 105 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements, but did eliminate all references to pre-codification 
standards. 
  
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and does not 
believe  that  there  are  any  other  new  accounting  pronouncements  that  have  been  issued  that  might  have  a  material  impact  on  its  financial 
position or results of operations. 
   
Item 7A.  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Material Risk.
  
Not Applicable.
27
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Item 8. 
  
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
 
May 31, 2011 
 
  
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
  
Consolidated Balance Sheets  
  
Consolidated Statements of Operations  
  
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  
  
Consolidated Statements of of Stockholders’ Deficit  
  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
28
Index
F-1
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
F-7
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Directors and Stockholders of 
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. (An Exploration Stage Company) 
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Black Tusk Minerals Inc. (An Exploration Stage Company) as of May 31, 
2011  and  2010  and  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  operations,  cash  flows  and  stockholders’  deficit  for  the  years  then  ended,  and 
accumulated from August 8, 2005 (Date of Inception) to May 31, 2011. These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the 
Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits. 
 
We conducted our audits in accordance with standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards 
require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audits  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  of  material 
misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The 
Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. An audit includes 
consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but 
not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting.  An audit also includes assessing 
the  accounting  principles  used  and  significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall  financial  statement 
presentation. 
 
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Black 
Tusk  Minerals  Inc.  (An  Exploration  Stage  Company)  as  of  May  31,  2011  and  2010,  and  the  results  of  its  operations,  cash  flows  and 
stockholders’ deficit for the years then ended and accumulated from August 8, 2005 (Date of Inception) to May 31, 2011, in conformity with 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. 
 
The  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  the  Company  will  continue  as  a  going  concern.  As 
discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company has working capital deficiency and accumulated losses from operations since 
inception. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to 
these matters are also discussed in Note 1. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the 
outcome of this uncertainty. 
 
/s/ “Manning Elliott LLP” 
 
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS 
  
Vancouver, Canada 
  
August 29, 2011
F-1
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(Expressed in US dollars)
ASSETS 
  
Current Assets
Cash 
Prepaid expenses 
  
Total Current Assets 
  
Equipment (Note 2(e)) 
  
Total Assets 
  
  
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIT 
  
Current Liabilities 
  
Accounts payable 
Accrued liabilities 
Due to related parties (Note 3) 
Convertible notes and interest, current (Note 5)
May 31,
2010 
$
257 
140 
  
397 
  
– 
  
397
33,283 
12,816 
224,734 
– 
  
270,833 
  
52,169 
  
323,002
944 
  
2,359,006 
  
42,750 
  
(2,725,305)
  
(322,605)
  
397
May 31,
2011 
$
2 
964 
  
966 
  
2,310 
  
3,276
85,872 
22,590 
151,673 
60,168 
  
320,303 
  
34,313 
  
354,616
4,000 
  
2,596,294 
  
51,750
(3,003,384)   
 
(351,340)
3,276
Total Current Liabilities 
  
Convertible Notes and Interest (Note 5) 
  
Total Liabilities 
  
  
Contingencies (Note 1) 
Subsequent Events (Note 11) 
  
Stockholders’ Deficit 
  
Common Stock, 100,000,000 shares authorized, $0.001 par value
4,000,000 shares issued and outstanding (2010 – 1,015,785) (Note 6)
  
Additional Paid-in Capital 
  
Donated Capital (Note 3) 
  
Deficit Accumulated During the Exploration Stage 
  
Total Stockholders’ Deficit 
  
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Deficit
F-2
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Operations 
(Expressed in US dollars)
Revenue 
  
Expenses
Amortization 
Donated rent (Note 3) 
Donated services (Note 3) 
General and administrative (Note 7) 
Impairment of mineral property costs (Note 4) 
Mineral property costs (Note 4) 
Professional fees
Total Operating Expenses 
  
Loss From Operations 
  
Other Expenses
Interest on convertible notes (Note 5) 
Gain on settlement of debt 
Loss on conversion of accounts payable to convertible note (Note 5)
Total Other Expenses 
  
Net Loss 
  
Net Loss Per Share – Basic and Diluted 
  
Weighted Average Shares Outstanding
$
– 
  
  
  
– 
3,000 
6,000 
633,547 
21,958 
42,143 
113,862 
  
820,510 
  
(820,510)
  
  
  
(20,426)
– 
(878)
  
(21,304)
  
(841,814)
(0.88)
941,000
Accumulated
From
August 8, 2005
(Date of 
Inception) 
to May 31,
For the Year
For the Year
Ended
    May 31,
2010
– 
  
  
  
538 
3,000 
6,000 
145,662 
– 
23,197 
86,982 
  
265,379
(265,379)   
 
 
 
(12,700)   
  
  
 
(12,700)   
 
(278,079)
– 
–
$
2011
Ended
     May 31,
2011
    
$ 
          
–        
          
          
          
538        
17,250        
34,500        
950,999        
1,452,208        
69,340        
416,903        
          
2,941,738        
          
(2,941,738 )      
          
          
          
(35,886 )      
–        
(25,760 )      
          
(61,646 )      
          
(3,003,384 )
1,833,000
(0.15)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-3
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
(Expressed in US dollars)
Operating Activities
Net loss 
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to cash:
Amortization 
Impairment of mineral property 
Loss on conversion of accounts payable to convertible note
Donated services and rent 
Common stock issued for services 
Accretion of convertible debt 
Stock – based compensation
Changes in operating assets and liabilities: 
Prepaid expenses 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Due to related parties
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities 
  
Investing Activities 
  
   Purchase of equipment 
   Mineral property acquisition costs 
  
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities 
  
Financing Activities 
  
   Bank indebtedness 
   Proceeds from issuance of common stock 
Proceeds from loans 
   Repayment of loans 
   Share issuance costs 
   Advance from related party 
  
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities 
  
Increase (Decrease) In Cash 
  
Cash - Beginning of Period 
  
Cash - End of Period 
  
Supplemental Disclosures
Interest paid
For the 
Year 
Ended 
May 31, 
 2010
$
(841,814)
  
  
  
– 
21,958 
878 
9,000 
– 
20,426 
557,903 
  
  
(59)
11,160 
104,097 
  
(116,451)
  
  
  
– 
(21,958)
  
(21,958)
  
  
  
(149)
5,000 
45,113 
(22,500)
– 
111,202 
  
138,666 
  
257 
  
– 
  
257
For the 
Year 
Ended 
May 31, 
 2011
$
71,384 
35,243
538 
– 
– 
9,000 
– 
8,859 
78,000
(278,079)   
      
      
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
      
(824)   
  
  
      
(75,879)   
      
      
      
(1,495)   
  
– 
      
(1,495)   
      
      
      
  
– 
  
36,500 
43,500 
  
(2,881)   
  
– 
– 
  
      
  
      
(255)   
      
  
      
2
77,119
257
3,958
1,159
Accumulated 
From August 
8, 2005 (Date 
of Inception) 
to May 31 ,
2011 
$
(3,003,384 )      
        
        
        
538        
1,452,208        
25,760        
51,750        
4,000        
32,045        
635,903        
        
        
(964 )      
170,703        
145,775        
        
(485,666 )      
        
        
        
(1,495 )      
(112,208 )      
        
(113,703 )      
        
        
        
–        
431,937        
93,613        
(25,381 )      
(12,000 )      
111,202        
        
599,371        
        
2        
        
–        
        
2        
        
        
        
5,317
Income tax paid
Non-cash Investing and Financing Activities
Common shares issued upon the conversion of convertible notes
Common shares issued for mineral property 
Settlement of accounts payable for convertible notes 
Common shares issued for settlement of accounts payable
Common shares issued for settlement of due to related party
Issuance of convertible notes for mineral property costs
–        
        
        
        
37,613        
1,330,000        
64,381        
3,254        
112,978        
34,113
–
10,000 
– 
– 
3,254 
112,978 
–
–
27,613 
– 
2,881 
– 
– 
34,113
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-4
Stock
Subscriptions
Receivable
$
Deficit
 
 
      Accumulated  
 
 
      During the
 
 
 
  Donated        Exploration
Capital
$
Stage
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
–
–
–
$
$
–
Amount
Shares
#
4,370
36,208
292
380
292,000
380,000
8,997 
  
– 
  
– 
  
49,575
–
3        
          
–        
          
–        
          
675
2,880        
          
–        
          
–        
          
674,880
Additional
     
Paid-in
Capital
     
          
–
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Deficit 
For the Period from August 8, 2005 (Date of Inception) to May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
     
  
  
     
  
     
     
  
  
  
  
     
Balance – August 8, 2005 
    
(Date of Inception) 
  
     
August 8, 2005 – common 
shares issued for cash at 
$0.0125 per share 
  
March 24, 2006 – common 
shares issued for cash at 
$0.125 per share 
  
May 31, 2006 – common 
shares issued for cash at 
$3.038 per share 
  
Donated rent and services 
  
Net loss for the period 
  
Balance – May 31, 2006 
  
August 31, 2006 – common 
shares issued for services at 
$0.125 per share 
  
Donated rent and services 
  
Net loss for the year 
  
Balance – May 31, 2007 
  
September 1, 2007 - 
common shares issued for 
cash at $3.750 per share 
  
Share issuance costs 
  
February 8, 2008 - common 
shares issued for cash at 
$3.750 per share 
  
April 24, 2008 – common 
shares issued for mineral 
property at a fair value of 
$3.325 per share 
  
April 24, 2008 – common 
shares returned for 
    
cancellation (Note 3) 
     
  
Subscriptions received 
    
     
  
Common stock subscribed      
  
     
Donated rent and services 
    
     
  
    
Net loss for the year 
     
  
Balance – May 31, 2008 
    
  
     
June 17, 2008 - common 
shares issued for cash at 
$0.110 per share
(240,000 )      
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
896,263
(2,760)
  
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
1,487,540
(240 )      
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
896
32,000        
          
–        
          
–        
          
706,880
32        
          
–        
          
–        
          
707
3,968 
  
– 
  
– 
  
53,543
25,123        
          
–
25        
          
–
400,000
20,480
94,186 
  
(3,000)
4,260
400
1,329,600
127,979
15,971
21
4
(250)
  
– 
  
– 
  
(250)
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
(250)
– 
  
–
–
–
– 
  
250 
  
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
–
–
Total
$
–
–
–
– 
  
– 
  
(24,639)
  
(24,639)
– 
  
– 
  
(47,215)
  
(71,854)
– 
  
–
–
4,750
36,500
8,750 
  
6,750 
  
(24,639)
  
32,111
4,000 
  
9,000 
  
(47,215)
  
(2,104)
94,211 
  
(3,000)
15,975
–
1,330,000
–
–
–
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
–
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
–
– 
  
–
–
–
–
–
–
–        
          
6,750        
          
–        
          
6,750
–        
          
9,000        
          
–        
          
15,750
–        
          
–
–
–
– 
  
– 
  
125,750 
  
– 
  
– 
  
125,750
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
9,000        
          
–        
          
24,750
–
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
(1,670,861)
  
(1,742,715)
(3,000)
  
250 
  
125,750 
  
9,000 
  
(1,670,861)
  
(103,779)
–
2,250
–
(125,750)
September 8, 2008 – 
common shares issued for 
cash at $5.00 per share 
  
Share issuance costs 
  
January 23, 2009 – intrinsic 
value of beneficial 
conversion feature on 
convertible debt (Note 6) 
    
  
     
January 23, 2009 – fair 
value of warrants issued 
    
     
  
Common stock subscribed      
  
     
Donated rent and services 
    
  
     
    
Net loss for the year 
  
     
Balance – May 31, 2009
20,000        
          
–
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
936,743
20        
          
–
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
937
99,980 
  
(9,000)
24,600
24,882 
  
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
1,755,981
– 
  
–
–
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
–
– 
  
–
–
– 
  
2,000 
  
– 
  
– 
  
2,000
–        
          
–
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
9,000        
          
–        
          
33,750
– 
  
–
100,000 
  
(9,000)
–
– 
  
– 
  
– 
  
(140,776)
  
(1,883,491)
24,600
24,882 
  
2,000 
  
9,000 
  
(140,776)
  
(90,823)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-5
$
878
Shares
Amount
11,338
18,868
21,851
457,184
3,200
$
1,755,981
–        
         
–        
         
–        
         
–
–        
         
–        
         
–        
         
–
# 
    
         
936,743        
         
–
Additional
     
Paid-in
Capital
     
         
937        
         
–
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Deficit 
For the Period from August 8, 2005 (Date of Inception) to May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
     
  
  
     
  
     
     
  
  
  
  
     
Balance – May 31, 2009 
    
     
  
June 26, 2009 – fair value 
    
of warrants issued 
  
     
July 14, 2009 – loss on 
conversion of accounts 
payable to convertible note      
     
  
August 25, 2009 – fair 
    
value of options issued 
  
     
September 1, 2009 – fair 
    
value of options issued 
     
  
September 7, 2009 – fair 
value of options issued 
    
     
  
September 11, 2009 – 
common shares issued for 
conversion of note 
  
September 11, 2009  – 
common shares issued for 
cash at $3.571 per share 
  
December 31, 2009 – 
common shares issued 
for  conversion of note 
  
January 4, 2010 – fair value 
of options issued 
  
Donated rent and services 
  
Treasury shares issued but 
not paid 
  
Net loss for the year 
  
Balance – May 31, 2010 
  
September 2, 2010 – 
Cancellation of treasury 
shares 
  
October 11, 2010 – 
Adjustment to number of 
shares outstanding after 
stock split 
  
February 8, 2011 – Shares 
issued to settle debt 
  
February 8, 2011 – 
Common shares issued for 
cash at $0.05 per share 
  
March 7, 2011 – common 
shares issued for cash at 
$0.075 per share 
  
March 11, 2011 – common 
shares issued for cash at
2,442        
         
–        
         
–        
         
72,000        
         
–        
         
1,015,785
3        
         
–        
         
–        
         
–        
         
–        
         
944
11        
–        
2,259,537        
–
– 
  
– 
  
2,359,006
–        
–        
2,259        
–
200,000        
–        
66,667
200        
–        
67
330,000        
–
(72,000 )
60,000 
  
–
1,400
330        
–
110,719 
–
3
1
–
13,699
6,999
12,208
14,800 
–
16,170 
–
– 
–
4,933
– 
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
– 
  
–
– 
  
– 
  
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
–
2,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
(2,000)
–
– 
  
–
– 
  
– 
  
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
–
Stock
Subscriptions
Receivable
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
Deficit
 
 
      Accumulated  
 
 
      During the
 
 
 
  Donated        Exploration
Capital
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Total
$
(90,823)
11,338
878
457,184
21,851
18,868
13,702
5,000
12,211
60,000 
  
9,000
– 
  
(841,814)
  
(322,605)
– 
–
– 
–
112,978 
–
16,500 
–
15,000 
–
5,000
Stage
$
(1,883,491)
$ 
     
          
33,750        
          
–
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
–
–
–
–        
          
–        
          
9,000        
          
–        
          
–        
          
42,750
–
– 
  
–
– 
  
(841,814)
  
(2,725,305)
–        
–
–        
–        
–        
–
–        
–
–        
–        
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
–
$0.075 per share 
  
March 30, 2011 – common 
shares issued 
for  conversion of note 
  
March 31, 2011 – common 
shares issued 
for  conversion of note 
  
March 18, 2011 – fair value 
of options issued 
  
April 14, 2011 – fair value 
of options issued 
  
Donated rent and services 
  
Gain on debt settlement 
  
Net loss for the year 
  
Balance – May 31, 2011
–
–
–
–
–
100,000        
–
100        
–
100,000        
         
–        
         
–        
         
–        
–        
–        
–        
–        
         
4,000,000
100        
         
–        
         
–        
         
–        
–        
–        
–        
–        
         
4,000
4,900 
–
4,900
66,000
12,000 
  
– 
– 
2,866 
– 
– 
  
2,596,294
– 
–
–
–
– 
  
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
  
–
– 
–
–
–
– 
  
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
  
–
–
–        
–
–        
          
–        
          
–        
          
9,000        
–        
–        
–        
–        
          
51,750
–
–
– 
–
–
–
– 
  
– 
– 
– 
– 
(278,079)
  
(3,003,384)
5,000 
–
5,000
66,000
12,000 
  
9,000 
– 
2,866 
– 
(278,079)
  
(351,340)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-6
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
 
1.   Nature of Business and Continuance of Operations
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated in the State of Nevada on August 8, 2005. Effective September 21, 2007, the 
Company  incorporated  a  wholly-owned  Peruvian  subsidiary,  Black  Tusk  Minerals  Peru  SAC.  The  Company  is  an  Exploration  Stage 
Company, as defined by Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 915, Development 
Stage Entities . The Company’s principal business is the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. The Company has not presently 
determined whether its properties contain mineral reserves that are economically recoverable. 
  
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize 
its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has never generated revenues since inception and has 
never paid any dividends and is unlikely to pay dividends or generate earnings in the immediate or foreseeable future. The continuation of 
the Company as a going concern is dependent upon the continued financial support from its management and shareholders, the ability of 
the Company to obtain necessary equity financing to continue operations, and the attainment of profitable operations. As at May 31, 2011, 
the Company has a working capital deficiency of $319,337 and has accumulated losses of $3,003,384 since inception. These factors raise 
substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. These consolidated financial statements do not include 
any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary 
should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. 
  
The Company’s plans for the next twelve months are to focus on the exploration of its mineral properties in Peru and estimates that cash 
requirements  of  approximately  $575,000  will  be  required,  $225,000  for  research  and  studies  and  $350,000  for  exploration  and 
administration costs and to fund working capital. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise sufficient funds to pay 
the expected expenses for the next twelve months.
2.   Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
a)  Basis of Presentation
These consolidated financial statements and related notes are presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in 
the United States, and are expressed in US dollars. These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and 
its  wholly-owned  Peruvian  subsidiary,  Black  Tusk  Minerals  Peru  SAC.  All  inter-company  accounts  and  transactions  have  been 
eliminated. The Company’s fiscal year-end is May 31. 
  
On October 11, 2010, the Company effected a 50:1 reverse stock-split of its issued and outstanding common stock. The issued and 
outstanding  share  capital  decreased  from  47,189,262  shares  of  common  stock  to  943,785  shares  of  common  stock.  All  per  share 
amounts,  number  and  exercise  price  of  stock  options,  warrants  and  conversion  price  of  convertible  debt  have  been  retroactively 
restated to reflect the reverse stock-split.
b)  Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  United  States  generally  accepted  accounting  principles 
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the 
financial  statements  and  the  reported  amounts  of  revenue  and  expenses  in  the  reporting  period.  The  Company  regularly  evaluates 
estimates and assumptions related to impairment of its mineral properties, valuation of donated capital, stock-based compensation, 
valuation of financial instruments and deferred income tax asset valuations. The Company bases its estimates and assumptions on 
current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of 
which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses 
that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by the Company may differ materially and adversely 
from the Company’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results 
of operations will be affected.
c)  Comprehensive Loss
ASC 220, Comprehensive Income, establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive loss and its components in the 
financial statements. As at May 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company has no items that represent other comprehensive loss and therefore, 
has not included a schedule of other comprehensive loss in the financial statements. The Company’s Peruvian subsidiary uses the US
dollar for its transactions and accounts for its operations in US dollars, which does not give rise to other comprehensive income or 
loss.
F-7
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
2.  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
d)  Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Share
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, Earnings per Share . ASC 260 requires presentation 
of both basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS) on the face of the income statement. Basic EPS is computed by dividing net income 
(loss) available to common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the 
period. Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method 
and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used 
in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants. Diluted EPS excludes all 
dilutive  potential  split-adjusted  shares  if  their  effect  is  anti-dilutive.  Split-adjusted  shares  underlying  these  securities  totalled 
4,204,989 as at May 31, 2011 (2010 – 115,452).
e)  Equipment
Equipment  is  comprised  of  computer  equipment  and  is  recorded  at  cost  and  amortized  using  the  straight  line  method  over  the 
estimated useful life of 3 years.
f)  Cash and Cash Equivalents
The  Company  considers  all  highly  liquid  instruments  with  maturity  of  three  months  or  less  at  the  time  of  issuance  to  be  cash 
equivalents .
g)  Mineral Property Costs
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its inception on August 8, 2005 and has not yet realized any revenues from its 
planned operations. It is primarily engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. Mineral property exploration costs 
are expensed as incurred. Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized.  The Company assesses the carrying costs for 
impairment under ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment at each fiscal quarter end. When it has been determined that a mineral 
property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves, the costs then incurred to develop 
such  property,  are  capitalized.  Such  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-production  method  over  the  estimated  life  of  the 
probable reserve. If mineral properties are subsequently abandoned or impaired, any capitalized costs will be charged to operations.
h)  Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment, the Company tests long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability 
when  events or  changes  in  circumstances  indicate  that  their  carrying  amount  may  not  be  recoverable.  Circumstances  which  could 
trigger a review include, but are not limited to: significant decreases in the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the 
business climate or legal factors; accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or 
construction of the asset; current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing 
losses  associated  with  the  use  of  the  asset;  and  current  expectation  that  the  asset  will  more  likely  than  not  be  sold  or  disposed 
significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair 
value which is generally determined based on the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and the eventual 
disposal of the asset, as well as specific appraisal in certain instances. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount is 
not recoverable and exceeds fair value.
i)  Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measures
The Company’s financial instruments consist principally of cash, accounts payable, amounts due to related parties and convertible 
notes and interest. The Company believes that the recorded values of all of the Company’s financial instruments approximate their 
current fair values because of their nature, respective relatively short maturity dates or durations, and current market interest rates for 
similar financial instruments. 
  
The  Company’s  operations  are  in  Canada,  which  results  in  exposure  to  market  risks  from  changes  in  foreign  currency  rates.  The 
financial risk is the risk to the Company’s operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility 
of these rates. Currently, the Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk.
F-8
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
2.  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
Income Taxes
j)
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes . The asset 
and  liability  method  provides  that  deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  recognized  for  the  expected  future  tax  consequences  of 
temporary  differences  between  the  financial  reporting  and  tax  bases  of  assets  and  liabilities,  and  for  operating  loss  and  tax  credit 
carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect 
when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount 
that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
k)  Foreign Currency Translation
The Company’s functional and reporting currency is the United States dollar ("US dollars"). The Company’s Peruvian subsidiary uses 
the US dollar for its transactions and accounts for its operations in US dollars. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign 
currencies are translated in accordance with ASC 830, Foreign Currency Translation Matters , using the exchange rate prevailing at 
the balance sheet date. Gains and losses arising on settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in 
the determination of income. Foreign currency transactions are primarily undertaken in Canadian dollars. The Company has not, to the 
date of these financials statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
l)  Stock-based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Based Compensation , and ASC 
505-50, Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees using the fair value method. All transactions in which goods or services are the 
consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or 
the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable.
m)  Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and 
does not believe that there are any new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its 
financial position or results of operations.
3.   Related Party Transactions and Balances
a)  During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company recognized $6,000 (2010 - $6,000) for donated services at $500 per month, and
$3,000 (2010 - $3,000) for donated rent at $250 per month provided by a former director.
b)  At  May  31,  2011,  the  Company  paid  $1,625  to  a  former  director  of  the  Company  for  returning  65,000  split-adjusted  shares  of 
common stock to the Company for cancellation. At May 31, 2011, the Company is indebted to a former director of the Company for 
$nil (May 31, 2010 - $1,625)
c)  At May 31, 2011, the Company paid $1,375 to the former secretary, treasurer and director of the Company for returning 55,000 split-
adjusted  shares  of  common  stock  to  the  Company  for  cancellation.  At  May  31,  2011,  the  Company  is  indebted  to  the  former 
secretary, treasurer and director of the Company for $nil (May 31, 2010 - $1,375).
d)  On February 8, 2011, the Company entered into a disgorgement and settlement agreement with Magellan Management Company, 
wholly owned and controlled by the President of the Company (Magellan). Pursuant to the agreement, the Company issued 5,163,313 
units at $0.05 per unit (“Magellan Placement) to settle $261,032 of debt owed to the Related Company (“Magellan Debt”) as a result 
of cash advances made by the Magellan to the Company. A portion of the Magellan Placement was rescinded (Refer to Note 3(f) 
below).  Each unit consists of one share of common stock and one warrant to purchase an additional common share of the Company 
at $0.05. As a result of this issuance of units, the Magellan was subject to matching under section 16(b) of the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934, due to sales of shares made by Magellan on August 13 and August 23, 2010. As a result of the matching transaction, 
Magellan was required to disgorge $2,866 in profits (refer to 3(f) below). The $2,866 was forgiven as part of the Magellan Debt (refer 
to Note 6(g)).
F-9
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
3.  Related Party Transactions and Balances (continued)
e)  At May 31, 2011, the Company is indebted to a company owned by the president of the Company for $151,673 (May 31, 2010 -
$221,734), of which $151,673 (May 31, 2010 - $110,532) represents expenses paid on behalf of the Company and $nil (May 31, 2010 
- $111,202) represents net cash advances provided to the Company. Indebtedness of $3,164 is non-interest bearing, unsecured and has 
no specific repayment terms. The remaining indebtedness amount of $148,509 will be converted into units pursuant to a rescission 
and conditional purchase agreements entered into by the Company and the related party on March 30, 2011 and April 14, 2011 (Refer 
to Note 3(f) below for details on the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreement).
f)  The Company determined that it may have improperly effected a share consolidation and that the Company may not have sufficient 
authorized capital to satisfy the Company’s business objectives and obligations. On March 30, 2011 and April 14, 2011, the Company 
entered into a rescission and conditional purchase agreement with Magellan (the “Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements”) 
whereby Magellan and the Company agreed to rescind a portion of the Magellan Placement by rescinding and cancelling 2,703,509 
and 266,667 (2,970,176 in the aggregate) shares of common stock and 2,703,509 and 266,667 (2,970,176 in the aggregate) share 
purchase warrants (collectively, the “Rescinded Units”) in consideration for the Company’s acknowledgement of the debt obligation 
in the amount of $135,176 and $13,333 ($148,509 in the aggregate) owed to Magellan in connection with the rescission of a portion 
of the Magellan Placement. The Company and Magellan also agreed that the Company would use commercially reasonable efforts to 
amend the Articles of Incorporation to increase the authorized capital of the Company, including obtaining shareholder approval for 
the amendment by a majority of the shareholders of the Company and a majority of the disinterested shareholders of the Company 
(shareholders excluding Magellan and Gavin Roy), and upon the increase in the authorized shares of common stock of the Company, 
the Company would permit Magellan to purchase the Rescinded Units under the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements 
under the same terms as the Magellan Placement. On June 13, 2011, the Company issued to Magellan, 2,970,176 units with each unit 
consisting of one common share and one common share purchase warrant with an exercise price of $0.05 per share exercisable until 
February 8, 2016. Refer to Note 11(b).
The above transactions have been recorded at the exchange amounts, being the amounts agreed upon by the related parties.
4.  Mineral Properties
On  August  13,  2007,  the  Company  entered  into  a  term  sheet  with  two  individuals  detailing  the  principal  terms  of  the  Company’s 
acquisition of 15 mining concessions and pediments covering approximately 8,000 hectares located in the District of Huanza, Province of 
Huarochiri, Peru. These concessions are subject to a 1% net smelter royalty granted to those individuals. As a result, the Company formed 
a Peruvian subsidiary to acquire the concessions. On December 5, 2007, the Company entered into a Master Purchase Agreement pursuant 
to  which  the  Company  would  issue  an  aggregate  of  400,000  split-adjusted  common  shares  of  the  Company  to  the  individuals  for  the 
transfer of the properties to the Company’s subsidiary. On April 24, 2008, the Company issued the 400,000 split-adjusted common shares 
at a fair value of $1,330,000. The Company paid $50,000 for the right to use adjacent property for mineral exploration purposes and has 
spent $41,860 on road building. The total cost of $1,421,860 was recognized as an impairment loss during the year ended May 31, 2008. 
On December 7, 2010, the Company entered into an Amendment to the Mining Concession Agreement.  Pursuant to the amendment, both 
parties agreed to terminate the 1% NSR royalty.
During the year ended May 31, 2010, the Company acquired additional mining rights in the district of Huanza, Province of Huarochiri, 
Peru by paying $21,958 and incurred $42,143 of mineral property costs.  During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company incurred 
additional  mineral  property  costs  of  $23,197.     As  it  has  not  been  determined  whether  there  are  proven  or  probable  reserves  on  the 
property, the Company recognized an impairment loss of mineral property acquisition costs for the year ended May 31, 2011 of $nil (2010 
- $21,958).
F-10
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
5.  Convertible Notes
a)  On January 23, 2009, the Company entered into two fee arrangement agreements to settle $61,500 of professional fees included in
accounts  payable.  Pursuant  to  the  agreement  the  Company  issued  two  convertible  notes  with  an  aggregate  principal  amount  of 
$61,500, bearing interest at 4% per annum, and convertible into the Company’s common shares at a conversion price of $5.00 and 
warrants to purchase 12,000 split-adjusted shares of the Company’s common stock at $5.00 per share until January 23, 2012. The 
note is due on the earlier of: (a) January 23, 2012, (b) the date the Company closes an Acquisition Transaction (defined as the sale of 
equity securities or securities convertible into equity securities, any merger, consolidation, statutory share exchange or acquisition 
transaction, any sale of substantially all of the assets of the Company or any similar transaction involving the issuance, cancellation or 
restructuring of equity securities of the Company, unless following the completion of such transaction, the then existing shareholders 
of the Company own or control, indirectly or directly at least 50% of the voting power or liquidation rights of the Company or the 
successor of such merger, consolidation or statutory share exchange) or (c) the date the Company raises financing of $250,000 or 
more. In accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt – Debt with Conversion and Other Options , the Company recognized the intrinsic value 
of  the  embedded  beneficial  conversion  feature  of  $24,600  as  additional  paid-in  capital  and  reduced  the  carrying  value  of  the 
convertible notes to $36,900. The carrying value of the convertible notes is to be accreted over the term of the convertible notes up to 
their face value of $61,500. As at May 31, 2011, the carrying values of the convertible debenture and accrued convertible interest 
payable thereon were $54,385 and $5,782, respectively.
b)  On June 26, 2009, the Company issued four convertible notes in exchange for cash proceeds used to pay concession fees due on the 
Company’s principal mineral properties in Peru. The notes bear interest at 10% per annum and are convertible into the Company’s 
common  shares  at  a  conversion  rate  of  $5.00  per  share.  The  principal  amounts  and  due  dates  are  as  follows:  $12,500  due  on 
September 26, 2009 and $37,613 on December 31, 2009. In conjunction with the convertible notes, the Company issued warrants to 
purchase 10,000 split-adjusted common shares of the Company at a price of $5.00 per share until January 23, 2012. On August 31, 
2009, the maturity date of the $12,500 convertible note was amended from August 31, 2009 to September 26, 2009. The notes are due 
on the earlier of (a) the specified due date, (b) the date the Company closes an Acquisition Transaction (defined as the sale of equity 
securities  or  securities  convertible  into  equity  securities,  any  merger,  consolidation,  statutory  share  exchange  or  acquisition 
transaction or any sale of substantially all of the assets of the Company, any similar transaction involving the issuance, cancellation or 
restructuring of equity securities of the Company, unless following the completion of such transaction, the then existing shareholders 
of the Company own or control, indirectly or directly at least 50% of the voting power or liquidation rights of the Company or the 
successor of such merger, consolidation or statutory share exchange) or (c) the date the Company raises financing of $250,000 or
more. In accordance with ASC 470-20, the Company determined that there was no intrinsic value or beneficial conversion feature on 
the  convertible  notes.  As  a  result,  the  Company  recorded  discounts  equal  to  the  relative  fair  value  of  the  detachable  warrants  of 
$11,338 as additional paid-in capital and reduced the carrying value of the convertible notes to $38,775. The carrying values of the 
convertible notes were to be accreted over the term of the convertible notes up to their face value of $50,113.
On  September  11,  2009,  the  Company  issued  3,200  split-adjusted  shares  of  common  stock  upon  the  conversion  of  a  note  in  the 
principal amount of $16,000 and recorded the unamortized discount of $2,298 to additional paid-in capital. 
  
On December 31, 2009, the Company repaid the convertible note in the principal amount of $10,000 due on December 31, 2009.  The 
Company also made interest payment of $515 on this note. 
  
On December 31, 2009, the Company repaid the convertible note in the principal amount of $12,500 due on September 26, 2009.  The 
Company also made interest payment of $644 on this note. 
  
On  December  31,  2009,  the  Company  issued  2,442  split-adjusted  shares  of  common  stock  upon  the  conversion  of  a  note  in  the 
principal amount of $11,613 and accrued interest of $598.  As at May 31, 2011, the Company paid the remaining $338 of interest 
outstanding on this note.
c)  On July 14, 2009, the Company entered into a fee arrangement agreement to settle $2,881 of professional fees included in accounts 
payable. Pursuant to the agreement the Company issued a convertible note with an aggregate principal amount of $2,881, bearing 
interest at 4% per annum, and convertible into the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $5.00 and warrants to purchase 
576 split-adjusted shares of the Company’s common stock at $5.00 per share until January 23, 2012. The note is due on the earlier of: 
(a)  January  23,  2012,  (b)  the  Company  closing  an  Acquisition  Transaction  (defined  as  the  sale  of  equity  securities  or  securities
convertible  into  equity  securities,  any  merger,  consolidation,  statutory  share  exchange  or  acquisition  transaction  or  any  sale  of 
substantially all of the assets of the Company, any similar
F-11
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
5.  Convertible Notes (continued)
transaction involving the issuance, cancellation or restructuring of equity securities of the Company, unless following the completion 
of such transaction, the then existing shareholders of the Company own or control, indirectly or directly at least 50% of the voting 
power or liquidation rights of the Company or the successor of such merger, consolidation or statutory share exchange), or (c) the date 
the Company raises financing of $250,000 or more. In accordance with ASC 470-20, the Company did not recognize intrinsic value as 
there  was  no  beneficial  conversion  feature.  On  February  17,  2011,  the  Company  repaid  the  remaining  principle  and  interest 
outstanding on the convertible note of $2,881 and $188 respectively. 
  
During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company recorded a loss on conversion of accounts payable to convertible note of $nil 
(2010 - $878) equal to the fair value of the warrants issued pursuant to the fee arrangement agreements.
d)  On February 8, 2011, the Company issued two convertible notes with an aggregate principal amount of $33,500, bearing interest at 
7% per annum, and convertible into the Company’s common shares at a conversion price of $0.05 and warrants to purchase 670,000 
shares of the Company’s common stock at $0.05 per share until March 1, 2016. The note is due on the earlier of: (a) March 1, 2016, 
(b) the date the Company closes an Acquisition Transaction (defined as (i) any sale of equity securities or securities convertible into 
equity securities of the Company; (ii) any merger, consolidation, statutory share exchange or acquisition transaction involving the 
Company or any material subsidiary of the Company; (iii), any sale of substantially all of the assets of the Company or any material 
subsidiary of the Company; or (iv) any similar transaction involving the issuance, cancellation or restructuring of equity securities of 
the Company, unless following the completion of such transaction, the then existing shareholders of the Company own or control, 
indirectly  or  directly  at  least  50%  of  the  voting  power  or  liquidation  rights  of  the  Company  or  the  successor  of  such  merger,
consolidation or statutory share exchange. In the event of a contemplated change of control transaction, the Company shall provide 
the holder at least fifteen business days prior to the effective date of any change of control transaction, except as may otherwise be 
prohibited  by  law)  In  accordance  with  ASC  470-20,  the  Company  did  not  recognize  intrinsic  value  as  there  was  no  beneficial 
conversion feature. As at May 31, 2011, the carrying values of the convertible debenture and accrued convertible interest payable 
thereon were $33,500 and $720, respectively.
e)  On February 10, 2011, the Company issued two convertible notes with an aggregate principal amount of $10,000, bearing interest at 
7% per annum, and convertible into Units at $0.05 per unit, consisting of one share of common stock of the Company and one share 
purchase warrant exercisable to acquire one share of common stock of the Company at an exercise price of $0.05. The note is due on 
the  earlier  of:  (a)  March  1,  2016,  (b)  the  date  the  Company  closes  an  Acquisition  Transaction  (defined  as  (i)  any  sale  of  equity 
securities or securities convertible into equity securities of the Company; (ii) any merger, consolidation, statutory share exchange or 
acquisition transaction involving the Company or any material subsidiary of the Company; (iii), any sale of substantially all of the 
assets of the Company or any material subsidiary of the Company; or (iv) any similar transaction involving the issuance, cancellation 
or  restructuring  of  equity  securities  of  the  Company,  unless  following  the  completion  of  such  transaction,  the  then  existing 
shareholders  of  the  Company  own  or  control,  indirectly  or  directly  at  least  50%  of  the  voting  power  or  liquidation  rights  of  the 
Company  or  the  successor  of  such  merger,  consolidation  or  statutory  share  exchange.  In  the  event  of  a  contemplated  change  of 
control transaction, the Company shall provide the holder at least fifteen business days prior to the effective date of any change of 
control transaction, except as may otherwise be prohibited by law). In accordance with ASC 470-20, the Company did not recognize 
intrinsic value as there was no beneficial conversion feature.
On  March 31,  2011,  the  Company  issued  200,000  split-adjusted  shares  of  common  stock upon  the conversion  of the  notes  in  the 
principal amount of $10,000. At May 31, 2011, $94 of accrued interest remains payable.
6.  Common Stock
a)  On September 11, 2009, the Company issued 1,400 split-adjusted common shares at $5.00 per share for gross proceeds of $7,000, of
which $2,000 was included in common stock subscribed at May 31, 2009.
b)  On September 11, 2009, the $16,000 convertible note was converted into 3,200 split-adjusted common shares at a conversion price of
$5.00 per share. The balance of the unamortized discount of $2,298 was included in additional paid-in capital. See Note 5 (b).
c)  On December 31, 2009, the $11,613 convertible note and accrued interest of $598 was converted into 2,442 split-adjusted common
shares at a conversion price of $5.00 per share. See Note 5 (b).
F-12

Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
6.  Common Stock (continued)
d)  On February 16, 2010, the Company effected a 2:1 forward stock-split of its issued and outstanding common stock. The issued and 
outstanding share capital increased from 25,394,631 shares of common stock to 50,789,262 shares of common stock. All per share 
amounts,  number  and  exercise  price  of  stock  options,  warrants  and  conversion  price  of  convertible  debt  have  been  retroactively 
restated to reflect the forward stock-split.
e)  On  May  3,  2010,  the  Company  issued  72,000  split-adjusted  shares  of  common  stock  in  error  that  were  held  in  treasury.  No
consideration was received for these shares, and these shares were cancelled on September 2, 2010.
f)  On October 11, 2010, the Company effected a 50:1 reverse stock-split of its issued and outstanding common stock. The issued and 
outstanding  share  capital  decreased  from  47,189,262  shares  of  common  stock  to  943,785  shares  of  common  stock.  All  per  share 
amounts,  number  and  exercise  price  of  stock  options,  warrants  and  conversion  price  of  convertible  debt  have  been  retroactively 
restated to reflect the reverse stock-split.
g)  On February 8, 2011, the Company issued 5,163,313 units at $0.05 per unit to a company which is wholly owned and controlled by 
the  President  of  the  Company  to  settle  $261,032  of  debt.  Each  unit  consists  on  one  share  of  common  stock  and  one  warrant  to 
purchase an additional share of the Company’s common stock price of $0.05 per share until February 8, 2016. The Company recorded 
a credit of $2,867 in additional paid in capital, pursuant to the Disgorgement Agreement. Pursuant to the Rescission and Conditional 
Purchase Agreements dated March 30, 2011 and April 14, 2011, respectively, the Company rescinded the purchase of 2,970,176 units 
issued to Magellan for a net issuance of 2,193,137 units to settle $109,657 of debt (Refer Note 3(d) and 3(f)).
h)  On February 8, 2011, the Company issued 66,400 units at $0.05 per unit to settle $3,321 of accounts payable. Each unit consists of 
one share of common stock and one warrant to purchase an additional share of common stock at a price of $0.05 per share until 
February 8, 2016.
i)  On February 8, 2011, the Company issued 330,000 units at $0.05 per unit for total proceeds of $16,500.    Each unit consists of one 
share of common stock and one warrant to purchase an additional share of common stock at a price of $0.05 per share until February 
8, 2016.
j)  On March 9, 2011, the Company issued 200,000 split-adjusted shares of common stock at $0.075 per share for total proceeds of
$15,000.
k)  On March 14, 2011, the Company issued 66,667 split-adjusted shares of common stock at $0.075 per share for total proceeds of
$5,000.
l)  On March 30, 2011, the Company issued 200,000 split-adjusted units at $0.05 per unit upon the conversion of the two convertible
notes as described in Note 5(e).
m)  On June 9, 2011, the Company increased the authorized common stock to 100,000,000 shares (see Note 11). 
  
7)  Stock-Based Compensation
On August 24, 2009, the Company adopted the 2009 Nonqualified Stock Option Plan (the “2009 Plan”). Pursuant to the 2009 Plan, the 
Company  may  grant  up  to  a  total  of  100,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  for  the  performance  of  services  relating  to  the  operation, 
development and growth of the Company.  At May 31, 2011, the Company had 40,000 shares of common stock available to be issued 
under the 2009 Plan.
On  August  25,  2009,  pursuant  to  the  2009  Plan,  the  Company  granted  80,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  with  immediate  vesting  to 
directors,  officers,  employees  and  consultants  to  acquire  80,000  split-adjusted  common  shares  at  an  exercise  price  of  $5.00  per  share 
exercisable for 10 years and recorded stock-based compensation for the vested options of $457,184, as general and administrative expense.
On  September  1,  2009,  pursuant  to  the  2009  Plan,  the  Company  granted  4,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  with  immediate  vesting  to 
consultants to acquire 4,000 split-adjusted common shares at an exercise price of $5.50 per share exercisable for 10 years and recorded 
stock-based compensation for the vested options of $21,851, as general and administrative expense.
F-13
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
7)  Stock-Based Compensation (continued)
On  September  7,  2009,  pursuant  to  the  2009  Plan,  the  Company  granted  4,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  with  immediate  vesting  to 
consultants to acquire 4,000 split-adjusted common shares at an exercise price of $5.00 per share exercisable for 10 years and recorded 
stock-based compensation for the vested options of $18,868, as general and administrative expense.
On  January  4,  2010,  pursuant  to  the  2009  Plan,  the  Company  granted  12,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  with  immediate  vesting  to 
consultant to acquire 12,000 split-adjusted common shares at an exercise price of $5.00 per share exercisable for 10 years and recorded 
stock-based compensation for the vested options of $60,000, as general and administrative expense. 
On May 30, 2010, 20,000 split-adjusted stock options were cancelled. 
On June 1, 2010, 20,000 split-adjusted stock options were cancelled.
On March 17, 2011, the Company adopted the 2011 Nonqualified Stock Option Plan (the “2011 Plan”). Pursuant to the 2011 Plan, the 
Company  may  grant  up  to  a  total  of  650,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  for  the  performance  of  services  relating  to  the  operation, 
development and growth of the Company. At May 31, 2011, the Company had no shares of common stock available to be issued under the 
2011 Plan.
On  March  18,  2011,  pursuant  to  the  2011  Plan,  the  Company  granted  550,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  with  immediate  vesting  to 
directors, officers and consultants to acquire 550,000 split-adjusted common shares at an exercise price of $0.12 per share exercisable for 
10 years and recorded stock-based compensation for the vested options of $66,000 as general and administrative expense.
On  April  6,  2011,  pursuant  to  the  2011  Plan,  the  Company  granted  100,000  split-adjusted  stock  options  with  immediate  vesting  to 
consultants to acquire 100,000 split-adjusted common shares at an exercise price of $0.12 per share exercisable for 10 years and recorded 
stock-based compensation for the vested options of $12,000 as general and administrative expense.
The fair value for stock options granted was estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the weighted 
average fair value of stock options granted during the year ended May 31, 2011 was $0.12 per share. 
The weighted average assumptions used were as follows:
Expected dividend yield 
Risk-free interest rate 
Expected volatility 
Expected option life (in years) 
The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s stock options:
Outstanding, May 31, 2009 
  
Granted 
Cancelled 
  
Outstanding, May 31, 2010
Number of 
Options
– 
 
  
100,000 
  
(20,000)
80,000
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise 
Price
–
5.00   
5.00
5.00
Year 
Ended 
May 31, 
2011
0 %   
3.32 %   
482 %   
10
Year
Ended 
May 31, 
2010
0%
3.50%
177%
10
Weighted-Average
Contractual Term
Remaining 
(years)
$
–       
         
         
         
         
9.30
Aggregate
Intrinsic Value
$
– 
  
  
  
  
–
Granted 
Cancelled 
  
Outstanding, May 31, 2011 
  
Exercisable, May 31, 2011
650,000 
  
(20,000)
710,000
710,000
F-14
0.12   
5.00
0.53
0.53
9.69       
         
9.69
–
–
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
 
8)  Share Purchase Warrants
A summary of the changes in the Company’s common share purchase warrants is presented below:
Balance – May 31, 2009 
Issued 
Balance – May 31, 2010 
Issued 
Balance – May 31, 2011
Number of 
Warrants
12,000     $
         
10,576     $
         
22,576     $
         
2,789,537     $
         
2,812,113     $
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise 
Price
5.00 
  
5.00 
  
5.00 
  
0.05 
  
0.05
9)  Fair Value Measurements
ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of 
unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective 
evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based 
upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be 
used to measure fair value:
Level 1 
  
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Valuations 
are  based  on  quoted  prices  that  are  readily  and  regularly  available  in  an  active  market  and  do  not  entail  a  significant  degree  of 
judgment. 
  
Level 2 
  
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are other than Level 1 observable inputs such as quoted prices for similar assets 
or  liabilities  in  active  markets;  quoted  prices  for  identical  assets  or  liabilities  in  markets  with  insufficient  volume  or  infrequent 
transactions (less active markets); or model-derived valuations in which significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally 
from, or corroborated by, observable market data. 
Level  2  instruments  require  more  management  judgment  and  subjectivity  as  compared  to  Level  1  instruments.  For  instance, 
determining which instruments are most similar to the instrument being priced requires management to identify a sample of similar 
securities based on the coupon rates, maturity, issuer, credit rating and instrument type, and subjectively select an individual security 
or multiple securities that are deemed most similar to the security being priced; and determining whether a market is considered active 
requires management judgment. 
  
Level 3 
  
Level 3 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that are significant to the 
measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities. The determination of fair value for Level 3 instruments requires the most 
management judgment and subjectivity.
Pursuant to ASC 825, cash is based on "Level 1" inputs and convertible notes are valued based on “Level 2” inputs, consisting of model 
driven valuations.  The Company believes that the recorded values of accounts payable, due to related parties and convertible notes and 
interest approximate their current fair values because of their nature, respective relatively short durations, or current market rates of interest 
for similar financial instruments.
F-15
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
May 31, 2011 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
  
  
9)  Fair Value Measurements (continued)
Fair Value Measurements Using
Assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis were presented on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of May 31, 2011 as 
follows: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Assets: 
Cash 
Total Assets
Quoted Prices in  
   Active Markets
For Identical
Instruments
(Level 1)
Significant 
Unobservable
Balance as of  
May 31, 2011
   
      
 
      
 
–      
–
2 
2
$
Inputs 
(Level 3)
Inputs
(Level 2)
Observable
Significant
Other
– 
–
2 
2
$
$
$
The  Company  is  subject  to United States  federal  income  taxes  at an  approximate  rate  of 35%.  The  reconciliation  of  the  provision for 
income taxes at the United States federal statutory rate compared to the Company’s income tax expense as reported is as follows:
10)  Income Taxes
Net loss before income taxes per financial statements
  
Income tax rate 
  
Expected income tax recovery 
  
Permanent differences 
  
Valuation allowance change 
  
Provision for income taxes
The significant components of deferred income tax assets at May 31, 2011 and 2010 are as follows:
Net operating loss carryforward 
  
Valuation allowance 
  
Net deferred income tax asset
May 31, 
2011 
    
$ 
    
 
278,079      
      
 
35 %   
      
 
(97,328 )
  
      
 
4,007      
      
 
93,321      
      
 
–
May 31,
2010 
$
841,814 
  
35%
  
(294,635)
  
4,135 
  
290,500 
  
–
May 31, 
2011 
$ 
   
 
 
1,021,857  
   
(1,021,857 )
   
–
May 31,
2010 
$
928,536 
  
(928,536)
  
–
The Company has net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $2,919,600 available to offset taxable income in future years which 
expire beginning in fiscal 2028. The Company has recognized a valuation allowance for the deferred income tax asset since the Company 
cannot be assured that it is more likely than not that such benefit will be utilized in future years.
11)  Subsequent Events
a)  On June 9, 2011, the Company filed amended Articles of Incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of the Company’s
common stock to 100,000,000 shares.
b)  On June 13, 2011, Black Tusk Minerals Inc. (the “Company”) issued to Magellan Management Company (“Magellan”), 2,970,176 
units with each unit consisting of one common share and one common share purchase warrant with an exercise price of $0.05 per
share  exercisable  until  February  8, 2016. This  issuance  is  in  accordance  with  the  rescission  and  conditional  purchase  agreements 
entered into by Magellan and the Company on March 30, 2011, and April 14, 2011. Pursuant to those rescission and conditional 
purchase  agreements  2,703,509  units  were  rescinded  on  March  30,  2011  and  266,667  units  were  rescinded  on  April  14,  2011. 
Magellan is wholly owned and controlled by Gavin Roy, the President and a director of the Company.
F-16
Item 9.  Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure. 
 
 None. 
  
Item 9A.  Controls and Procedures. 
   
Disclosure Control and Procedure 
  
At  the  end  of  the  period  covered  by  this  report  on  Form  10-K  for  the  year  ended  May  31,  2011,  an  evaluation was  carried  out  under  the 
supervision of and with the participation of the Company's management, including the President, who is the principal executive officer, and 
Treasurer, who is the principal financial and accounting officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operations of the Company's disclosure 
controls and procedures (as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) under the Exchange Act).  Based on that evaluation the President and the Treasurer have 
concluded  that  the  Company's  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  were  adequately  designed  and  effective  in  ensuring  that:  (i)  information 
required to be disclosed by the Company in reports that it files or submits to the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Exchange Act 
is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in applicable rules and forms and (ii) material information 
required to be disclosed in our reports filed under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our 
President and Treasurer, as appropriate, to allow for accurate and timely decisions regarding required disclosure. 
  
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
  
The Company's management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in 
Rules 13a-15(f) under the Exchange Act. Our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance 
regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  and  fair  presentation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
  
A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, 
in  reasonable  detail,  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the  transactions  and  dispositions  of  the  assets  of  the  company;  (ii)  provide  reasonable 
assurance  that  transactions  are  recorded  as  necessary  to  permit  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted 
accounting  principles,  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being  made  only  in  accordance  with  authorizations  of 
management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  It should be noted that a 
control system, no matter how well conceived or operated, can only provide reasonable assurance, not absolute assurance, that the objectives of 
the  control  system  are  met.  Also, projections  of  any  evaluation of  effectiveness  to  future  periods  are  subject  to  the  risk  that  controls  may 
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. 
  
Management conducted an evaluation of the design and operation of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 
2011 based on the criteria in a framework developed by the Company’s management pursuant to and in compliance with the principles and 
framework of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. This evaluation included review of the documentation 
of  controls,  evaluation  of  the  design  effectiveness  of  controls,  testing  of  the  operating  effectiveness  of  controls  and  a  conclusion  on  this 
evaluation.  Based on this evaluation, management has concluded that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as 
of May 31, 2011 and no material weaknesses were discovered. The error that occurred regarding the total number of authorized share capital of 
the Company, was a result of rounding procedures used by Colonial Stock Transfer Inc, the Company’s transfer agent, when conducting the 50-
1 reverse stock split. 
  
Attestation Report of the Registered Public Accounting Firm 
  
This annual report does not include an attestation report of the Company’s registered public accounting firm regarding internal control over 
financial reporting.  Management's report was not subject to attestation by the Company’s registered public accounting firm pursuant to the 
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act of 2010 and the Company only provided the management's report in this annual report.
29
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
  
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13(a)-15(f)) that occurred during the Company’s the 
period  covered  by  this  annual  report  that  have  materially  affected,  or  are  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  our  internal  control  over 
financial reporting. 
  
Item 9B.  Other Information. 
 
None. 
 
   
Item 10.  Directors, executive Offices and Corporate Governance.
  
Directors and Executive Officers and Significant Employees 
  
All directors of the Company hold office until the next annual meeting of the stockholders or until their successors have been elected and 
qualified. The officers of the Company are appointed by our board of directors and hold office until their death, resignation or removal from 
office.  Our  directors,  executive  officers  and  significant  employees,  their  ages  (as  of  May  31,  2011),  positions  held,  and  date  first 
elected/appointed, are as follows:
PART III
Name
Position
Elected/Appointed
Age    
  
44 
August 9, 2007
  
  
  
42 
February 8, 2011
  
  
70 
   March 30, 2011
  
  
53 
  
June 9, 2011
  
  
    June 9, 2011
49
President, Secretary, and Director
  
Director
  
Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
  
Director
  
    Director
Gavin Roy 
  
Kurt Bordian 
  
James Bordian 
  
Robert Krause 
  
Mark White 
 
Gavin Roy 
Gavin Roy was elected Vice President of the Company on August 9, 2007, resigned as Vice President on April 24, 2008 and was appointed as 
Director and President effective April 24, 2008. On March 30, 2010, Mr. Roy was appointed Secretary and Treasurer. Mr. Roy resigned as 
Treasurer on the appointment of James Bordian. Mr. Roy is currently the principal of Magellan Management Company, a venture capital firm 
in Vancouver, British Columbia. Prior to forming Magellan Management in 2005, Mr. Roy’s principal occupation has been as an investment 
advisor with Canaccord Capital Corporation, Octagon Capital Corporation and Global Securities Corporation. Mr. Roy has been a registrant in 
Canada with the British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Ontario securities commissions. 
 
Robert Krause 
Mr. Krause was elected to the Board, effective June 9, 2011. Mr. Krause brings over 25 years of experience in the mining and exploration 
sector, having worked on projects in both North and South America. He serves and has served both private and public corporations in various 
positions such as: Vice President of exploration for Wyn Developments Inc., Vice President of Exploration for Starfield Resources Inc. and 
Mine  Geologist  for  Skylark  Resources  Ltd.  Robert  Krause  graduated  from  the  University  of  British  Columbia  in  1985  with  a  Bachelor  of 
Science in geology. Robert Krause has also been a consulting geologist for the Company. 
 
Mark White 
Mr. White was elected to the Board, effective June 9, 2011. Mr. White is also the Chairman and founder of MyRapidMD a mobile application 
developer specializing in healthcare and first response applications. He also serves as the VP of Business Development for Virtual Medical 
Centre Inc. (“ VMC ” ), one of Australia’s leading online healthcare and medical information portals. Mr. White is leading VMC’s push into the 
North American market. Previously he was co-founder and President of Pixtera Corp, a developer of handheld electronic reading devices. From 
1999 through 2002 he was as an independent business consultant to young public companies and from 1997-1999 was director of investor 
relations for Turbodyne Technologies, a maker of electronic turbo chargers. Prior to moving in the direction of entrepreneurial ship he was a 
stock broker in Los Angeles where he still lives. He is conversant in all aspects of strategic planning, capital raising for early stage companies, 
as  well  as  the  day-to-day  obligations  of  managing  an  operating  company.  He  received  his  BA  from  Victoria  University,  Wellington  New 
Zealand and currently resides in Los Angeles, California.
Date First
30
Kurt Bordian 
Mr. Bordian was appointed to the Board effective February 8, 2011. Mr. Bordian is a designated Certified General Accountant, and holds a 
Bachelor of Commerce (Honours) Degree from the University of Manitoba. He has worked primarily with public companies in the mineral 
exploration and oil and gas industries over the past 12 years. Mr. Bordian currently serves as a director or officer on a number of resource 
exploration and development companies, including: Chief Financial Officer of ESO Uranium Corp. (ESO-TSX.V), Chief Financial Officer of 
Canyon Copper Corp. (CNYC-OTCBB), director of Palo Duro Energy Inc. (PDE-TSX.V), and director of Calypso Uranium Corp.   (CLP-
TSX-V). 
 
James Bordian 
James Bordian was appointed by the board of directors of the Company as the Chief Financial Officer of the Company effective March 30, 
2011. James Bordian is a retired Chartered Accountant and Certified Internal Auditor with over 40 years experience. During his career, Mr. 
Bordian has held senior management positions with US Plywood, Dillingham Corporation, Air Canada, and BC Hydro.  Presently he is Vice 
President of a Vancouver-based private management-consulting firm offering financial accounting services. James Bordian has also held the 
following past positions: Director and Chairman of Audit and Finance Committee for Royal Aloha Vacation Club; Director and Treasurer of 
Grand  Lakefront  Resort  Club  Canada;  and  President  of  Institute  of  Internal  Auditors  –  Vancouver  Chapter.  Mr.  Bordian  has  extensive 
experience in income tax planning, budgeting, financial statement presentations and business evaluations. James Bordian is 70 years old and is 
the father of Kurt Bordian, a director of the Company. 
  
Significant Employees 
  
Gavin  Roy  and  James  Bordian  are  the  Company’s  sole  employees.  We  hire  independent  contractors  to  assist  with  general  administrative 
matters from time-to-time. 
  
Family Relationships 
  
James Bordian, the Chief Financial Officer of the Company, is the father of Kurt Bordian who is a Director of the Company. 
  
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings 
  
Our directors, executive officers and control persons have not been involved in any of the following events during the past five years:
any  bankruptcy  petition  filed  by  or  against  any  business  of  which  such  person  was  a  general  partner  or  executive 
officer either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior to that time;
1.
2.
any conviction in a criminal proceeding or being subject to a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and 
other minor offences);
3.
4.
being  subject  to  any  order,  judgment, or  decree,  not  subsequently  reversed, suspended  or vacated,  of  any  court  of 
competent  jurisdiction,  permanently  or  temporarily  enjoining,  barring,  suspending  or  otherwise  limiting  his 
involvement in any type of business, securities or banking activities; or
being  found  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  (in  a  civil  action),  the  Commission  or  the  Commodity  Futures 
Trading Commission to have violated a federal or state securities or commodities law, and the judgment has not been 
reversed, suspended, or vacated.
31
LATE REPORTS
6 
   1 
   4 
   n/a 
    n/a
LATE TRANSACTIONS 
13
Conflicts of Interest 
  
To  our  knowledge,  and  other  than  as  disclosed  in  this  report,  there  are  no  known  existing  or  potential  conflicts  of  interest  among  us,  our 
promoters, directors and officers, or other members of management, or of any proposed director, officer or other member of management as a 
result of their outside business interests except that certain of the directors and officers serve as directors and officers of other companies, and 
therefore it is possible that a conflict may arise between their duties to us and their duties as a director or officer of such other companies. 
  
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance 
  
Section  16(a)  of  the  Exchange  Act,  requires  the  Company's  officers,  directors,  and  persons  who  beneficially  own  more  than  10%  of  the 
Company's common stock (“10% Stockholders”), to file reports of ownership and changes in ownership with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission. Such officers, directors and 10% Stockholders are also required by Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules to furnish us 
with copies of all Section 16(a) forms that they file. 
  
Based solely on our review of the copies of such forms received by us, or written representations from certain reporting persons, we believe 
that during fiscal year ended May 31, 2011, all filing requirements applicable to its officers, directors and greater than 10% percent beneficial 
owners were complied with, except for the following: 
 
NAME AND NATURE 
OF AFFILIATION 
Gavin Roy – President, Secretary, and 
Director 
James Bordian 
Kurt Bordian 
Robert Krause* 
Mark White* 
  
*The appointment of Robert Krause and Mark White to the Board was effective on June 9, 2011, which was after the fiscal year end. 
  
Code of Ethics 
  
The  Company  is  aware  of  its  corporate  governance  responsibilities  and  seeks  to  operate  to  the  highest  ethical  standards.  However,  the 
Company has not adopted a code of ethics because of its limited size. The Company only has two employees, James Bordian who serves as an 
officer and Gavin Roy who serves as an officer and director, and therefore has not found it necessary to adopt a code of ethics. 
  
Corporate Governance 
  
As of August 26, 2011, we did not effect any material changes to the procedures by which our shareholders may recommend nominees to our 
board of directors. Our board of directors does not have a policy with regards to the consideration of any director candidates recommended by 
our shareholders. Our board of directors has determined that it is in the best position to evaluate the Company's requirements as well as the 
qualifications  of  each  candidate  when  the  board  considers  a  nominee  for  a  position  on  our  board  of  directors.  If  shareholders  wish  to 
recommend candidates directly to our board, they may do so by sending communications to the President of the Company at the address on the 
cover of this annual report. 
  
Audit Committee 
  
We do not have a standing audit committee at the present time. To our knowledge, and other than as disclosed in this report, there are no 
known existing or potential conflicts of interest among us, our promoters, directors and officers, or other members of management, or of any 
proposed director, officer or other member of management as a result of their outside business interests except that certain of the directors and 
officers serve as directors and officers of other companies, and therefore it is possible that a conflict may arise between their duties to us and 
their duties as a director or officer of such other companies.
0 
   0 
   0 
   n/a 
    n/a
REPORTS NOT FILED
1
5
n/a
   n/a
32
We believe that the members of our board of directors are capable of analyzing and evaluating our financial statements and understanding 
internal controls and procedures for financial reporting. The board of directors of the Company does not believe that it is necessary to have an 
audit  committee  because  we  believe  that  the  functions  of  an  audit  committee  can  be  adequately  performed  by  the  board  of  directors  as  it 
currently exists. In addition, we do not have an “audit committee financial expert” as we believe that retaining an independent director who 
would qualify as an “audit committee financial expert” would be overly costly and burdensome and is not warranted in our circumstances given 
the early stages of our development and the fact that we have not generated any significant revenues from operations to date. 
  
Item 11.  Executive Compensation. 
  
A summary of cash and other compensation paid to our Principal Executive Officer and other executives for the fiscal year ended May 31, 
2011 is as follows:
33
(a)
Name and 
Principal 
Position 
Gavin Roy , President, 
Secretary, and Director 
(former Vice President and 
former Treasurer) 
Michael McIsaac , Former 
Secretary, Treasurer and 
Director 
Kurt Bordian 
Director, and Former 
Secretary, Treasurer 
James Bordian 
Chief Financial Officer 
(1)
Year 
(b)
May 31, 2011    
   May 31, 2010    
   May 31, 2011    
   May 31, 2010    
   May 31, 2011    
   May 31, 2010    
   May 31, 2011    
   May 31, 2010
Salary 
($) 
(c) 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL
Bonus ($) 
(d) 
  
NIL 
NIL 
  
NIL 
  
NIL 
  
  
NIL 
NIL 
  
NIL 
  
  
NIL
Stock 
Awards 
($) 
(e)
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
Option 
Awards 
($) 
(f)
12,000(1)
260,000(1)
NIL
NIL(2)
9,000(3)
NIL
6,000(4)
NIL
Non-Equity
Incentive Plan 
Compensation
Nonqualified 
Deferred 
Compensation 
Earnings ($)
($) 
(g)
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
(h) 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL 
NIL
All Other 
Compensation
($) 
(i)
112,657(1)
     
5,097(1)
  
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
Total ($)
(j)
124,657(1)
265,097(1)
NIL
NIL(2)
9,000(3)
NIL
6,000(4)
NIL
Magellan Management Company, of which Mr. Roy is a principal, has provided administrative and consulting services to the 
Company. On March 18, 2011, the Company granted Magellan 100,000 stock options pursuant to the 2011 Plan. On February 8, 
2011,  the Company granted Magellan 2,193,137 units in order to pay off $109,657 of debt owed to the Magellan as a result the 
Magellan Debt. As a result of this issuance of units, Magellan was subject to disgorgement under Section 16(b) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934, due to sales of shares made by Magellan on August 13 and August 23, 2010. Magellan was required to 
disgorge $2,866 in profits. Under the terms of the Disgorgement Agreement, Magellan disgorged $2,866 by forgiving that amount of 
the Magellan Debt. In addition, during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2011, the Company paid Magellan, $3,000 for administrative 
and consulting services. During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010, the Company paid $5,097   to Magellan for administrative and 
consulting services and granted Magellan Management Company 40,000 split adjusted stock options on August 25, 2009, and 12,000 
split adjusted options on January 4, 2010.
(2) 
(3)
On August 25, 2009, the Company granted Michael McIsaac 20,000 split adjusted stock options at an exercise price of $5.00, which 
were subsequently cancelled March 30, 2010 upon his resignation as director, secretary and treasurer. 
On March 18, 2011, Kurt Bordian was granted 75,000 options to purchase shares of common stock of the Company at an exercise 
price of $0.12 pursuant to the 2011 Plan. Kurt Bordian was not an officer of the Company when he received the options, but he was a 
director of the Company. 
On March 18, 2011, James Bordian was granted 50,000 options to purchase shares of common stock of the Company at an exercise
price of $0.12 pursuant to the 2011 Plan. At the time, James Bordian was not an officer of the Company.
(4) 
  
Narrative Disclosure to Summary Compensation Table 
  
For the fiscal year ending May, 31, 2011 we did not pay to our directors or officers any salary or ongoing consulting fees. However, Magellan 
was paid $3,000 for consulting and administrative services during the fiscal year ending May 31, 2011. Effective June 1, 2011, James Bordian, 
the Chief Financial Officer of the Company, is being paid $1,500 per quarter. We anticipate that additional compensation may be paid to an 
officer  in  the  event  that  we  decide  to  proceed  with  advanced  exploration  programs  on  the  Peru  Properties.  Please  reference  the  executive 
compensation table and accompanying footnote above for all information concerning executive and director compensation. 
  
Other Compensation Information 
  
The Company does not maintain any long-term compensation plans, and did not maintain such plans at any time during our two most recently 
completed fiscal years ended May 31, 2011. As such, there were no long-term compensation plan awards or payouts to any of the named 
executive officers of the Company during our two most recently completed fiscal years ended May 31, 2011 and 2010. 
  
There are no arrangements or plans in which we provide pension, retirement or similar benefits for directors or executive officers. We do not 
have  any  material  bonus  or  profit  sharing  plans  pursuant  to  which  cash  or  non-cash  compensation  is  or  may  be  paid  to  our  directors  or 
executive officers. 
  
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End 
  
    
Option awards
Stock awards
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised 
options 
(#) 
(c)
unexercisable
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised 
options 
(#) 
exercisable      
(b) 
    
40,000       
        
12,000       
100,000
50,000
-
-
Equity 
incentive 
plan 
awards: 
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised 
unearned 
options 
(#) 
(d)
-
-
Name 
(a) 
Gavin Roy , 
President, 
  
Secretary, 
Treasurer and 
Director 
(former Vice 
President) 
James 
Bordian Chief 
Financial 
Officer
Market 
value of 
shares of 
units of 
stock that 
have  not 
vested 
($) 
(h)
-
-
-
-
Option 
exercise 
price 
($)
(e)
Option 
expiration 
date
(f)
5.00  August 25, 2019
5.00 
January 4, 2020  
0.12  March 18, 2021
Number 
of  shares 
or units  of 
stock that 
have not 
vested 
(#)
(g)
0.12  March 18, 2021
34
Equity
incentive 
plan 
awards: 
Number  of 
unearned 
shares, 
units or 
other 
rights that 
have not 
vested 
(#) 
(i)
Equity 
incentive 
plan
awards: Market 
or payout value 
of unearned 
shares, units or 
others rights  that 
have not  vested
($)
(j)
-
-
-
-
5.00 
5.00 
5.00
Stock Options
2009 Plan 
On August 24, 2009, the Company’s Board of Directors adopted the Plan.  The Plan was approved by the Company’s shareholders became 
effective on November 16, 2009. 
 
Pursuant to the Plan, stock options may be granted to any person who is performing or who has been engaged to perform services of special 
importance to management of the Company in the operation, development and growth of the Company.  The maximum number of shares with 
respect to which stock options may be granted under the Plan may not exceed 100,000 (split adjusted).  All stock options granted under the 
Plan  shall  be  nonqualified  stock  options  and  shall  be  evidenced  by  agreements,  which  shall  be  subject  to  the  applicable  provisions  of  the 
Plan.  The foregoing description of the Plan is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Plan, a copy of which is filed as Exhibit 10.1 to 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on August 29, 2009. 
  
On August 25, 2009, the Committee (as defined in the Plan) and the Company’s Board of Directors authorized and approved the following 
stock option grants at an exercise price of $5.00 per share (split adjusted), which was the closing price of the Company’s common shares on the 
OTC Bulletin Board on the trading day immediately prior to the date of grant: 
  
  
  Exercise Price
Name 
40,000   
  $ 
Magellan Management Company 
Robert Krause 
20,000 (1)    $ 
20,000 (2)    $ 
Michael McIsaac 
  
(1) The Company granted Robert Krause 20,000 split adjusted stock options which were cancelled on June 1, 2010. 
  
(2) The Company granted Michael McIsaac 20,000 split adjusted stock options which were cancelled March 30, 2010, upon his resignation as 
director, secretary and treasurer. 
  
On January 4, 2010, the Committee (as defined in the Plan) and the Company’s Board of Directors authorized and approved the following 
stock option grants at an exercise price of $5.00 per share, which was the closing price of the Company’s common shares on the OTC Bulletin 
Board on the trading day immediately prior to the date of grant: 
  
Name 
Magellan Management Company 
  
2011 Plan 
  
On March 17, 2011, the Company’s Board of Directors adopted the 2011 Plan.  The Plan was ratified by the shareholders by written consent on 
April 29, 2011. 
 
Pursuant to the 2011 Plan, stock options may be granted to any person who is performing or who has been engaged to perform services of 
special importance to management of the Company in the operation, development and growth of the Company.  The maximum number of 
shares with respect to which stock options may be granted under the 2011 Plan may not exceed 650,000.  All stock options granted under the 
2011 Plan shall be nonqualified stock options and shall be evidenced by agreements, which shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the 
2011 Plan.  The foregoing description of the Plan is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Plan, a copy of which was filed as Exhibit 99.1 
to a Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on March 23, 2011. 
 
The Company’s Board of Directors authorized, approved and ratified the grants of stock options, to officers and directors of the Company, on 
August 11, 2011 and the grants and exercise prices as follows, which were the closing prices of the Company’s common shares on the OTC 
Bulletin Board on the trading day immediately prior to the date of grant. 
 
Name of Optionee 
James Bordian (i) 
Robert G. Krause(ii) 
Mark White (ii) 
Kurt Bordian 
Magellan Management Co.
Date of Grant
March 18, 2011
March 18, 2011
March 18, 2011
March 18, 2011
March 18, 2011
(i) James Bordian was not an officer of the Company when the stock options were granted. 
(ii) Mark White and Robert Krause were not directors of the Company when the stock options were granted.
Exercise Price
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
Number of Shares
50,000 
50,000 
25,000 
75,000 
100,000
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12
Stock Options
12,000     $
Exercise Price
5.00
35
Retirement, Resignation or Termination Plans 
  
We sponsor no plan, whether written or verbal, that would provide compensation or benefits of any type to an executive upon retirement, or 
any plan that would provide payment for retirement, resignation, or termination as a result of a change in control of our Company or as a result 
of a change in the responsibilities of an executive following a change in control of our Company. 
  
Compensation of Directors 
  
We do not pay to our directors any compensation for serving on our board of directors. Directors can participate in the Company’s stock option 
plans and other compensation plans. 
  
Employment Contracts and Termination of Employment and Change-In-Control Arrangements 
  
None. 
  
Compensation Committee 
 
The Company does not have a Compensation Committee. The Board as a whole makes decisions related to compensation. 
 
Compensation Committee Report 
 
The Company does not have a Compensation Committee. Each member of the Board has reviewed the Compensation and Discussion and 
Analysis and recommended it be included in this Annual Report on 10-K. 
  
Item 12.  Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and related Stockholder Matters.
  
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the beneficial ownership of shares of our common stock as of August 26, 2011:
each person who is known by us to beneficially own more than 5% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock;
all of our executive officers and directors as a group.
our named executive officers;
our directors; and




36
Gavin Roy 
7425 Arbutus Street 
Vancouver, BC 
Canada V6P 5T2 
Kurt Bordian 
408-1199 West Pender Street 
Vancouver, BC 
V6E 2R1 
James Bordian 
103-6109 Boundary Drive West 
Surrey, BC 
V3X 2A4 
Robert Krause 
615-700 West Pender Street 
Vancouver, BC 
V6C 1G8 
Mark White 
925 Dickson Street 
Marina Del Ray, CA 
90292
Magellan Management Company
7425 Arbutus Street 
Vancouver, BC 
Canada V6P 5T2
675,880 (2)
250,000 (3)
250,587 (4)
25,000 (5)
7,219180   
   
5,417,713 (6)
76.28%
9.04%
3.56%
3.54%
**
86.28%
 
76.28%
Title of Class 
Directors and Named Executive Officers 
Common Stock
Name and Address of
Beneficial Owner
Amount and Nature of 
Beneficial Owner
Percent of Class*
   
5,417,713 (1)
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Directors and Named Executives as a Group 
5% Shareholders 
Common Stock
(1)  Includes 80,000 shares held by Gavin Roy; 132,000 shares issuable to Magellan, a company solely owned and controlled by Gavin Roy, 
upon exercise of outstanding stock options; 5,205,713 shares of Common Stock held directly by Magellan. In addition, Magellan owns 
5,163,313 share purchase warrants which may be exercised at $0.05 until February 8, 2016. Under the terms of the warrants, the warrants 
may not be exercised if the warrant holder would beneficially own more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock of the 
Company unless the warrant holder waived the restriction with 61 days written notice.
(2)  Includes 165,880 shares of Common Stock; 165,000 share purchase warrants held by Kurt Bordian which may be converted to shares of
Common Stock at exercise price of $0.05 per share and 75,000 shares issuable to Kurt Bordian upon exercise of outstanding stock options. 
Kurt  Bordian also  has  the right  to  convert  $21,750  in principal  under a  7%  convertible  debentures  into units, which  would  consist  of
435,000 shares of Common Stock, par value $0.001 and 435,000 share purchase warrants exercisable at $0.05. Under the terms of the 
warrants, the warrants may not be exercised if the warrant holder would beneficially own more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding
Common Stock of the Company unless the warrant holder waived the restriction with 61 days written notice.
(3)  Includes 200,000 shares of Common Stock and 50,000 shares issuable to James Bordian upon exercise of outstanding stock options.
(4)  The shares beneficial owned by Robert Krause are held in the name of 695809 BC Ltd, which owns 134,187 shares of Common stock; 
warrants exercisable to purchase 66,400 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.05, as part of units purchased on February 8,
2011. Also includes 50,000 shares issuable to Robert Krause upon exercise of outstanding stock options.
(5)  Includes 25,000 shares issuable to Mark White upon exercise of outstanding stock options.
(6)  Includes 80,000 shares held by Gavin Roy; 132,000 shares issuable to Magellan, a company solely owned and controlled by Gavin Roy, 
upon exercise of outstanding stock options; 5,205,713 shares of Common Stock held directly by Magellan. In addition, Magellan owns
5,163,313 share purchase warrants which may be exercised at $0.05 until February 8, 2016. Under the terms of the warrants, the warrants 
may not be exercised if the warrant holder would beneficially own more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock of the
Company unless the warrant holder waived the restriction with 61 days written notice.
*  Percentages are  calculated on  a partially  diluted basis based on  6,970,176  shares  issued  and outstanding  on August  26,  2011  and  shares 
acquirable by the holder within the next 60 days. 
 
** the percentage of ownership of this director does not exceed 1%. 
  
We have no knowledge of any other arrangements, including any pledge by any person of our securities, the operation of which may at a 
subsequent date result in a change in control of the Company. 
  
We are not, to the best of our knowledge, directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation or foreign government.
37


Item 13.  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
  
Except for the transactions described below, none of our directors, executive officers or more-than-five-percent shareholders, nor any associate, 
affiliate, or family member of the foregoing, have any interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction or in any proposed transactions, since the 
start of the fiscal year ending May 31, 2011, which has materially affected or will materially affect us.
a)  During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company recognized $6,000 (2010 - $6,000) for donated services at $500 per month, and
$3,000 (2010 - $3,000) for donated rent at $250 per month provided by a former director.
b)  At  May  31,  2011,  the  Company  paid  $1,625  to  a  former  director  of  the  Company  for  returning  65,000  split-adjusted  shares  of 
common stock to the Company for cancellation. At May 31, 2011, the Company is indebted to a former director of the Company for 
$nil (May 31, 2010 - $1,625)
c)  At May 31, 2011, the Company paid $1,375 to the former secretary, treasurer and director of the Company for returning 55,000 split-
adjusted  shares  of  common  stock  to  the  Company  for  cancellation.  At  May  31,  2011,  the  Company  is  indebted  to  the  former 
secretary, treasurer and director of the Company for $nil (May 31, 2010 - $1,375).
d)  On  February  8,  2011,  the  Company  entered  into  a  disgorgement  and  settlement  agreement  with  Magellan  ,  wholly  owned  and 
controlled by Gavin Roy, the President of the Company. Pursuant to the agreement, the Company issued 5,163,313 units at $0.05 per 
unit (“Magellan Placement) to settle $261,302 of debt owed to the Related Company (“Magellan Debt”) as a result of cash advances 
made by the Magellan to the Company. A portion of the Magellan Placement was rescinded (Refer to (g) below).  Each unit consists 
of one share of common stock and one warrant to purchase an additional common share of the Company at $0.05. As a result of this 
issuance of units, the Magellan was subject to matching under section 16(b) of the Exchange Act, due to sales of shares made by 
Magellan on August 13 and August 23, 2010. As a result of the matching transaction, Magellan was required to disgorge $2,866 in 
profits (refer to (f) below). The $2,866 was forgiven as part of the Magellan Debt.
e)  At May 31, 2011, the Company is indebted to a company owned by the president of the Company for $151,673 (May 31, 2010 -
$221,734), of which $151,673 (May 31, 2010 - $110,532) represents expenses paid on behalf of the Company and $nil (May 31, 2010 
- $111,202) represents net cash advances provided to the Company. Indebtedness of $3,164 is non-interest bearing, unsecured and has 
no specific repayment terms. The remaining indebtedness amount of $148,509 was converted into units subsequent to year end on 
June 13, 2011, pursuant to the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements.
f)  On February 8, 2011, the Company and Magellan entered the Disgorgement Agreement. Magellan is wholly owned and controlled by 
Gavin  Roy,  the  President  and  a  director  of  the  Company.  As  part  of  a  private  placement  that  occurred  on  February  8,  2011,  the 
Company issued 5,163,313 units to Magellan in the Magellan Placement, in order to pay off the Magellan Debt. As a result of this 
issuance of units, Magellan was subject to disgorgement under Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act, due to sales of shares made by 
Magellan on August 13, 2010 and August 23, 2010. Magellan was required to disgorge $2,867 in profits. Under the terms of the 
Disgorgement Agreement, Magellan disgorged $2,867 by forgiving that amount of the Magellan Debt.
g)  The Company determined that it may have improperly effected a share consolidation and that the Company may not have sufficient 
authorized capital to satisfy the Company’s business objectives and obligations. On March 30, 2011 and April 14, 2011, the Company 
entered into the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements whereby Magellan and the Company agreed to rescind Rescinded 
Units in consideration for the Company’s acknowledgement of the debt obligation in the amount of $135,176 and $13,333 ($148,509 
in the aggregate) owed to Magellan in connection with the rescission of a portion of the Magellan Placement. The Company and 
Magellan also agreed that the Company would use commercially reasonable efforts to amend the Articles of Incorporation to increase 
the authorized capital of the Company, including obtaining shareholder approval for the amendment by a majority of the shareholders 
of the Company and a majority of the disinterested shareholders of the Company (shareholders excluding Magellan and Gavin Roy), 
and upon the increase in the authorized shares of common stock of the Company, the Company will permit Magellan to purchase the 
Rescinded Units under the Rescission and Conditional Purchase Agreements under the same terms as the Magellan Placement.
h)  On  June  13,  2011,  in  accordance  with  the  Rescission  and  Conditional  Purchase  Agreements,  the  Company  issued  to  Magellan, 
2,970,176 units consisting of 2,970,176 shares of common stock of the Company and 2,970,176 common share purchase warrants of 
the Company which may be converted into shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001, at a conversion price of $0.05 
per warrant share, until February 8, 2016.
38
i)  During the fiscal year ending May 31, 2011, Magellan was paid $3,000 for consulting and administrative services.
Other than as set forth above, none of our directors, executive officers or more-than-five-percent shareholders, nor any associate, affiliate, or 
family member of the foregoing, has entered into any agreement with the Company in which any of them is to receive from the Company or 
provide to the Company anything of value. 
 
  Director Independence 
  
We currently act with four directors: Gavin Roy, Kurt Bordian, Mark White and Robert Krause  We have determined that Mark White and 
Robert Krause are independent directors using the standards for independence set out in the NYSE Amex LLC Company Guide. 
  
Item 14.  Principal Accountant Fees and Services. 
  
Audit Fees 
  
The aggregate fees billed by Manning Elliott, the Company's auditors, for professional services rendered in connection with the audit of the 
Company's annual consolidated financial statements for fiscal years ended May 31, 2011 and 2010 and reviews of the consolidated financial 
statements included in the Company's Forms 10-K for fiscal years ended May 31, 2011 and 2010 were $21,250 and $18,850, respectively. 
  
Audit-Related Fees
The aggregate fees billed by the Company's auditors for any additional fees for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to 
the performance of the audit or review of the Company's financial statements and are not reported under ‘Audit Fees’ above for fiscal years 
ended May 31, 2011 and 2010 were $Nil and $2,500, respectively. 
  
Tax Fees 
  
The aggregate fees billed by the Company's auditors for professional services for tax compliance, tax advice, and tax planning for fiscal years 
ended May 31, 2011 and 2010 were $Nil and $Nil,  respectively. 
  
All Other Fees 
  
The aggregate fees billed by the Company's auditors for all other non-audit services rendered to the Company, such as attending meetings and 
other miscellaneous financial consulting, for fiscal years ended May 31, 2011 and 2010 were $Nil and $Nil, respectively.
39
PART IV
Item 15.  Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
 
Financial Statements 
 
The following financial statements have been filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K and are presented in Item 8, herein. 
 
1. Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
 
2. Consolidated Balance Sheets 
 
3. Consolidated Statements of Operations 
 
4. Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
 
5. Consolidated Statements of Stockholders Equity (Deficit) 
 
6. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
 
Exhibits 
 
3.1 
  
3.2 
  
3.3 
  
3.4 
  
10.1 
  
10.2 
  
10.3
Articles of Incorporation (incorporated by reference from our SB-2 filed on September 28, 2006) 
  
   Certificate of Change (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 11, 2007)
  
   Bylaws (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 13, 2011) 
  
   Certificate of Amendment (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 13, 2011)
  
   Property  Acquisition  Agreement,  dated August  24,  2006, between  Black  Tusk  Minerals  Inc.  and  George  E.  Nicholson  Limited
  
   Term  Sheet,  dated  August  13,  2007,  among  Black  Tusk  Minerals  Inc.,  Leonard  Raymond  De  Melt  and  Marlene  Ore  Lamilla
  
   Master Purchase Agreement, dated December 5, 2007, among Black Tusk Minerals Inc., Black Tusk Minerals Peru SAC, Leonard 
Raymond De Melt and Marlene Ore Lamilla (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on December 
7, 2007)
(incorporated by reference from our SB-2 filed on September 28, 2006)
  
(incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 14, 2007)
Mining  Concessions  and  Claims  Transfer  Agreement,  dated  December  5,  2007,  between  Black  Tusk  Minerals  Peru  SAC  and
Marlene Ore Lamilla (English Translation) (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 28, 
2008) 
  
September 1, 2009) 
  
10-K filed on September 1, 2009) 
  
from our 10-K filed on September 1, 2009) 
  
filed on August 29, 2009)
Fee Arrangement Agreement with Dorsey & Whitney LLP, dated May 29, 2009 (incorporated by reference from our 10-K filed on 
  
   Fee Arrangement Agreement with Rodrigo, Elías & Medrano Abogados, dated May 29, 2009 (incorporated by reference from our
  
   Fee Arrangement Agreement with Forstrom Jackson, Barristers and Solicitors, dated July 14, 20092009 (incorporated by reference
  
   Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 2009 Nonqualified Stock Option Plan (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K
10.4
10.5 
  
10.6 
  
10.7 
  
10.8
40
10.9 
  
10.10 
  
31.1 
  
31.2 
  
32.1 
  
32.2
Black Tusk Minerals Inc. 2011 Nonqualified Stock Option Plan (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K 
  
   Section 16 Disgorgement and Settlement Agreement (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on 
  
   Certification of Principal Executive Officer filed pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) of the Exchange Act 
  
   Certification of Principal Financial Officer filed pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) of the Exchange Act 
  
   Certification  of  Principal  Executive  Officer  pursuant  to  18  U.S.C.  Section  1350,  as  adopted  pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the 
  
    Certification  of  Principal  Financial  Officer  pursuant  to  18  U.S.C.  Section  1350,  as  adopted  pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the
filed on March 23, 2011) 
  
February 11, 2011) 
  
  
  
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
  
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
41
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be 
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. 
 
  
  
August 30, 2011 
  
  
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed by the following persons on behalf of the 
Registrant and in the capacities and on the date indicated. 
 
Signature
BLACK TUSK MINERALS INC. 
 
By:
Gavin Roy, President and Secretary 
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/   Gavin Roy
Date
42
/s/ Gavin Roy 
Gavin Roy 
/s/ James Bordian 
James Bordian 
/s/ Robert Krause 
Robert Krause 
/s/ Mark White 
Mark White 
/s/ Kurt Bordian 
Kurt Bordian
Title
(Principal Financial Officer)
(Principal Executive Officer)
President, Secretary, and Director
  
  
   Chief Financial Officer
  
  
   Director 
  
  
   Director 
  
  
   Director
August 30, 2011
  
  
   August 30, 2011
  
  
   August 30, 2011
  
  
   August 30, 2011
  
  
   August 30, 2011
Certifications
Exhibit 31.1
I, Gavin Roy, certify that: 
  
1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Black Tusk Minerals Inc.; 
  
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to 
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period 
covered by this report; 
  
3.  Based  on  my  knowledge,  the  financial  statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this  report,  fairly  present  in  all  material 
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report; 
  
4.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a – 
15 (f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have: 
  
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, 
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those 
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared; 
  
(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal controls over financial reporting to be designed under our 
supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; 
  
(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the 
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and 
  
(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most 
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to 
materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and 
  
5.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent  evaluation  of  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting,  to  the  registrant’s  auditors  and  the  audit  committee  of  the  registrant’s  board  of  directors  (or  persons  performing  the  equivalent 
functions): 
  
(a)  All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are 
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and 
  
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal 
control over financial reporting. 
 
August 30, 2011
/s/ Gavin Roy
Gavin Roy
President and Secretary
(Principal Executive Officer)
Certifications
Exhibit 31.2
I, James Bordian, certify that: 
  
1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Black Tusk Minerals Inc.; 
  
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to 
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period 
covered by this report; 
  
3.  Based  on  my  knowledge,  the  financial  statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this  report,  fairly  present  in  all  material 
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report; 
  
4.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a – 
15 (f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have: 
  
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, 
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those 
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared; 
  
(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal controls over financial reporting to be designed under our 
supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; 
  
(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the 
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and 
  
(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most 
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to 
materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and 
  
5.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent  evaluation  of  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting,  to  the  registrant’s  auditors  and  the  audit  committee  of  the  registrant’s  board  of  directors  (or  persons  performing  the  equivalent 
functions): 
  
(a)  All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are 
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and 
  
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal 
control over financial reporting. 
 
August 30, 2011
/s/ James Bordian
James Bordian
Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer)
Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code), the 
undersigned officer of Black Tusk Minerals Inc. (the “Company”) does hereby certify with respect to the Annual Report of the Company on 
Form 10-K for the period ended May 31, 2011 (the “Report”) that:
(2)  The  information  contained  in  the  Report  fairly  presents,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  condition  and  results  of
(1)  The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
operations of the Company.
August 30, 2011
/s/ Gavin Roy
Gavin Roy
President and Secretary
(Principal Executive Officer)
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code), the 
undersigned officer of Black Tusk Minerals Inc. (the “Company”) does hereby certify with respect to the Annual Report of the Company on 
Form 10-K for the period ended May 31, 2011 (the “Report”) that:
(2)  The  information  contained  in  the  Report  fairly  presents,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  condition  and  results  of
(1)  The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
operations of the Company.
August 30, 2011 
  
  
  
  
 
 The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Section 1350 of Chapter 63 
of Title 18 of the United States Code) and is not being filed as part of the Report or as a separate disclosure document.
/s/ James Bordian
James Bordian
Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer)
Exhibit 32.2