
S-8 1 d31980ds8.htm FORM S-8 Form S-8
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 8, 2015
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-8
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
WESTMORELAND COAL COMPANY
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Its Charter)
Delaware
(State or Other Jurisdiction
of Incorporation or Organization)
23-1128670
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
9540 South Maroon Circle, Suite 200
Englewood, CO 80112
(Address of Principal Executive Offices, including Zip Code)
Westmoreland Coal Company and Subsidiaries Employees’ Savings Plan
(Full Title of the Plan)
Jennifer S. Grafton, Esq.
SVP, Chief Administrative Officer and Secretary
Westmoreland Coal Company
9540 South Maroon Circle, Suite 200
Englewood, CO 80112
(303) 922-6463
(Name, Address and Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Agent for Service)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated
filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
(Check one):
Large accelerated filer ¨
Non-accelerated filer
¨  (Do not check if a smaller reporting
company)
Accelerated filer
x
Smaller reporting company ¨
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Amount
to be
Proposed
Proposed
maximum
maximum
offering price
aggregate
Amount of
Title of securities to be registered registered(1)  per share  offering price registration fee
Common Stock, par value $0.01
per share
$7,360,000(2)
$14.72(2)
500,000
$855.23
(1)Represents an additional 500,000 previously unregistered shares of common stock, par value
$0.01 per share (“Common Stock”), of Westmoreland Coal Company, issuable under the
Westmoreland Coal Company and Subsidiaries Employees’ Savings Plan (the “401(k) Plan”).
Pursuant to Rule 416 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), this registration statement shall be deemed to cover any additional securities
that become issuable under the 401(k) Plan by reason of any stock splits, stock dividends or
recapitalizations or other similar transactions effected without the registrant’s receipt of
consideration which results in an increase in the number of outstanding shares of Common
Stock. This Registration Statement also registers an indeterminate amount of plan interests to
be offered or sold under the 401(k) Plan.
(2)Estimated pursuant to Rule 457(c) and Rule 457(h) of the Securities Act solely for purposes of
calculating the amount of the registration fee, based upon the average of the high and low
prices for a share of the Common Stock on August 31, 2015, as reported on the NASDAQ
Global Market.
EXPLANATORY NOTE
This Registration Statement is being filed pursuant to General Instruction E. of Form S-8 under
the Securities Act to register an additional 500,000 shares of Common Stock of Westmoreland
Coal Company (the “Company”) that may be issued pursuant to the 401(k) Plan, as well as an
indeterminate amount of plan interests under the 401(k) Plan. The issuance of the additional
shares of Common Stock under the 401(k) Plan was approved by the Company’s Board of
Directors on September 8, 2015. The 401(k) Plan qualifies as an employee benefit plan as
defined under Rule 405 of Regulation C. The Company previously registered shares of its
common stock for issuance under the 401(k) Plan on registration statements on Form S-8 filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “Commission”) on August 3, 2001 (File
No. 333-66698), April 16, 2007 (File No. 333-142132) and April 29, 2010 (File No. 333-166393).
Pursuant to General Instruction E. to Form S-8, the contents of such registration statements,
including all exhibits thereto as applicable, are incorporated herein by reference, other than as
modified as set forth in this Registration Statement.
PART I.
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE SECTION 10(a) PROSPECTUS
Item 1. Plan Information.*
Item 2. Registrant Information and Employee Plan Annual Information.*
*
In accordance with Rule 428 under the Securities Act and the instructional Note to Part I of
Form S-8, the information specified in Part I of Form S-8 has been omitted from this
Registration Statement. The documents containing the information specified in Part I of Form
S-8 have been or will be sent or given to participating employees as specified by Rule 428(b)
(1) under the Securities Act. Such documents and the documents incorporated by reference
herein pursuant to Item 3 of Part II, taken together, constitute a prospectus that meets the
requirements of Section 10(a) of the Securities Act. Such documents are not required to be,
and are not, filed with the Commission either as a part of this Registration Statement or as
prospectuses or prospectus supplements pursuant to Rule 424 under the Securities Act.
PART II.
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT
Item 3. Incorporation of Documents by Reference.
The Registrant hereby incorporates by reference into this Registration Statement the following
documents filed by the Registrant with the Commission:
Commission Filing (File No. 001-11155)
Annual Report on Form 10-K
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q
Current Reports on Form 8-K and Form 8-K/A
Description of the Registrant’s Common Stock,
$0.01 par value per share
Period Covered or Date of Filing
Fiscal year ended December 31, 2014; filed
March 6, 2015.
Fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2015; filed
April 28, 2015. Fiscal quarter ended June 30,
2015; filed July 31, 2015.
Filed on January 7, 2015, January 20, 2015,
January 28, 2015, February 25, 2015,
March 16, 2015, May 21, 2015, June 2, 2015,
June 8, 2015, June 11, 2015, July 7, 2015
and August 4, 2015; and excepting all such
current reports furnished under Item 2.02 or
Item 7.01 of Form 8-K and exhibits filed on
such form that are related to such items
unless such Form 8-K expressly provides to
the contrary.
Form 8-A filed with the Commission on
April 29, 2011, including any amendment or
report filed for the purpose of amending such
description, in which there is described the
terms, rights and provisions applicable to the
Registrant’s Common Stock.
In addition, all documents subsequently filed pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(d) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), prior to the filing of a
post-effective amendment which indicates that all Common Stock offered hereby has been sold
or which deregisters all of the Common Stock then remaining unsold, shall be deemed to be
incorporated by reference into this Registration Statement and to be a part hereof from the date of
filing of such documents.
Any statement contained herein or in a document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by
reference herein will be deemed to be modified or superseded for purposes of this Registration
Statement to the extent that a statement contained herein or in any other subsequently filed
document that is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference herein modifies or supersedes
such previous statement. Any such statement so modified or superseded will not be deemed to
constitute a part of this Registration Statement, except as so modified or superseded.
Under no circumstances will any information furnished under Item 2.02 or 7.01 of Current Report
on Form 8-K be deemed incorporated herein by reference unless such Form 8-K expressly
provides to the contrary.
Item 4. Description of Securities.
Not applicable.
Item 5. Interests of Named Experts and Counsel.
Jennifer S. Grafton, Esq., SVP, Chief Administrative Officer and Secretary of the Registrant, has
delivered a legal opinion to the effect that the issuance and sale of the Common Stock offered
hereby was duly authorized by the Registrant and that such Common Stock will be validly
issued, fully paid and nonassessable when issued pursuant to the 401(k) Plan. Ms. Grafton
currently is the beneficial owner of 17,759 shares of the Registrant’s Common Stock, including in
the form of restricted stock units granted under the Registrant’s equity incentive plan and shares
Common Stock acquired through the Registrant’s 401(k) Plan which, in the aggregate, account
for less than 1.0% of the Registrant’s outstanding Common Stock.
Item 6. Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Section 145 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware empowers a corporation to
indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any
threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he or she is or was a director, officer,
employee or agent of the corporation or another enterprise if serving such enterprise at the
request of the corporation. Depending on the character of the proceeding, a corporation may
indemnify against expenses (including attorney’s fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in
settlement actually and reasonably incurred in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if
the person indemnified acted in good faith and in a manner he or she reasonably believed to be
in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation, and, with respect to any criminal action
or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful. In the case
of an action by or in the right of the corporation, no indemnification may be made in respect to any
claim, issue or matter as to which such person shall have been adjudged to be liable to the
corporation unless and only to the extent that the Court of Chancery or the court in which such
action or suit was brought shall determine that despite the adjudication of liability, but in view of
all the circumstances of the case, such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for
such expenses that the court shall deem proper. Section 145 further provides that to the extent a
director or officer of a corporation has been successful in the defense of any action, suit or
proceeding referred to above, or in defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, he or she shall
be indemnified against expenses (including attorney’s fees) actually and reasonably incurred by
him or her in connection therewith.
Our certificate of incorporation, as amended, and bylaws, as amended, provide that we shall, to
the fullest extent authorized by the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, indemnify
our directors and executive officers; provided; however, that we may limit the extent of such
indemnification by individual contracts with our directors and executive officers; and, provided,
further, that we shall not be required to indemnify any director or executive officer in connection
with any proceeding (or part thereof) initiated by such person or any proceeding by such person
against us or our directors, officers, employees or other agents unless (i) such indemnification is
expressly required to be made by law, (ii) the proceeding was authorized by the board of
directors, and (iii) such indemnification is provided by us, in our sole discretion, pursuant to our
powers under the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware.
We have entered into agreements to indemnify our directors and executive officers. These
indemnity agreements require us to hold harmless and indemnify each of our directors and
executive officers (i) to the fullest extent authorized or permitted by the provisions of our bylaws
and the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, as the same may be amended from
time to time, and (ii) subject to certain exclusions, against expenses that such director or
executive officer becomes legally obligated to pay because of any claim or claims made against
or by such director or executive officer in connection with threatened, pending or completed
actions, suits or proceedings, to which such director or executive officer at any time becomes a
party or a participant, or is threatened to be made a party, by reason of the fact that such director
or executive officer is, was or at any time becomes a director, officer, employee or other agent of
ours, or is or was serving or at any time serves at our request as a director, officer, employee or
other agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, employee benefit plan or other
enterprise, including any of our subsidiaries. These indemnity agreements also establish the
processes and procedures for indemnification claims, advancement of expenses and costs and
other determinations with respect to indemnification. The contractual rights to indemnification
provided by these indemnity agreements are subject to the limitations and conditions specified in
such agreements.
Our bylaws, as amended, also permit us to maintain insurance to protect us and any director,
officer, employee or agent against any liability with respect to which we would have the power to
indemnify such persons under the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware. We
maintain an insurance policy insuring our directors and officers against certain liabilities.
Item 7. Exemption from Registration Claimed.
Not applicable.
Item 8. Exhibits.
The list of exhibits is set forth under “Index to Exhibits” at the end of this Registration Statement
and is incorporated herein by reference.
Item 9. Undertakings.
(a) The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes:
(1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment
to this Registration Statement:
(i) To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act;
(ii) To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of this
Registration Statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually
or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in this
Registration Statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of
securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was
registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range
may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in
the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20 percent change in
the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in
the effective registration statement; and
(iii) To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in this Registration Statement or any material change to such information in this
Registration Statement;
provided, however, that paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii) do not apply if the information required
to be included in a post-effective amendment by those paragraphs is contained in periodic
reports filed with or furnished to the Commission by the Registrant pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act that are incorporated by reference in this Registration
Statement.
(2) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each such post-
effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial
bona fide offering thereof.
(3) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(b) The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining any liability
under the Securities Act, each filing of the Registrant’s annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or
Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act (and, where applicable, each filing of an employee benefit
plan’s annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act) that is incorporated by
reference in this Registration Statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement
relating to the securities offered herein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be
deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(c) Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to
directors, officers and controlling persons of the Registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions,
or otherwise, the Registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Commission such
indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore,
unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the
payment by the Registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer, or controlling
person of the Registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted
by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered,
the Registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling
precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification
by it is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be governed by the final
adjudication of such issue.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant, Westmoreland Coal Company,
a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-8 and has
duly caused this Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized, in the City of Englewood, Colorado, on this 8th day of September, 2015.
WESTMORELAND COAL
COMPANY
By: /s/ Keith E. Alessi
Keith E. Alessi
Chief Executive Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears
below constitutes and appoints Kevin A. Paprzycki and Keith E. Alessi, and each or any one of
them, his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and
resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to
sign any and all amendments (including post-effective amendments) to this registration
statement, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and other documents in connection
therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto said attorneys-in-fact
and agents, and each of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and
thing requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully to all intents and
purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said
attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or their or his substitutes or substitute, may lawfully
do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, this registration statement has been signed by
the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ Keith E. Alessi
Keith E. Alessi
/s/ Kevin A. Paprzycki
Kevin A. Paprzycki
/s/ Nathan M. Troup
Nathan M. Troup
Terry Bachynski
Gail E. Hamilton
/s/ Michael G. Hutchinson
Michael G. Hutchinson
/s/ Richard M. Klingaman
Richard M. Klingaman
/s/ Craig R. Mackus
Craig R. Mackus
/s/ Jan B. Packwood
Jan B. Packwood
/s/ Robert C. Scharp
Robert C. Scharp
Title
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer) and
Director
Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer)
Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Date
September 8, 2015
September 8, 2015
September 8, 2015
September 8, 2015
September 8, 2015
September 8, 2015
September 8, 2015
September 8, 2015
EXHIBIT INDEX
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
Number  Exhibit Description
  3.1
Amended and Restated
Certificate of Incorporation
File
Form
Number    Exhibit
Filing
Date
Filed
Herewith
3.2
  4.1
  5.1
23.1
23.2
23.3
24
99.1
10-Q    001-11155  
  Amended and Restated Bylaws    8-K    001-11155  
  Common Stock certificate
S-2    33-1950    4(c)
3.1     7/31/2015    
3.1     2/25/2015    
    12/4/1985
Legal opinion of Jennifer S.
Grafton, Esq.
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP
  
  Consent of Grant Thornton LLP
Consent of Jennifer S. Grafton,
Esq. (included in Exhibit 5.1)
Power of Attorney (included on
signature page)
Westmoreland Coal Company
and Subsidiaries Employees’
Savings Plan
X
X
X
X
X