
6-K 1 pbra20150717_6k1.htm NEW DECISION ON THE PARQUE DAS BALEIAS ARBITRATION
pbra20150717_6k1.htm - Generated by SEC Publisher for SEC Filing
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
Report of Foreign Private Issuer
Pursuant to Rule 13a-16 or 15d-16 of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the month of July, 2015
Commission File Number 1-15106
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A. - PETROBRAS
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Brazilian Petroleum Corporation - PETROBRAS
(Translation of Registrant's name into English)
Avenida República do Chile, 65 
20031-912 - Rio de Janeiro, RJ
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Address of principal executive office)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover Form 20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F ___X___ Form 40-F _______
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this Form is also thereby furnishing the
information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes _______ No___X____
New Decision on the Parque das Baleias Arbitration
Rio de Janeiro, July 17, 2015 – Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. – Petrobras, regarding the press released filled on July 6th about the Parque das
Baleias Arbitration, informs that the Arbitration Tribunal presented a new ruling determining the suspension of the deposits of the
disputed special participation tax amounts, estimated in R$ 350 million per quarter.
This decision is provisional and it is valid until the final judgement of the Request for Reconsideration presented by Petrobras in order to
suspend the effects of the former decision.
The tribunal also postponed the deadline for the parties to present the precise calculation of the amounts corresponding to the historical
differences in the special participation tax and the proposal for the deposit of such differences.
Petrobras will continue acting steadily in defense of its rights and all material facts on this matter will be disclosed to the market in a
timely manner.
www.petrobras.com.br/ir
Contacts:
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A. – PETROBRAS | Investor Relations Department I e-mail: petroinvest@petrobras.com.br
Av. República do Chile, 65 – 10th floor, 1002 – B – 20031-912 – Rio de Janeiro, RJ | Phone: 55 (21) 3224-1510 / 3224-9947
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This release includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended,
and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, that are subject to risks and uncertainties. The forward-
looking statements, which address the Company’s expected business and financial performance, among other matters, contain
words such as “believe,” “expect,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “optimistic,” “intend,” “plan,” “aim,” “will,” “may,” “should,”
“could,” “would,” “likely,” and similar expressions. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-
looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which they are made. There is no assurance that the expected events,
trends or results will actually occur. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information or future events or for any other reason.
The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those expressed or forecast in any forward-looking statements as a
result of a variety of assumptions and factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following: (i) failure to comply
with laws or regulations, including fraudulent activity, corruption, and bribery; (ii) the outcome of ongoing corruption
investigations and any new facts or information that may arise in relation to the “Lava Jato Operation”; (iii) the effectiveness of
the Company’s risk management policies and procedures, including operational risk; and (iv) litigation, such as class actions
or proceedings brought by governmental and regulatory agencies.  A description of other factors can be found in the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 20-F for the year ended December 31, 2014, and the Company’s other filings with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report
to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURE
Date: July 17, 2015
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A--PETROBRAS
/S/  Ivan de Souza Monteiro
Ivan de Souza Monteiro
Chief Financial Officer and Investor Relations Officer
By:
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This press release may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (Securities Act), and Section 21E
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act) that are not based on historical facts and are not assurances of future results.  These forward-looking
statements are based on management's current view and estimates of future economic circumstances, industry conditions, company performance and financial results. The
words "anticipates", "believes", "estimates", "expects", "plans" and similar expressions, as they relate to the company, are intended to identify forward-looking statements.
Statements regarding the declaration or payment of dividends, the implementation of principal operating and financing strategies and capital expenditure plans, the
direction of future operations and the factors or trends affecting financial condition, liquidity or results o f operations are examples of forward-looking statements. Such
statements reflect the current views of management and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. There is no guarantee that the expected events, trends or
results will actually occur. The statements are based on many assumptions and factors, including general economic and market conditions, industry conditions, and
operating factors. Any changes in such assumptions or factors could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations.  
All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement, and you should not place reliance on any forward-looking statement
contained in this press release. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information or future
events or for any other reason.