
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT DOCUMENT WHICH REQUIRES YOUR IMMEDIATE ATTENTION.
Bidder’s Statement
IN RELATION TO A RECOMMENDED OFFER BY
EMERALD RESOURCES NL
(ACN 009 795 046)
TO ACQUIRE ALL OF YOUR ORDINARY SHARES IN
RENAISSANCE MINERALS LIMITED
(ACN 141 196 545)
THE INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS OF RENAISSANCE UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMEND YOU
ACCEPT THE OFFER
IN THE ABSENCE OF A SUPERIOR PROPOSAL.
THE OFFER IS DATED 24 AUGUST 2016 AND WILL CLOSE AT 5:00PM (WST) ON 26 SEPTEMBER 
2016, UNLESS EXTENDED OR WITHDRAWN. TO ACCEPT EMERALD’S OFFER, SIMPLY COMPLETE
THE ENCLOSED ACCEPTANCE FORM AND RETURN IT IN THE ENVELOPE PROVIDED.
LEGAL ADVISER
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
Bidder’s Statement
This document is a bidder’s statement dated 19 August 2016 issued by Emerald Resources 
NL (ACN 009 795 046) under Part 6.5 of the Corporations Act in relation to an off-market 
offer by Emerald to acquire all Renaissance Shares not currently owned by it and sets out 
certain disclosures required by the Corporations Act.
A copy of this Bidder’s Statement was lodged with ASIC on 19 August 2016. Neither ASIC 
nor any of its officers take any responsibility for the contents of this Bidder’s Statement.
Defined terms
A  number  of  defined  terms  are  used  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement.  Unless  the  contrary 
intention appears, the context requires otherwise or words are defined in Section 11 of 
this  Bidder’s  Statement,  words  and  phrases  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement  have  the  same 
meaning as in the Corporations Act.
Investments risks
There are a number of risks that may have a material impact on the value of the Offer, the 
future  performance  of  the  Merged  Entity  and  the  value  of  Emerald  Shares.  These  are 
described in Section 8 of this Bidder’s Statement.
Foreign jurisdictions
Renaissance  Shareholders  should  note  that  the  consideration  under  the  Offer  involves 
the  issue  of  Emerald  Shares.  The  Offer  is  subject  to  disclosure  requirements  in  Australia 
which are different from those applicable in other countries.
Subject to the paragraphs below, Renaissance Shareholders who are citizens or residents 
or a jurisdiction other than, or whose addresses in Renaissance’s register of Shareholders 
is  a  place  outside,  Australia  or  its  external  territories,  New  Zealand,  Singapore  and 
Cambodia will not  be entitled  to  receive  Emerald  Shares  on  acceptance  of  the  Offer 
(unless Emerald determines otherwise). Instead, those Ineligible Foreign Shareholders who 
accept  the  Offer  will  be  paid  a  cash  amount  calculated  in  accordance  with  Section 
9.16  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement.  This  Bidder’s  Statement  does  not  constitute  an  offer  to 
issue  or  sell,  or  the  soliciting  of  an  offer  to  buy,  any  Emerald  Shares  referred  to  in  this 
Bidder’s Statement in any jurisdiction in which the offer or issue of such Emerald Shares 
would be unlawful.
In  particular,  Emerald  Shares  have  not  been,  and  will  not  be,  registered  under  the 
Securities  Act  1933  of  the  United  States  of  America  (Securities  Act)  and  may  not  be 
offered or sold in the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, a US person (as 
defined in Regulation S under the Securities Act), except in a transaction exempt from 
the  registration  requirements  of  the  Securities  Act  and  applicable  United  States  state 
securities laws.
The  information  in  this  Bidder’  Statement  has  been  prepared  to  comply  with  the 
applicable requirements of the securities laws of Australia
This Offer does not, and does not intend to, constitute an offer in any place or jurisdiction 
in which, or to any person to whom, it would not be lawful to make such an offer or to 
issue this Bidder’s Statement.
No  action  has  been  taken  to  register  or  qualify  the  Offer,  or  the  Emerald  Shares,  or 
otherwise  permit  a  public  offering  of  the  Emerald  Shares,  in  any  jurisdiction  outside  of 
Australia.
2
New Zealand
In making the Offer available to Renaissance Shareholders with registered addresses in 
New  Zealand,  Emerald  is  relying  on  an  exemption  contained  in  the  New  Zealand 
Securities  Act  (Overseas  Companies)  Exemption  Notice  2013  in  relation  to  prospectus 
and investment statement requirements in New Zealand. This Bidder’s Statement may not 
contain all the information that a bidder’s statement or prospectus under New Zealand 
law is required to contain.
Singapore
This document has not been lodged or registered as a prospectus in Singapore with the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  and  therefore,  the  statutory  liability  under  the 
Securities and Futures Act (Cap. 289) (SFA) in relation to the content of prospectuses will 
not apply. The MAS assumes no responsibility for the contents of this document. The MAS 
has not in any way considered the merits of the Emerald Shares being offered pursuant 
to  the  Offer  as  described  in  this  document.  You  should  consider  carefully  whether  this 
Offer is suitable for you.
This document and any other document or material in connection with the offer or sale, 
or  invitation  for  subscription  or  purchase  of  Emerald  Shares  may  not  be  circulated  or 
distributed,  nor may  Emerald  Shares  be  offered  or  sold,  or  be made  the  subject  of an 
invitation  for  subscription  or  purchase,  whether  directly  or  indirectly,  to  persons  in 
Singapore except pursuant to and in accordance with the exemption set out in section 
273(1)(b)  of  the  SFA  or  otherwise  in  accordance  with  any  other  relevant  exemption 
under the SFA.
Any offer of Emerald Shares is personal to you, as a current shareholder of Renaissance, 
and is not made to you with a view to the Emerald Shares being subsequently offered for 
sale  to  any  other  party.  You  are  advised  to  acquaint  yourself  with  the  SFA  provisions 
relating to on sale restrictions in Singapore and comply accordingly.
Disclaimer as to forward looking statements
This  Bidder’s  Statement  includes  forward-looking  statements  that  have  been  based  on 
Emerald’s  current  expectations  and  predictions  about  future  events  including  Emerald’s 
intentions (which include those set out in Section 6). These forward-looking statements are, 
however, only predictions and are subject to inherent risks, uncertainties and assumptions 
that could cause actual results, performance or achievements of Emerald, Renaissance 
and  the  Merged  Entity  to  differ  materially  from  the  expectations  and  predictions, 
expressed  or  implied,  in  such  forward-looking  statements.  These  factors  include,  among 
other things, those risks identified in Section 8.
None of Emerald, its officers, employees or any persons named in this Bidder’s Statement 
with  their  consent  or  any  person  involved  in  the  preparation  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement 
makes any representation or warranty (express or implied) as to the accuracy or likelihood 
of  fulfilment  of  any  forward  looking  statements,  events  or  results  expressed  or  implied  in 
any forward looking statement, except to the extent required by law. You are cautioned 
not to place undue reliance on these statements.
Value of Emerald Shares
As  you  are  being  offered  Emerald  Shares  as  consideration  for  your  Renaissance  Shares, 
the  implied value of  the  Offer will vary  with  the market  price  of  Emerald  Shares.  Further 
information on the implied value of the Offer is contained in this document.
In addition, all references to the implied value of the Offer are subject to the effects of 
rounding.
3
Disclaimer as to Renaissance and Emerald information
The information on Renaissance and Renaissance’s securities contained in this Bidder’s 
Statement has been prepared by Emerald using only publicly available information.
The  information  in  this Bidder’s Statement  concerning  Renaissance  and  the  assets  and 
liabilities,  financial  position  and  performance,  profits  and  losses  and  prospects  of 
Renaissance has not been independently verified by Emerald.
the  Corporations  Act,  make  any 
Accordingly  Emerald  does  not,  subject 
representation  or  warranty,  express  or  implied,  as  to  the  accuracy  or  completeness  of 
such information.
to
The information on the Emerald Group contained in this Bidder’s Statement, to the extent 
that it incorporates or reflects information on Renaissance, has also been prepared using 
publicly available information. Accordingly, information in relation to the Emerald Group 
is  subject  to  the  foregoing  disclaimer  to  that  extent.  Further  information  relating  to 
Renaissance’s  business  may  be  included  in  Renaissance’s  Target’s  Statement  which 
Renaissance must provide to its shareholders in response to this Bidder’s Statement.
Investment advice
This Bidder’s Statement does not take into account the individual investment objectives, 
financial  or  tax  situation  or  particular  needs  of  each  Renaissance  Shareholder  (or  any 
other  person).  Accordingly,  you  are  encouraged  to  seek  your  own  professional  advice 
before making a decision as to whether or not to accept the Offer.
Privacy
Emerald has collected your information from the registers of Renaissance for the purposes 
of  making  the  Offer  and  administering,  if  accepted,  your  acceptance  of  the  Offer. 
Emerald and its share registry may use your personal information in the course of making 
and implementing the Offer. Emerald and its share registry may also disclose your personal 
information to their Related Bodies Corporate and external service providers and may be 
required to disclose such information to regulators, such as ASIC. If you would like details of 
information about you held by Emerald, please contact Emerald at the address set out in 
the Key Contacts Section.
Internet sites
Emerald  and  Renaissance  each  maintain  internet  sites.  The  URL  location  for  Emerald  is 
www.emeraldresources.com.au and for Renaissance is www.renaissanceminerals.com.au.  
Information contained in or otherwise accessible through these internet sites is not part of 
this  Bidder’s  Statement.  All  references  to  these  sites  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement  is  for 
information purposes only.
Estimates and assumptions
Unless otherwise indicated, all references to estimates, assumptions and derivations of the 
same in this Bidder’s Statement are references to estimates, assumptions and derivations 
of the same by  Emerald’s management. Management estimates reflect and are based 
on  views  as  at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement,  and  actual  facts  or  outcomes  may 
materially differ from those estimates or assumptions.
Effect of rounding
Figures, amounts, percentages, prices, estimates, calculations of value and fractions in this 
Bidder’s  Statement  may  be  subject  to  the  effect  of  rounding.  Accordingly,  the  actual 
figures may vary from those included in this Bidder’s Statement.
4
Currencies
In this Bidder’s Statement, references to “Australian dollars”, “AUD”, “$” or “cents” are to 
the lawful currency of Australia.
This Bidder’s Statement may contain conversions of relevant currencies to other currencies 
for convenience. These conversions should not be construed as representations that the 
relevant currency could be converted into the other currency at the rate used or at any 
other rate. Conversions that have been calculated at the date of this Bidder’s Statement 
(or any other relevant date) may not correspond to the amounts shown in the historic or 
future  financial  statements  of  Emerald  or  Renaissance  in  respect  of  which  different 
exchange rates may have been, or may be, used.
Maps and diagrams
Any diagrams and maps appearing in this Bidder’s Statement are illustrative only and may 
not be drawn to scale. Unless stated otherwise, all data contained in charts, maps, graphs 
and tables is based on information available at the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
Queries
You should contact professional financial advisor if you are unsure about how to deal with 
this Bidder’s Statement.
If you have any enquires about the Offer, please contact Emerald on 1300 729 543   or 
your professional financial advisor.
5
19 August 2016
Dear Renaissance Shareholders,
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
RECOMMENDED OFF-MARKET TAKEOVER BID FOR RENAISSANCE MINERALS LIMITED
On 19 July 2016, Emerald Resources NL (Emerald) announced its intention to make an off-
market  takeover  offer  for  all  the  shares  in  Renaissance  Minerals  Limited  (Renaissance) 
that Emerald does not already own. On behalf of the directors of Emerald, I am pleased 
to  provide  you  with  this  Bidder’s  Statement  detailing  Emerald’s  offer  to  acquire  your 
Renaissance Shares.
By accepting Emerald’s offer you will, subject to the terms and conditions of the offer, 
receive 1.55 Emerald Shares for every 1 Renaissance Share held (Offer).  The terms and 
conditions of the Offer are explained further in Annexure A to this Bidder’s Statement.
The  Independent  Directors  unanimously  recommend  that  Renaissance  Shareholders 
accept the Offer in the absence of a Superior Proposal1.
Once completed (and assuming Emerald holds a relevant interest in at least 90% of all 
Renaissance  Shares  on  issue  and  moves  to  compulsory  acquisition),  the  merger  will 
create a well-funded mid-tier gold company which is well placed to develop its assets 
and pursue any value enhancing opportunities which may arise.
Certain  large  Renaissance  shareholders  have  provided  their  support  for  the  Offer  by 
entering  into  pre-bid  acceptance  deeds  with  Emerald  in  respect  of  9.42%  of  the 
Renaissance Shares on issue. The obligation of Renaissance shareholders to accept the 
Offer under the pre-bid acceptance deeds will cease in limited circumstances, including 
if  a  superior  proposal  is  made  and  recommended  by  the  Independent  Directors.    In 
addition, four (4) shareholders of Renaissance, holding in aggregate 15% of Renaissance 
shares, have indicated their intention to accept the Offer in full no earlier than 21 days 
after  commencement  of  the  Offer,  in  the  absence  of  a  superior  proposal.    Emerald 
currently holds 10% of Renaissance Shares in its own right.
Participate in benefits under the Offer
Merging Renaissance and Emerald will:
•  centralise 100% ownership of the Cambodian Gold Project;
•  create a simplified single ownership structure with a strong board and management 
team  that  can  oversee  the  acceleration  of  exploration  and  development  of  the 
Cambodian Gold Project;
•  provide  synergies  through  the  removal  of  duplicated  corporate,  compliance  and
head office administrative functions;
•  create  a  merged  entity  having  a  strong  balance  sheet  with  approximately  A$18.2
million of cash2 and no debt; and
1 The Independent Directors are all of the Renaissance Directors as at the date of the Bidder’s Statement other than 
Ross Williams, who is also an Emerald Director and therefore abstained from making a recommendation in relation to 
the Offer or participating in Renaissance’s consideration of the Offer.
6
•  enhance  financing  options  and  broader  equity  markets  appeal  from  improved
operational, liquidity and increased ability to source development financing.
The Offer provides a premium for your Renaissance Shares
The Offer represents a premium of:
•  22% to the last closing price on the ASX of Renaissance Shares of 5.7 cents on 15 July
20163;
•  27% to the 30-day volume weighted average price (VWAP) of Renaissance Shares on
the ASX of 5.66 cents to 15 July 20164; and
•  29% to the 60-day VWAP of Renaissance Shares on the ASX of 5.07 cents to 15 July
20165.
If  Emerald  acquires  at  least  90%  of  all  Renaissance  Shares,  it  intends  to  proceed  with 
compulsory  acquisition  of  the  remaining  Renaissance  Shares  and  de-list  Renaissance 
from the ASX.
I encourage you to read this important document carefully, including the risk factors set 
out  in  Section  8.  The  Offer  is  open  for  your  acceptance  until  5:00pm  (WST)  on  26 
September 2016, unless extended. If you wish to accept the Offer, you should follow the 
instructions on the relevant Acceptance Form enclosed.
If you have any questions about the Offer, please contact Emerald on 1300 729 543, or 
your professional financial advisor.
Yours sincerely
Mr Simon Lee AO 
Chairman 
EMERALD RESOURCES NL
2 Based on the cash position of Emerald and Renaissance of approximately $14.5 million and $3.7 million respectively 
at 30 June 2016.  The pro forma cash position does not take into account events subsequent to 30 June 2016 or the 
costs of the Offer. 
3 Based on Emerald’s last closing share price of 4.5 cents on the ASX on 15 July 2016, the last trading date of Emerald 
and Renaissance before the Announcement Date. 
4 Based on the 30-day VWAP of Emerald Shares on ASX of 4.64 to 15 July 2016, being the last trading day of Emerald 
and Renaissance Shares before the Announcement Date. 
5 Based on the 60-day VWAP of Emerald Shares on ASX of 4.22 cents to 15 July 2016.
7
KEY DATES*
Announcement of Offer
Date of this Bidder’s Statement
Date this Bidder’s Statement is lodged with ASIC
Date of Offer
Offer Closes (unless otherwise extended)
19 July 2016
19 August 2016
19 August 2016
24 August 2016
5:00pm (WST) on 26 
September 2016
*All  dates  and  times  are  subject  to  change  in  accordance  with  applicable  regulatory 
requirements.
KEY CONTACTS
Emerald Resources NL 
 
1110 Hay Street 
WEST PERTH WA 6005 
Phone: 1300 729 543 
 
 
 
Current Directors
Simon Lee AO – Non-Executive Chairman 
Morgan Hart – Managing Director 
Ross Stanley – Non-Executive Director 
Ross Williams – Non-Executive Director 
 
Proposed Director*
Justin Tremain – Proposed Director 
 
Company Secretary
Mark Clements
ASX Code: EMR
Website
www.emeraldresources.com.au
Legal advisers
Steinepreis Paganin 
Lawyers and Consultants 
Level 4, The Read Buildings 
16 Milligan Street 
PERTH WA 6000
Share registry* 
 
Security Transfer Registrars Pty Ltd 
770 Canning Highway 
APPLECROSS WA 6153 
 
 
 
Sale Nominee* 
 
Euroz Securities Limited 
Level 18 Alluvion 
58 Mounts Bay Road 
PERTH  WA 6000
Auditor*
HLB Mann Judd 
Level 4, 130 Stirling Street 
Perth WA 6000
* This person or entity has not been involved in the preparation of this Bidder’s Statement. 
Its name is included for information purposes only.
8
CONTENTS
1. 
2.
SUMMARY OF THE OFFER ........................................................................................... 11 
DETAILED REASONS WHY THE EMERALD DIRECTORS BELIEVE YOU SHOULD 
ACCEPT THE OFFER ..................................................................................................... 19 
PROFILE OF EMERALD RESOURCES NL ....................................................................... 23 
3. 
PROFILE OF RENAISSANCE MINERALS LIMITED .......................................................... 33 
4. 
MERGED ENTITY .......................................................................................................... 41 
5. 
INTENTIONS OF EMERALD RESOURCES NL ................................................................. 47 
6. 
AUSTRALIAN TAX CONSIDERATIONS ......................................................................... 51 
7. 
RISK FACTORS ............................................................................................................ 55 
8. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ...................................................................................... 64 
9. 
AUTHORISATION ......................................................................................................... 77 
10. 
11. 
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION ........................................................................... 78 
ANNEXURE A – TERMS OF OFFER.............................................................................................. 85 
ANNEXURE B – RENAISSANCE PRESCRIBED OCCURRENCES ................................................... 98 
ANNEXURE C – EMERALD’S ASX ANNOUNCEMENTS ............................................................ 101 
ANNEXURE D – RENAISSANCE’S ASX ANNOUNCEMENTS ..................................................... 103
9
REASONS WHY YOU SHOULD ACCEPT THE OFFER 
The  Emerald  Directors  believe  that  there  are  compelling  reasons  to  accept  the  Offer.  
You should read this Bidder’s Statement (and in particular, Sections 2 and 8) in full before 
deciding whether or not to accept the Offer. In summary:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.   
7.   
8.
9.   
10.
unanimously
recommend
Independent  Directors
The 
that 
Renaissance  Shareholders  accept  the  Offer,  in  the  absence  of  a 
Superior Proposal 
The  Merged  Entity  will  create  a  well-funded  mid-tier  gold  company 
which  is  well  placed  to  develop  and  enhance  the  value  of  the 
Merged Entity’s assets 
The  Offer  provides  a  premium  to  the  price  of  Renaissance  Shares  in 
the period prior to the Announcement Date  
The  Merged  Entity  will  have  a  strong  board  and  management  team 
that can deliver the strategy and growth going forward  
You may be eligible to receive capital gains tax relief in Australia if 
Emerald achieves ownership of more than 80% of Renaissance Shares 
Renaissance’s Share price may fall if the Offer is not successful 
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement no Superior Proposal exists 
Certain  Renaissance  Shareholders  have  committed,  or  indicated  an 
intention, to accept the Offer  
No duty or brokerage will be payable by Renaissance Shareholders  
There are implications of being a minority shareholder of Renaissance 
if you do not accept the Offer
10
1.
SUMMARY OF THE OFFER
The information in this Section 1 is not intended to be comprehensive and should 
be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  detailed  information  contained  in  this  Bidder’s 
Statement.
You should read this Bidder’s Statement in its entirety and the separate Target’s 
Statement 
to  deal  with  your 
Renaissance Shares. The detailed terms of the Offer are set out in Annexure A.
from  Renaissance  before  deciding  how
The  information  in  this  Section  1  is  set  out  by  way  of  response  to  a  series  of 
questions.  Each  answer  has,  where  appropriate,  cross-references  to  other 
questions  in  this  summary  and  other  parts  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement,  including 
the  Annexures  that  contain  more  information  that  you  might  find  useful  or 
relevant.
Part  A  of  this  Section  1  deals  with  the  Offer.  Part  B  deals  with  Emerald.  Part  C 
deals with risks relating to the Offer. Part D deals with other relevant questions.
PART A – OVERVIEW OF THE OFFER
Further Information 
Annexure  A  contains  the  full 
terms  of  the  Offer  and  the 
Conditions.  The  answers 
to 
questions 5 to 8 in Part A and in 
Parts  C  and  D  explain  other 
aspects of the Offer.
9.8
contains
a 
Section 
summary of the Option Transfer 
Emerald 
Deeds 
proposes to enter into with the 
Renaissance Optionholders.
which
No.  Question 
1.
What is Emerald 
offering to buy?
2.
Is there an offer 
in respect of my 
Renaissance 
Options?
is  offering
Answer 
Emerald 
to  buy  all 
Renaissance  Shares  that  it  does  not 
already  own,  including  Renaissance 
Shares that may be issued during the 
Offer Period due to the conversion of 
Renaissance  Options,  on  the  terms 
set out in this Bidder’s Statement. 
You  may  only  accept  the  Offer  in 
respect  of  all  (but  not  some)  of  the 
Renaissance Shares held by you. 
Emerald  is  not  making  an  offer  to 
holders  of  Renaissance  Options 
under  the  Offer.  Emerald  intends  to 
enter  into  private  agreements  with 
Renaissance  Optionholders 
the 
under  which 
their  Renaissance 
to 
Options  will  be 
Renaissance 
Emerald 
and 
Optionholders  will 
1.55 
Emerald  Options  for  every  one  (1) 
Renaissance  Option  held  by  them 
the  Offer  becoming 
(subject 
unconditional 
Emerald 
acquiring  at 
of 
Renaissance  Shares).  Each  Emerald 
Option 
to  a  Renaissance 
Optionholder  will  have  an  exercise 
price  equal  to  the  exercise  price  of 
their Renaissance Options divided by 
1.55 and will otherwise be on broadly 
similar  terms  to  their  Renaissance 
Options. If, by the end of the Offer 
Period  Emerald  has  acquired  a 
Relevant Interest in at least 90% of 
then 
all  Renaissance 
Emerald  intends  to  give  notices  to
transferred
and 
least
Shares,
to
issued
receive
50.1%
11
No.  Question
3.
What choices 
do I have?
4.
How do I accept 
the Offer?
5.
6.
How long will 
the Offer remain 
open?
What will you 
receive if you 
accept the 
Offer?
remaining
Answer 
any 
Renaissance 
Optionholders  offering  to  acquire 
their  Renaissance  Options 
in 
accordance  with  section  663C  of 
the Corporations Act. 
The 
Directors 
Independent 
recommend  that  you  ACCEPT  the 
Offer  in  the  absence  of  a  Superior 
Proposal,  however,  you  have  the 
choice to: 
(a)  ACCEPT the Offer for all of your 
in 
the
Renaissance 
accordance 
Acceptance Form;  
sell  your  Renaissance  Shares, 
which  may  be  at  a  higher  or 
lower  price  than  the  Offer 
Consideration; or
Shares 
with
(b)
(c)  do nothing if you wish to reject
the Offer.
(which
You  may  accept  the  Offer  by 
completing  the  Acceptance  Form 
in accordance with the instructions 
on it and returning it to an address 
on the Acceptance Form. 
The  Acceptance  Form  will  only 
give rise to a valid acceptance if it 
is  received  in  sufficient  time  to  be 
processed  before  the  end  of  the 
Offer  Period 
for  CHESS 
Holdings,  means  sufficient  time  to 
enable  Emerald  to  instruct  your 
Controlling  Participant  to  initiate 
acceptance on your behalf). 
The  Offer  opens  on  24  August  2016. 
Unless  withdrawn  or  extended 
in 
accordance  with  the  Corporations 
Act,  the  Offer  is  scheduled  to  close 
at  5:00pm  (WST)  on  26  September 
2016. 
If  you  are  an  Eligible  Shareholder 
(being a Renaissance Shareholder as 
at  the  Record  Date  who  is  a  citizen 
or resident of a jurisdiction other than 
or, with a registered address outside, 
Australia  or 
its  external  territories, 
New 
Singapore  and 
Cambodia)  and  accept  the  Offer, 
subject  to  satisfaction  or  waiver  of 
the  Conditions,  you  will  be  issued 
1.55  Emerald  Shares 
for  every  1 
Renaissance  Share  held  by  you  on 
the Record Date.  
If you accept the Offer and you are
Zealand,
Further Information
1.4  and  1.5  of 
Sections 
Annexure  A  provide 
further 
information  on  how  to  accept 
the Offer.
The Key Dates Section provides 
an indicative timetable for the 
Offer.
and
the  Offer
Annexure  A  contains  full  terms 
the 
of 
Conditions.  
 
Section 9.16 and Section 1.8 of 
Annexure  A  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement 
further 
information.
provide
12
No.  Question
7.
Why should I 
accept the 
Offer?
8.
What is the 
value of the 
Offer?
Answer 
an 
Ineligible  Foreign  Shareholder, 
you  will  not  be  entitled  to  receive 
Emerald  Shares  as  consideration  for 
your  Renaissance  Shares.  In  these 
circumstances,  the  Emerald  Shares 
which  would  otherwise  have  been 
issued to you will instead be issued to 
the Sale Nominee who will sell those 
Emerald  Shares  on  your  behalf  and 
remit  the  net  proceeds  to  you  in 
Australian  dollars.  As  at  the  date  of 
this  Bidder’s  Statement,  Emerald 
proposes  to  appoint  Euroz  Securities 
Limited  (ACN  089  314  983)  (AFSL: 
243302) as the Sale Nominee, subject 
to ASIC approval. 
The Emerald Directors believe there 
are  a 
reasons 
Renaissance  Shareholders  should 
accept the Offer, which are set out 
in  Section  2  of 
this  Bidder’s 
Statement.  These  reasons  include 
that  you  will  gain  the  benefit  of 
exposure  to  a  highly  credentialed 
board  and  management  team 
and  become  a  shareholder  of  a 
mid-tier 
gold 
company capable of accelerating 
the  exploration  and  development 
of the Cambodian Gold Project.  
The  implied  value  of  Renaissance 
under 
the 
Announcement 
was 
approximately  $40  million  or  6.975 
cents per Renaissance Share (on an 
undiluted basis)6. 
Based on Emerald’s closing price of 
5.7 cents on 18 August 2016 (being 
the last trading before the date of 
this 
the 
implied  value  for  Renaissance  is 
approximately  $50.8  million  or  8.84 
cents per Renaissance Share.
the  Offer  as  at
well-funded
Bidder’s
Statement),
number
of
Date
The  value  of  the  Offer  may  change 
as a consequence of changes in the 
market  price  of  Emerald  Shares  on 
ASX.
Further Information
this  Bidder’s 
Section  2  of 
Statement  provides 
further 
information  in  respect  of  the 
highlights of the Offer.
Section  2.3  of 
this  Bidder’s 
Statement  provides 
further 
information  in  respect  of  the 
implied value of the Offer. 
in 
The  answers  to  questions 
Parts  B  and  C  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement 
contain  more 
information  about  Emerald,  its 
business  and  assets  and  the 
risks 
to  a 
that  may  apply 
shareholding in Emerald. 
Section  2  of 
this  Bidder’s 
Statement contains the view of 
Emerald  as  to  why  they  think 
you should accept the Offer.
6 Based on the closing share price of Emerald Shares of 4.5 cents on 15 July 2016, the last trading day prior to the 
Announcement Date.
13
PART B – OVERVIEW OF EMERALD
No.  Question 
1.
Answer 
 Who is Emerald?  Emerald
is
an
Australian 
incorporated company listed on the 
Official  List  of  the  ASX  (ASX  Code: 
EMR).
2.
Will  my 
new 
Emerald  Shares 
be 
listed  on 
ASX?
3.
4.
What  rights  and 
liabilities 
will 
to  my 
attach 
new 
Emerald 
Shares? 
 Who  are 
Emerald 
Directors 
Proposed 
Director 
what 
experience  do 
they have?
and
and
the
them
to  admit
Within  7  days  of  the  date  of  this 
Bidder’s  Statement,  Emerald  will 
apply to the ASX for quotation of the 
new  Emerald  Shares  on  the  ASX. 
Quotation  of 
the  new  Emerald 
Shares depends on ASX exercising its 
discretion 
to 
quotation on ASX. Emerald is already 
admitted  to  the  Official  List  of  ASX 
and  Emerald  Shares  in  the  same 
class  as  the  new  Emerald  Shares 
being offered are already quoted. 
The  new  Emerald  Shares 
issued 
under  the  Offer  will  be  issued  fully 
paid  and  will  from  the  time  of  issue 
rank  equally  with  existing  Emerald 
Shares. 
The Directors of Emerald are: 
(a)
Simon Lee AO – Non-Executive 
Chairman;
(b)  Morgan Hart – Managing
Director;
(c)  Ross Stanley – Non-Executive
Director; and
(d)  Ross Williams – Non-Executive
Director.
in  more
If  Emerald  acquires  a  Relevant 
than  90%  of 
Interest 
Renaissance and the Offer becomes 
unconditional  or  the  Conditions  are 
satisfied or waived, it is intended that 
Justin  Tremain  will  be  appointed  as 
an executive director of Emerald.
Further Information 
Sections  3,  6  and  8  of  this 
Statement  contain 
Bidder’s 
more 
information 
about 
Emerald’s  assets, 
financial 
position,  details  of  Emerald 
securities currently on issue and 
the  risks  that  may  apply  to 
Emerald. 
Section  3.10  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement 
contains  more 
information  in  relation  to  the 
admission  of 
the  Emerald 
Shares  to  the  Official  List  of 
ASX.
liabilities  attaching
Section  3.11  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement 
contains  more 
rights 
information  about  the 
and 
to 
Emerald Shares. 
this  Bidder’s 
Section  3.2  of 
Statement  contains 
further 
information  in  relation  to  the 
Emerald 
expertise  of 
Proposed 
Directors 
Director.
and
the
14
Further Information 
Sections  9.11  and  9.12  of  this 
Bidder’s  Statement  contains 
further information in relation to 
the 
the 
Offer 
shareholdings 
Emerald 
Directors 
Proposed 
Director  have  in  Renaissance 
and  their  potential  conflicts  of 
interest.
and
and
Section  9.11  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement  contains 
further 
information.
No.  Question 
5.
and
the  current
Do 
Emerald 
Directors 
Proposed 
Director 
Emerald 
any 
conflicts 
interest 
relation 
Offer 
Renaissance?
of 
have 
potential 
of 
in 
the 
or
to
6.
Do  the  Emerald 
Directors 
and 
Proposed 
Director 
any 
Emerald 
securities?
have 
in
interest
interest
the  current
Emerald 
in
Answer 
None  of 
Directors  have  an 
Renaissance securities.  
Justin  Tremain  and  his  Associates 
have  a  Relevant  Interest  in  0.5%  of 
Renaissance  Shares. 
In  addition, 
Tremain  will  be  offered 
Justin 
employment  with  Emerald 
if  the 
Offer  becomes  unconditional  and 
Emerald acquires a Relevant Interest 
in  more  than  90%  of  Renaissance 
Shares. 
that 
Renaissance  will  pay  a  sum  to  Mr 
Tremain  upon  Emerald  acquiring  a 
Relevant  Interest  in  at  least  51%  of 
Renaissance Shares (under the Offer) 
pursuant  to  Mr  Tremain’s  current 
employment 
with 
Renaissance. 
The  current  Emerald  Directors  (and 
their  Associates)  currently  have  the 
following 
Emerald 
securities: 
(a)
is  also  proposed
agreement
interests
in
It
(b)  Morgan
257,318,823
Simon  Lee  AO:  114,000,000 
Emerald Shares;  
Hart: 
Emerald Shares; 
Ross 
Stanley: 
Emerald Shares; and 
Ross  Williams: 
Emerald Shares.
222,163,613
25,000,000
(c)
(d)
As  at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement,  Justin  Tremain  holds  no 
Emerald Shares.
PART C – OVERVIEW OF RISKS
No.  Question 
1.
Are  there  risks  if 
the
I  accept 
Offer?
Further information 
See  Section  8  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement  which 
contains 
further details in respect of each 
of the risks.
you  are  an
Answer 
Yes, 
Eligible 
if 
Shareholder, you accept the Offer, 
and  it  becomes  unconditional  or 
the  Conditions  are  satisfied  or 
waived,  you  will  be  issued  new 
Emerald  Shares  and  Emerald  will 
acquire  your  Renaissance  Shares. 
There  are  risks  in  holding  Emerald 
Shares.  
You  are  already  exposed  to  some 
of these risks, to varying degrees, as 
a result of you holding Renaissance 
Shares. 
Section 8 of this Bidder’s Statement 
provides  a  summary  of  these  risks. 
Specifically it deals with:
15
Further information
Further information 
Section 1.2 of Annexure A of this 
Statement  contains 
Bidder’s 
more 
the 
circumstances in which the Offer 
Period can be extended.
information  as
to
Please  refer  to  Section  1.1  of 
Annexure  A  of 
this  Bidder’s 
Statement. 
Section 1.6 of Annexure A of this 
Statement  contains 
Bidder’s 
more 
the 
limited  circumstances  in  which 
you  may  be  able  to  withdraw 
your acceptance.
information  as
to
Section 1.7 of Annexure A of this 
Bidder’s 
Statement  contains 
more  information  as  to  when 
your new Emerald Shares will be 
issued to you.
No.  Question
Answer 
(a) 
(b)
(c)
risks relating to the Offer;  
risks  that  relate  to  Emerald 
and  Renaissance  (to  which 
you are already exposed) as 
the Merged Entity; and 
general and industry risks  (to 
which 
you  are  already 
exposed).
PART D – OTHER RELEVANT QUESTIONS
No.  Question 
1.
Can
the  Offer 
be
Period 
extended?
2.
Can
3.
I  accept 
the Offer for part 
of my holding? 
If  I  accept  the 
I 
Offer 
withdraw 
my 
acceptance?
can
4.
When  will  you 
receive the Offer 
Consideration?
Answer 
Yes, 
the  Offer  Period  can  be 
extended at Emerald’s election, up 
to  a  maximum  Offer  Period  of  12 
months.  Renaissance  Shareholders 
will  receive  written  notice  of  any 
extension, and the extension will be 
announced to ASX.  
No,  you  must  accept  the  Offer  for 
all of your holding.
to  meet
Generally no. You cannot withdraw 
or  revoke  your  acceptance  unless 
a  withdrawal  right  arises  under  the 
Corporations  Act.  A  withdrawal 
right  will  arise  if,  after  you  have 
accepted the Offer, Emerald varies 
the  Offer  in  a  way  that  postpones 
for  more  than  1  month  the  time 
that  Emerald  has 
its 
obligations  under  the  Offer  (for 
example,  if  Emerald  extends  the 
Offer  for  more  than  1  month  while 
the Offer remains subject to any of 
the Conditions). 
If  you  accept  the  Offer  and  the 
Offer  is  declared  unconditional  or 
satisfied  or 
all  Conditions  are 
waived,  Emerald  will 
issue  you 
Emerald Shares as consideration for 
your  Renaissance  Shares  on  or 
before the earlier of: 
(a)
1  month  after  you  have 
validly accepted the Offer or 
the contract resulting from its 
becomes 
acceptance 
unconditional 
or 
the 
Conditions  are  satisfied  or 
waived  (whichever  is  later); 
and 
21 days after the end of the 
Offer Period.
(b)
16
No.  Question 
5.
I  need
to 
  Will 
pay 
any 
transaction costs 
if  I  accept  the 
Offer?
6.
What  happens  if 
I  do  not  accept 
the Offer?
7.
Are
there 
conditions to the 
Offer?
Further information 
Section  2.9  of 
Statement 
information.
this  Bidder’s 
further
contains
if
Section  6  of 
this  Bidder’s 
Statement 
provides  more 
information  regarding  Emerald’s 
intentions 
it  acquires  a 
Relevant  Interest  in  at  least  90% 
of 
Shares 
during or at the end of the Offer 
Period.
the  Renaissance
Section 1.9 of Annexure A to this 
Bidder’s  Statement  sets  out  the 
Conditions in full.
a
duly
in  at
least
outstanding
incur  any  brokerage
Answer 
If  your  Renaissance  Shares  are 
registered  in  an  Issuer  Sponsored 
Holding  in  your  name  and  you 
deliver 
executed 
Acceptance Form to Emerald, you 
will  not 
in 
connection  with  your  acceptance 
of the Offer. 
Subject  to  the  explanation  below, 
you  will  remain  a  shareholder  of 
Renaissance  and  will  not  receive 
the Offer Consideration.  
If you do not accept the Offer and 
Emerald  acquires  a  Relevant 
Interest 
90%  of 
Renaissance Shares during or at the 
end  of  the  Offer  Period  and  the 
other  Conditions  of  the  Offer  are 
satisfied or waived, Emerald intends 
to proceed to compulsorily acquire 
the 
Renaissance 
Shares.  If  your  Renaissance  Shares 
are  compulsory  acquired  by 
Emerald,  it  will  be  on  the  same 
the  Offer 
terms 
Consideration 
each 
Renaissance  Share  acquired)  as 
the Offer. 
If the Offer becomes or is declared 
unconditional or the Conditions are 
satisfied  or  waived  but  Emerald 
does  not  become  entitled 
to 
your 
compulsorily 
Renaissance  Shares  under 
the 
Corporations  Act,  unless  you  sell 
your  Renaissance  Shares,  you  will 
remain 
in 
a 
Renaissance. 
In 
these  circumstances  and, 
depending  on 
the  number  of 
Renaissance  Shares  acquired  by 
Emerald,  you  may  be  a  minority 
Renaissance Shareholder. 
The  Offer 
subject 
the 
Conditions set out in Section 1.9 of 
Annexure A and include: 
(a)
shareholder
(including
acquire
is
to
for
Emerald acquiring an interest 
in  at 
least  90%  of  all 
Renaissance  Shares  on  issue 
at  the  end  of  the  Offer 
Period; 
that 
no 
Prescribed 
occurs; and 
that no Renaissance Material
Renaissance 
Occurrences
(b)
(c)
17
No.  Question
Answer
Further information
Adverse Change occurs.
to
summary
is  set  out
is  expressed
terms  only  and
the  Offer  closes  and
As  at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement, Emerald is not aware of 
any  act,  omission,  event  or  fact 
that  would  result  in  any  of  the 
Conditions 
the  Offer  being 
triggered (or not being satisfied, as 
appropriate). 
If 
the 
Conditions  are  not  satisfied  or 
waived,  the  Offer  will  lapse,  and 
your  acceptance  will  be  void.  In 
other  words,  you  will  continue  to 
hold  your  Renaissance 
Shares 
(unless  you  otherwise  sell  them). 
Emerald will announce whether the 
Conditions  have  been  satisfied  or 
waived  during  the  Offer  Period  in 
accordance  with 
its  obligations 
under the Corporations Act.  
A  general  summary  of  the  major 
Australian  tax  consequences  for 
Renaissance 
Shareholders  who 
accept  the  Offer 
in 
Section 7 of this Bidder’s Statement. 
This 
in 
is  not 
general 
to  provide 
intended 
taxation 
specific 
advice 
your 
for 
circumstances. 
Renaissance 
Shareholders should seek their own 
taxation  advice  in  relation  to  the 
Offer. 
Yes,  however,  once  you  accept 
the Offer you will not be permitted 
to  sell  your  Renaissance  Shares  on 
market,  accept  any  other  offer  or 
otherwise 
your 
Renaissance  Shares.  If  you  have 
already  accepted  the  Offer,  you 
settle  any 
will  be  unable 
subsequent 
of 
your 
Renaissance Shares, subject to you 
your  acceptance.  
withdrawing 
However,  you  should  note  that  if 
you have accepted the Offer and 
Emerald subsequently increases the 
Offer  Consideration,  you  will  be 
entitled to the higher consideration 
provided  the  Offer  is,  or  becomes, 
unconditional.  
If you have any questions in relation 
to the Offer or how to accept it, or 
you  have  lost  your  Acceptance 
Form  and  require  a  replacement, 
please call 1300 729 543.
deal
with
to
sale
8.
What
if
the 
Conditions  are 
not  satisfied  or 
waived?
9.
What are the tax 
implications  of 
accepting 
the 
Offer?
10.
Can
I  sell  my
Renaissance 
Shares 
market?
on
11.
Where  should  I 
I  need
go 
if 
more 
information?
Sections 1.9 to 1.11 of  Annexure 
A to this Bidder’s Statement sets 
out further information.
Section  7  of 
Statement 
set 
information.
this  Bidder’s 
out 
further
18
2.
2.1
DETAILED REASONS WHY THE EMERALD DIRECTORS BELIEVE YOU SHOULD ACCEPT 
THE OFFER
Unanimous recommendation from the Independent Directors
The  Independent  Directors  have  unanimously  recommended  Renaissance 
Shareholders accept the Offer, in the absence of a Superior Proposal.
Each Renaissance Director who holds Renaissance Shares intend to accept, or 
procure the acceptance of, the Offer in respect of any Renaissance Shares that 
they own or control, in the absence of a Superior Proposal.
If you are an Eligible Shareholder and you accept the Offer made to you and 
that Offer becomes or is declared unconditional or the Conditions are satisfied or 
waived, you will receive the Offer Consideration, being 1.55 Emerald Shares for 
every 1 Renaissance Share you hold.
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, Emerald is not aware of any Superior 
Proposal having been received by Renaissance and Renaissance has not made 
Emerald aware of any party having made an intention to make such a proposal.
2.2
Creation of a well-funded mid-tier gold company
If the Offer is successful, Eligible Shareholders who accept the Offer will become 
part of a larger gold company with a portfolio which focuses on the Cambodian 
Gold Project, which is currently in the exploration and feasibility study phase.
In addition to continuing to have exposure to the future upside associated with 
the  Cambodian  Gold  Project  through  owning  shares  in  the  Merged  Entity, 
Renaissance  Shareholders  will  gain  exposure  to  a  number  of  benefits  of  the 
Merged Entity, including:
(a)
(b)
The  Merged  Entity  will  have  a  strong  balance  sheet  of  approximately      
$18.2 million cash7 and no debt. The Merged Entity’s enlarged size and 
balance sheet are expected to improve access to future development 
funding  at  a  lower  cost  than  what  Renaissance  could  achieve  on  its 
own  and  provide  the  Merged  Entity  with  the  flexibility  to  support  near 
term  project  funding  and  accelerate  exploration  and  development 
activities.
A simplified single ownership structure and operational management of 
assets currently owned by Renaissance and which are the subject of the 
JV  Agreement.  This  is  expected  to  allow  for  the  acceleration  of 
exploration and development of the Cambodian Gold Project.
(c)
The  Merged  Entity  may  receive  increased  coverage  from  equity 
research  analysts,  benefit  from  greater  relevance  and  interest  from 
institutional investors and increased access to a wider range of investors. 
This may result in a market re-rating of the Merged Entity that is superior 
to  the  market  ratings  of  Emerald  and  Renaissance  as  stand-alone 
companies.
7 Based on the cash positions of Emerald and Renaissance of approximately $14.5 million and $3.7 million respectively 
as at 30 June 2016.  The pro forma cash position does not take into account events subsequent to 30 June 2016 or 
the costs of the Offer.
19
2.3
Premium on Renaissance Shares
Under the Offer, Eligible Shareholders are being offered 1.55 Emerald Shares for 
every 1 Renaissance Share held as at the Record Date.  The Offer represents a 
premium of:
(a)
(b)
(c)
22%  to  the  last  closing  price  on  the  ASX  of  Renaissance  Shares  of  5.7 
cents on 15 July 20168;
27%  premium  to  the  30-day  VWAP  of  Renaissance  Shares  to  the 
Announcement Date9; and
29%  premium  to  the  60-day  VWAP  of  Renaissance  Shares  to  the 
Announcement Date10.
Based on the closing price of Emerald Shares of 4.5 cents on 15 July 2016 (being 
the  last  trading  day  before  the  Announcement  Date),  the  implied  value  of 
Renaissance is approximately $40 million or 6.975 cents per Renaissance Share.
Based on Emerald’s closing price of 5.7 cents on 18 August 2016 (being the last 
trading  before  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement),  the  implied  value  for 
Renaissance is approximately $50.8 million or 8.84 cents per Renaissance Share.
The price of Emerald Shares and Renaissance Shares may rise or fall during the 
Bid Period.  You should note that continued fluctuations in the price of Emerald 
Shares will continue to favourably or adversely impact the implied value of the 
Offer.
2.4
Strong board and management team of the Merged Entity
The board and management team of the Merged Entity are highly credentialed 
and experienced with delivering operational excellence, and is proposed to be 
expanded with the appointment of Mr Justin Tremain as an Executive Director. 
Further details on the current Emerald  Directors and  the Proposed Director are 
set out in to Section 3.2.
By accepting the Offer, Eligible Shareholders will become a shareholder in the 
Merged  Entity  which  will  benefit  from  a  high  quality  management  team  and 
business model, and will improve the exploration and development pathway for 
the Cambodian Gold Project.
2.5
Potential eligibility for capital gains tax relief in Australia
Provided  Emerald  achieves  ownership  of  more  than  80%  of  the  issued 
Renaissance Shares, Eligible Shareholders may be entitled to scrip for scrip relief 
from capital gains tax on the Emerald Shares they receive under the Offer. Such 
rollover relief, if available, will allow those Eligible Shareholders to disregard any 
capital  gain  in  whole  or  in  part,  that  would  otherwise  arise  in  respect  of  the 
disposal  of  their  Renaissance  Shares  by  way  of  acceptance  of  the  Offer.
8 Based on Emerald’s last closing share price of 4.5 cents on the ASX on 15 July 2016, the last trading date of Emerald 
and Renaissance before the Announcement Date. 
9 Based on the 30-day VWAP of Emerald Shares on ASX of 4.64 cents and the 30-day VWAP of Renaissance Shares of 
5.66 cents to 15 July 2016. 
10 Based on the 60-day VWAP of Emerald Shares on ASX of 4.22 cents to 15 July 2016.
20
However,  Renaissance  Shareholders  may  be  subject  to  capital  gains  tax  as  a 
result  of  a  later  taxable  event  (such  as  a  disposal)  happening  to  the  Emerald 
Shares received as consideration under the Offer. Please refer to Section 7 of this 
Bidder’s  Statement  for  more  information.  You  should  consult  a  qualified  tax 
adviser for further taxation advice.
2.6
Renaissance’s share price may fall if the Offer is not successful
Emerald  believes  that  if  the  Offer  does  not  succeed,  and  if  there  are 
subsequently no other alternative offers or proposals for Renaissance Shares, the 
trading price of Renaissance Shares may fall and Renaissance Shares may trade 
below the implied value of the Offer Consideration.
In such circumstances, the current market conditions may make it challenging 
for  Renaissance  to  raise  equity  funding,  and  any  equity  raising  is  likely  to  be 
dilutive to the existing Renaissance Shareholders who do not participate in that 
raising.
The Offer mitigates this funding risk whilst enabling Renaissance Shareholders to 
continue  to  participate  in  the  future  upside  of  the  Cambodian  Gold  Project 
through being a shareholder of the Merged Entity.
2.7
No Superior Proposal
The Offer is the only offer available for your Renaissance Shares as at the date of 
this  Bidder’s  Statement.  Emerald  is  not  aware  of  any  other  party  intending  to 
make  an  offer  for  Renaissance  Shares  which  is  superior  to  the  Offer  and 
Renaissance  has  not  made  Emerald  aware  of  any  party  having  made  an 
intention to make such a proposal.
2.8
Support from major Renaissance Shareholders
Emerald  has  entered  into  Pre-Bid  Deeds  with  Renaissance  Shareholders  in 
respect of a total of 9.42% of Renaissance Shares outstanding. A summary of the 
Pre-Bid Deeds and a list of the Renaissance Shareholders that have entered into 
those deeds are set out in Section 9.6.
Under the terms of the Pre-Bid Deeds, each Pre-Bid Shareholder must accept the 
Offer in respect of their Renaissance Shares subject to those arrangements within 
2 Business Days of the date which is 21 days after the Offer opens, unless the Pre-
Bid Deeds are terminated.
The commitment by the Renaissance Shareholders, holding in aggregate 9.42% 
of Renaissance Shares that have entered into Pre-Bid Deeds clearly supports the 
view  of  the  Independent  Directors  as  to  the  merits  of  a  merger  with  Emerald. 
These  commitments  also  improve  the  prospects  of  the  merger  between 
Renaissance and Emerald being completed in a timely manner.
As  a  result  of  Emerald’s  entry  into  the  Pre-Bid  Deeds  (in  respect  of  9.42%  of 
Renaissance  Shares)  and  its  direct  holding  of  10%  of  Renaissance  Shares, 
Emerald has a Relevant Interest in 19.42% of Renaissance Shares as at the date 
of this Bidder’s Statement.
In  addition,  several  Renaissance  Shareholders  holding 
in  the  aggregate 
approximately  15%  of  Renaissance  Shares  have  indicated  that  they  intend  to 
accept the Offer on a date that is not earlier than 21 days after the Offer opens, 
in  the  absence  of  a  superior  proposal.    A  list  of  the  Renaissance  Shareholders
21
that have indicated that they intend to accept the Offer, in the absence of a 
superior proposal, is set out in Section 9.7.
2.9
No duty or brokerage
If your Renaissance Shares are registered in an Issuer Sponsored Holding in your 
name and you deliver a duly executed Acceptance Form to Emerald, you will 
not incur any brokerage in connection with your acceptance of the Offer.
If  your  Renaissance  Shares  are  registered  in  a  CHESS  Holding,  or  if  you  are  a 
beneficial  owner  whose  Renaissance  Shares  are  registered  in  the  name  of  a 
broker, bank custodian or other nominee, you will not be obliged to pay duty by 
accepting the Offer, but you should ask your Controlling Participant (usually your 
broker)  or  that  nominee  whether  it  will  charge  any  transaction  fees  or  service 
charges in connection with acceptance of the Offer.
If you are an Ineligible Foreign Shareholder, brokerage will be payable in respect 
of  the  Emerald  Shares  sold  by  the  Sale  Nominee  and  these  costs  will  be 
deducted from the proceeds of sale that will be provided to you.
2.10
Implications of remaining as a minority shareholder of Renaissance
You  will  be/remain  a  minority  shareholder  in  Renaissance,  in  circumstances 
where:
(a)
either:
(i)
(ii)
Emerald  receives  acceptances  that  result  in  it  having  a 
Relevant  Interest  of  more  than  50%  but  less  than  90%  of 
Renaissance Shares;
Emerald  receives  acceptances  that  result  in  it  having  a 
Relevant Interest of less than 50% of Renaissance Shares;
(b)
(c)
the Offer Period closes and the Offer is unconditional or the Conditions 
are satisfied or waived at the time; and
you do not accept the Offer in respect of your Renaissance Shares.
In  the  circumstances  described  in  Section  2.10(a)(i),  you  will  be  a  minority 
Shareholder in a company which is controlled by Emerald and it will be likely that 
the market for Renaissance Shares may become less liquid or active, which may 
affect your ability to dispose of your Renaissance Shares.  Further information is 
set out in Section 6.5.
In  the  circumstances  described  in  Section  2.10(a)(ii),  Renaissance  will  not 
become  a  controlled  entity  of  Emerald,  and  Emerald  will  seek  to  exercise  its 
rights  as  a  shareholder  of  Renaissance  and  will  seek  to  appoint  nominee 
directors  to  the  Renaissance Board  to  the  proportion of  the voting  power  that 
Emerald holds in Renaissance. Further information is set out in Section 6.6.
22
3.
3.1
PROFILE OF EMERALD RESOURCES NL
Corporate information
Emerald  is  a  public  company  listed  on  the  official  list  of  ASX.   Emerald  was 
incorporated on 15 September 1969. Since late August 2014, Emerald has been 
evaluating new acquisition opportunities, both in Australia and overseas, which 
have the potential to add shareholder value.
On 29 March 2016, Emerald entered into a farm-in and joint venture agreement 
with  Renaissance  and  Renaissance  Cambodia  Pty  Ltd,  pursuant  to  which, 
Renaissance granted Emerald the conditional right to earn up to a 51% interest 
in  the  Cambodian  Gold  Project  and  form  an  incorporated  joint  venture  with 
Renaissance to explore the Cambodian Gold Project (JV Agreement). Emerald 
can earn up to a 51% interest in the Cambodian Gold Project by:
(a)
(b)
(c)
sole funding exploration on the Cambodian Gold Project of a minimum 
of US$3 million;
managing  completion  of  the  definitive  feasibility  study  of  the  Okvau 
Deposit; and
managing  completion  of  the  environmental  and  social 
assessment of the Okvau Deposit,
impact
by 17 May 2018.
Emerald has incurred exploration expenditure on the Cambodian Gold Project 
and commenced work on the definitive feasibility study.
3.2
Directors and Proposed Director of Emerald
Details of the responsibilities and experience of the Emerald Directors (as at the 
date of this Bidder’s Statement) are set out in  Emerald’s 2015 Annual Financial 
Report,  a  copy  of  which  is  available  on  request  or  from  Emerald’s  website 
www.emeraldresources.com.au.
A summary of the Emerald Board, as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, and 
the Proposed Director, Mr Justin Tremain, is set out below.
Simon Lee AO - Non-Executive Chairman
Mr  Lee  has  had  extensive  management  experience  with  a  diverse  range  of 
business  enterprises  in  a  career  that  has  based  him  in  Asia,  England,  Canada 
and  Australia.  Mr.  Lee  has  held  a  number  of  positions,  which  include  Board 
Member  of  the  Australian  Trade  Commission  and  President  of  the  Western 
Australian  Chinese  Chamber  of  Commerce  Inc.  In  1993,  he  received  the 
Advance Australia Award for his contribution to commerce and industry and in 
1994,  he  was  bestowed  an  Officer  of  the  Order  of  Australia.  Mr  Lee  has  a 
successful  track  record  in  the  resources  industry  which  has  included  building 
gold mine companies, Great Victoria Gold NL, Samantha Gold NL and Equigold 
NL. Mr Lee is also currently a Non-Executive Director of MOD Resources Limited.
Morgan Hart - Managing Director
Mr  Hart  is  a  Geologist  and  experienced  Mining  Executive.  He  was  formerly  an 
Executive  Director  and  Chief  Operating  Officer  of  Regis  Resources  Ltd, 
responsible for the development of three gold mines in four years (Moolart Well, 
Garden Well and Rosemont). Prior to  that, Mr Hart was Executive Director and 
23
Chief  Operating  Officer  of  Equigold  NL,  responsible  for  the  development  and 
construction of the Bonikro Gold Project in Ivory Coast West Africa in addition to 
the management of Equigold’s Australian mining operations.
Ross Stanley - Non-Executive Director
Mr Stanley is a well-respected mining executive with extensive experience both 
in Australian and African mining enterprises. Mr Stanley was formerly the majority 
shareholder and Managing Director of ASX Listed Stanley Mining Services prior to 
its merger with Layne Christensen in 1997. Stanley Mining was the dominant drill 
services  provider  in  Ghana  in  the  1990’s.  Mr  Stanley  also  served  as  a  Non-
Executive Director of Equigold NL.
Ross Williams - Non-Executive Director
Mr  Williams  is  a  founding  shareholder  of  MACA  Limited  and  up  until  July  2014 
held  the  position  of  CFO  and  Finance  Director  with  responsibility  for  capital 
management, finance, financial reporting and corporate strategy. He played a 
key role in the highly successful initial offering of MACA in 2010 and was pivotal 
to its subsequent success as a publicly listed company. He currently serves on as 
Chairman  of  Neon  Capital  Ltd.  Mr  Williams  holds  a  Post  Graduate  Diploma  in 
Financial Services Management from Macquarie University and was a Fellow of 
the  Australian  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  prior  to  establishing  MACA  in 
2002. Mr Williams also serves as a Non-Executive Director of Renaissance.
Justin Tremain - Proposed Executive Director
Mr Tremain graduated from the University of Western Australia with a Bachelor of 
Commerce  degree.  Mr  Tremain  has  over  10  years’  investment  banking 
experience in the natural resources sector. He has held positions with Investec, 
NM Rothschild & Sons and Macquarie Bank and has extensive experience in the 
funding of natural resource projects in the junior to mid-tier resource sector. Mr 
Tremain  has  undertaken  numerous  advisory  assignments 
resource 
companies, including acquisition and disposal assignments and project advisory 
roles.  Mr  Tremain  is  currently  the  Managing  Director  of  Renaissance  and  has 
been a director of Renaissance since its incorporation in December 2009.
for
3.3
Overview of Emerald’s projects
3.3.1  Cambodian Gold Project
The  Cambodian  Gold  Project  is  located  approximately  265km  north-east  of 
Cambodia’s capital, Phnom Penh. The Okvau and adjoining O’Chhung licences 
(which comprise the Cambodian Gold Project) cover approximately 400km2 and 
are located within the core of a prospective Intrusive Related Gold province in 
Cambodia’s eastern plains.
Emerald  has  recently  focussed on  earning  an  interest  in  the  Cambodian Gold 
Project and undertaking exploration and work on the definitive feasibility study in 
respect  of  the  Okvau  Deposit.  The  results  of  the  definitive  feasibility  study  will 
determine the economic viability and possible timing for the commencement of 
mining operations on the Cambodian Gold Project.
Emerald and Renaissance have commenced a resource infill drilling program to 
improve the confidence level of the resource estimate for the Okvau Deposit. As 
at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement,  Emerald  has  met  the  initial  exploration 
expenditure commitment and is entitled to a 5% interest in the Cambodian Gold 
Project.  However,  the  parties  to  the  JV  Agreement  have  agreed  that  Emerald 
24
will not earn in its 5% interest in the Cambodian Gold Project until after the Offer 
Period.  Emerald intends to terminate the JV Agreement if it acquires a Relevant 
Interest in 90% or more of Renaissance Shares.
Further information on the Cambodian Gold Project is set out in Section 4.3;
3.3.2  Magoffin County Project
Emerald currently has a 5% overriding royalty interest in all gas production from 
various  oil  and  gas  interests  owned  by  Slone  Energy,  LLC  located  in  Magoffin 
County,  Kentucky.  Emerald  is  not  currently  receiving  any  revenue  from  this 
project as it is not yet in production.
3.4
Capital structure
The capital structure of Emerald as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement is as 
follows:
Securities 
Shares 
Current Emerald Shares  
TOTAL 
Options 
Current Emerald Options  
TOTAL 
 
Notes:
Number
1,306,627,448 
1,306,627,448
20,000,0001 
20,000,000
Unlisted options exercisable at $0.025 on or before 21 January 2020.
1. 
 
Use of unaudited balance sheet and information statement
3.5
Emerald’s preliminary  unaudited  balance  sheet  and income  statement  for  the 
financial year ended 30 June 2016 (FY16) are set out in sections 3.6.2 and 3.6.3 
(Preliminary  Financial  Statements).   The  Preliminary  Financial  Statements  have 
been prepared in accordance with the recognition and measurement principles 
of Australian Accounting Standards.  The Preliminary Financial Statements are in 
an  abbreviated  form  insofar  as  they  do  not  include  all  the  disclosures, 
statements and comparative information as required by Australian Accounting 
Standards applicable to annual financial reports prepared in accordance with 
the Corporations Act.
The Preliminary Financial Statements have been prepared based on preliminary 
unaudited  management  accounts  for  FY16  and  before  the  finalisation  of  the 
financial year end statutory accounting processes and external audit (FY16 Year 
End Processes).
The  Emerald  Directors  believe  that  the  Preliminary  Financial  Statements  have 
been prepared with due care and attention based on the information available 
to them at the time of preparation of this Bidder’s Statement, however, there is a 
risk that the FY16 Year End Processes may have an impact on the actual results 
reported  for  the  FY16  year  when  compared  to  the  Preliminary  Financial 
Statements.
25
Emerald’s auditors are in the process of auditing Emerald’s financial statements 
for  FY16,  however  Emerald  does not  expect  that  audited  financial  information 
for  this  period  will  be  available  until  after  the  end  of  the  Offer  Period.   If  the 
information does become available prior to the end of the Offer Period, Emerald 
intends to release the results by way of a supplementary bidder’s statement.
Section  5.11  sets  out  the  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of 
financial position of the Merged Entity, prepared on the basis set out in Section 
5.10.
3.6 
3.6.1
Summary historical financial information
Basis of presentation of historical financial information
The historical financial information below relates to Emerald and its Subsidiaries 
on  a  stand-alone  basis  and  accordingly  does  not  reflect  any  impact  of  the 
Offer.  It  is  a  summary  only  and  has  been  extracted  from  the  audited 
consolidated  financial  reports  of  Emerald  (including  the  notes  therein)  for  the 
years  ending  30  June  2013,  30  June  2014  and  30  June  2015.  Copies  of  these 
annual  reports  are  available  at  www.emeraldresources.com.au  and  also  the 
ASX website.
The historical financial information in respect of Emerald has been prepared in 
accordance with the recognition and measurement principles of the Australian 
Accounting Standards, and in accordance with the accounting policies, as set 
out in the financial reports of Emerald for the full year ended 30 June 2013, 30 
June 2014 and 30 June 2015.
26
3.6.2
Emerald consolidated statement of financial position
fair  value
ASSETS 
Current assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Financial  assets  at 
though profit and loss 
Total current assets 
Non-current assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration Costs 
Oil and Gas Assets 
Total non-current assets 
TOTAL ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
Current liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Total current liabilities 
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
NET ASSETS 
EQUITY 
Issued capital 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
Total equity attributable to  owners 
of the parent 
Non-controlling interest 
TOTAL EQUITY
30 June 2016 
Unaudited 
$
14,548,194 
142,796
3,421,556
18,112,546 
  
11,690 
1,076,319 
- 
1,088,009 
19,200,555 
  
  
433,159 
433,159 
433,159 
18,767,395 
  
50,777,054 
1,926,308 
(33,840,062)
30 June 2015 
Audited 
$ 
 
 
17,965,799 
134,021
30 June 2014 
Audited 
$ 
 
 
12,573,838 
71,935
30 June 2013 
Audited 
$ 
 
 
403,672 
40,242
-
-
12,485,233
18,099,820 
  
9,608 
- 
- 
9,608 
18,109,428 
  
  
128,484 
128,484 
128,484 
17,980,944 
  
51,057,425 
1,924,366 
(34,904,943)
12,645,773 
  
88,142 
297,688 
434,362 
820,192 
13,465,965 
  
  
88,934 
88,934 
88,934 
13,377,031 
  
45,412,529 
1,145,592 
(33,128,873)
12,929,147 
  
182,037 
389,068 
530,149 
1,101,254 
14,030,401 
  
  
64,024 
64,024 
64,024 
13,966,377 
  
46,356,181 
1,059,713 
(33,539,990)
18,863,299
18,076,848
13,429,248
13,875,904
(95,904) 
18,767,395
(95,904) 
17,980,944
(52,217) 
13,377,031
90,473 
13,966,377
27
3.6.3
Emerald consolidated statement of comprehensive income
Revenue 
Cost of sales 
Gross loss 
Profit on sale of financial assets 
Corporate, legal and 
administration expenses 
Impairment of assets 
Consulting and contracting 
expenses 
Fair value gains/(losses) on 
financial assets 
Profit/(Loss) from operating 
activities 
Finance income 
Finance expense 
Net finance income 
Profit/(Loss) before income tax
Income tax benefit
Profit/(Loss) from continuing 
operations 
Loss from discontinued operations 
Profit/(Loss) for the year 
Other comprehensive income 
Items that may be reclassified to 
profit or loss 
Exchange differences on 
translation of foreign operations 
Reclassification adjustments   
Transfer of foreign exchange 
reserve on disposal of 
discontinued operations   
Other comprehensive income for 
the year 
Total comprehensive 
(loss)/income for the year 
(Loss)/Profit for the year is 
attributable to: 
Owners of the parent 
Non-controlling interest
Total comprehensive 
(loss)/income for the year is 
attributable to: 
Owners of the parent 
Non-controlling interest
30 June 2016 
Unaudited 
$
- 
- 
92,250
30 June 2015 
Audited 
$ 
7,042 
(34,343) 
(27,301) 
(819,699)
30 June 2014 
Audited 
$ 
94,781 
(98,691) 
(3,910) 
1,177,785
30 June 2013 
Audited 
$ 
107,878 
(153,503) 
(45,625) 
-
(835,750)
(1,187,216)
(747,021)
(680,579)
(16,171)
-
-
-
-
(185,053)
(220,041)
(286,237)
1,352,604
-
-
(128,689)
592,933
(2,219,269)
471,949 
- 
471,949 
1,064,882 
-
601,197 
- 
601,197 
(1,618,072) 
-
1,064,882
(1,618,072)
- 
(1,618,072)
- 
1,064,882
-
-
-
206,813
146,925 
- 
146,925 
353,738 
-
353,738
- 
1,064,882
(1,141,130)
44,526 
(34,460) 
10,066 
(1,131,064) 
-
(1,131,064)
(6,671,291) 
(7,802,355)
193,089
568
(207,403)
-
-
(811,915)
193,089
568
(1,019,318)
1,064,882
(1,424,983)
354,306
(8,821,673)
1,064,882 
- 
1,064,882
1,064,882 
- 
1,064,882
(1,342,774) 
(275,298) 
(1,618,072)
411,117 
(57,379) 
353,738
(7,736,915) 
(65,440) 
(7,802,355)
(1,124,972) 
(300,011) 
(1,424,983)
407,135 
(52,829) 
354,306
(8,774,397) 
(47,276) 
(8,821,673)
28
3.7
Emerald forecast information
Emerald’s  future  financial  performance  is  dependent  on  a  range  of  factors, 
many  of  which  are  beyond  Emerald’s  control.  Accordingly,  the  Emerald 
Directors  have  concluded  that  forecast  financial 
information  would  be 
misleading  to  provide,  as  a  reasonable  basis  does  not  exist  for  providing 
forecasts  that  would  be  sufficiently  meaningful  and  reliable  as  required  by 
applicable Australian law, policy and market practice.
Further  information  is  available  on  Emerald’s  financial  performance  from  its 
financial  reports.  Copies  of  these  reports  are  available  from  Emerald’s  website 
www.emeraldresources.com.au.
3.8
Corporate governance
The  Emerald  Board  seeks,  where  appropriate,  to  provide  accountability  levels 
that meet  or  exceed  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance Council’s  Principles  and 
Recommendations.
Details on Emerald’s corporate governance procedures, policies and practices 
can be obtained at www.emeraldresources.com.au.
3.9
Recent performance of Emerald Shares
Set  out  below  is  a  table  showing  relevant  trading  prices  of  Emerald  Shares  on 
ASX:
Comparative trading period
Highest trading price on ASX in the 4 months prior to 
the  date  this  Bidder’s  Statement  was  lodged  with 
ASIC 
Lowest trading price on ASX in the 4 months prior to 
the  date  this  Bidder’s  Statement  was  lodged  with 
ASIC 
Closing trading price on ASX on the last trading day 
before the date Emerald announced the Offer 
Last  available  closing  sale  price  of  Emerald  Shares 
(as at  18 August 2016)  on ASX prior to the date this 
Bidder’s Statement was lodged with ASIC 
30-day  volume  weighted  average  price  of  Emerald 
Shares before the Announcement Date
Price of Emerald
Shares 
6 cents
2.5 cents
4.5 cents
5.7 cents
4.64 cents
3.10
Quotation of Offer Consideration
Emerald Shares are admitted to trading on the Official List of ASX. Emerald will 
lodge  an  application  for  admission  to  quotation  of  the  Emerald  Shares 
comprising  the  Offer  Consideration  to  trading  on  ASX.  Quotation  will  not  be 
automatic  and  will  depend  upon  ASX  exercising  its  discretion.  Nothing  in  this 
Bidder’s Statement is to be taken to state or imply that the Emerald Shares issued 
as Offer Consideration will be quoted on ASX. However, quotation is expected in 
the ordinary course as Emerald is already admitted to the Official List of ASX.
As Emerald is listed on ASX, Emerald’s actions and activities are subject to  the 
ASX Listing Rules.
29
3.11
Rights and liabilities of Emerald Shares
The Emerald Shares offered to Eligible Shareholders under the Offer are fully paid 
ordinary  shares  in  the  capital  of  Emerald,  and  from  the  date  of  their  issue  will 
rank  equally  with  existing  Emerald  Shares  and  will  have  the  same  rights  and 
liabilities attaching to them.
Set  out  below  is  a  summary  of  the  significant  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to 
Emerald Shares. It does not purport to be exhaustive or to constitute a definitive 
statement  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  of  shareholders  of  Emerald.  Eligible 
Shareholders should seek their own advice when trying to establish their rights in 
specific circumstances.
Full details of the rights attaching to Emerald Shares are set out in the constitution 
of Emerald, a copy of which is available for inspection at  Emerald’s registered 
office during normal business hours.
Heading 
Voting rights
General 
meeting and 
notices
Dividend 
rights
Variation of 
class rights
Description of the right or liability 
Subject to any rights or restrictions for the time being attached to any class 
or  classes  of  shares,  at  general  meetings  of  shareholders  or  classes  of 
shareholders, each shareholder entitled to vote may vote in person or by 
proxy,  attorney  or  representative.  On  a  show  of  hands,  every  person 
present  who  is  a  shareholder  or  a  proxy,  attorney  or  representative  of  a 
shareholder  has  one  vote.  On  a  poll,  every  person  present  who  is  a 
shareholder or a proxy, attorney or representative of a shareholder shall, in 
respect  of  each  fully paid  share held  by  him, or  in  respect  of which he is 
appointed a proxy, attorney or representative, have one vote for the share, 
but  in  respect  of  partly  paid  shares  shall  have  such  number  of  votes  as 
bears  the  same  proportion  to  the  total  of  such  shares  registered  in  the 
shareholder’s  name  as the  amount  paid  (not  credited)  bears  to  the  total 
amounts paid and payable (excluding amounts credited). 
Shareholders are entitled to be present in person, or by proxy, attorney or 
representative  to  attend  and  vote  at  general  meetings  of  Emerald.  
Shareholders may requisition meetings in accordance with Section 249D of 
the Corporations Act and the constitution of Emerald. 
Subject to the rights of persons (if any) entitled to shares with special rights 
to  dividends,  the  Emerald  Directors  may  declare  a  final  dividend  out  of 
profits  in  accordance  with  the  Corporations  Act  and  may  resolve  to  pay 
any dividend they think appropriate. Subject to the rights of persons (if any) 
entitled to shares with special rights as to dividends, all dividends are to be 
declared and paid according to the proportion that the amount paid (not 
credited)  is  of  the  total  amounts  paid  and  payable  (excluding  amounts 
credited)  in  respect  of  such  shares,  in  accordance  with  Part  2H.5  of 
Chapter 2H of the Corporations Act. Interest may not be paid by Emerald in 
respect of any dividend, whether final or interim. 
If  Emerald  issues  different  classes  of  Emerald  Shares,  or  divides  issued 
Emerald Shares into different classes, the rights attached to Emerald Shares 
in  any  class  may  (subject  to  sections  246C  and  246D  of  the  Corporations 
Act)  be  varied  or  cancelled  with  the  written  consent  of  the  holders  of  a 
majority  of  the issued Emerald  Shares  of  the  affected  class or  by ordinary 
resolution passed at a meeting of the holders of the Emerald Shares of the 
affected class.
30
Heading 
Transfer of 
Emerald 
Shares
Forfeiture of 
shares
Winding up
Description of the right or liability 
Generally,  Emerald  Shares  are  freely  transferable,  subject  to  formal 
requirements, the registration of the transfer not resulting in a contravention 
of or failure to observe the provisions of a law of Australia and the transfer 
not being in breach of the Corporations Act or the Listing Rules. 
An Emerald Share is immediately forfeited if a call is made on the share and 
the  call  is  unpaid  at  the  end  of  14  days  after  it  became  payable.  The 
forfeited  share  must  then  be  offered  for  sale  by  public  auction  within  6 
weeks  after  the  call  became  payable.    If  a  person’s  Emerald  Share 
becomes forfeited, the person may redeem the Emerald Share, at any time 
up  to  or  on  the  last  business  day  before  the  proposed  sale,  by  paying 
Emerald all calls due on the Emerald Share and, if required by Emerald, a 
pro rata portion of all costs and expenses incurred by Emerald in respect of 
the  forfeiture  and  any  proceeding  that  has  been  taken  in  respect  of  the 
forfeiture.  
If Emerald is wound up, and a surplus remains, it must be distributed among 
the parties entitled to it in proportion to the number of shares held by them, 
irrespective  of  the  amount  paid  up  on  the  shares.  A  member  who  is  in 
arrears  in  payment  of  a  call  on  a  share,  but  whose  share  has  not  been 
forfeited, is not entitled to participate in the distribution until it has paid the 
amount owing in respect of the call.
3.12
Substantial shareholders of Emerald
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, so far as is known to Emerald based on 
publicly available information, the following persons are substantial shareholders 
of Emerald:
Emerald Shareholder
Morgan Hart 
Ross Stanley  
SHL  Pty  Ltd    as  trustee  for  the       
SH Lee Family Account 
Confederate  Capital Pty Ltd
Number of Emerald 
Shares 
257,318,823 
222,163,613
% of Emerald issued 
share capital 
19.69 
17.00
114,000,000
105,942,549
8.72
8.11
Notes: 
1.
Actual voting power may differ from that shown above as there is no obligation to 
publicly disclose changes in voting power of less than 1%.
The Emerald Directors currently have a Relevant Interest in 618,482,436 Emerald 
Shares,  being  approximately  47.33%  of  the  total  number  of  Emerald  Shares  on 
issue. The individual Relevant Interests held by each Emerald Director are as set 
out in Section 9.11.
3.13
Terms of Emerald Options
As  at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement,  Emerald  has  20,000,000  unlisted 
Emerald Options on issue which may be exercised for $0.025 each on or before 
5:00pm (WST) on 21 January 2020. Full terms of the Emerald Options are set out in 
Emerald’s Appendix 3B dated 22 January 2015.
31
3.14
Employee share option plan
The  Emerald  Board  adopted  an  employee  share  option  plan  in  or  around 
November 2014, and Emerald Shareholders subsequently approved the issue of 
securities under that plan in accordance with the ASX Listing Rules. A summary of 
the  material  terms  of  the  employee  share  option  plan  is  set  out  in  Emerald’s 
notice of meeting dated 24 October 2014.
Pursuant  to  the  employee  share  option  plan,  the  Emerald  Board  may  grant 
Emerald Options to any full time or part time employee or executive director of 
Emerald or an associated body corporate and, subject to and in accordance 
with any necessary ASIC relief being obtained, a casual employee or contractor 
of Emerald or any associated body corporate.
3.15
Dividend history
Emerald has not previously paid, and does not currently pay, dividends.
3.16
Further information
Emerald is a listed disclosing entity for the purposes of the Corporations Act and 
as  such  is  subject  to  regular  reporting  and  disclosure  obligations.  Emerald  is 
subject  to  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  which  require  continuous  disclosure  of  any 
information  Emerald  has  concerning  itself  that  a  reasonable  person  would 
expect to have a material effect on the price or value of its securities, subject to 
limited exceptions.
ASX  maintains  files  containing  publicly  disclosed  information  about  all  listed 
companies.  Emerald’s  file  is  available  for  inspection  at  ASX  during  normal 
business hours.
Emerald  is  also  required  to  lodge  various  documents  with  ASIC.  Copies  of 
documents lodged with ASIC by Emerald may be obtained from, or inspected 
at, an ASIC office.
A list of the announcements Emerald has lodged with ASX since 1 October 2015 
is set out in Annexure C to this Bidder’s Statement.
A  substantial  amount  of  information  about  Emerald  is  available  in  electronic 
form from www.emeraldresources.com.au and on the ASX website.
32
4.
4.1
PROFILE OF RENAISSANCE MINERALS LIMITED
Disclaimer
This  overview  of  Renaissance  and  all 
information  concerning 
Renaissance  contained  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement  has  been  prepared  by 
Emerald using publicly available information.
financial
The information in this Bidder’s Statement concerning Renaissance has not been 
independently verified. Emerald does not, subject to any applicable laws, make 
any  representation  or  warranty,  express  or  implied,  as  to  the  accuracy  or 
completeness  of  this  information.  The  information  on  Renaissance  is  not 
considered to be comprehensive.
4.2
Overview of Renaissance
Renaissance  is  an  Australian  ASX-listed  gold  exploration  company  which  owns 
the Cambodian Gold Project.  Renaissance listed on the ASX on 11 June 2010 
and trades under the code ‘RNS’.
Renaissance’s core asset is its 100% interest in the Cambodian Gold Project. On 
29  March  2016,  Emerald  entered  into  the  JV  Agreement  with  Emerald  under 
which Renaissance granted Emerald the right to earn up to a 51% interest in the 
Cambodian  Gold  Project  and  form  an 
joint  venture  with 
Renaissance to explore, develop and extract value from the Cambodian Gold 
Project.
incorporated
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, Emerald has met the initial exploration 
expenditure  commitment  under  the  JV  Agreement  and  is  entitled  to  a  5% 
interest  in  the  Cambodian  Gold  Project.    However,  the  parties  to  the  JV 
Agreement have agreed that Emerald will not earn its 5% interest until after the 
Offer Period.
Further  information  relating  to  Renaissance  and  its  projects  is  contained  in 
Renaissance’s Target Statement.
Renaissance Projects
4.3 
4.3.1  Cambodian Gold Project
The  100%  Renaissance  owned  (subject  to  the  JV  Agreement)  Okvau  and 
adjoining O’Chhung licences cover approximately 400km2 of project area and 
are  located  within  the  core  of  a  prospective  Intrusive  Related  Gold  (IRG) 
province  in  the  eastern  plains  of  Cambodia.  The  Cambodian  Gold  Project  is 
located  in  the  Mondulkiri  Province  of  Cambodia  approximately  265  kilometres 
north-east of the capital Phnom Penh.  A map illustrating the location of the two 
licences that make up the Cambodian Gold Project is shown below:
33
Figure 1: Location of Okvau and O’Chhung licences
Renaissance  completed  a  Pre-Feasibility  Study  (Study)  in  July  2015  for  the 
potential  development  of  a  1.5Mtpa  operation  based  only  on  the  Okvau 
Deposit via an open pit mining operation. The Study was completed to +/-20% 
level of accuracy.  The Study  demonstrates  the  potential for a  robust,  low  cost 
development with an initial Life of Mine of 8 years, producing on average 91,500 
ounces  of  gold  per  annum  via  conventional  open  pit  mining  methods  from  a 
single pit to be mined in three stages. Key results of the study are presented in 
the table below1:
In Pit Mineral Resource 
LOM Strip Ratio (waste:ore) 
Throughput 
Life of Mine 
Processing Recovery 
Recovered Ounces 
Average Annual Production 
Target
11.6Mt @ 2.2g/t gold for 829,000 ounces contained
7.7:1
1.5Mtpa 
8 years
85%
708,500 ounces 
91,500 ounces
34
Capital
Pre-production 
Costs2 
Sustaining Capital Costs 
Gold Price 
LOM  Net  Revenue  (net  of 
royalties3 and refining) 
Operating Cash Flow  
Project Cash Flow 
NPV4 (5%) 
Payback 
IRR pre-tax 
IRR  post-tax 
incentives) 
LOM C1 Cash Costs5 
LOM  All-In  Sustaining  Costs 
(‘AISC’)6
(with
no
US$120M
US$10M
US$1,100/oz
US$1,250/oz
US$1,400/oz
US$756M 
US$272M 
US$142M 
US$90M 
3.2 years
21%
19%
US684/oz
US$860M 
US$376M 
US$245M 
US$174M 
2.6 years 
35% pa
29% pa 
US$684/oz
US$964M 
US$479M 
US$349M 
US$257M 
1.9 years
47%
38%
US$684/oz
US$731/oz
US$735/oz
US$738/oz
Notes: 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Results above are reported on a 100% ownership basis
Capital Costs include working capital and 10% contingency
Government royalty fixed at 2.5% of gross revenue
After royalties but before corporate tax
C1 Cash Costs include all mining, processing and general & administration costs
AISC Includes C1 Cash Costs plus Government royalties, refining costs, maintaining capital and 
closure costs. It does not include the 1.5% royalty payable to Oz Exploration Pty Ltd.
The following information sets out the updated Mineral Resource Estimate for the 
Okvau Deposit as at July 201511.
July 2015 JORC Resource (0.6g/t gold cut-off)
Tonnage (Mt)
Grade (g/t Au)
Gold (Koxz)
2.3 
2.0
2.2g/t
15.8Mt
13.2 
2.7
Indicated 
Inferred 
Total 
 
Renaissance and Emerald have commenced a significant exploration program 
which is focused on drill testing previously identified target areas. An RC drilling 
campaign  has  commenced  testing  geochemical  and  geophysical  anomalies 
within  close  proximity  to  the  Okvau  Deposit.  As  part  of  the  definitive  feasibility 
study to be funded and managed by Emerald, a diamond drilling rig has been 
mobilised  to  undertake  approximately  600  metres  of  drilling  for  metallurgical 
samples for test work to further refine the previously proposed processing path.
962 
169 
1,131
11 Reference is made to Renaissance’s ASX release dated 27 July 2015 titled Okvau PFS Demonstrates Compelling 
Project Economics. All material assumptions underpinning the production target or the forecast financial information 
continue to apply and have not materially changed.
35
Refer  is  made  to  Renaissance’s  ASX  released  dated  27  July  2015  titled  Okvau 
PFD Demonstrates Compelling Project Economics.
4.3.2
Eastern Goldfields Pinjin Project
Renaissance’s  Eastern  Goldfields  Project  covers  an  area  located  north-east  of 
Kalgoorlie  known  as  the  Pinjin  Project  (Pinjin  Project).  The  Pinjin  Project  covers 
Archaean greenstones within the highly prospective Eastern Goldfields Province 
of the Yilgarn Craton. Renaissance owns an 80% joint venture interest of the Pinjin 
Project, with the other 20% joint venture interest being held by Gel Resources Pty 
Ltd.
Renaissance  is  currently  continuing  its  commitment  to  the  Pinjin  Project, 
focussing  on  limited  field  activity,  low  cost  data  review,  interpretation  and 
maintaining its tenement reporting obligations.
4.3.3  Quicksilver Gold Project
The Quicksilver Gold Project is located within the highly prospectus Tintina Gold 
Belt in south-west Alaska.
Renaissance  has  entered  into  an  agreement  with  Afranex  Gold  Limited 
(Afranex),  an  unlisted  public  company,  to  dispose  of  its  90%  interest  in  the 
Quicksilver  Gold  Project  for  10  million  shares  in  Afranex.  The  parties  are  in  the 
process of completing that transaction.
4.4
Renaissance Board of Directors
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, the directors of Renaissance are:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Mr Hamish Halliday – Non-Executive Chairman;
Justin Tremain – Managing Director;
Mr David Kelly – Non-Executive Director; and
Mr Ross Williams – Non-Executive Director.
4.5
Information about Renaissance securities
Based  on  material  lodged  by  Renaissance  with  ASX,  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Bidder’s Statement, Renaissance’s issued securities consisted of:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
574,444,444 fully paid ordinary shares;
1,150,000 unlisted options exercisable at $0.10 each on or before    18 
September 2016;
9,800,000 unlisted options exercisable at $0.10 each on or before    15 
October 2017; and
14,550,000  unlisted  options  exercisable  at  $0.05  each  on  or  before  30 
September 2020.
4.6
Substantial shareholders of Renaissance
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, so far as is known to Emerald based on 
publicly available information, the following persons are substantial shareholders 
of Renaissance:
36
Renaissance Shareholder
Number of
Renaissance Shares
% of Renaissance 
issued share capital1
Emerald Resources Limited 
Ingalls & Snyder Value Partners L.P. 
Westoz Funds Management Pty Ltd
111,541,347 
39,381,625 
30,000,000
19.42% 
6.85% 
5.22%
Emerald’s Relevant Interest in 19.42% of Renaissance Shares arises as a result of 
Emerald entering into the Pre-Bid Deeds with the Pre-Bid Shareholders which hold 
in aggregate 9.42% of Renaissance Shares and Emerald’s 10% direct holding of 
Renaissance Shares. Further details on the Pre-Bid Deeds are set out in Section 
9.6.
Notes: 
1.
Actual  voting  power  may  differ  from  that  shown  above  as  there  is  no  obligation  to  publicly 
disclose changes in voting power of less than 1%.
4.7
4.7.1
Summary historical financial information
Basis of presentation of historical financial information
The  historical  financial  information  below  relates  to  Renaissance  and  its 
Subsidiaries on a stand-alone basis and accordingly does not reflect any impact 
of  the  Offer.  It  is  a  summary  only  and  has  been  extracted  from  the  audited 
consolidated financial report of Renaissance (including the notes therein) for the 
years ending 30 June 2013 and 30 June 2014 and 30 June 2015. Copies of these 
reports  are  available  at  www.renaissanceminerals.com.au  and  also  the  ASX 
website.
The historical financial information in respect of Renaissance has been prepared 
in  accordance  with  the  recognition  and  measurement  principles  of  the 
Australian  Accounting  Standards,  and  in  accordance  with  the  accounting 
policies, as set out in the financial reports of Renaissance for the full year ended 
30 June 2013, 30 June 2014 and 30 June 2015.
37
4.7.2
Renaissance consolidated statement of financial position
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables 
Total Current Assets 
Non Current Assets 
Trade and other receivables
Financial assets
Property, plant and equipment
Exploration and evaluation expenditure 
Total Non Current Assets 
Total Assets 
Current Liabilities 
Trade and other payables
Deferred consideration
Provisions 
Total Current Liabilities 
Total Liabilities 
Net Assets 
Equity 
Contributed equity
Reserves
Accumulated losses 
Total Equity
30 June 2015 
$ 
  
1,574,708
156,505  
      1,731,213  
  
             53,000
-
176,917
18,213,324  
      18,443,241  
      20,174,454  
  
          366,307
-
143,335  
           509,642  
           509,642  
      19,664,812  
  
      50,061,916
2,529,945
(32,927,049) 
      19,664,812
30 June 2014 
$ 
 
1,521,375
30 June 2013 
$ 
 
1,660,017
183,118 
1,704,493 
 
58,490
-
157,838
19,088,656 
19,304,984 
21,009,477 
 
431,759
-
115,947 
547,706 
547,706 
20,461,771 
 
44,454,281
2,042,940
152,560 
1,812,577 
 
175,490
56,900
122,453
29,867,622 
30,222,465 
32,035,042 
 
355,561
9,590,070
118,095 
10,063,726 
10,063,726 
21,971,316 
 
39,618,885
1,719,193
(26,035,450) 
20,461,771
(19,366,762) 
21,971,316
38
4.7.3
Renaissance consolidated statement of comprehensive income
Revenue 
Other income 
Administrative costs 
Consultancy expenses 
Employee benefits expense 
Share based payment expense 
Occupancy costs 
Compliance and regulatory expense 
Insurance expense 
Depreciation expense 
Finance costs 
Loss on sale of financial assets 
Exploration expenditure expensed 
Other expenditure 
Profit/(Loss) before income tax
Income tax benefit
Profit/(Loss) attributable to owners 
Other comprehensive income 
Items that may be reclassified to profit or loss 
Exchange differences on translation of 
foreign operations 
Revaluations of available for sale financial 
assets   
Total comprehensive (loss)/income for the 
year
30 June 2015 
Audited
30 June 2014 
Audited
30 June 2013 
Audited
$
$
$
87,912 
- 
(257,405) 
(339,822) 
(580,062) 
(198,100) 
(63,819) 
(58,915) 
(35,504) 
(70,870) 
(7,338) 
(294,100) 
(5,250,331) 
(4,193) 
(7,072,547)
180,948
(6,891,599)
91,783 
- 
(320,263) 
(286,405) 
(540,054) 
(1,231,477) 
(51,472) 
(64,403) 
(68,241) 
(75,577) 
(100,013) 
(165,367) 
(3,983,555) 
(1) 
(6,795,045) 
126,357 
 
(6,668,688)
133,834 
- 
(482,010) 
(203,676) 
(524,389) 
(418,315) 
(41,587) 
(67,514) 
(80,343) 
(70,377) 
(464,444) 
- 
(7,389,443) 
(7,094) 
(9,615,348) 
- 
 
(9,615,348)
288,905
(17,163)
41,389
-
(6,900)
(339,300)
(6,602,694)
(6,692,751)
(9,913,259)
4.8
Further information on Renaissance
Renaissance is a listed disclosing entity for the purposes of the Corporations Act 
and  as  such 
is  subject  to  regular  reporting  and  disclosure  obligations. 
Renaissance  is  subject  to  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  which  require  continuous 
disclosure  of  any 
itself  that  a 
reasonable person would expect to have a material effect on the price or value 
or its securities, subject to limited exceptions.
information  Renaissance  has  concerning
Renaissance’s preliminary unaudited balance sheet and income statement for 
the financial year ended 30 June 2016 (FY16) are set out in in the independent 
expert’s  report  attached  to  Renaissance’s  Target  Statement  (RNS  Preliminary 
Financial  Statements).   The  RNS  Preliminary  Financial  Statements  are  in  an 
abbreviated form insofar as they do not include all the disclosures, statements 
and  comparative  information  as  required  by  Australian  Accounting  Standards 
applicable  to  annual  financial  reports  prepared  in  accordance  with  the 
Corporations Act. Refer to Section 8.6 of the Target’s Statement for information 
39
regarding  the  basis  on  which  the  RNS  Preliminary  Financial  Statements  were 
prepared.
A  list  of  the  announcements  Renaissance  has  lodged  with  ASX  since  28 
September 2015 is set out in Annexure D to this Bidder’s Statement.
A substantial amount of information about Renaissance is available in electronic 
form from http://www.renaissanceminerals.com.au and on the ASX website.
40
5. 
5.1
MERGED ENTITY
Approach
This Section 5 provides an overview of the Merged Entity assuming the successful 
completion  of  the  Offer,  in  the  various  scenarios  following  the  Offer,  and  the 
effect of the Offer on Emerald and Renaissance.
5.2
Disclaimer regarding Renaissance and the Merged Entity information
In  preparing  the  information  relating  to  Renaissance  and  the  Merged  Entity 
contained  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement,  Emerald  has  relied  on  publicly  available 
information relating to Renaissance and this has not been independently verified 
by  Emerald  or  the  Emerald  Directors.  Risks may  exist  in  relation  to  Renaissance 
(which  may  affect  the  Merged  Entity)  of  which  Emerald  is  unaware.  If  any 
material risks are known to the directors of Renaissance, they must be disclosed 
in the Target’s Statement to be issued by Renaissance.
Accordingly, subject to any applicable laws, Emerald makes no representations 
or warranties (express or implied) as to the accuracy and completeness of such 
information.
5.3
Profile of the Merged Entity
If  the  Offer  is  successful,  Eligible  Shareholders  will  each  receive  1.55  Emerald 
Shares for every  1 Renaissance Share held by them on the Record Date. After 
the Bid Period, if Emerald becomes entitled to compulsorily acquire outstanding 
Renaissance  Shares  in  accordance  with  Part  6A.1  of  the  Corporations  Act,  it 
intends  to  proceed  with  the  compulsory  acquisition  of  those  shares  and  all  of 
Emerald’s Shareholders (including Renaissance Shareholders who have received 
Emerald Shares pursuant to the Offer) will be shareholders in the Merged Entity.
If  it  is  required  to  do  so  under  section  663A  of  the  Corporations  Act,  Emerald 
intends  to  give  notices  to  Renaissance  Optionholders  offering  to  acquire  their 
Renaissance Options in accordance with section 663C of the Corporations Act. 
In  addition,  if  Emerald  becomes  entitled  to  compulsorily  acquire  outstanding 
Renaissance  Options  in  accordance  with  Part  6A.2  of  the  Corporations  Act,  it 
intends to proceed with the compulsory acquisition of those options.
5.4
Effect of completion of the Offer
Upon completion of the Offer, the Merged Entity will be a well-funded mid-tier 
gold  company  with  greater  market  capitalisation  and  financial  capacity  for 
project  expansion  and  development  and  will  achieve  a  strengthening  and 
simplification  of  the  current  management  arrangements  and  should  achieve 
cost savings by reducing corporate overheads.
5.5
Effect on the assets and operations of the Merged Entity
The  Merged  Entity  will  provide  a  simplified  single  ownership  structure  and 
operational  management  of  assets  currently  owned  via  the  JV  Agreement. 
Emerald  proposes  to  terminate  the  JV  Agreement  if  it  acquires  a  Relevant 
Interest in 90% of Renaissance Shares.
41
5.6
Effect of the Offer on the company’s corporate and capital structure
Following Completion of  the  Offer,  the  Merged  Entity  is  expected  to  have  the 
following key attributes:
(a)
it will be a well-funded mid-tier gold company which owns 100% of the 
Cambodian Gold Project, which includes the Okvau Deposit which has 
a Mineral Resource Estimate as set out in the table below12:
Indicated 
Inferred 
Total
July 2015 JORC Resource (0.6g/t gold cut-off)
Tonnage
(Mt) 
13.2 
2.7
15.8Mt
Grade 
(g/t Au)
2.3 
2.0
2.2g/t
Gold 
(Koz) 
962 
169 
1,131
(b)
(c)
enhanced  scale  and  market  relevance,  with  the  financial  strength  to 
optimise  funding  the  exploration  of  the  Cambodian  Gold  Project, 
including  greater  exposure  to  a  global  and  expanding  retail  and 
institutional investor base giving greater funding flexibility; and
a  strong  board  and  management  team  with  significant  depth  of 
technical and corporate expertise.
Following completion of the Offer, the Merged Entity Group structure will be as 
set out below:
12 Reference is made to Renaissance’s ASX release dated 27 July 2015 titled Okvau PFS Demonstrates Compelling 
Project Economics. All material assumptions underpinning the production target or the forecast financial information 
continue to apply and have not materially changed.
42
5.7
Effect of the Offer on the Merged Entity capital structure
Under  the  Offer,  Emerald  is  offering  to  issue  Emerald  Shares  to  Eligible 
Shareholders.
The effect of the Offer on the capital structure of Emerald on a post-completion 
basis is set out in the below table:
Securities 
Shares 
Current Emerald Shares1 
Emerald Shares issued pursuant to the Offer 2 
TOTAL 
Options 
Unlisted  options  exercisable  at  6.45  cents  on  or 
before 18 September 20163 
Unlisted  options  exercisable  at  6.45  cents  on  or 
before 15 October 20173 
Unlisted  options  exercisable  at  3.23  cents  on  or 
before 30 September 20203 
Unlisted  options  exercisable  at  2.5  cents  on  or 
before 21 January 2020 
TOTAL 
Notes 
1.
Number
1,306,627,448 
801,349,999 
2,107,977,447
1,782,500
15,190,000
22,552,500
20,000,000
59,525,000
2.
3.
The  rights  attaching  to  the  Emerald  Shares  are  summarised  in  Section  3.11  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement and based on Emerald’s constitution.  
Assuming a 100% take up under the Offer (excluding the 57,444,445 Renaissance Shares held by 
Emerald as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement), that all Renaissance Shareholders are Eligible 
Shareholders,  that  no  Renaissance  Options  are  exercised  and  that  no  Emerald  Options  are 
exercised or other Emerald Shares are issued.  
Assuming that all Renaissance Optionholders agree to the transfer of their Renaissance Options to 
Emerald in consideration for the issue of Emerald Options pursuant to the Option Transfer Deeds. 
Refer to Section 9.8 for further details.
5.8
Substantial Shareholder
The substantial holders of Emerald as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement and 
following  completion  of  the  Offer,  so  far  as  is  known  to  Emerald  based  on 
publicly available information, are as follows:
Substantial Holder
Emerald 
Shares
Pre-
Takeover %
Post-
Takeover %
257,318,823 
222,163,613 
114,000,000
Morgan Hart 
Ross Stanley  
SHL Pty Ltd as trustee for the            
SH Lee Family Account 
Confederate Capital Pty Ltd 
 
The above table assumes that Emerald acquires all Renaissance Shares it does 
not  already  own,  all  Renaissance  Shareholders  are  Eligible  Shareholders,  no
12.21% 
10.54% 
5.41%
19.69 
17.00 
8.72
105,942,549
8.11
5.03%
43
Renaissance  Options  are  exercised  and  no  Emerald  Options  are  exercised  or 
Emerald  Shares  are  issued.    The  above  table  does  not  take  into  account 
rounding.
5.9
Offer Consideration
Under  the  Offer,  accepting  Eligible  Shareholders  will  be  issued  1.55  Emerald 
Shares for every 1 Renaissance Share held, implying a theoretical value of 6.975 
cents per Renaissance Share based on the last traded price for Emerald Shares 
prior to the announcement of Emerald’s intention to make the Offer (4.5 cents 
on 15 July 2016).
Based  on  the  number  of  Renaissance  Shares  on  issue  on  the  day  before  the 
date of this Bidder’s Statement, the maximum number of Emerald Shares which 
would be required to be issued under the Offer if every Renaissance Shareholder 
accepted  the  Offer  and  was  an  Eligible  Shareholder  (other  than  in  respect  of 
the  Renaissance  Shares  currently  owned  by  Emerald)  is  801,349,999  Emerald 
Shares (subject to rounding).
5.10
Basis  for  preparation  of  the  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of 
financial position of the Merged Entity
The  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of  financial  position  of  the 
Merged Entity has been prepared in connection with the proposed acquisition 
of Renaissance by Emerald. The unaudited pro forma consolidated statement of 
financial  position  has  been  prepared  for  illustrative  purposes  only  and  gives 
effect  to  the  acquisition  by  Emerald  pursuant  to  the  assumptions  described  in 
Section 5.12 and gives effect to the transaction by Emerald as if it had occurred 
as of 30 June 2016.
The  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of  financial  position  is  not 
necessarily indicative of the financial position that would have been achieved if 
the transaction had been completed on the dates or for the periods presented, 
nor do they purport to project the results of operations or the financial position of 
the  consolidated  entities  for  any  future  period  or  as  of  any  future  date.  The 
unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of  financial  position  does  not 
reflect  any  special  items  such  as  integration  costs  or  operating  synergies  that 
may be incurred or achieved as a result of the acquisition.
The unaudited pro forma adjustments and allocations of the purchase price for 
the  proposed  acquisition  of  Renaissance  are  based  on  a  preliminary 
determination that the fair value of net assets acquired will be allocated to the 
exploration  and  evaluation  assets.  The  final  purchase  price  allocation  will  be 
completed after the transaction is complete.
The unaudited pro forma consolidated statement of financial position has been 
prepared in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards.
In preparing the Merged Entity unaudited pro forma consolidated statement of 
financial position, the following historical information was used:
(a)
(b)
unaudited  Emerald  30  June  2016    consolidated  statement  of  financial 
position (refer to Section 3.6.2); and
unaudited  Renaissance  30  June  2016  consolidated  statement  of 
financial position. RNS Preliminary Financial Statements for FY16 are set 
out  in  in  the  independent  expert’s  report  attached  to  Renaissance’s 
Target  Statement.   The  RNS  Preliminary  Financial  Statements  are  in  an 
abbreviated  form  insofar  as  they  do  not  include  all  the  disclosures,
44
statements  and  comparative  information  as  required  by  Australian 
Accounting Standards applicable to annual financial reports prepared 
in  accordance  with  the  Corporations  Act.  Refer  to  Section  8.6  of  the 
Target’s Statement for information regarding the basis on which the RNS 
Preliminary Financial Statements were prepared.
In  preparing  the  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of  financial 
position  no  alignment  has  been  made  between  the  accounting  policies  of 
Renaissance  and  Emerald.  The  Directors  of  Emerald  are  not  aware  of  any 
material differences which would arise on such an alignment.
5.11
Merged  Entity  30  June  2016  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of  financial 
position
ASSETS 
Current assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Financial assets at fair value though profit and loss 
Total current assets 
Non-current assets 
Trade and other receivables 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration Costs 
Total non-current assets 
TOTAL ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
Current liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Provisions 
Total current liabilities 
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
NET ASSETS 
EQUITY 
Issued capital 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
Total equity attributable to owners of the parent 
Non-controlling interest 
TOTAL EQUITY
Proforma  
30 June 2016 
Unaudited 
$
18,250,234 
257,684 
377,000 
18,884,919 
  
  53,000  
164,731 
36,882,192 
37,099,922 
55,984,841 
  
  
861,010 
195,920 
1,056,930 
1,056,930 
54,927,910 
  
86,645,654 
2,218,223 
(33,840,062) 
55,023,814 
(95,904) 
54,927,910
45
5.12
Effect of transaction on the unaudited pro forma statement of financial position
The  unaudited  pro 
financial  position 
incorporates  the  following  pro  forma  assumptions  in  relation  to  Emerald’s 
proposed acquisition of Renaissance:
forma  consolidated  statement  of
(a)
The pro forma adjustment reflects:
(i)
(ii)
the  issue  of  801,349,999  Emerald  Shares  at  $0.045  per  Emerald 
Share  under  the  Offer  and  the  issue  of  39,525,000  unlisted 
Emerald  Options 
replace  25,500,000  existing  unlisted 
to 
Renaissance Options;
the  estimated  merger  costs  of  $36,160,515  include  $192,150 
cash costs in relation to the Offer (refer to Section 9.10.3) and 
$36,060,750  to  be  issued  in  Emerald  Shares  equivalent  to 
Emerald’s last closing share price of 4.5 cents on the ASX on 15 
July  2016,  the  last  trading  date  of  Emerald  and  Renaissance 
before  the  Announcement  Date  and  $291,915  to  be  issued  in 
Emerald Options; and
(iii)
the difference between the purchase price and the net assets 
acquired has been allocated to exploration costs.
5.13
Outlook for the Merged Entity
This Bidder’s Statement does not include any financial forecasts or projections for 
revenue or profit in relation to Emerald, Renaissance or the Merged Entity.
Emerald  has  given  careful  consideration  as  to  whether  there  is  a  reasonable 
basis to produce reliable and meaningful forecast financial information for the 
Merged Entity. However, the  Emerald Directors have concluded that as at the 
date  of  this  Bidder's  Statement,  it  would  be  misleading  to  provide  forecast 
financial information for the Merged Entity.
5.14
Dividends
Given the funding requirements for the exploration and potential development 
of the Cambodian Gold Project, Emerald expects that dividends are unlikely to 
be  available  from  the  Merged  Entity  for  the  immediately  foreseeable  future.
46
6. 
6.1
INTENTIONS OF EMERALD RESOURCES NL
Introduction
This Section 6 sets out Emerald’s intentions in relation to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the continuation of the business of Renaissance;
any  major  changes 
redeployment of the fixed assets of Renaissance; and
the  business  of  Renaissance  and  any
to
the future employment of the present employees of Renaissance.
These  intentions  have  been  formed  on  the  basis  of  the  facts  and  information 
concerning  Renaissance,  and  the  general  business  environment,  which  are 
known  to  Emerald  at  the  time  of  preparation  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement.    The 
articulation  and  formulation  of  Emerald’s  intentions  are  necessarily  limited  by 
virtue of the fact that Emerald does not have access to all material information 
that is necessary to assess the implications of its current intentions.
Final  decisions  will  only  be  reached  in  the  context  of  all  material  facts  and 
circumstances  at  the  relevant  time,  including  once  Emerald  has  had  an 
opportunity  to  conduct  a  review  of  Renaissance’s  operations  and  assets  as 
referred  to  below.    Accordingly,  the  statements  set  out  in  this  section  are 
statements  of  current  intentions  only  which  may  vary  as  new  information 
becomes available or circumstances change.
6.2
Rationale for the Offer
Emerald believes (based on the information currently available to it) that there 
are  a  number  of  key  strategic  and  financial  benefits  that  will  arise  from  the 
successful  acquisition  of  Renaissance  by  Emerald.  Through  acquiring  all  of  the 
shares it does not currently own in Renaissance, Emerald will acquire 100% of the 
Cambodian  Gold  Project,  and  the  Merged  Entity  will  become  a  well-funded 
mid-tier gold company.
6.3
Overview
Subject to the below, it is the present intention of Emerald, on the basis of the 
information concerning Renaissance which is known to Emerald and the existing 
circumstances affecting the business of Renaissance, that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the business of Renaissance will otherwise be continued in substantially 
the  same  manner  as  it  is  presently  being  conducted  concerning  the 
assets in Cambodia and Western Australia;
no other major  changes  will  be made  to  the  business  of  Renaissance; 
and
the  present  employees  of  Renaissance  will  otherwise  continue  to  be 
employed  by  Renaissance.  Where  there  is  duplication,  the  fair  and 
equitable  solution  as  per  the  current  employee  agreements  will  be 
decided in consultation with the Renaissance Board.
The  current  intentions  of  Emerald  may  change  in  light  of  material  facts  and 
circumstances at the relevant time.
4251-01//1528475_14.docx
47
Following  a  period  of  review,  the  value  accretive  treatment  of  the  assets  not 
central to the strategy of near term production will be presented to the Emerald 
Board to assess and determine the future treatment of those assets. Emerald will 
also continue to assess its size and composition as the activities of the Merged 
Entity change.
Intentions upon acquisition of 90% or more of Renaissance
6.4 
6.4.1  Corporate matters
If  as  a  result  of  the  Offer,  Emerald  becomes  entitled  to  compulsorily  acquire 
outstanding  Renaissance  Shares 
in  accordance  with  Part  6A.1  of  the 
Corporations Act and the outstanding Renaissance Options in accordance with 
Part 6A.2 of the Corporations Act, it intends to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
proceed with the compulsory acquisition of those shares and options;
undertake 
in  Section  6.3  above  and  delist 
Renaissance from the ASX, subject to the required regulatory approvals;
the  steps  outlined
replace members of the Renaissance Board (other than Justin Tremain) 
with  nominees  of  Emerald.    Replacement  Emerald  directors  have  not 
yet  been  identified  by  Emerald  and  their  identity  will  depend  on  the 
circumstance  at  the  relevant  time.  However,  it  is  expected  that  the 
majority  of  the  replacement  board  members  will  be  members  of  the 
Emerald management team;
change  Renaissance’s  company  type  to  that  of  a  proprietary 
company; and
amend  the  constitution  of  Renaissance  to  reflect  its  status  as  a  wholly 
owned subsidiary of Emerald and a proprietary company.
6.4.2  Operational review
After  the  end  of  the  Offer  Period,  Emerald  intends  to  conduct  an  immediate 
broad  based  review  of  Renaissance’s  operations  on  both  a  strategic  and 
financial  level  to  determine  mechanisms  for  improving  performance  and  to 
realise  any  potential  operations  and  financial  synergies.  In  conjunction  with 
Emerald’s proposal to compulsorily acquire the Renaissance Shares that it does 
not  hold,  Emerald  also  proposes  to  terminate  the  JV  Agreement  as  the 
Cambodian Gold Project will become 100% owned by the Merged Entity.
In the course of this review, Emerald intends to focus on a number of key specific 
areas including (but not limited to):
(a)
(b)
(c)
closing  Renaissance’s  current  head  office  and  principle  place  of 
business  and  relocating  all  head  office  functions  to  Emerald’s  head 
office located in West Perth, Western Australia;
to  progress  exploration  activities
continuing 
the 
development of the Cambodian Gold Project, including completing the 
definitive 
impact 
assessment; and
feasibility  study  and  environmental  and  social
required
for
eliminating  duplication  of  functions,  systems  or  processes  where  it  is 
economical to do so.
48
6.4.3
Employees
Renaissance is understood to operate with a very small number of employees. 
Emerald intends to make Renaissance’s Managing Director, Mr Justin Tremain an 
offer of employment with Emerald and it is currently anticipated that the other 
present  employees of Renaissance will otherwise continue  to be  employed  by 
Renaissance. Where  there is duplication, the fair and equitable solution as per 
the  current  employee  agreements  will  be  decided  in  consultation  with  the 
Renaissance  Board.  As  a  result  of  implementing  Emerald’s  intentions  set  out  in 
this  Section  6,  however,  it  is  possible  that  certain  operational  functions  will 
become  redundant.  While  some  redundancies  may  occur  as  a  result,  the 
incidence, extent and timing of such actions cannot be predicted in advance. If 
redundancies  do  occur,  the  relevant  employees  will  receive  benefits  in 
accordance with  their contractual  and  other legal  entitlements.    Further,  as  a 
Merged  Entity,  the  business may  require  additional  resources with  specific  skills 
which will be assessed against future requirements.
6.5
Intentions upon gaining control but less than 90% of Renaissance
Emerald  may  waive  the  satisfaction  of  the  Conditions  in  its  sole  discretion. 
However,  Emerald  has not  decided whether  it will free  the  Offer  from  the  90% 
minimum acceptance condition (or any other condition).
This  Section  6.5  outlines  Emerald’s  current  intentions  if,  on  completion  of  the 
Offer,  Emerald  holds  a  sufficient  number  of  Renaissance  Shares  to  exercise 
control  over  the  management  and  operations  of  Renaissance,  but  it  is  not 
entitled to compulsorily acquire all outstanding Renaissance Shares.
6.5.1  Corporate matters
As soon as practicable after Emerald acquires a Relevant Interest in more than 
50% of the Renaissance Shares and the Offer becomes unconditional, Emerald 
intends to:
(a)
(b)
seek  to  appoint  its  nominees  to  the  Renaissance  Board  such  that  a 
majority  of  the  Renaissance  Directors  are  nominated  by  Emerald, 
provided that a proper Board is constituted at all times and at least two 
directors on the Renaissance Board are nominees of Renaissance and 
that Emerald procures that its nominees do not participate in decisions 
of  Renaissance  in  relation  to  the  Offer  until  after  the  End  Date.    No 
decision has been made as to the identity of Emerald’s nominees at this 
point in time; and
subject  to  the  conditioned  compliance  with  the  Listing  Rules,  to 
maintain  Renaissance’s 
in  these 
circumstances,  Renaissance  Shareholders  should  be  aware  that  the 
liquidity of Renaissance Shares may be materially adversely affected.
listing  on  the  ASX.
However,
Even if Emerald is not entitled to proceed to compulsory acquisition of minority 
holdings after  the  end of  the  Offer  Period  under  Part  6A.1  of  the Corporations 
Act,  it  may  subsequently  become  entitled  to  exercise  rights  of  general 
compulsory  acquisition  under  Part  6A.2  of  the  Corporations  Act.  This  could 
occur, for example, if Emerald acquired further Renaissance Shares in reliance 
on the 3% creep exception provided in item 9 of section 611 of the Corporations 
Act.    If  any  such  rights  of  compulsory  acquisition  arise,  Emerald  intends  to 
exercise those rights.
49
6.5.2  Operational review
After  the  end  of  the  Offer  Period,  Emerald  will  seek  to  procure  that  the  new 
Renaissance Board implements the strategies and goals outlined in Section 6.4.2 
to  the  extent  possible  and  appropriate  in  the  circumstances.    However,  the 
ability  of  Emerald  to implement  the  intentions set  out  in  this Section  6.5 will be 
subject to the legal obligations of the Renaissance Directors to have regard to 
the  interest  of  Renaissance  and  the  Renaissance  Shareholders  and  the 
requirements  of  the  Corporations  Act  and  the  Listing  Rules  relating  to 
transactions  between  related  parties.  These  factors  may  limit  or  modify  the 
implementation of the intentions outlined above.
If Emerald gains control of Renaissance but holds less than 90% of Renaissance 
Shares, the JV Agreement will remain on foot.
6.6
Intentions if Emerald acquires less than 50% of Renaissance
This Section 6.6 describes Emerald’s intentions if Renaissance does not become a 
controlled  entity  of  Renaissance  (that  is,  Emerald  owns  less  than  50%  of  the 
Renaissance Shares). In those circumstances:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the JV Agreement will remain on foot;
Emerald does not expect to be in a position to necessarily give effect to 
the intentions set out in Sections 6.4 or 6.5, although Emerald will, subject 
to Renaissance’s constitution and the Corporations Act, seek to exercise 
its  rights  as  a  shareholder  of  Renaissance  and  will  seek  to  appoint 
nominee  directors  to  the  Renaissance  Board  to  the  proportion  of  the 
voting power that Emerald holds in Renaissance; and
Emerald’s current intention is to continue to hold its stake in Renaissance 
with  a  view  to  maximising  returns  for  Emerald  Shareholders,  though  it 
reserves its right to dispose of its stake in Renaissance Shares or acquire 
further Renaissance Shares as permitted by law if it considers that is in 
the best interests of Emerald Shareholders at the relevant time.
In  addition  to  the  limitations  set  out  in  Section  6.5.2,  Emerald’s  ability  to 
implement its intentions will be limited by its ability to influence the decisions of 
Renaissance  in  its  capacity  as  a  non-majority  shareholder  of  Renaissance  and 
through its representation (if any) on the Renaissance Board.
6.7
Other intentions
Subject  to  the  matters  described  in  this  Section  6  and  elsewhere  in  the  Bidder’s 
Statement  and,  in  particular,  the  completion  of  the  general  operational  review  of 
Renaissance’s  operations,  it  is  the  intention  of  Emerald,  on  the  basis  of  facts  and 
information  concerning  Renaissance  that  are  known  to 
it  and  the  existing 
circumstances affecting the assets and operations of Renaissance at the date of this 
Bidder’s Statement that:
(a)
(b)
the  business  of  Renaissance  will  be  conducted  in  substantially  the  same 
manner as at the date of the Bidder’s Statement; and
there will be no redeployment of the fixed assets of Renaissance.
50
7. 
7.1
AUSTRALIAN TAX CONSIDERATIONS
Overview
The  following  summary  is  a  general  overview  of  the  Australian  income  tax 
consequences for Renaissance Shareholders who accept the Offer and dispose 
of  their  Renaissance  Shares  to  Emerald  in  accordance  with  the  Offer.  The 
comments  set  out  below  are  relevant  only  to  those  Renaissance  Shareholders 
who are residents of Australia for tax purposes and hold their Renaissance Shares 
on capital account.
Certain Renaissance Shareholders (such as those engaged in a business of share 
trading  or  investment,  those  who  acquired  their  Renaissance  Shares  for  the 
purpose of resale at a profit or those which are banks, insurance companies, tax 
exempt organisations, persons who are temporary residents or non-residents for 
Australian  tax  purposes  or  persons  who  acquired  their  Renaissance  Shares  in 
respect of their employment with Renaissance) will or may be subject to special 
or  different 
their  circumstances.  Such 
Renaissance Shareholders should seek independent taxation advice regarding 
the disposal of Renaissance Shares based on their specific circumstances.
tax  consequences  particular
to
laws  of  Australia,  nor  does
The summary is based on taxation law and practice in effect at the date of the 
Offer. It is not intended to be an authoritative or comprehensive analysis of the 
taxation 
facts  or 
circumstances that may apply to particular Renaissance Shareholders. Further, it 
does  not  deal  with  the  taxation  consequences  of  disposing  of  Renaissance 
Shares which may have been issued under an employee share scheme, which 
may be subject to specific tax provisions.
it  consider  any  specific
Given  the  complexity  of  the  taxation  legislation,  Renaissance  Shareholders 
should  seek  independent  taxation  advice  regarding  the  tax  consequences  of 
disposing of Renaissance Shares given the particular circumstances which apply 
to them.
7.2
Renaissance Shareholders holding Renaissance Shares on capital account
Acceptance  of  the  Offer  is  likely  to  involve  a  disposal  by  a  Renaissance 
Shareholder of their Renaissance Shares for CGT purposes.
An  Australian-resident  Renaissance  Shareholder  may  make  a  capital  gain  or 
capital loss, depending on whether their capital proceeds from the exchange 
are  more  than  the  cost  base  of  their  Renaissance  Shares,  or  whether  those 
capital proceeds are less than the cost base of those shares.
The  capital  proceeds  that  a  Renaissance  Shareholder  will  be  taken  to  have 
received in respect of the disposal of their Renaissance Shares will generally be 
the market value of Emerald Shares on the date of acceptance of the Offer.
The  cost  base  of  Renaissance  Shares  will  generally  be  the  cost  at  which  they 
were  acquired  including  any  incidental  costs  of  acquisition  together  with  any 
additional cost base elements.
In  broad  terms,  the  Australian  income  tax  consequences  for  Renaissance 
Shareholders  who  hold  their  Renaissance  Shares  on  capital  account  and  who 
accept the Offer will depend on whether or not 'scrip for scrip' capital gains tax 
rollover  relief  (rollover  relief)  is  available  and,  if  available,  is  elected.  The 
following discussion considers the general Australian income tax consequences 
for Renaissance Shareholders where:
(a)
rollover relief is available and is elected; and
51
(b)
rollover relief is not available or is not elected.
7.3
Acceptance of the Offer where rollover relief is available and is elected
Australian-resident  Eligible  Shareholders  may  be  entitled  to  rollover  relief  in 
respect of the consideration referable to Emerald Shares where the exchange of 
the shares would otherwise realise an assessable capital gain. Broadly speaking, 
rollover  relief  is  available  to  Eligible  Shareholders  who  exchange  shares  in  one 
company  for  shares  in  another  company  where  the  transaction  is  made 
pursuant the Offer and provided certain qualifying conditions are satisfied.
In broad terms, these qualifying conditions include the requirement that Emerald 
must  make  an  offer  to  all  shareholders  in  Renaissance  to  acquire  their  voting 
shares on substantially the same terms and Emerald must become the owner of 
at least 80% of the voting shares in Renaissance as a consequence of the Offer.
If  the  qualifying  conditions  are  satisfied  and  an  Eligible  Shareholder  elects  for 
rollover relief to apply, the rollover relief is available.
The effect of the rollover relief is that the CGT event for Eligible Shareholders (and 
therefore  their  respective  capital  gains)  will  be  deferred  until  they  dispose  of 
some or all of their Emerald Shares in the future.
The  CGT  cost  base  of  the  new  Emerald  Shares  acquired  in  the  exchange  is 
determined by reasonably attributing to it the CGT cost base of the Renaissance 
Shares for which a rollover was obtained. For example, the CGT cost base for 1 
Renaissance  Share  will  be  apportioned  to  the  1.55  Emerald  Shares  received. 
Further, the Eligible Shareholders will be taken to acquire their Emerald Shares at 
the  time  they  originally  acquired  their  Renaissance  Shares  (for  the  purpose  of 
determining any entitlement to a CGT discount (discussed further below) on an 
otherwise assessable capital gain in relation to a subsequent dealing in their new 
Emerald Shares).
As  discussed  above,  rollover  relief  will  only  be  available  if  the  qualifying 
conditions  are  satisfied  and  Eligible  Shareholders  elect  to  apply  for  it.  Further, 
rollover relief is not available if Eligible Shareholders realise a capital loss on the 
disposal of their Renaissance Shares.
Rollover relief does not apply automatically and must be elected. The election 
to utilise rollover relief is evidenced by the manner in which the tax return for the 
relevant  income  year  is  prepared  although  it  may  be  prudent  (though  not 
required) to keep a written record of that election with your tax records.
Given the complexity of the provisions governing rollover relief and the various 
qualifying conditions that need to be satisfied, Renaissance Shareholders should 
seek independent taxation advice regarding their particular circumstances.
7.4
Acceptance of the Offer where rollover relief is not available or is not elected
If  Renaissance  Shareholders  do  not  elect  to  obtain  rollover  relief  (or  if  it  is  not 
available),  they  will  need  to  calculate  whether  they  make  a  capital  gain  or 
capital loss on the disposal of their shares in Renaissance. As discussed above, 
this  will  involve  a  calculation  of  their  cost  base  and  capital  proceeds  for  their 
shares in Renaissance.
Where the amount of capital proceeds received by a Renaissance Shareholder 
in  respect  of  the  disposal  of  their  Renaissance  Shares  is  greater  than  the  cost 
base of those Renaissance Shares, then the shareholder should realise a capital 
gain for Australian CGT purposes.
52
Where the amount of capital proceeds received by a Renaissance Shareholder 
in  respect  of  the  disposal  of  their  Renaissance  Shares  is  less  than  the  reduced 
cost  base  (broadly  the  cost  of  acquiring  the  shares,  not  including  certain 
incidental  costs  of  ownership)  of 
the 
Renaissance  Shareholder  should  realise  a  capital  loss  for  Australian  CGT 
purposes.
those  Renaissance  Shares,
then
Where it is expected that a capital gain will result, if a Renaissance Shareholder 
does  not  elect  for  rollover  relief,  or  that  relief  is  not  available,  then  individuals, 
complying  superannuation  funds  and  trusts,  may  be  eligible  for  the  CGT 
discount. Companies that hold shares in Renaissance are not eligible for the CGT 
discount.
Specifically,  where  Renaissance  Shares  have been held  for  at  least  12 months 
(not  including  the  day  of  acquisition  and  the  day  of  disposal)  before  their 
disposal,  a  Renaissance  Shareholder  who 
individual,  a  complying 
superannuation  entity  or  the  trustee  of  a  trust  should  be  able  to  reduce  the 
capital gain arising from the disposal of Renaissance Shares by the CGT discount 
(see below).
is  an
Subject to the Renaissance Shareholder having any available capital losses from 
previous income years or net capital losses in the tax year in which they dispose 
of  their  Renaissance  shares,  where  the  CGT  discount  is  available,  eligible 
Renaissance  Shareholders  which  are  individuals  or  trustees  of  trusts  (excluding 
complying  superannuation  entities)  will  reduce  the  capital  gain  arising  on  the 
disposal  of  Renaissance  Shares  by  one-half.  For  individuals,  this  reduced  gain 
should be assessed at the Renaissance Shareholder's marginal tax rate. Trustees 
should  seek  specific  advice  regarding  the  tax  consequences  of  distributions 
attributable to discounted capital gains and whether the beneficiaries of such 
trust distributions may be eligible to receive a CGT discount on any net capital 
gain distributed.
Subject to the Renaissance Shareholder having any available capital losses from 
previous income years or net capital losses in the tax year in which they dispose 
of their Renaissance shares, where Renaissance Shares are held by a complying 
superannuation  entity  and  the  CGT  discount  is  available,  the  discount  will 
reduce the nominal capital gain on the disposal of the shares by one-third.
The  CGT  discount  is  generally  applied  after  taking  into  account  any  available 
capital losses or revenue losses from previous income years or net capital losses 
or  revenue  losses  in  the  tax  year  in  which  they  dispose  of  their  Renaissance 
shares.  Renaissance  Shareholders  having  any  capital  losses  or  revenue  losses 
from previous income years or net capital losses or revenue losses in the tax year 
in  which  they  dispose  of  their  Renaissance  Shares  should  seek  independent 
advice in relation to the potential availability of the CGT discount.
If Emerald waives the 90% minimum acceptance Condition or declares that the 
Offer is unconditional and Emerald does not have a Relevant Interest in at least 
80%  of  Renaissance  Shares,  no  Renaissance  Shareholder  will  be  entitled  to 
receive scrip for scrip rollover relief.
7.5
Renaissance  Shareholders  who  are  companies  will  not  be  entitled  to  the  CGT 
discount
Companies are not entitled to the CGT discount. The capital gain or capital loss 
will be calculated with reference to the capital proceeds less the cost base or 
reduced  cost  base of  the  shares.  Where  a  company  realises  a capital  gain,  it 
may  be  eligible  to  reduce  that  gain  with  capital  losses  from  previous  income 
years,  net  capital  losses  in  the  tax  year  in  which  they  dispose  of  their 
53
Renaissance  shares  or  revenue  losses  (subject  to  satisfying  certain  tax  loss 
integrity  measures).  We  recommend  that  companies  seek  advice  from  their 
professional tax advisor in relation to the availability and deductibility of any tax 
losses.
7.6
GST
GST should not apply to the disposal of Renaissance Shares under the Offer, the 
issue of Emerald Shares under the Offer, or any subsequent disposal of Emerald 
Shares.
Renaissance  Shareholders  who  are  registered  for  GST  purposes  may  not  be 
entitled  to  full  input  tax  credits  for  any  GST  incurred  on  costs  (e.g.  accounting 
advisors’ costs) associated with acquiring or disposing of securities in Emerald or 
Renaissance. Renaissance Shareholders should seek their own tax advice in this 
respect.
54
8.
8.1
RISK FACTORS
Overview
If  the  Offer  becomes  unconditional  or  the  Conditions  are  satisfied  or  waived, 
Renaissance  Shareholders  who  accept  the  Offer  will  become  Emerald 
Shareholders. In those circumstances, Renaissance Shareholders will:
(a)
(b)
(c)
continue to be exposed to the risks associated with the investment 
in  Renaissance  as  a  result  of  their  indirect  interest  in  Renaissance 
through Emerald;
be  exposed  to  the  risks  which  are  specific  to  an  investment  in 
Emerald; and
be exposed to additional risks relating to the Offer and the Merged 
Entity.
These  risks  are  explained  below.  Renaissance  Shareholders  should  read  this 
Bidder’s  Statement  carefully  and  consult  their  professional  advisors  before 
deciding  whether  to  accept  the  Offer.  By  accepting  the  Offer,  Renaissance 
Shareholders will be investing in Emerald.
The business activities of Emerald and the Merged Entity are subject to various 
risks  that  may  impact  on  the  future  performance  of  Emerald  and  the  Merged 
Entity.  Some  of  these  risks  can  be  mitigated  by  the  use  of  safeguards  and 
appropriate systems and controls, but some are outside the control of Emerald 
and the Merged Entity and cannot be mitigated.
Accordingly,  an  investment  in  the  Merged  Entity  carries  no  guarantee  with 
respect to the payment of dividends, return of capital or price at which shares 
will  trade  and  should  be  considered  speculative.  The  principal  risk  factors 
include, but are not limited to, the following.  The risks are general only and do 
not take into account your individual objectives, financial situation or needs. You 
should  carefully  consider  the  following  risk  factors,  as  well  as  other  information 
provided  by  Emerald,  and  consult  your  professional  advisers  before  deciding 
whether to accept the Offer.
Risks Relating to the Offer
8.2 
8.2.1  Conditions of the Offer
As described in Section 1.9 of Annexure A of the Bidder's Statement, the Offer is 
subject to a number of Conditions.
Subject to any statutory withdrawal rights that may be available (see Section 1.6 
of  Annexure  A  of  the  Bidder's  Statement),  Renaissance  Shareholders  who 
accept the Offer whilst it still remains conditional will no longer be able to trade 
their Renaissance Shares on the ASX or withdraw their acceptance of the Offer. 
Renaissance  Shareholders  should  be  aware 
the  market  price  of 
Renaissance  Shares  may  exceed  the  implied  price  under  the  Offer  during  the 
Offer Period.
that
For  those  Renaissance Shareholders who  accept  the  Offer  and  the Conditions 
remain unsatisfied at the end of the Offer Period and are not otherwise waived 
by Emerald, there is no obligation on Emerald to issue Emerald Shares to you as 
consideration  for  your  Renaissance  Shares. 
In  those  circumstances,  any 
acceptances of the Offer will be void and you would then be free to deal with 
your Renaissance Shares.
55
8.2.2
Limited withdrawal rights
As  described 
in  Section  1.6  of  Annexure  A  of  the  Bidder's  Statement, 
Renaissance Shareholders may only withdraw their acceptance of the Offer in 
limited  circumstances.  Otherwise,  Renaissance  Shareholders  will  be  unable  to 
withdraw  their  acceptances,  even  if  the  value  of  the  Emerald  Shares  to  be 
issued to Renaissance Shareholders as consideration varies from the date of their 
acceptance.
8.2.3
Issue of Emerald Shares as consideration
Eligible Shareholders are being offered specific quantities of Emerald Shares as 
consideration  under  the  Offer.  As  a  result,  the  value  of  the  consideration  will 
fluctuate  depending  upon  the  market  value  of  Emerald  Shares  at  any  given 
time.
Furthermore,  some  of  the  holders  of  Renaissance  Shares  that  receive  Emerald 
Shares  as  consideration  under  the  Offer  may  not  intend  to  continue  to  hold 
those Emerald Shares and may wish to sell them on ASX. There is a risk that if a 
significant  number  of  holders  of  Renaissance  Shares  seek  to  dispose  of  their 
Emerald Shares, this may adversely impact the price of Emerald Shares.
Accordingly,  the  market  value  of  the  Emerald  Shares  at  the  time  you  receive 
them  may  vary  significantly  from  their  market  value  on  the  date  of  your 
acceptance  of  the  Offer.  This  may  result  in  the  value  of  the  consideration  to 
Renaissance Shareholders increasing as well as decreasing.
8.2.4
Rollover relief
A condition of the Offer is that the level of acceptance must result in Emerald 
obtaining a Relevant Interest in at least 90% of all Renaissance Shares. Emerald 
reserves  the  right  to  free  the  Offer  from  the  90%  minimum  acceptance 
Condition.
If Emerald does not acquire a Relevant Interest in at least 80% of Renaissance 
Shares,  and  Emerald  waives  the  90%  minimum  acceptance  Condition  or 
declares the Offer to be unconditional, CGT rollover relief will not be available to 
Renaissance Shareholders. Refer to Section 7 above for further details.
8.2.5
Acquisition of less than 90% of Renaissance Shares
If  Emerald  decides  to  waive  the  90%  minimum  acceptance  Condition,  it  is 
possible  that  Emerald  could  acquire  a  Relevant  Interest  of  less  than  90%  of 
Renaissance Shares on issue under the Offer. The existence of a minority interest 
in  Renaissance  may  have  an  impact  on  the  operations  of  the  Merged  Entity, 
although  this  impact  will  depend  upon  the  ultimate  level  of  Renaissance 
ownership acquired by Emerald.
8.3
Risks relating to the Merged Entity
This Section 8.3 sets out risks that are specific to Emerald and Renaissance as the 
Merged Entity.
8.3.1
Exploration and mining
The mineral exploration licences comprising the Merged Entity’s projects are at 
exploration and feasibility study stage, and potential investors should understand 
that mineral exploration and development are high-risk undertakings.
56
There  can  be  no  assurance  that  future  exploration  of  these  licences,  or  any 
other  mineral  licences  that  may  be  acquired  in  the  future,  will  result  in  the 
discovery  of  an  economic  ore  deposit.  Even  if  an  apparently viable deposit  is 
identified, there is no guarantee that it can be economically exploited.
The  future  exploration  activities  of  the  Merged  Entity  may  be  affected  by  a 
range of factors including geological conditions, limitations on activities due to 
seasonal weather patterns, unanticipated operational and technical difficulties, 
industrial  and  environmental  accidents,  native 
title  process,  changing 
government  regulations  and  many  other  factors  beyond  the  control  of  the 
Merged Entity.
The success of the Merged Entity will also depend upon its ability to maintain title 
to the mineral exploration licences comprising the Cambodian Gold Project and 
obtaining all required approvals for its contemplated activities. In the event that 
exploration  programmes  prove  to  be  unsuccessful  this  could  lead  to  a 
diminution in the value of the Merged Entity’s projects, a reduction in the cash 
reserves of the Merged Entity and possible relinquishment of one or more of the 
mineral exploration licences comprising the projects.
8.3.2
Development and mining
The  Merged  Entity’s  projects  are  at  an  exploration  and  feasibility  study  stage. 
Ultimate  and  continuous  success  of  activities  is  dependent  on  a  number  of 
factors including:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
the discovery and/or acquisition of economically recoverable Ore 
Reserves;
access to adequate capital to fund and develop its projects;
construction of efficient development and production infrastructure 
within capital expenditure budgets;
securing and maintaining title to interests;
obtaining regulatory consents and approvals necessary for the 
conduct of mineral exploration, development and production; and
retention of appropriately skilled and experienced employees, 
contractors and consultants.
The  Merged  Entity’s  operations  may  be  delayed  or  prevented  as  a  result  of 
factors  including  weather  conditions,  mechanical  difficulties  or  a  shortage  of 
technical  expertise  or  equipment.  There  may  be  difficulties  with  obtaining 
government  and/or  third  party  approvals,  operational  difficulties  encountered 
with construction, extraction and production activities, unexpected shortages or 
increase  in  the  price  of  consumables,  plant  and  equipment,  cost  overruns  or 
lack of access to required levels of funding.
The  Merged  Entity’s  operations  may  be  curtailed  or  disrupted  by  a  number  of 
risks beyond its control such as environmental hazards, industrial accidents and 
disputes,  technical  failures,  unusual  or  unexpected  geological  conditions, 
adverse weather conditions, fires, explosions and other accidents.
The  Merged  Entity’s  operations  may  be  adversely  affected  by  higher  than 
anticipated  ore 
than  anticipated  metallurgical
treatment  costs,  worse
57
conditions, fluctuations in metal prices or lack of availability of treatment plant 
capacity.
The  occurrence  of  any  of  these  circumstances  could  result  in  Emerald  not 
realising its operational or development plans or in such plans costing more than 
expected  or  taking  longer  to  realise  than  expected.  Any  of  these  outcomes 
could have an adverse effect on the Merged Entity’s financial and operational 
performance.
Possible future development of mining operations at any of the Merged Entity’s 
projects are also subject to numerous risks. No assurance can be given that the 
Merged Entity will achieve commercial viability through development of any of 
its projects.
In  addition,  for  development  projects,  reserves,  resources  and  stockpiles  are 
based on estimates of grade, volume and tonnage. The accuracy and precision 
of these estimates will depend upon drill spacing and other information such as 
continuity,  geology,  rock  density,  metallurgical  characteristics,  mining  dilution 
and  costs  which  evolve  as  the  mine  moves  through  different  parts  of  the  ore 
body.
8.3.3  Commodity price volatility
The  revenue  that  the  Merged  Group  may  derive  through  the  sale  of 
commodities exposes the potential income of the Merged Entity to commodity 
price and exchange rate risks. Commodity prices fluctuate and are affected by 
many  factors  that  would  be  beyond  the  control  of  the  Merged  Entity.  Such 
factors include supply and demand fluctuations for precious and base metals, 
technological  advancements,  forward  selling  activities  and  other  macro-
economic factors.
If exploration is successful, a substantial source of revenue and operating cash 
flow  of  the  Merged  Entity  may  be  derived  from  the  sale  of  gold  from  the 
Cambodian  Gold  Project.  Gold  prices  have  been  and  will  continue  to  be 
subject to fluctuation as a result of a number of factors which would be beyond 
the  control  of  the  Merged  Entity,  including  demand  for  the  product,  prices 
agreed by the world’s largest producers with their customers, production costs 
and  capacities  of  other  suppliers  of  gold,  the  level  of  competition  between 
producers  and  end-uses  of  the  product.  If  realised  product  prices  fall,  the 
business, results of operations, financial condition and prospects of the Merged 
Entity could be materially adversely affected.
Future  material  price  declines  in  the  market  value  of  the  commodities  to  be 
supplied by the Merged Entity could cause the continued development of, and 
eventually the commercial production from, the Merged Entity’s projects to be 
uneconomic. Depending on the price of these commodities, the Merged Entity 
could  be  forced  to  discontinue  production  or  development  and  may  lose  its 
interest in, or be forced to sell, some of its properties. There is no assurance that, 
even as commercial quantities of the commodities are produced, a profitable 
market will exist for them.
8.3.4
Exchange rate risks
International  prices  of  various  commodities  are  denominated  in  United  States 
dollars  and  therefore  much  of  the  Merged  Entity’s  revenue  will  be  reported  in 
United States dollars, whereas the expenditure and indebtedness of the Merged 
Entity  will  be  taken  into  account  in  United  States  dollars  or  Cambodian  Riels, 
exposing  the  Merged  Entity  to  the  fluctuations  and  volatility  of  the  rate  of
58
exchange  between  the  United  States  dollar,  the  Australian  dollar  and  the 
Cambodian Riel as determined in international markets.
8.3.5  Operating costs
The strong commodity cycle over recent years and the large number of projects 
being developed in the resources industry has led to increased demand for, and 
worldwide  shortages  in,  skilled  personnel,  contractors,  materials,  equipment, 
spare  parts  and  supplies  that  are  required  as  critical  inputs  to  those  existing 
projects and planned developments. Such shortages may increase the costs of 
its operations, as a result of inputs becoming more expensive. Furthermore, the 
Merged Entity’s input costs may be affected by changes in market conditions, 
government  policies,  exchange  rates  and  inflation  rates,  which  can  be 
unpredictable  and  outside  its  control.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  the 
Merged  Entity’s  present  and  future  projects  will  continue  to  have  access  to 
adequate  power  and  water  supplies  in  the  future  or  that  the  prices  of  such 
utilities will remain affordable. Any resulting increase in costs or production delays 
could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  its  business,  results  of  operations, 
financial condition and prospects and result in the shutdown of an operation.
8.3.6
Approvals, permits and licences
The  Merged  Entity’s  operations  will  be  dependent  on  certain  government 
permits, approvals and licenses for each of its projects, including environmental 
and  health  and  safety  approvals.  The  Merged  Entity’s  ability  to  carry  on  its 
business  will  therefore  be  subject  to 
its  ability  to  obtain,  and  various 
governments’  willingness  to  renew  and  not  revoke,  such  rights.  If  the  Merged 
Entity is not able to obtain or renew such rights, or such rights are revoked, this 
may  have  a  material  and  adverse  impact  on  its  business,  results  of  operation, 
financial condition and prospects.
8.3.7
Land and resource tenure
The  Merged  Entity  may  lose  title  to,  or  interests  in,  its  mineral  licences  if  the 
conditions  to  which  those  mineral  licences  are  subject  are  not  satisfied  or  if 
insufficient funds are available to meet expenditure commitments.
In the jurisdictions in which the Merged Entity will operate, both the conduct of 
operations and the steps involved in acquiring interests will involve compliance 
with  numerous  procedures  and  formalities.  It  is  not  always  possible  to  comply 
with,  or  obtain  waivers  from,  all  such  requirements  and  it  is  not  always  clear 
whether  requirements  have  been  properly  completed,  or  that  it  is  possible  or 
practical to obtain evidence of compliance.
In particular, mineral licences are subject to expenditure and work commitments 
which  must  be  complied  with  in  order  to  keep  the  mineral  licences  in  good 
standing.  In  certain  circumstances,  these  commitments  may  be  varied  at  the 
discretion of the relevant mining authority.  Failure to meet these commitments 
could lead to forfeiture of the mineral licence.
Where mineral licences expenditures and work commitments or other regulatory 
requirements  are  not  complied  with,  regulatory  exemptions  may  need  to  be 
applied  for  within  specified  periods.  Should  exemptions  not  be  applied  for  in 
time,  or  are  applied  for  in  time  but  are  not  ultimately  granted,  fines  may  be 
payable to avoid the mineral licences being forfeited or, in extreme cases, the 
mineral licences may be forfeited.
Further, it is possible that mineral licences in which the Merged Entity will have an 
interest in may be subject to a native title claim. If native title rights do exist in 
59
respect of a mineral licence, the ability of the Merged Entity to gain access to 
that mineral licence may be adversely affected.
8.3.8
Resources and reserves estimates
Resource  estimates  are  expressions  of  judgement  based  on  knowledge, 
experience  and  industry  practice.  Estimates  that  were  valid  when  originally 
calculated may alter significantly when new information or techniques become 
available. In addition, by their very nature, resource estimates are imprecise and 
depend to some extent on interpretations, which may prove to be inaccurate. 
As  further  information  becomes  available  through  additional  fieldwork  and 
analysis,  the  estimates  are  likely  to  change.  This  may  result  in  alterations  to 
development and mining plans that may, in turn, adversely affect the Merged 
Entity’s operations.
A current Mineral Resource estimate has been released for the Okvau Deposit 
by  a  competent  (JORC,  industry  expert)  person.  To  advance  the  Cambodian 
Gold Project through completion of the definitive feasibility study and potential 
development, additional work will be required to increase the confidence in the 
Mineral Resource Estimate classifications. This work will require additional drilling, 
assaying  and  geological  investigation.  The  likelihood  of  this  work  adversely 
affecting the viability of the Cambodian Gold Project by downgrading the size, 
tenor  and  continuity  of  the  Mineral  Resource  is  considered  low  but  the 
consequence of any downgrade could be major.
8.3.9
Environmental risks
The  operations  and  proposed  activities  of  the  Merged  Entity  are  subject  to 
extensive  environmental  regulation  in  Australia,  Cambodia  and  all  other 
jurisdictions  in  which  the  Merged  Entity  will  operate.  As  with  most  exploration 
projects  and mining  operations,  the  Merged  Entity’s  activities are  expected  to 
have  an  impact  on  the  environment,  particularly  if  advanced  exploration  or 
mine development proceeds. It is Emerald’s intention that the Merged Entity will 
conduct  its  activities  to  the  highest  standard  of  environmental  obligation, 
including compliance with all environmental laws.
Mining  operations  have  inherent  risks  and  liabilities  associated  with  safety  and 
damage to the environment and the disposal of waste products occurring as a 
result of mineral exploration and production. The occurrence of any such safety 
or environmental incident could delay production or increase production costs. 
Events,  such  as  unpredictable  rainfall  or  bushfires  may  impact  on  the  Merged 
Entity’s  ongoing  compliance  with  environmental  legislation,  regulations  and 
licences.  Significant  liabilities  could  be  imposed  on  the  Merged  Entity  for 
damages, clean-up costs or penalties in the event of certain discharges into the 
environment,  environmental  damage  caused  by  previous  operations  or  non-
compliance with environmental laws or regulations.
The disposal of mining and process waste and mine water discharge are under 
constant  legislative  scrutiny  and  regulation.  There  is  a  risk  that  environmental 
laws  and  regulations  become  more  onerous  making  the  Merged  Entity’s 
operations more expensive.
Approvals  are  required  for  land  clearing  and  for  ground  disturbing  activities. 
Delays  in  obtaining  such  approvals  may  result  in  the  delay  to  anticipated 
exploration programmes or mining activities.
The  Okvau  Deposit  is  located  within  the  outer  boundary  of  the  Phnom  Prich 
Wildlife  Sanctuary,  a  protected  area.  Wild  life  preserves  are  protected  areas 
under  Cambodian  law  and  are  subject  to  management  by  the  Cambodian 
60
Ministry of Environment (MOE). Consultation has been ongoing with the MOE on 
the grant, exploration and exclusion of a portion of the Okvau Deposit for the 
purpose  of  mineral  exploitation.  The  MOE  to  date  has  been  supportive  of 
defining  an  exclusion  zone  within  the  preserve  for  the  purpose  of  mining  but 
formal  recognition  of  an  exploitation  exclusion  zone  will  depend  on  the 
submission of a mutually acceptable development plan and associated mineral 
investment  convention  being  agreed  between  the  Merged  Entity  and  the 
Cambodian Government, including the MOE.
Emerald  considers  the  inability  of  all  parties  to  agree  a  development  process 
(should  a  suitably  economic  scenario  be  defined  in  the  definitive  feasibility 
study) to be unlikely, however, this outcome cannot be guaranteed.
8.3.10
Future funding
Future  funding  may  be  required  by  the  Merged  Entity  to  support  its  proposed 
activities.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  such  funding  will  be  available  on 
satisfactory terms or at all. The Merged Entity’s capital requirements will depend 
on  numerous  factors.  Any  additional  equity  financing  will  dilute  shareholdings, 
and  debt  financing,  if  available,  may  involve  restrictions  on  financing  and 
operating activities. If the Merged Entity is unable to secure additional financing 
as  needed,  it  may  be  required  to  reduce  the  scope  of  its  operations.  There  is 
however,  no  guarantee  that  the  Merged  Entity  will  be  able  to  secure  any 
additional  funding  or  be  able  to  secure  funding  on  terms  favourable  to  the 
Merged Entity.
Further,  loan  agreements  and  other  financing  rearrangements  such  as  debt 
facilities, convertible note issues and finance leases (and any related guarantee 
and  security)  that  may  be  entered  into  by  the  Merged  Entity  may  contain 
covenants,  undertakings  and  other  provisions  which,  if  breached,  may  entitle 
lenders  to  accelerate  repayment  of  loans  and  there  is  no  assurance  that  the 
Merged  Entity  would  be  able  to  repay  such  loans  in  the  event  of  an 
acceleration. Enforcement of any security granted by Merged Entity or default 
under a finance lease could also result in the loss of assets.
8.3.11
Transport and infrastructure
The  Merged  Entity’s  operations  will  depend  on  an  uninterrupted  flow  of 
materials,  supplies,  equipment,  services  and  finished  products.  Due  to  the 
geographic location of  the  Cambodian  Gold Project,  it  is  dependent  on  third 
parties  for  the  provision  of  rail,  port,  marine,  shipping  and  other  transportation 
services. Contractual disputes, demurrage charges, classification of commodity 
inputs  and  finish  products,  rail  marine  and  port  capacity  issues,  availability  of 
vessels and rail cars, weather problems, labour disruptions or other factors could 
have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the  Merged  Entity’s  ability  to  transport  (or 
take delivery of transported) materials according to schedules and contractual 
commitments and could have a material adverse effect on the Merged Entity’s 
business, results of operations and financial performance.
8.3.12
Integration risks
There is a risk that integration of the businesses of Emerald and Renaissance may 
take  longer  than  expected  and  that  the  potential  efficiencies  and  benefits  of 
the  Merged  Entity  may  be  less  than  anticipated.    Potential  risks  include 
differences in management culture, inability to achieve synergies, cost savings 
and tax advantages and the loss of key personnel.  Whilst Emerald anticipates 
that  value will be added  through  the  Offer,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  full  benefits 
may only be realised in part, or not at all.
61
8.3.13  Related  party  limitations  if  Emerald  does  not  acquire  more  than  90%  of
Renaissance Shares
If  the  Offer  goes  unconditional  and  Emerald  acquires  more  than  50%  of 
Renaissance  and  gains control of  Renaissance  (but  Emerald  does  not  acquire 
more  than  a  90%  interest  in  the  Renaissance  Shares  by  the  end  of  the  Offer 
Period, then the related party provisions of the Corporations Act  (and the ASX 
Listing Rules) will apply to the two companies which may limit activities between 
the  companies  or  increase  regulatory  compliance  for  undertaking  certain 
activities between the companies.
8.3.14  Economic risk and external market factors
Factors  such  as,  but  not  limited  to,  political  movements,  stock  market  trends, 
changing  customer  preferences,  interest  rates,  inflation  levels,  commodity 
prices,  industrial  disruption,  environmental  impacts,  international  competition, 
taxation  changes  and  legislative  or  regulatory  changes,  may  all  have  an 
adverse impact on the Merged Entity's prospects, operating costs, profit margins 
and  share  price.  These  factors  would  be  beyond  the  control  of  the  Merged 
Entity  and  Emerald  cannot,  to  any  degree  of  certainty,  predict  how  they  will 
impact on the Merged Entity.
8.3.15
Litigation risk
Litigation  risks  relating  to  the  Merged  Entity 
include  contractual  claims, 
employee claims, regulatory disputes, joint venture claims and disputes and the 
costs  associated  with  such  claims  and  disputes.  There  is  a  risk  that  material  or 
costly  disputes  could  arise  which  may  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the 
financial performance and position of the Merged Entity.
Renaissance  announced  on  29  June  2015  that  it  had  been  advised  by  Oz 
Minerals  Limited  (Oz  Minerals)  of  a  potential  claim  by  a  third  party  for  an 
encumbrance  on  the  Cambodian  Gold  Project.    Renaissance  has  since  been 
advised  by  Oz  Minerals  that  it  has  agreed  to  terms  with  the  third  party  to 
extinguish any such claim.  However, there can be no guarantee that the third 
party, or any other party, may in the future, make a claim in this respect.
8.3.16  Sovereign risk
Changes in Cambodian laws and regulations may have a significant effect on 
the  Merged  Entity’s  exploration  operations,  especially  changes 
to 
environmental, mining, grant or renewal of concessions, royalties and taxation.
Cambodia currently has a relatively open trading regime and its adherence to 
the  global  market,  freedom  from  exchange  controls  and  unrestricted  capital 
movement make it one of the most business friendly countries in the region. The 
Cambodian Government has implemented a strategy to create an appropriate 
investment environment to attract foreign companies, particularly in the mining 
industry.  Cambodia  has  a  modern  and  transparent  mining  code  and  the 
government  is  supportive  of  foreign  investment  particularly  in  mining  and 
exploration  to  help  realise  the  value  of  its  potential  mineral  value.  However, 
potential risk to the Merged Entity’s activities may occur if there are changes to 
the  political,  legal  and  fiscal  systems  which  might  affect  the  ownership  and 
operation  of  the  Merged  Entity’s  interests  in  Cambodia.  This  may  also  include 
changes in exchange control regulation, expropriation of mining rights, changes 
in government and in legislative and regulatory regimes.
62
The Merged Entity’s projects are subject to the risks associated with operating in 
foreign countries. These risks may include economic, social or political instability 
or change, hyperinflation, currency non-convertibility or instability and changes 
of law affecting foreign ownership, government participation, taxation, working 
conditions,  rates  of  exchange,  exchange  control,  exploration  licensing,  export 
duties,  repatriation  of  income  or  return  of  capital,  environmental  protection, 
mine  safety,  labour  relations  as  well  as  government  control  over  mineral 
properties or government regulations that require the employment of local staff 
or contractors or require other benefits to be provided to local residents.
Any  of  these  factors  may,  in  the  future,  adversely  affect  the  financial 
performance of the Merged Entity and the market price of its shares.
No assurance can be given regarding future stability in Cambodia or any other 
country in which the Merged Entity may, in the future, have an interest.
8.3.17  War and terrorist attacks
War  or  terrorist  attacks  anywhere  in  the  world  could  result  in  a  decline  in 
economic conditions worldwide or in a particular region. There could also be a 
resultant  material  adverse  effect  on  the  business,  financial  condition  and 
financial performance of the Merged Entity.
63
9.
9.1
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Emerald’s interest in Renaissance Shares
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement and the day before the first Offer will be 
sent:
(a)
(b)
Emerald  holds  57,444,445  Renaissance  Shares  which  equates  to  voting 
power of 10% in Renaissance; and
Emerald  has  a  Relevant  Interest  in  111,541,347  Renaissance  Shares 
which equates to 19.42% of Renaissance Shares.
Acquisitions of Renaissance Shares by Emerald and its Associates
Previous 4 months
Other than in respect of the Pre-Bid Deeds noted in Section 9.6, neither Emerald 
nor any Associate of Emerald has provided, or agreed to provide, consideration 
for  Renaissance  Shares  under  any  purchase  or  agreement  during  the  period 
beginning  4  months  before  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement  ending  on  the 
day immediately before the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
9.2 
9.2.1
9.2.2
Period before Offer
Other than in respect of the Pre-Bid Deeds noted in Section 9.6, neither Emerald 
nor any Associate of Emerald has provided, or agreed to provide, consideration 
for  Renaissance  Shares  under  any  purchase  or  agreement  during  the  period 
starting  on  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement  and  ending  on  the  date 
immediately before the date of the Offer.
9.3
No escalation agreements
Neither Emerald nor any Associate of Emerald has entered into any escalation 
agreement that is prohibited by Section 622 of the Corporations Act.
9.4 
9.4.1
Collateral benefits
Previous 4 months
During the period beginning 4 months before the date of this Bidder’s Statement 
and ending on the day immediately before the date of this Bidder’s Statement, 
neither Emerald nor any Associate of Emerald gave, or offered to give or agreed 
to give, a benefit to another person that was likely to induce the other person, or 
an Associate of that person, to:
(a)
(b)
accept the Offer; or
dispose of their Renaissance Shares,
and which is not offered to all holders of Renaissance Shares under the Offer.
9.4.2
Period before Offer
During the period starting on the date of this Bidder’s Statement and ending on 
the  date  immediately  before  the  date  of  the  Offer,  neither  Emerald  nor  any 
Associate of Emerald gave, or offered or agreed to give, a benefit to another
64
person that was likely to induce the other person, or an Associate of that person, 
to:
(a)
(b)
accept the Offer; or
dispose of their Renaissance Shares,
and which is not offered to all holders of Renaissance Shares under the Offer.
9.5
Disclosure of Information
Due to the fact that Emerald is offering Emerald Shares as consideration for the 
acquisition of Renaissance Shares under the Offer, the Corporations Act requires 
that this Bidder’s Statement must include all information that would be required 
for a prospectus for an offer of Emerald Shares under Sections 710 to 713 of the 
Corporations Act.
As a company whose shares are quoted on ASX, Emerald is subject to regular 
disclosure requirements. In particular, Emerald is required to disclose information 
concerning  its  finances,  activities  and  performance.  This  disclosure  is  available 
on Emerald’s website as well as on the ASX website (ASX Code: EMR).
Please  refer  to  Section  3.8  for  further  details  in  relation  to  Emerald’s  corporate 
governance policies.
9.6
Pre-Bid Deeds
On  19  July  2016,  Emerald  announced  that  it  had  entered  into  pre-bid 
acceptance  agreements  with  certain  Renaissance  Shareholders  in  respect  of 
their Renaissance Shares, representing 9.4% of Renaissance Shares. Each Pre-Bid 
Shareholder  has  agreed  to  accept  the  Offer  for  the  number  of  Renaissance 
Shares set out below:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Zero  Nominees  Pty  Ltd,  in  respect  of  27,610,236  Renaissance  Shares 
(which equates to voting power in Renaissance of 4.81%);
Mr  Kee  Khoo  Seah,  in  respect  of  8,333,333  Renaissance  Shares  (which 
equates to voting power in Renaissance of 1.45%)
Mutual Investments Pty Ltd as trustee for the Mitchell Family Account, in 
respect  of  3,333,333  Renaissance  Shares  (which  equates  to  voting 
power in Renaissance of 0.58%);
Inkese  Pty  Ltd,  in  respect  of  2,100,000  Renaissance  Shares  (which 
equates to voting power in Renaissance of 0.37%);
Zero  Nominees  Pty  Ltd,  Mrs  Emma  Jane  Woods,  Mrs  Jodi  Clayton,  Mrs 
Melanie Jane Chessell and BNM Holdings Pty Ltd as trustee for the BJD 
Beresford  Family  Account,  in  respect  of  1,490,000  Renaissance  Shares 
each (which equates to a total voting power in Renaissance of 1.30%);
Tethyan Holdings Pty Ltd as trustee for the Tethyan Investment Account, 
in  respect  of  1,480,000  Renaissance  Shares  (which  equates  to  voting 
power in Renaissance of 0.26%);
Mr  Andrew  McKenzie  and  Mrs  Catherine  McKenzie  as  trustee  for  the 
McKenzie Super Fund Account in respect of 920,000 Renaissance Shares 
(which equates to voting power in Renaissance of 0.16%);
65
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Mrs  Catherine  McKenzie  in  respect  of  750,000  Renaissance  Shares 
(which equates to voting power in Renaissance of 0.13%);
Mr  Simon  Yeo  and  Mrs  Jennifer  Yeo  as  trustee  for  the  Cape 
Superannuation Fund Account in respect of 700,000 Renaissance Shares 
(which equates to voting power in Renaissance of 0.12%);
Attrition Holdings Pty Ltd in respect of 570,000 Renaissance Shares (which 
equates to voting power in Renaissance of 0.10%);
Mr  Robert  Black  in  respect  of  500,000  Renaissance  Shares  (which 
equates to voting power in Renaissance of 0.09%); and
Market Watch Pty Ltd as trustee for the R Gardner Super Fund Account 
in  respect  of  350,000  Renaissance  Shares  (which  equates  to  voting 
power in Renaissance of 0.06%).
The  Pre-Bid  Shareholders  have  agreed  to  accept  the  Offer  in  respect  of  the 
above Renaissance Shares within 2 business days of the date that is 21 days after 
the  Offer  is  open  for  acceptance,  provided  that  no  Third  Party  Offer  is  made 
and recommended by the Independent Directors prior to that date.
The Pre-Bid Deeds will terminate automatically if:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the Offer is withdrawn;
the Offer lapses or expires because a defeating condition has not been 
satisfied or waived at the end of the Offer Period;
a  Renaissance Shareholder  has  accepted  the  Offer in  respect  of  their 
Renaissance Shares;
a Third Party Offer is made prior the End Date which exceeds the Offer 
Consideration and is recommended by the Independent Directors; or
the  Takeovers  Panel  decides  that  all  or  any  part  of  the  transactions 
contemplated 
the  Pre-Bid  Deeds  constitute  unacceptable 
circumstances.
in
Under the terms of the Pre-Bid Deeds, the Pre-Bid Shareholders are not permitted 
to  sell,  dispose  of,  encumber  or  otherwise  deal  with  any  of  their  respective 
number of Renaissance Shares set above unless it is in accordance with the Pre-
Bid Deeds.
The full terms of the Pre-Bid Deeds were released to ASX on 20 July 2016 as an 
annexure to Emerald’s Notice of Change of Interests of Substantial Holder dated 
20 July 2016.  The closing price of Emerald Shares on 18 August 2016 (being the 
date prior to the date of lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement) was 5.7 cents
9.7
Renaissance Shareholder’s Intention to Accept the Offer
On  19  July  2016,  Emerald  and  Renaissance  jointly  announced  that  they  had 
entered  into  the  Bid  Implementation  Agreement,  and  that  Renaissance  had 
been provided with letters of intention to accept the Offer, in the absence of a 
superior proposal, from:
(a)
Ingalls  and  Snyder  Value  Partners  L.P., 
Renaissance Shares;
in  respect  of  39,381,625
66
(b)
(c)
(d)
Mr Robert L Gipson, in respect of 22,000,000 Renaissance Shares;
PS Consulting Pty Ltd, in respect of 15,000,000 Renaissance Shares; and
JA  Advisory  Services  Pty  Ltd,  in  respect  of  10,000,000  Renaissance 
Shares,
representing in aggregate  15% of  Renaissance  Shares  (86,381,625  Renaissance 
Shares).  These  Renaissance  Shareholders  have  consented  to  the  disclosure  of 
the  letter  of  intention  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement  and  have  not  withdrawn  that 
consent before the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
9.8
Option Transfer Deeds
Emerald  proposes  to  enter  into  option  transfer  deeds  with  the  Renaissance 
Optionholders  under  which,  upon  the  Offer  becoming  unconditional  or  the 
Conditions  are  satisfied  or  waived  and  Renaissance  holding  at  least  50.1%  of 
Renaissance Shares, Renaissance Optionholders will receive, in exchange for the 
transfer to Emerald of their unlisted Renaissance Options, a total of 1.55 Emerald 
Options for  every  one Renaissance  Option  held.  The  new  Emerald  Options will 
have the same expiry date as the original Renaissance Options and an exercise 
price which is equal to the exercise price of each Renaissance Option divided 
by  1.55  and  will  otherwise  have  terms  that  are  broadly  similar  to  those  of  the 
Renaissance Options.  Renaissance has obtained a waiver under ASX Listing Rule 
6.23.4 for the transfer of those Renaissance Options which are non-transferable 
on  the  condition  that  the  Offer  becomes  unconditional  and  Emerald  has 
acquired at least 50.1% of Renaissance Shares.
Until  the  Offer  is  unconditional  or  the  Conditions  are  satisfied  or  waived  and 
least  50.1%  of  Renaissance  Shares,  Renaissance 
Renaissance  holds  at 
Optionholders will not be permitted to exercise, transfer, dispose of or otherwise 
deal with their Renaissance Options without the prior written consent of Emerald.
The  Emerald  Options  to  be  issued  to  Renaissance  Optionholders  will  have 
substantially  similar  terms  as  the  Renaissance  Options  being  transferred  to 
Emerald  other  than  for  the  change  in  the  exercise  price.  The  closing  price  of 
Emerald  Shares  on  18  August  2016  (being  the  date  prior  to  the  date  of 
lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement) was 5.7 cents.
If there are any Renaissance Shares that have not been transferred to Emerald, 
exercised or cancelled and Emerald becomes entitled to compulsorily acquire 
all of the outstanding Renaissance Options in accordance with the Corporations 
Act, then Emerald proposes to compulsorily acquire those Renaissance Options.
9.9
Bid implementation Agreement
On 18 July 2016, Renaissance and Emerald entered into the Bid Implementation 
Agreement pursuant to which Emerald agreed to make a conditional off-market 
Offer for all of the Renaissance Shares which it does not currently own.
2016  and  can  be  obtained
A full copy of the Bid Implementation Agreement was lodged with the ASX on 19 
July 
(at 
http://www.emeraldresources.com.au) or Emerald's profile on the ASX's website 
(at www.asx.com.au).
from
Emerald's  website
9.9.1
Exclusivity Arrangements
The Bid Implementation Agreement contains certain exclusivity arrangements in 
favour of Emerald. These arrangements are set out in full in clause 7 of the Bid 
67
Implementation  Agreement.  In  summary,  Renaissance  has  agreed  to  the 
following exclusivity arrangements:
(a)
(b)
Cease discussions - Renaissance has represented that it is not currently 
in  any  discussions  or  negotiations  in  respect  of  any  Competing 
Transaction,  and  has  ceased  any  discussions  or  negotiations  to  the 
extent they were on foot prior to 18 July 2016;
No shop - during the Exclusivity Period, Renaissance must not, and must 
ensure  that  none  of  its  representatives,  solicits,  invites,  encourages  or 
initiates any enquiries, negotiations or discussions, or communicates any 
intention to do any of those things with a view to obtaining any offer, 
proposal or expression of interest in relation to a Competing Transaction;
(c)
No talk and no due diligence - during the Exclusivity Period, Renaissance 
must not, and must ensure that its representatives do not:
(i)
(ii)
enter  into  or  participate  in  any  discussions  or  negotiations 
regarding or which could be reasonably expected to lead to a 
Competing Transaction; or
make available to any other person or permit make available 
to  any  other  person  to  receive  any  non-public  information  in 
relation  to  the  Renaissance  Group,  in  connection  with  that 
person  formulating,  developing  or  finalising,  or  assisting  in  the 
formulation,  development  or  finalisation  of,  a  Competing 
Transaction,
unless  the  Independent  Directors  determine  in  good  faith  and  acting 
reasonably that the  Competing Transaction is bona fide and failing to 
respond  to it would  be  reasonably likely  to  constitute  a  breach of  the 
fiduciary or statutory duties of the Independent Directors (the fiduciary 
out exception);
(d)
Notification  of  approaches  -  during  the  Exclusivity  Period,  Renaissance 
must immediately notify Emerald in writing of:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
any approach, inquiry or proposal in respect to, or which could 
reasonably  be  expected 
to,  any  Competing 
Transaction;
lead
to
any provision of information relating to the Renaissance Group 
or  their  businesses  or  operations  in  connection  with  or  for  the 
purposes of a current or future Competing Transaction; or
any proposal to take any action of the kind described in clause 
9.9.1(c) above,
including  all  material  details  relating  to  the  proposed  Competing 
Transaction  (except  the  identity  of  the  proposed  acquirer),  unless  the 
fiduciary out exception applies; and
(e)
Notification  of  change  in  recommendation  -  during  the  Exclusivity 
Period,  Renaissance  must  notify  Emerald  within  one  Business  Day  if  a 
Competing  Transaction  is  or  becomes  a  Superior  Proposal.  Subject  to 
Renaissance’s  continuous  disclosure  obligations,  Renaissance  must  use 
best endeavours to not enter into or publicly announce an intention to 
enter  into  or  publicly  announce  an  agreement  in  relation  to  a
68
Competing Transaction and Renaissance must use best endeavours to 
not make, and must procure that no Renaissance Director makes, any 
public  announcement  in  which  Renaissance,  recommends  a  Superior 
Proposal  or  an 
its 
recommendation of the Offer without giving Emerald four Business Days’ 
notice and providing Emerald all material terms of the Superior Proposal 
(other than the identity of the proposed acquirer).
Independent  Director  changes  or  withdraws
9.9.2  Conduct of business
The Bid Implementation Agreement sets out in clauses 6.1 to 6.3 the obligations 
of  Renaissance  from  the  date  of  the  Bid  Implementation  Agreement  until  the 
End Date in relation to its conduct of business.
Amongst other things:
(a)
Renaissance  and  Emerald  must  conduct  their  business  in  the  ordinary 
and  proper  course  in  substantially  the  same  manner  as  previously 
conducted and regularly consult with the other party on the manner of 
conduct  of  its  business  including  on  any  matter  that  may  have  an 
adverse  impact  on  the  integration  of  the  business  of  Emerald  and 
Renaissance following implementation of the Offer; and
(b)
other than with the approval of the other party, each party must, during 
the Exclusivity Period, undertake a number of activities, including to:
(i)
(ii)
maintain the conditions of its business and assets in accordance 
with the ordinary course of its business;
not enter into, vary, amend or terminate any material contract; 
and
(iii)
not offer to dispose or agree to dispose of any mineral asset.
9.9.3
Board changes
The Bid Implementation Agreement sets out in clauses 2.4 and 2.5 the obligations 
of  each  of  Renaissance  and  Emerald  in  relation  to  the  composition  of  their 
respective Boards.
In summary, if the Offer becomes unconditional or is declared by Emerald to be 
free of all conditions and Emerald has Relevant Interests in more than:
(a)
(b)
50%  of  Renaissance  Shares,  then  Renaissance  must  take  all  actions 
necessary  to  cause  the  appointment  as  Renaissance  directors  of  that 
number of nominees of Emerald that would constitute a majority of the 
directors  on  the  Renaissance  Board  provided  that  a  proper  Board  is 
constituted  at  all  times  and  at  least  2  directors  on  the  Renaissance 
Board are nominees of Renaissance and that Emerald procures that its 
appointees to the Renaissance Board do not participate in decisions of 
Renaissance in relation to the Offer until after the End Date; and
90%  of  Renaissance  Shares,  then  Renaissance  must  take  all  actions 
necessary  to  ensure  that  all  directors  on  the  Renaissance  Board  other 
than Emerald's nominees resign, provided always that a proper board is 
constituted  at  all  times  and  that  the  appointees  to  the  Renaissance 
Board do not participate in decisions of Renaissance in relation to the 
Offer until after the End Date and a quorum remains for that purpose.
69
If  the  Offer  becomes  unconditional  or  Emerald  acquires  a  Relevant  Interest  in 
more  than  90%  of  Renaissance  Shares,  then  Emerald  shall  appoint  Mr  Justin 
Tremain as an executive director of Emerald subject to receiving a consent to 
act from Mr Tremain.
9.9.4
Termination
Either  Emerald  or  Renaissance  may 
Agreement by written notice to the other at any time in the following instances:
Implementation
terminate
the  Bid
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the  other  party  is  in  material  breach  of  the  Bid  Implementation 
Agreement (including a material breach of a representation or warranty 
given by it) and (if capable of remedy) has failed to remedy the breach 
within five business days of written notice from the first party notifying the 
other party of the breach;
any  court  or  regulatory  authority  (including  the  Takeovers  Panel)  has 
issued  any  final  and  non-appealable  order,  decree  or  ruling  or  taken 
other  action  which  permanently  restrains  or  otherwise  prohibits  the 
Offer, or has refused to do anything necessary to permit the Offer;
an Independent Director does not recommend the Offer or withdraws 
or adversely modifies its recommendation to the Offer;
Emerald withdraws the Offer for any reason or the Offer lapses; or
the other party or any of their Subsidiaries becomes insolvent.
Emerald  may  also  terminate  the  Bid  Implementation  Agreement  by  written 
notice  to  Renaissance with immediate  effect  if  a  Superior Proposal is made or 
publicly  announced  for  Renaissance  by  a  third  party,  a  person  (other  than 
Emerald  or  its  associates)  has  a  Relevant  Interest  in  more  than  20%  of 
Renaissance  Shares  on  issue  or  a  Renaissance  Material  Adverse  Change  or  a 
Renaissance Prescribed Occurrence occur.
Renaissance may also terminate the Bid Implementation Agreement by written 
notice to Emerald with immediate effect if the independent expert engaged by 
Renaissance  does  not  conclude  that  the  Offer  is  fair  and  reasonable  to 
Renaissance Shareholders or a material adverse change in respect of Emerald 
or a prescribed occurrence in respect of Emerald occurs. As at the date of this 
Bidder’s  Statement,  Renaissance  has  not  terminated  the  Bid  Implementation 
Agreement  and  has  indicated  that  it  does  not  propose  to  terminate  the  Bid 
Implementation Agreement as a result of the independent expert engaged by it 
concluding that the Offer is not fair, but reasonable.
9.10 
9.10.1
Interests and benefits relating to the Offer
Interests
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Bidder’s Statement, no:
(a)
(b)
director or proposed director of Emerald;
person named in this Bidder’s Statement as performing a function in a 
professional,  advisory  or  other  capacity 
in  connection  with  the 
preparation or distribution of this Bidder’s Statement; or
(c)
promoter of Emerald,
70
(together, the Interested Persons) holds or has held at any time during the last 
two (2) years before the date of this Bidder’s Statement, any interest in:
(d)
(e)
the formation or promotion of Emerald;
any  property  acquired  or  proposed  to  be  acquired  by  Emerald  in 
connection  with  its  formation  or  promotion  or  the  offer  of  Emerald 
Shares under the Offer; or
(f)
the offer of Emerald Shares under the Offer.
9.10.2  Disclosure of fees and benefits received by certain persons
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Bidder’s Statement, no amounts 
have  been  paid  or  agreed  to  be  paid  and  no  benefits  have  been  given  or 
agreed to be given:
(a)
(b)
to  a  Director  or  proposed  director  of  Emerald  to  induce  them  to 
become,  or  to  qualify  as,  a  director  of  Emerald  (other  than  director’s 
fees and remuneration in the ordinary course); or
for  services  provided  by  an  Interested  Person  in  connection  with  the 
formation or promotion of Emerald or the offer of Emerald Shares under 
the Offer.
Steinepreis  Paganin  has  acted  as  the  Australian  legal  advisors  to  Emerald  in 
relation to the Offer.  Emerald estimates it will pay Steinepreis Paganin $120,000 
(excluding GST) for these services.
Security Transfer Registrars Pty Ltd has acted as the share registry to Emerald in 
relation to the Offer. Emerald estimates that it will pay Security Transfer Registrars 
Pty Ltd $25,500 (excluding GST) for these services.
Euroz Securities Limited (ACN 089 314 983) (AFSL: 243302) will, subject to receipt 
of ASIC approval, act as Sale Nominee in relation to the Offer. Emerald estimates 
that it will pay Euroz Securities Limited $5,200 (excluding GST) for these services.
9.10.3  Expenses of the Offer
The total amount of cash that Emerald may become obliged to pay to satisfy all 
expenses  incurred  by  Emerald  and  relating  to  the  Offer  will  be  provided  from 
Emerald’s existing cash balances.
Emerald estimates it will incur fees for services provided in connection with the 
Offer, including for legal, taxation, financial advisors, share register and ASX and 
other professional fees, and advisory fees payable by Renaissance and Emerald 
if  the  Offer  becomes  unconditional,  in  the  amount  of  approximately  $192,150 
(excluding GST).
ASIC 
ASX listing fees for new Emerald  Shares 
Legal – Australia  
Share Registry, Printing and Mailing 
TOTAL
$  
2,350 
44,300 
120,000 
25,500 
$192,150
71
9.11
Disclosure of interests of Directors and the Proposed Director
The directors and proposed new director of Emerald have the following interests 
in Emerald securities as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
Director 
Simon Lee AO  
Morgan Hart 
Ross Stanley 
Ross Williams 
Justin Tremain
Shares
114,000,000 
257,318,823 
222,163,613 
25,000,0001
Nil
Options
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Notes: 
1.
This interest comprises 15,000,000 Shares held by Ross Campbell  Williams as trustee for 
The  Williams  Trading  Trust  and  10,000,000  Shares  held  by  Ross  Campbell  Williams  and 
Nicola Ann Williams as trustee for The Williams Superannuation Fund.
The Emerald Directors do not have any interest  (either held directly or held by 
their  Associates)  in  any  Renaissance  securities  as  at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement.  However,  Justin  Tremain,  a  proposed  director  of  Emerald  owns  or 
controls  2,800,000  Renaissance  Shares  and  7,750,000  Renaissance  Options 
(comprising  3,750,000  Renaissance  Options  exercisable  at  $0.10  each  on  or 
before 15 October 2017 and 4,000,000 Renaissance Options exercisable at $0.05 
each on or before 30 September 2020) as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
9.12
Fees and benefits of Directors and the Proposed Director
The constitution of Emerald provides that the Emerald Directors may be paid for 
their  services  as  Emerald  Directors  a  sum  not  exceeding  such  fixed  sum  per 
annum  as  may  be  determined  by  Emerald  in  general  meeting,  to  be  divided 
among the Emerald Directors as determined by the Emerald Board or in equal 
shares.  The  annual  remuneration  (inclusive  of  superannuation,  fees  and  equity 
apart from Mr Hart whose remuneration is exclusive of statutory superannuation) 
of the Emerald Directors for the last two financial years and the current financial 
year is as follows:
Director
Remuneration for
financial year 
ended 30 June
Remuneration for
financial year 
ended 30 June
Simon Lee AO
Morgan Hart
Ross Stanley
Ross Williams
2015  
$48,000
$48,000
$36,000
$36,000
2016  
$48,000
$48,000
$36,000
$36,000
Remuneration for
financial year 
ending 30 June 
2017 (proposed)
$48,000
$48,000
$36,000
$36,000
The  Bid  Implementation  Agreement  provides  that  if  the  Offer  becomes 
unconditional,  or  Emerald  acquires  more  than  90%  of  the  Renaissance  Shares, 
that Mr Justin Tremain will be appointed an Executive Director of Emerald.  The 
parties  have  not  yet  finalised  the  terms  of  Mr  Tremain’s  employment,  but  it  is 
anticipated  that  Mr  Tremain  will  be  appointed  on  terms  consistent  with  his 
72
existing  employment  with  Renaissance.    In  addition,  in  accordance  with  Mr 
Tremain’s  employment  agreement with  Renaissance,  if Emerald is  successful  in 
acquiring at least 51% of Renaissance Shares pursuant to the Offer, Mr Tremain 
will  be  entitled  to  a  payment  of  $290,000  (being  12  months’  salary)  from 
Renaissance.
Emerald Directors are also reimbursed for all reasonable expenses incurred in the 
course of conducting their duties which include, but are not in any way limited 
to, out of pocket expenses, travelling expenses, disbursements made on behalf 
of Emerald and other miscellaneous expenses.
The  remuneration  of  Emerald  Directors  is  reviewed  annually  by  Emerald.  The 
figures  for  the  2016  Financial  Year  are  current  as  at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s 
Statement.
9.13
Agreements with Directors
9.13.1  Non-executive Director engagements
Emerald has entered into service agreements with its non-executive directors in 
respect of their appointment to the Board. A summary of the key terms of the 
service agreements is set out below:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Term:  the  service  agreements  are  monthly  contracts  that  are  agreed 
and reviewed annually;
Fees:  directors’ 
fees  of  either  $36,000  or  $48,000  (inclusive  of 
superannuation)  per  annum  are  payable  by  Emerald  to  each  non-
executive director; and
Termination:  notice  periods  are  not  expressly  provided 
the 
agreements  and  there  are  no  termination  benefits  or  provisions 
provided in the agreements.
in
9.13.2  Executive Director engagement
Emerald entered into an employment agreement with Morgan Hart in respect of 
his  appointment  to  the  Emerald  Board.  A  summary  of  the  key  terms  of  the 
employment agreement is set out below:
(a)
(b)
Salary: a salary of $48,000 per annum is payable by Emerald to Mr Hart 
as consideration for his services as Managing Director of Emerald; and
Termination: either Emerald or Mr Hart may terminate the agreement by 
giving  the  other  party  three  months’  written  notice.  In  addition,  a 
termination  benefit  equal  to  6  months’  salary  will  be  due  if  the 
termination of employment is a result of a change of control event.
9.14
Deeds of indemnity, insurance and access
Emerald has entered into a deed of indemnity, insurance and access with each 
of the Emerald Directors.  Under these deeds, Emerald agrees to indemnify each 
officer  to  the  extent  permitted  by  the  Corporations  Act  against  any  liability 
arising as a result of the officer acting as an officer of Emerald.  Emerald is also 
required to maintain insurance policies for the benefit of the relevant officer and 
must  also  allow  the  officers  to  inspect  board  papers  in  certain  circumstances. 
Emerald proposes to enter into a deed of indemnity, insurance and access on 
the same terms with Justin Tremain if he is appointed as a director of Emerald.
73
9.15
Material litigation
Emerald  is  not  a  party  to  any  material  litigation  and  is  not  involved  in  any 
material disputes.
9.16
Ineligible Foreign Shareholders
Renaissance  Shareholders  who  are  Ineligible  Foreign  Shareholders  will  not  be 
entitled to receive Emerald Shares as consideration for their Renaissance Shares 
pursuant to the Offer.
A Renaissance Shareholder is an Ineligible Foreign Shareholder for the purposes 
of the Offer if they are a citizen or resident of a jurisdiction, or their address as 
shown in the register of members of Renaissance is, outside of Australia and its 
external  territories,  New  Zealand,  Singapore  and  Cambodia.  However,  such  a 
person will not be an Ineligible Foreign Shareholder if Emerald determines that it 
is lawful and not unduly onerous or impracticable to issue Emerald Shares to such 
a Renaissance Shareholder on acceptance of the Offer and it is lawful for the 
Renaissance Shareholder to participate in the Offer in such circumstances in the 
relevant  jurisdiction.  It  is  your  sole  responsibility  to  satisfy  yourself  that  you  are 
permitted  by  any  law  of  a  country  other  than  Australia  applicable  to  you  to 
accept  the  Offer  and  to  comply  with  any  other  necessary  formality  and  to 
obtain  any  necessary  governmental  or  other  consents.  Refer  to  Section  1.8  of 
Annexure A for further information.
The  Emerald  Shares  which  would  otherwise  have  been  issued  to  Ineligible 
Foreign  Shareholders  will  instead  be  issued  to  the  Sale  Nominee  approved  by 
ASIC, who will sell these shares. The net proceeds of the sale of such shares will 
then be remitted to the relevant Ineligible Foreign Shareholders.
9.17
Status of Conditions
The conditions of the Offer are set out in Section 1.9 of Annexure A. Emerald will 
use all reasonable endeavours to ensure the Conditions are satisfied as soon as 
possible after the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
As  at  the  date  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement,  Emerald  is  not  aware  of  any  events 
which would result in a breach or inability to satisfy the Conditions.
Emerald will give a notice of the status of the Conditions in accordance with the 
Corporations Act on 16 September 2016 (subject to extension if the Offer Period 
is extended).
9.18
Consents
Chapter  6  of  the  Corporations  Act  imposes  a  liability  regime  on  Emerald,  the 
Emerald  Directors,  the  persons  named  in  the  Bidder’s  Statement  with  their 
consent  as  Proposed  Directors,  persons  named  in  the  Bidder’s  Statement  with 
their consent having made a statement in the Bidder’s Statement and persons 
involved in a contravention in relation to the Bidder’s Statement, with regard to 
misleading and deceptive statements made in the Bidder’s Statement. Although 
Emerald bears primary responsibility for the Bidder’s Statement, the other parties 
involved in the preparation of the Bidder’s Statement can also be responsible for 
certain statements made in it.
Each of the parties referred to in this Section 9.18:
(a)
in  light  of  the  above,  only  to  the  maximum  extent  permitted  by  law, 
expressly disclaims and takes no responsibility for any part of this Bidder’s 
Statement other than a reference to its name and a statement included 
74
in this Bidder’s Statement with the consent of that party as specified in 
this Section 9.18; and
(b)
has not caused or authorised the issue of this Bidder’s Statement.
Steinepreis  Paganin  as  legal  advisors  to  Emerald  in  relation  to  the  Offer  has 
consented  to  being  named  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement  and  has  not  withdrawn 
such consent prior to the lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement with ASIC.
Security Transfer Registrars Pty Ltd has acted as the share registry to Emerald in 
relation to the Offer and has not withdrawn such consent prior to the lodgement 
of this Bidder’s Statement with ASIC.
Brian  Wolfe  as  the  competent  person  has  consented  to  being  named  in  this 
Bidder’s Statement and has not withdrawn such consent prior to the lodgement 
of this Bidder’s Statement with ASIC.
Each of Ingalls and Snyder Value Partners L.P., Mr Robert L Gipson, PS Consulting 
Pty Ltd and JA Advisory Services Pty Ltd consent to being named in this Bidder’s 
Statement  and  to  the  inclusion  of  statements  about  them  and  has  not 
withdrawn such consent prior to the lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement.
HLB Mann Judd has consented to being named in this Bidder’s Statement and to 
the  inclusion  of  audited  and  reviewed  Emerald  financial  statements  being 
included in this Bidder’s Statement and has not withdrawn such consent prior to 
the lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement.
Euroz Securities Limited (ACN 089 314 983)  (AFSL: 243302) as Sale Nominee has 
consented  to  being  named  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement  and  has  not  withdrawn 
such consent prior to the lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement with ASIC.
The  information  in  Section  4  of  this  Bidder’s  Statement  has  been  prepared  by 
Renaissance.  Renaissance  has  consented  and  has  not  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Bidder's  Statement  withdrawn  its  consent  to  the  inclusion  of  the  information 
about  it  in  this Bidder's  Statement  in  the form and  context  in  which  it  appears 
and  to  all  references  in  this  Bidder's  Statement  to  that  information  in  the  form 
and context in which they appear.
Renaissance:
(a)
(b)
(c)
has not authorised or caused the issue of this Bidder's Statement;
except  as  described  above,  does  not  make,  or  purport  to  make,  any 
statement  in  this  Bidder's  Statement  or  any  statement  on  which  a 
statement in this Bidder's Statement is based; and
to the maximum extent permitted by law, expressly disclaims and takes 
no  responsibility  for  any  part  of  this  Bidder's  Statement,  other  than  the 
information described above.
As  permitted  by  ASIC  Class  Order  13/521,  this  Bidder’s  Statement  includes 
statements  which  are  made  in,  or  based  on  statements  made  in,  documents 
lodged  with  ASIC  or  on  the  company  announcement  platform  of  ASX.  Under 
that  Class  Order,  the  parties  making  those  statements  are  not  required  to 
consent  to,  and  have  not  consented  to,  inclusion  of  those  statements  in  this 
Bidder’s Statement. If you would like to receive a copy of any of these reports or 
statements free of charge, please contact Emerald on 1300 729 543.
As permitted by ASIC Corporations (Consent to Statements) Instrument 2016/72, 
this Bidder’s Statement may include or be accompanied by certain statements 
75
fairly  representing  a  statement  by  an  official  person  or  from  a  public  official 
document  or  a  published  book,  journal  or  comparable  publication,  as  well  as 
ASX share price trading information sourced from ASX without its consent.
9.19
Other material information
There  is  no  other  information  that  is material to  the making of  a decision by  a 
holder of Renaissance Shares whether or not to accept the Offer that is known 
to  Emerald  and  which  has  not  previously  been  disclosed  to  Renaissance 
Shareholders other than as is contained elsewhere in this Bidder’s Statement.
9.20
Expiry date
No securities will be issued on the basis of this Bidder’s Statement after the date 
which is 13 months after the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
9.21
Offer for Renaissance securities other than Renaissance Shares
The  Offer  does  not  extend  to  the  Renaissance  Options.  However,  the  Offer 
extends  to  the  Renaissance  Shares  that  are  issued  on  the  exercise  of 
Renaissance Options during the period from the Record Date until the end of the 
Offer Period.
If  Emerald  becomes  entitled 
to  compulsorily  acquire  any  outstanding 
Renaissance Shares, Emerald presently intends to seek to compulsorily acquire or 
cancel  any  outstanding  Renaissance  Options  pursuant  to  Part  6A.2  of  the 
Corporations Act, although it reserves the right not to do so.
9.22
Date for determining holders
For  the  purposes  of  Section  633  of  the  Corporations  Act,  the  date  for 
determining  the  people  to  whom  this  Bidder’s  Statement  is  sent  is  the  Record 
Date.
9.23
ASIC modifications and exemptions, ASX waivers
ASIC has published various “Class Order” instruments providing for modifications 
and exemptions that apply generally to all persons, including Emerald, in relation 
to the operation of Chapter 6 of the Corporations Act. Emerald may rely on this 
“Class Order” relief. Further, Emerald has not been granted any waivers from ASX 
in relation to the Offer but notes that Renaissance has been granted a waiver of 
ASX Listing Rule 6.23.4 to permit Renaissance to amend the terms of some of the 
Renaissance  Options  to  enable  them  to  be  transferred  to  Emerald  without 
approval by Renaissance Shareholders.
9.24
Competent Person
The information in this Bidder’s Statement that relates to the Mineral Resources 
for the Okvau Deposit was prepared by International Resource Solutions Pty Ltd 
(Brian  Wolfe),  who  is  a  consultant  to  Renaissance  Minerals  Limited,  who  is  a 
Member  of  the  Australian  Institute  of  Geoscientists  (AIG),  and  has  sufficient 
experience  relevant  to  the  style  of  mineralisation  and  type  of  deposit  under 
consideration  and  to  the  activity  which  he  is  undertaking  to  qualify  as  a 
Competent  Person  as  defined  by  the  JORC  Code.  Mr  Wolfe  consents  to  the 
inclusion  of  the  matters  based  on  his  information  in  the  form  and  context  in 
which it appears.
Reference 
to  Renaissance’s  ASX  announcement,  ‘Okvau  PFS 
Demonstrates  Compelling  Project  Economics’  dated  27  July  2015.  All  material
is  made
76
assumptions  underpinning  the  production  target  and  financial  information 
continue to apply and have not materially changed.
10.
AUTHORISATION
This Bidder’s Statement is dated 19 August 2016 and was approved pursuant to a 
unanimous resolution passed at a meeting of the directors of Emerald.
Each Director and the Proposed Director has consented, and as at the date of 
this Bidder’s Statement has not withdrawn his consent, to the lodgement of this 
Bidder’s Statement with the ASIC.
Signed for and on behalf of 
Emerald Resources NL 
Mr Simon Lee AO 
Chairman
77
11. 
11.1
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
Definitions
In this Bidder’s Statement (including its annexures), unless the context otherwise 
requires:
$ or Dollar means Australian dollars.
Acceptance  Form  means  the  form  of  acceptance  and  transfer  for  the  Offer 
accompanying  this  Bidder’s  Statement  or  alternatively  any  acceptance  form 
sent to a Renaissance Shareholder by Emerald’s share registry in relation to the 
Offer, as the context requires.
Announcement  Date  means  19  July  2016,  being  the  date  the  Offer  was 
announced on ASX.
Associate has the meaning given in chapter 6 of the Corporations Act.
ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
ASX means ASX Limited ACN 008 624 691 or the Australian Securities Exchange 
(as the context requires).
ASX  Listing  Rules  or  Listing  Rules  means  the  official  listing  rules  of  ASX,  as 
amended from time to time.
ASX Settlement means ASX Settlement Pty Ltd ABN 49 008 504 532.
ASX Settlement Operating Rules means the operating rules of the ASX Settlement 
Facility (as defined in Rule 1.1.1 and Rule 1.1.2 of the ASX Settlement Operating 
Rules) in accordance with Rule 1.2 which govern, inter alia, the administration of 
the CHESS subregisters.
Bid  Implementation  Agreement  means  the  bid  implementation  agreement 
between Emerald and Renaissance dated 18 July 2016.
Bid Period has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
Bidder’s Statement means this document including the Annexures.
Board or Emerald Board means the board of directors of Emerald.
Business  Day  means  a  day  that  is  not  a  Saturday,  Sunday  or  any  other  day 
which is a public holiday or a bank holiday in Western Australia.
Cambodian  Gold  Project  means  the  Cambodian  gold  project  owned  by 
Renaissance and which is the subject of the JV Agreement.
CGT means capital gains tax as defined in the Australian Income Tax Assessment 
Act 1997 (Cth).
CHESS means ASX’s Clearing House Electronic Subregister System.
CHESS Holding means a number of Renaissance Shares which are registered on 
Renaissance’s share register being a register administered by the ASX Settlement 
and which records uncertified holdings of shares.
Competing  Transaction  means  any  expression  of  interest,  proposal,  offer  or 
transaction notified to the Renaissance Board which, if completed substantially 
78
in accordance with its  terms,  would mean  a person  (other  than  Emerald or  its 
Related Bodies Corporate) would:
(a)
directly  or  indirectly,  acquire  an  interest  or  Relevant  Interest  in  or 
become the holder of:
(i)
(ii)
20% or more of all Renaissance Shares; or
all  or  a  substantial  part  of  the  business  conducted  by  the 
Renaissance Group;
(b)
(c)
acquire control of Renaissance, within the meaning of section 50AA of 
the Corporations Act; or
otherwise  directly  or  indirectly  acquire  or  merge  with  Renaissance  or 
acquire  an  economic  interest  in  the  whole  or  a  substantial  part  of 
Renaissance or the Renaissance Group or their businesses (including by 
takeover  offer,  scheme  of  arrangement,  capital  reduction,  sale  of 
assets,  strategic  alliance,  joint venture,  partnership or  reverse  takeover 
offer).
Conditions  means  the  conditions  to  the  Offer  as  set  out  in  Section  1.9  of 
Annexure A to this Bidder’s Statement.
Controlling Participant means a Participant who is designated as the controlling 
participant  for  shares  or  other  security  in  a  CHESS  Holding  in  accordance with 
the ASX Settlement Rules.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Director or Emerald Director means a director of Emerald as at the date of this 
Bidder’s Statement.
Emerald Board means the board of directors of Emerald.
Emerald Director means a member of the Emerald Board.
Emerald Group means Emerald and its Related Bodies Corporate.
Eligible  Shareholder  means  every  Renaissance  Shareholder  as  at  the  Record 
Date that is not an Ineligible Foreign Shareholder.
Emerald means Emerald Resources NL (ACN 009 795 046) or the Merged Entity as 
the context requires.
Emerald Option means an option to acquire an Emerald Share.
Emerald Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of Emerald.
Emerald Shareholder means a holder of an Emerald Share.
End Date means the earliest of:
(a)
date  of 
accordance with its terms; and
termination  of
the  Bid
Implementation  Agreement
in
(b)
the end of the Offer Period,
or such later date as the parties agree.
79
Exclusivity Period means the period commencing on 18 July 2016 and ending on 
the earlier to occur of:
(a)
(b)
termination of the Bid Implementation Agreement; and
the End Date.
FY16 means the financial year ended 30 June 2016.
HIN means Holder Identification Number and has the same meaning as in the 
ASX Settlement Operating Rules.
Independent  Directors  means  Mr  Hamish  Halliday,  Mr  Justin  Tremain  and  Mr 
David Kelly, being all the directors of Renaissance other than Mr Ross  Williams, 
who  is  also  a  director  of  Emerald  and  therefore  abstains  from  making  a 
recommendation in relation to the Offer.
Ineligible Foreign Shareholder means a Renaissance Shareholder:
(a)
(b)
who  is  a  citizen  or  resident  of  a  jurisdiction  other  than  residents  of 
Australia  and 
its  external  territories,  New  Zealand,  Singapore  or 
Cambodia; or
whose address shown in the Register is a place outside Australia and its 
external territories, New Zealand, Singapore and Cambodia,
unless Emerald determines that:
(a)
(b)
it is lawful and not unduly onerous or unduly impracticable to issue that 
Renaissance  Shareholder  with  Emerald  Shares  on  completion  of  the 
Offer; and
it is lawful for that Renaissance Shareholder to participate in the Offer by 
the law of the relevant place outside Australia and its external territories, 
New Zealand, Singapore and Cambodia.
Issuer  Sponsored  Holdings  means  the  holding  of  Renaissance  Shares  on  the 
Renaissance issuer sponsored subregister.
JORC  Code  means  the  Australasian  Code  for  Reporting  of  Exploration  Results, 
Mineral  Resources  and  Ore  Reserves  prepared  by  the  Joint  Ore  Reserves 
Committee of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, the Australian 
Institute of Geoscientists and the Minerals Council of Australia.
JV Agreement has the meaning given in Section 3.1.
Merged  Entity  means  Emerald  and  its  subsidiaries  following  the  acquisition  by 
Emerald  of  all,  or  a  portion,  of  Renaissance  Shares  on  issue  (that  it  does  not 
already own).
Offer means the off market takeover offer by Emerald of 1.55 Emerald Shares for 
every  1  Renaissance  Share on  the  terms  and  conditions  set out  in  this  Bidder’s 
Statement.
Offer Consideration means 1.55 Emerald Shares for every 1 Renaissance Share.
Offer Period means the period during which the Offer is open for acceptance.
80
Official  List  means  the  official  list  of  entities  that  ASX  has  admitted  and  not 
removed.
Okvau Deposit means the deposit containing the Mineral Resource the subject 
of  the  estimate  prepared  by  independent  resource  consultants  International 
Resource Solutions Pty Ltd (Principal Geologist, Brian Wolfe) of Perth, Australia for 
Renaissance in July 2015 and reported in accordance with the JORC Code.
Option Transfer Deeds means the option transfer deeds proposed to be entered 
into between Emerald and the Renaissance Optionholders.
Participant  means  an  entity  admitted  to  participate  in  CHESS  under  rules  4.3.1 
and 4.4.1 of the ASX Settlement Operating Rules.
Perth Time means Perth (Western Australia) Standard Time.
Pre-Bid  Deeds  means  the  Pre-Bid  Acceptance  Deeds  dated  19  July  2016 
between Emerald and various Renaissance Shareholders.
Pre-Bid Shareholders means those Renaissance Shareholders who have entered 
into Pre-Bid Deeds with Emerald.
Proposed Director means Mr Justin Tremain as a proposed director of Emerald.
Public  Authority  means  any  governmental,  semi-governmental,  administrative, 
fiscal, judicial or quasi-judicial body, department, commission, authority, tribunal, 
agency or entity.
Record  Date  means  the  date  set  by  Emerald  under  Section  633(2)  of  the 
Corporations Act, being 5:00pm (Perth Time) on 19 August 2016.
Renaissance means Renaissance Minerals Limited (ACN 141 196 545).
Renaissance Board means the board of directors of Renaissance.
Renaissance Group means Renaissance and its Related Bodies Corporate.
Renaissance Group Entity means any member of the Renaissance Group.
Renaissance Material Adverse Change means any act, omission, event, change, 
matter  or  circumstance  occurring,  or  being  discovered  or  becoming  public 
(either  individually  or  aggregated  with  other  acts,  omissions,  events,  changes, 
matters or circumstances) which:
(a)
(b)
has, will or is reasonably likely to result in an event of Force Majeure (as 
that term is defined in the JV  Agreement) or  have a material adverse 
effect  on 
financial  position,  performance, 
profitability  or  prospects  of  the  Renaissance  Group  taken  as  a  whole 
(whether  individually  or  when  aggregated  with  one  or  more  other 
events, matters or things); or
the  assets,
liabilities,
any  event,  matter  or  thing,  as  described  in  sub-paragraph  (a),  which 
occurred  before  the  date  of  the  Bid  Implementation  Agreement  but 
was  not  apparent  from  public  filings  of  Renaissance  before  then, 
becomes public,
where the financial impact of such event, change, condition, matter or thing on 
the Renaissance Group exceeds $250,000, but does not include:
81
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
anything  which  has  arisen  solely  as  a  result  of  actions  taken  by  any 
member of the Renaissance Group in the ordinary course of its business;
those  events  or  circumstances  required  to  be  done  or  procured  by 
Renaissance pursuant to the Bid Implementation Agreement;
those  events  or  circumstances  relating  to  changes  in  the  global  gold 
industry or security markets generally or a change in the market price of 
gold  which  impacts  on  Renaissance  and  its  competitors  in  a  similar 
manner; or
an event, circumstance, matter or information that is known to Emerald 
or its Representatives on or prior to the date of the Bid Implementation 
Agreement or otherwise disclosed in public filings by Renaissance with 
ASIC  or  provided  to  ASX  on  or  prior  to  the  date  of  the  Bid 
Implementation Agreement.
Renaissance Option means an option to acquire a Renaissance Share.
Renaissance Optionholder means a holder of a Renaissance Option.
Renaissance Prescribed Occurrence means any of the events listed in Annexure 
B.
Renaissance  Share  means  a  fully  paid  ordinary  share  in  the  capital  of 
Renaissance.
Renaissance Shareholders means all persons who hold Renaissance Shares.
Representatives of a party includes:
(a)
(b)
a Related Bodies Corporate of the party; and
each of the officers and advisers of the party or any of its Related Bodies 
Corporate.
Related  Bodies  Corporate  has  the  meaning  given  to  that  term 
Corporations Act.
in  the
Relevant Interest has the meaning given in Section 9 of the Corporations Act.
Rights means all accreditations, benefits and rights attaching to or arising from 
Renaissance  Shares  directly  or  indirectly  at  or  after  the  Announcement  Date 
(including, but not limited to, all dividends and all rights to receive dividends and 
to receive or subscribe for shares, stock units, notes or options declared, paid, or 
issued by Renaissance).
RNS  Preliminary  Financial  Statements  means  Renaissance’s  preliminary 
unaudited balance sheet and income statement for the financial year ended 30 
June 2016.
Sale  Nominee  means  the  nominee  to  be  approved  by  ASIC  for  the  sale  of 
Renaissance Shares held by the Ineligible Foreign Shareholders.
Section means a section of this Bidder’s Statement.
SRN means Securityholder Reference Number.
Subsidiaries has the meaning given to it in the Corporations Act.
82
Superior Proposal means a Competing Transaction which, is in the determination 
of the Independent Directors acting reasonably and in good faith and in order 
to  satisfy  what  the  Independent  Directors  consider  to  be  their  fiduciary  and 
statutory duties:
(a)
(b)
reasonably  capable  of  being  completed  taking  into  account  all 
aspects of the Competing Transaction; and
more favourable to Renaissance Shareholders than the Offer, taking into 
account all terms and conditions of the Competing Transaction.
Subsidiaries has the meaning given in the Corporations Act.
Takeovers Panel means the Takeovers Panel established under section 171 of the 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (Cth).
Third Party Offer means an offer or proposal made by a third party  to acquire 
more  than  50%  of  Renaissance  Shares,  by  way  of  an  offer,  a  scheme  of 
arrangement or otherwise where:
(a)
(b)
if  the  Third  Party  Offer  is  a  takeover  offer,  the  offer  is  capable  of 
acceptance  and  are  not  subject  to  any  condition  substantially  more 
onerous than the conditions of the Offer; and
in any other case, a binding agreement has been entered into between 
Renaissance and the third party in respect of the Third Party Offer.
Third Party Offer Price means the highest price or value per Renaissance Share 
offered under a Third Party Offer as determined in accordance with the Pre-Bid 
Deeds.
VWAP  means  the  volume  weighted  average  price  of  trading  in  the  relevant 
shares on the ASX and the Chi-X Market, excluding trades which are not made in 
the ordinary course of trade, including block trades (including special crossings), 
large  portfolio  trades,  permitted  trades  during  the  pre-trading  hours  period, 
crossings  made  during  the  closing  phase,  permitted  trades  during  the  post-
trading  hours  period,  out  of  hours  trades,  overnight  crossings,  overseas  trades, 
exchange  traded  option  exercises  and  any  other  trades  agree  on  the  parties 
(acting reasonably) to exclude on the basis that they are not representative of 
the general price at which Shares are trading on the ASX or the Chi-X Market.
11.2
Interpretation
The following rules of interpretation apply unless intention appears or the context 
requires otherwise:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
a reference to a time is a reference to Perth (Western Australian) time, 
unless otherwise stated;
headings are for convenience only and do not affect interpretation;
the singular includes the plural and conversely;
a reference to a Section is to a Section of this Bidder’s Statement;
a gender includes all genders;
where a word or phrase is defined, the other grammatical forms have a 
corresponding meaning;
83
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
$,  or  cents  is  a  reference  to  the  lawful  currency  in  Australia,  unless 
otherwise stated;
a reference to a person includes a body corporate, an unincorporated 
body or other entity and conversely;
a reference to a person includes a reference to the person’s executors, 
administrators,  successors,  substitutes  (including  persons  taking  by 
novation) and assigns;
a  reference  to  any  legislation  or  to  any  provision  of  any  legislation 
includes any modification or re-enactment of it, any legislative provision 
substituted  for  it  and  all  regulations  and  statutory  instruments  issued 
under it;
a  reference  to  any  instrument  or  document  includes  any  variation  or 
replacement of it;
a  term  not  specifically  defined  in  this  Bidder’s  Statement  has  the 
meaning given to it (if any) in the Corporations Act;
a reference to a right or obligation of any two or more persons confers 
that  right,  or  imposes  that  obligation,  as  the  case  may  be,  jointly  and 
individually;
a reference to you is to a person to whom the Offer is made; and
the words ‘include’, ‘including’, ‘for example’ or ‘such as’ are not used 
as,  nor  are  they  to  be  interpreted  as,  words  of  limitation,  and,  when 
introducing an example, do not limit the meaning of the words to which 
the example relates to that example or examples of a similar kind.
84
AN NEXU RE A – TERMS O F OF FER
The Offer and any contract resulting from acceptance of the Offer is subject to fulfilment 
of the following conditions:
1.1
General terms
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Emerald offers to acquire all of your Renaissance Shares, together with 
all  Rights  attached  to  them, on  the following  terms  and  conditions  set 
out in this Annexure A. The Offer relates to Renaissance Shares (that are 
not currently owned by Emerald) that exist or will exist as at the Record 
Date and extends to any Renaissance Shares that are issued between 
that date and the end of the Offer Period as a result of the exercise of 
any Renaissance Options that are on issue as at the Record Date.
The Offer Consideration being offered by Emerald for the acquisition of 
all  of  your  Renaissance  Shares  is  1.55  Emerald  Shares  for  every  1 
Renaissance Share you own, subject to the terms and conditions set out 
in this Offer. You may only accept the Offer for all of your Renaissance 
Shares.
If  you  become  entitled  to  a  fraction  of  an  Emerald  Share  under  the 
Offer, the number of Emerald Shares will be rounded up to the nearest 
whole Emerald Share.
If you are an Ineligible Foreign Shareholder at the time the Offer is made 
to  you  then  you  will  not  receive  Emerald  Shares,  instead,  you  will  be 
paid a cash amount calculated under Section 1.8 of this Annexure A.
The Emerald Shares to be issued pursuant to this Offer will be fully paid 
and,  from  their  date  of  issue,  rank  equally  in  all  respects  with  existing 
Emerald Shares currently on issue.
By  accepting  this  Offer,  you  undertake  to  transfer  to  Emerald not only 
the  Renaissance  Shares  to  which  this  Offer  relates  but  also  all  Rights 
attached to those Renaissance Shares.
If at any time during the Offer Period you are registered or entitled to be 
registered as the holder of one or more parcels of Renaissance Shares 
as trustee or nominee for, or otherwise on account of, another person, 
you may accept as if a separate and distinct offer on the same terms 
and conditions as this Offer had been made in relation to each of those 
distinct parcels and any distinct parcel you hold in your own right. If, for 
the purposes of accepting, you require additional copies of this Bidder’s 
statement  and  the  Acceptance  Form,  please  call  1300  729  543  to 
request those additional copies.
If  your  Renaissance  Shares  are  registered  in  the  name  of  a  broker, 
investment  dealer,  bank,  trust  company  or  other  nominee  you  should 
contact that nominee for assistance in accepting the Offer.
The rights and obligations of the Emerald Shares to be issued under the 
Offer are summarised in Section 3.11 of the Bidder’s Statement.
The Offer is dated 24 August 2016.
85
1.2
Offer Period
(a)
Unless withdrawn, this Offer will remain open for acceptance during the 
period  commencing  on  the  date  of  this  Offer  and  ending  at  5:00pm 
(WST) on the later of:
(i)
(ii)
26 September 2016; or
any date to which the Offer Period is extended, in accordance 
with the Corporations Act.
(b)
(c)
Emerald reserves the right, exercisable in its sole discretion, to extend the 
Offer Period in accordance with the Corporations Act.
If, within the last 7 days of the Offer Period, either of the following events 
occurs:
(i)
(ii)
the Offer is varied to improve the consideration offered; or
Emerald’s voting power in Renaissance increases to more than 
50%,
then the Offer Period will automatically be extended so that it ends 14 
days after the relevant events in accordance with Section 624(2) of the 
Corporations Act.
1.3
Who may accept
(a)
An Offer in this form and bearing the same date is being made to each 
person  registered  as  a holder of  Renaissance Shares on  Renaissance’s 
register of members at 5:00pm (Perth Time) on the Record Date.
(b)
A person who:
(i)
(ii)
is able, during the Offer Period, to give good title to a parcel of 
Renaissance Shares; and
has  not  already  accepted  this  Offer  which  relates  to  those 
Renaissance Shares,
may accept as if an offer from Emerald on terms identical with this Offer 
had been made to that person in relation to those Renaissance Shares.
(c)
If, at the time the Offer is made to you, or at any time during the Offer 
Period, another person is registered as the holder of some or all of your 
Renaissance Shares, then:
(i)
(ii)
a corresponding offer on the same terms and conditions as this 
Offer will be deemed to have been made to that other person 
in respect of those Renaissance Shares;
a corresponding offer on the same terms and conditions as this 
Offer will be deemed to have been made to you in respect of 
any  other  Renaissance  Shares  you  hold  to  which  the  Offer 
relates; and
(iii)
this Offer will be deemed to have been withdrawn immediately 
at that time.
86
(d)
This Offer is not registered in any jurisdiction outside Australia (unless an 
applicable foreign law treats it as registered as a result of the Bidder’s 
Statement being lodged with ASIC).
1.4
How to accept this Offer
(a)
(b)
You may accept this Offer at any time during the Offer Period.
Issuer Sponsored Holdings
If you hold your Renaissance Shares in an Issuer Sponsored Holding (your 
SRN starts with I), to accept the Offer you must:
(i)
(ii)
complete  and  sign 
accordance with the instructions on it; and
the  enclosed  Acceptance  Form
in
return  the  completed  Acceptance  Form,  and  all  other 
documents  required  by  the  instructions  on  the  Acceptance 
Form,  so  that  they  are  received  before  the  end  of  the  Offer 
Period at the address specified on the Acceptance Form.
(c)
CHESS Holdings
If your Renaissance Shares are in a CHESS Holding (your HIN starts with X) 
and  you  are  not  a  Participant,  to  accept  the  Offer  in  respect  of 
Renaissance Shares you must either:
(i)
(ii)
instruct  your  Controlling  Participant  (this 
the 
stockbroker  through  whom  you  bought  your  Renaissance 
Shares  or  ordinarily  acquires  shares  on  the  ASX)  to  initiate  the 
acceptance  on  your  behalf  under  rule  14.14  of  the  ASX 
Settlement  Operating  Rules  in  respect  of  your  Renaissance 
Shares, before the end of the Offer Period; or
is  normally
authorise  Emerald  to  instruct  your  Controlling  Participant  on 
your behalf to initiate acceptance of the Offer in accordance 
with rule 14.14 of the ASX Settlement Operating Rules in respect 
of  your  Renaissance  Shares,  by  completing,  signing  and 
returning the accompanying Acceptance Form in accordance 
with the instructions on it (together with all documents required 
by  the  instructions  on  the  Acceptance  Form),  at  the  address 
specified in the Acceptance Form or directly to your Controlling 
Participant  in  sufficient  time  for  it  to  be  processed  before  the 
end of the Offer Period.
If you are a Participant, you may yourself initiate acceptance under rule 
14.14 of the ASX Settlement Operating Rules before the end of the Offer 
Period.
If your Renaissance Shares are in a CHESS Holding, you must comply with 
any other applicable ASX Settlement Operating Rules.
(d)
To  accept  this  Offer  for  Renaissance  Shares  held  in  your  name,  you 
must:
(i)
complete and sign the Acceptance Form in accordance with 
the terms of this Offer and the instructions on the Acceptance 
Form; and
87
(ii)
that
the  Acceptance
ensure 
(including  any 
documents  required  by  the  terms  of  this  Offer  and  the 
instructions  on  the  Acceptance  Form)  is  received  before  the 
end  of  the  Offer  Period,  at  the  address  shown  on  the 
Acceptance Form.
Form
(e)
Acceptance Form and Other Documents
(i)
(ii)
The Acceptance Form forms part of the Offer. The requirements 
on  the  Acceptance  Form must  be observed  in  accepting  the 
Offer.
For  your  acceptance  to  be  valid  you  must  ensure  that  your 
Acceptance  Form  (including  any  documents  required  by  the 
terms of this Offer and the instructions on the Acceptance Form) 
are posted or delivered in sufficient time for it to be received by 
Emerald at the address shown on the Acceptance Form before 
the end of the Offer Period.
(iii)
The  postage  and  transmission  of  the  Acceptance  Form  and 
other documents is at your own risk.
(iv)
When accepting the Offer, you must also forward for inspection:
(A)
(B)
if the Acceptance Form is executed by an attorney, a 
certified copy of the power of attorney; and
if the Acceptance Form is executed by the executor of 
a will or the administrator of the estate of a deceased 
Renaissance Shareholder, the relevant grant of probate 
or letters of administration.
1.5
Validity of acceptances
(a)
(b)
Subject to this Section 1.5 of this Annexure A, your acceptance of the 
Offer  will  not  be  valid  unless  it  is  made  in  accordance  with  the 
procedures set out in Section 1.4 of this Annexure A.
Emerald may, in its sole discretion, at any time deem any Acceptance 
Form  it  receives  to  be  a  valid  acceptance  in  respect  of  your 
Renaissance Shares even if a requirement for acceptance has not been 
complied with.
(c)
Emerald may at any time in its sole discretion:
(i)
(ii)
treat the receipt by it of an Acceptance Form during the Offer 
Period (or in an envelope post-marked before the expiry of the 
Offer Period) as a valid acceptance notwithstanding that one 
or more of the other requirements for a valid acceptance have 
not been complied with and without further communication to 
you; and
where  you  have  satisfied  the  requirements  for  acceptance  in 
respect  of  only  some  of  your  Renaissance  Shares,  treat  the 
acceptance  as  a  valid  acceptance  in  respect  of  all  of  your 
Renaissance Shares.
88
(d)
In respect of any part of an acceptance treated by it as valid, Emerald 
will  provide  you  with  the  relevant  consideration  in  accordance  with 
Section  1.7(a)  of  this  Annexure  A,  and  the  exercise  of  Emerald’s  rights 
under  this  Section  1.5  of  this  Annexure  A  will  be  conclusive  and  only 
evidenced by its so doing. The provision of the Offer Consideration may 
be delayed until any irregularity has been resolved or waived and any 
other  documents  required  to  procure  registration  have  been  received 
by Emerald.
1.6
The effect of acceptance
(a)
Once you have accepted this Offer, you will be unable to revoke your 
acceptance and  the contract  resulting  from your  acceptance will be 
binding  on  you.  In  addition,  you  will  be  unable  to  withdraw  your 
acceptance  of  the  Offer  or  otherwise  dispose  of  your  Renaissance 
Shares, except as follows:
(i)
(ii)
if, by the time specified in Section 1.6(b) of this Annexure A, the 
Conditions  have  not  all  been  fulfilled  or  freed,  the  Offer  will 
automatically  terminate  and  your  Renaissance  Shares  will  be 
returned to you; or
if the Offer is varied in accordance with the Corporations Act in 
a way that postpones for more than one month the time when 
Emerald  has  to  meet  its  obligations  to  provide  the  Offer 
Consideration,  and,  at  the  time,  the  Offer  is  subject  to  one or 
more  of  the  Conditions,  you  may  be  able  to  withdraw  your 
acceptance 
the 
Corporations  Act  and a  notice will  be  sent  to  you  at  this  time 
explaining your rights in this regard.
in  accordance  with  Section  650E  of
(b)
(c)
The relevant time for the purposes of Section 1.6(a) is at the end of the 
Offer Period.
By  signing  and  returning  the  Acceptance  Form  in  accordance  with 
Section 1.4 of this Annexure A or pursuant to Section 1.5 of this Annexure 
A and subject to all Conditions to the Offer being fulfilled or freed, you 
will be deemed to have:
(i)
(ii)
accepted  the  Offer  and,  subject  to  the  Conditions  being 
fulfilled  or  waived,  agreed  to  transfer  to  Emerald  all  of  your 
Renaissance  Shares  and  all  of  the  Rights  attached  to  those 
Renaissance  Shares  (regardless  of  the  number  of  Renaissance 
Shares specified in the Acceptance Form);
authorised  Emerald  (or  any  of  its  officers  or  agents)  to  alter  or 
complete the Acceptance Form on your behalf by correcting 
any errors in or omissions from the Acceptance Form as may be 
necessary:
(A)
(B)
to  make 
acceptance of this Offer; and/or
the  Acceptance  Form  an  effective
to enable registration of the transfer to Emerald of your 
Renaissance Shares;
(iii)
irrevocably  authorised  and  directed  Renaissance  to  pay  to 
Emerald  or  to  account  to  Emerald  for  all  Rights  which  arise  or 
89
accrue  after  the  date  of  this  Offer 
in  respect  of  your 
Renaissance Shares (subject to Emerald accounting to you for 
any Rights received if this Offer is withdrawn or lapses);
(iv)
represented and warranted to Emerald that:
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
at the time of acceptance and the time that transfer of 
your  Renaissance  Shares  (including  all  Rights)  to 
Emerald is registered, Emerald will acquire good title to 
and  beneficial  ownership  of  all  of  your  Renaissance 
Shares 
liens, 
encumbrances (whether legal or equitable) and other 
adverse 
from 
restrictions on transfer or any nature;
from  all  mortgages,  charges,
interests  of  any  nature  and
free
free
you have paid Renaissance all amounts which are due 
in respect of your Renaissance Shares;
all of your Renaissance Shares are fully paid; and
you have full power and capacity to accept the Offer 
and  to  sell  and  transfer  the  legal  and  beneficial 
ownership of your Renaissance Shares (together with all 
Rights attached to them) to Emerald;
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
unless  you  are  an  Ineligible  Foreign  Shareholder,  agreed  to 
accept  the  Emerald  Shares  to  which  you  become  entitled  by 
accepting this Offer subject to the constitution and the terms of 
issue of the Emerald Shares and to have authorised Emerald to 
place your name on its register of shareholders as the holder of 
the Emerald Shares issued to you under the Offer;
acknowledged and agreed that if you are an Ineligible Foreign 
Shareholder,  Emerald  will  arrange  for  any  Emerald  Shares 
otherwise  issuable  to  you  to  be  issued  and  sold,  and  the  net 
proceeds (less any transaction costs) to be remitted to you, as 
described in Section 1.8 of this Annexure A;
represented  and  warranted  to  Emerald  that  the  making  by 
Emerald  to  you,  and  your  acceptance,  of  this  Offer  is  lawful 
under  any  foreign law which  applies  to  you,  to  the making of 
this Offer, and to your acceptance of this Offer;
with effect from the later of acceptance of the Offer and the 
date  that  any  contract 
resulting  from  that  acceptance 
becomes, or is declared unconditional, appointed (and agreed 
not  to  revoke  that  appointment)  Emerald  and  each  of  its 
directors,  secretaries  and  other  officers  from  time  to  time 
severally as your agent and true and lawful attorney to exercise 
all your powers and rights in relation to your Renaissance Shares, 
including, without limitation powers and rights to:
(A)
attend  and  vote  (in  person  and  by  proxy  or  body 
corporate 
your 
Renaissance  Shares  at  any  and  all  meetings  of 
shareholders of Renaissance;
representative)
respect  of
in
90
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
requisition  or  join  with  other  holders  of  Renaissance 
Shares in requisitioning and/or convening a meeting of 
the members of Renaissance;
demand  a  poll  for  any  vote  to  be  taken  at  any 
meeting of Renaissance Shareholders;
propose or second any resolutions to be considered at 
any, and all meetings of Renaissance Shareholders;
forms,
execute  all 
transfers,  assignments,  notices, 
instruments (including instruments appointing a director 
of  Emerald  as  a  proxy  in  respect  of  all  or  any  of  your 
Renaissance  Shares  and  a  transfer  form  for  your 
Renaissance  Shares),  proxies,  consents,  agreements 
and resolutions relating to your Renaissance Shares;
(F)
request Renaissance to register in the name of Emerald 
or its nominee your Renaissance Shares which you hold 
on any register of Renaissance; and
(G)
do all things incidental or ancillary to the foregoing,
and to have agreed that in exercising the powers conferred by 
that power of attorney, the attorney shall be entitled to act in 
the interests of Emerald as the beneficial owner and intended 
registered  holder  of  your  Renaissance  Shares  in  respect  of 
which  you  have  accepted  this  Offer  and  to  have  further 
agreed  to  do  all  such  acts,  matters  and  things  that  Emerald 
may  require  to  give  effect  to  the  matters  the  subject  of  this 
paragraph  (including  the  execution of  a written form of proxy 
to  the  same  effect  as  this  paragraph  which  complies  in  all 
respects  with 
the  constitution  of 
Renaissance)  if  requested  by  Emerald.  This  appointment  is 
irrevocable  and  terminates  upon  registration  of  a  transfer  to 
Emerald or your Renaissance Shares;
requirements  of
the
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
with effect from the later of acceptance of the Offer and the 
date  that  any  contract 
resulting  from  that  acceptance 
becomes,  or  is  declared  unconditional,  agreed  not  to  vote  in 
person  at  any  general  meeting  of  Renaissance  or  to  exercise 
(or purport to exercise) in person, by proxy or otherwise, any of 
the powers conferred on Emerald and the directors, secretaries 
and  other  officers  of  Emerald  by  Section  1.6(c)(viii)  of  this 
Annexure A;
irrevocably  authorised  Emerald  to  notify  Renaissance  on  your 
behalf  that  your  place  of  address  for  the  purposes  of  serving 
notices  upon  you  in  respect  of  your  Renaissance  Shares  is  the 
address specified by Emerald in the notification;
agreed to indemnify Emerald in respect of any claim or action 
against it or any loss, damage or liability whatsoever incurred by 
it  as  a  result  of  you  not  producing  your  HIN  or  SRN  or  in 
consequence  of  the  transfer  of  your  Renaissance  Shares  to 
Emerald being registered by Renaissance without production of 
your HIN or SRN for your Renaissance Shares;
91
(xii)
(xiii)
(xiv)
(xv)
irrevocably authorised Emerald (and any nominee) to transmit 
a message in accordance with Rule 14.17 of the ASX Settlement 
Operating  Rules  to  transfer  your  Renaissance  Shares  to 
Emerald’s Takeover Transferee Holding, regardless of whether it 
has paid the consideration due to you under this Offer;
agreed  to  do  all  such  acts,  matters  and  things  that  Emerald 
may  require  to  give  effect  to  the  matters  the  subject  of  this 
Section 1.6 (including the execution of a written form of proxy to 
the same effect as this Section 1.6 which complies in all respects 
with  the  requirements  of  the  constitution  of  Renaissance)  if 
requested by Emerald;
represented  and  warranted  to  Emerald  that,  unless  you  have 
notified it in accordance with Section 1.1(g) of this Annexure A, 
your Renaissance Shares do not consist of a separate parcel of 
shares; and
agreed,  subject  to  the  Conditions  being  fulfilled  or  freed,  to 
execute all such documents, transfers and assurances, and do 
all  such  acts,  matters  and  things  that  Emerald  may  consider 
necessary  or  desirable  to  convey  your  Renaissance  Shares 
registered in your name and Rights to Emerald.
(d)
The representations, warranties, undertakings and authorities referred to 
in this Section 1.6 of this Annexure A will (unless otherwise stated) remain 
in force after you receive the consideration for your Renaissance Shares 
and after Emerald becomes registered as the holder of them.
1.7
Provision of Offer Consideration
(a)
Subject to the terms of this Offer and the Corporations Act, Emerald will 
provide the consideration for your Renaissance Shares on or before the 
earlier of:
(i)
one month after the date of your acceptance or, if this Offer is 
subject  to  a  defeating  condition  when  you  accept  this  Offer, 
within  one  month  after  this  Offer  becomes  unconditional 
(whichever is later); and
(ii)
21 days after the end of the Offer Period.
Under  no  circumstances  will  interest  be  paid  on  the  consideration  to 
which  you  are  entitled  under  the  Offer,  regardless  of  any  delay  in 
providing the consideration or any extension of the Offer.
If you are an Ineligible Foreign Shareholder and you have accepted the 
Offer, you will receive your share of the proceeds from the sale of the 
Renaissance Shares in accordance with Section 1.8 of this Annexure A.
Where  the  Acceptance  Form  requires  an  additional  document  to  be 
given with your acceptance (such as a power of attorney):
(i)
if  that  document  is  given  with  your  acceptance,  Emerald  will 
provide the consideration in accordance with Section 1.7(a) of 
this Annexure A;
(b)
(c)
(d)
92
(ii)
if  that  document  is  given  after  your  acceptance  and  before 
the  end  of  the  Offer  Period  while  this  Offer  is  subject  to  a 
defeating condition, Emerald will provide the consideration by 
the end of whichever of the following periods ends earlier:
(A)
within  one  month  after 
unconditional; or
this  Offer  become
(B)
21 days after the end of the Offer Period;
(iii)
if that document is given after the Offer Period while this Offer is 
not  subject  to  a  defeating  condition,  Emerald  will provide  the 
consideration due to you on or before the earlier of:
(iv)
(A)
one  month  after  that  document  is  given  to  Emerald; 
and
(B)
21 days after the end of the Offer Period; and
if that document is given after the end of the Offer Period, and 
the  Offer  is  not  subject  to  a  defeating  condition,  Emerald  will 
provide the consideration within 21 days after that document is 
given. However, if at the time the document is given, the Offer 
is  still  subject  to  a  defeating  condition  that  relates  only  to  the 
happening of an event of circumstances referred to in Section 
652C(1) or (2) of the Corporations Act, Emerald will provide the 
consideration  for  you  within  21  days  after  the  Offer  becomes 
unconditional.
(e)
Subject  to  Sections  1.8  and  1.9  of  this  Annexure  A,  the  obligation  of 
Emerald to issue any Emerald Shares to which you are entitled under the 
Offer will be satisfied by:
(i)
(ii)
entering your name on the register of members of Emerald; and
dispatching or procuring the dispatch to you by pre-paid post 
to  your  address  specified 
in  your  Acceptance  Form,  a 
confirmation of the issue of Emerald Shares in your name. If your 
Renaissance Shares are held in a joint name, a confirmation of 
the issue of new Emerald Shares will be issued in the name of, to 
the holder whose name appears first in your Acceptance Form.
(f)
If, at the time you accept this Offer, any authority or clearance of the 
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade or of the Australian 
Taxation  Office  is  required  for  you  to  receive  any  consideration  under 
this Offer, or you are resident in, or a resident of, a place to which, or 
you are a person to whom:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
the Autonomous Sanctions Regulations 2011 (Cth);
the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  (Sanctions  –  Al-Qaida) 
Regulations 2008 (Cth);
the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  (Dealing  with  Assets) 
Regulations 2008 (Cth); or
any  law  or  regulation  would  make  it  unlawful  for  Emerald  to 
provide consideration for your Renaissance Shares,
93
applies, then acceptance of the Offer will not create or transfer to you 
any right (contractual or continent) to receive the Offer Consideration 
unless  all  requisite  authorities  or  clearances  have  been  obtained  in 
favour of Emerald.
1.8
Ineligible Foreign Shareholders
(a)
If  you  are  an Ineligible Foreign  Shareholder,  you will not be  entitled to 
receive  Emerald  Shares  as  the  consideration  for  accepting  the  Offer, 
and Emerald will:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
arrange for the issue to the Sale Nominee approved by ASIC of 
the  number  of  Emerald  Shares  to  which  you  and  all  other 
Ineligible Foreign Shareholders would have been entitled but for 
Section 1.1(d) of this Annexure A and the equivalent provision of 
each other offer under the Offer;
cause the Emerald Shares so issued to be offered for sale by the 
Sale Nominee on ASX as soon as practicable and otherwise in 
the  manner,  at  the  price  and  on  such  other  terms  and 
conditions  as  are  determined  by  the  Sale  Nominee  acting  in 
good faith; and
cause the Sale Nominee to pay to you the amount ascertained 
in  accordance  with  the  following  formula  (calculated  on  an 
average  basis  so  that  all  Ineligible  Foreign  Shareholders  who 
accept the Offer receive the same proceeds per Renaissance 
Share, subject to rounding):
Where:
Net Proceeds of Sale x YS
TS
Net  Proceeds  of  Sale  is  the  amount  received  by  the  Sale 
Nominee upon the sale of an Emerald Share under this Section 
1.8 of this Annexure A, less the expenses of the sale (brokerage, 
duty and other selling costs, taxes and charges);
YS  is  the  number  of  Emerald  Shares  which  would,  but  for 
Sections 1.8(a) and 1.1(d) of this Annexure A, have been issued 
to you; and
TS  is  the  total  number  of  Emerald  Shares  issued  to  the  Sale 
Nominee under this Section 1.8 of this Annexure A in respect of 
all Ineligible Foreign Shareholders.
(b)
(c)
You  will  be  paid  your  share  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  Emerald 
Shares by the Sale Nominee in Australian currency.
Payment  will  be  made  by  cheque  payable  in  Australian  Dollars  and 
drawn  on  an  Australian  bank  branch  posted  to  you  at  your  risk  by 
airmail  as  soon  as  practicable  and  in  any  event  within  the  period 
required  by  the  Corporations  Act  to  your  address  as  specified  in  your 
Acceptance Form.
(d)
Under  no  circumstances  will  interest  be  paid  on  your  share  of  the 
proceeds of the sale of Emerald Shares by the Sale Nominee, regardless
94
of any delay in remitting these proceeds to you or your receipt of those 
proceeds.
1.9
Conditions of the Offer
The  Offer,  and  any  contract  resulting  from  the  acceptance  of  the  Offer,  are 
subject to the following conditions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(90% minimum acceptance condition): at the end of the Offer Period, 
Emerald  and its  Associates  have  a  Relevant Interest  in more  than 90% 
(by number) of all of the Renaissance Shares both on an undiluted and 
on a fully diluted basis.
(No  Renaissance  Material  Adverse  Changes):  there  not  occurring  a 
Renaissance Material Adverse Change during the Offer Period.
(No  material  acquisitions,  disposals  or  new  commitments):  except  for 
any  proposed  transaction  publicly  announced  by  Renaissance  before 
the  Announcement  Date  or  disclosed  in  writing  by  Renaissance  to 
Emerald prior to the Announcement Date, none of the following events 
occur during the period from the Announcement Date to the end of the 
Offer Period without the written consent of other party:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
a member of the Renaissance Group acquires, offers to acquire 
or  agrees  to  acquire  one  or  more  companies,  businesses  or 
assets (or any interest in one or more companies, businesses or 
assets)  for  an  amount  in  aggregate  greater  than  $100,000  or 
makes  an  announcement  in  relation  to  such  an  acquisition, 
offer or agreement;
a  member  of  the  Renaissance  Group  disposes  of,  offers  to 
dispose  of  or  agrees  to  dispose  of  one  or  more  companies, 
businesses or assets (or any interest in one or more companies, 
businesses or assets) for an amount, or in respect of which the 
book value is, in aggregate, greater than $100,000 or makes an 
announcement  in  relation  to  such  a  disposition,  offer  or 
agreement;
a  member  of  the  Renaissance  Group  enters  into,  or  offers  to 
enter into or agrees to enter into, any agreement, joint venture, 
partnership,  farm-in  agreement,  management  agreement  or 
commitment which would require expenditure, or the foregoing 
of  revenue,  by  a  member  of  the  Renaissance  Group  of  an 
amount which is, in aggregate, more than $100,000 other than 
in the ordinary course of business, or makes an announcement 
in relation to such an entry, offer or agreement;
a  member  of  the  Renaissance  Group  disposes  of,  offers  to 
dispose of or agrees to enter into any agreement, joint venture, 
partnership,  farm-in  agreement,  management  agreement  or 
commitment  involving  the  disposal  of  any  legal,  beneficial  or 
economic interest or right to or in connection with exploration 
licence  E28/1634  and/or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  or  applications 
therefore; and
(v)
a member of the Renaissance Group materially varies, amends, 
or  modifies  any  material  contract  (being  a  contract  or
95
commitment requiring total payments by, or providing revenue 
to, a party in excess of $50,000).
(d)
(e)
(No material litigation) before the end of the Offer Period, no member 
of the Renaissance Group, without the written consent of Emerald, has 
threatened or commenced against it any material claims or proceeding 
in any court or tribunal.
(No  Renaissance  Prescribed  Occurrences):  there  not  occurring  a 
Renaissance Prescribed Occurrence during the Offer Period.
The above Conditions are conditions subsequent and do not prevent a contract 
resulting from acceptance of the Offer from coming into effect but any breach 
or non-fulfilment of them entitles Emerald to rescind any contracts resulting from 
acceptance of the Offer.
1.10
Freeing the Offer of Conditions
Subject to clause 1.10(b), Emerald may free this Offer, and any contract resulting 
from  its  acceptance,  from  all  or  any  of  the  Conditions  by  giving  notice  to 
Renaissance  and  to  the  ASX  declaring  the  Offer  to  be  free  from  the  relevant 
Condition  or  Conditions  specified  in  accordance  with  Section  650F  of  the 
Corporations Act. This notice may be given not less than 7 days before the end 
of the Offer Period.
(a)
(b)
If, at the end of the Offer Period, the Conditions have not been fulfilled 
and  Emerald  has  not  declared  the  Offer  (or  it  has  not  become)  free 
from  those  Conditions,  all  contracts  resulting  from  the  acceptance  of 
the Offer will be automatically void.
Subject to the provisions of the Corporations Act, Emerald alone will be 
entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  Conditions  and  any  breach  or  non-
fulfilment thereof may be relied upon only by Emerald.
1.11
Notice of status of Conditions
So  that  Renaissance  Shareholders  know  the  status  of  the  Conditions,  the 
Corporations  Act  prescribes  the  notice of  the status  of  the  conditions must  be 
given towards the end of the Offer Period.
The date for giving the notice required by Section 630(1) of the Corporations Act 
is 16 September 2016, subject to extension in accordance with 630(2) if the Offer 
Period is extended.
1.12
Quotation
(a)
(b)
An  application  will  be  made  within  7  days  after  the  start  of  the  Bid 
Period to ASX for the granting of official quotation of the Emerald Shares 
to be issued in accordance with the Offer. However, official quotation is 
not granted automatically on application.
Pursuant to the Corporations Act, this Offer and any contract that results 
from your acceptance of it are subject to a condition that permission for 
official quotation by ASX (as the circumstances require) of the Emerald 
Shares to be issued pursuant to the Offer is granted no later than 7 days 
after  the  end  of  the  Bid  Period.  If  this  condition  is  not  fulfilled,  all 
resulting 
contracts 
the  Offer  will  be 
automatically void.
the  acceptance  of
from
96
1.13
Withdrawal of Offer
Emerald may withdraw this Offer at any time before you accept it, but only with 
the  consent  in  writing  of  ASIC  (which  consent  may  be  given  subject  to  such 
conditions, if any, as are imposed by ASIC). If ASIC gives such consent, Emerald 
will  give  notice  of  the withdrawal  to  the  ASX and  to  Renaissance  and  comply 
with any other conditions imposed by ASIC.
If,  at  the  time  this  Offer  is  withdrawn,  all  the  Conditions  have  been  freed,  all 
contracts  arising  from  acceptance  of  the  Offer  before  it  was  withdrawn  will 
remain enforceable.
If, at the time this Offer is withdrawn, the Offer remains subject to one or more of 
the  conditions  in  Section  1.9  of  this  Annexure  A,  all  contracts  arising  from  its 
acceptance  will  become  void  (whether  or  not  the  events  referred  to  in  the 
relevant conditions have occurred).
A withdrawal pursuant to this Section 1.13 of this Annexure A will be deemed to 
take effect:
(a)
(b)
if  the withdrawal is  not  subject  to  conditions imposed  by  ASIC,  on  the 
date after the date on which that consent in writing is given by ASIC; or
if the withdrawal is subject to conditions imposed by ASIC, on the date 
after the date on which those conditions are satisfied.
1.14
Variation
Emerald  may  vary  this  Offer  in  accordance  the  Corporations  Act.  If  Emerald 
subsequently 
increases  the  Offer  Consideration,  all  Eligible  Shareholders 
(regardless  of  whether  they  have  accepted  the  Offer  before  the  Offer 
Consideration  is  increased)  will  receive  the  increased  consideration  provided 
the Offer is or becomes unconditional.
1.15
Duty or other costs
(a)
(b)
All costs and expenses of the preparation, dispatch and circulation of 
this Offer and any duty payable in respect of the transfers will be paid 
by Emerald.
As long as your Renaissance Shares are registered in your name and you 
deliver  them  directly  to  Emerald,  you  will  not  incur  any  brokerage  in 
connection with your acceptance of this Offer.
1.16
Governing law
This  Offer  and  any  contract  that  results  from  your  acceptance  of  this  Offer  is 
governed by the laws in force in Western Australia.
1.17
Date of Offer
This Offer is dated 24 August 2016.
97
AN NEXU RE B – RENAISSA NCE PRESCRIBED OCCUR RENCES
Each of the following is a Renaissance Prescribed Occurrence:
(a)
(b)
(Conversion): Renaissance or any Subsidiary converts all or any of its shares into 
a larger or smaller number of shares.
(Reduction of share capital): Renaissance or any Subsidiary resolves to reduce its 
share capital in any way or reclassifies, combines, splits, redeems or repurchases 
directly or indirectly any of its shares.
(c)
(Buy-back): Renaissance or any Subsidiary:
(i)
(ii)
enters into a buy-back agreement; or
resolves  to  approve  the  terms  of  a  buy-back  agreement  under  the 
Corporations Act.
(d)
(Issuing or granting shares or options): Renaissance or any of its Subsidiaries:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
issues shares;
grants an option over its shares; or
agrees to make such an issue or grant such an option,
without  the  prior  written  consent  of  Emerald,  such  consent  not  to  be 
unreasonably  withheld,  other  than  the  issue  of  any  Renaissance  Shares  in 
connection with the exercise of Renaissance Options issued or granted prior to 
the  date  of  the  Bid  Implementation  Agreement,  or  whose  issue  or  grant  was 
fairly  disclosed  to  Renaissance  prior  to  the  date  of  the  Bid  Implementation 
Agreement.
(Securities  or  other  instruments):  Renaissance  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  issues  or 
agrees  to  issue  securities  or  other  instruments  convertible  into  Renaissance 
Shares,  shares  in  a  Subsidiary  of  Renaissance  or  debt  securities  other  than 
pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  Renaissance  Options  already  on  issue  or  as  fairly 
disclosed to Emerald before the date of the Bid Implementation Agreement.
(Constitution): Renaissance or any of its Subsidiaries adopts a new constitution or 
modifies or repeals its constitution or a provision of it.
(Disposals): Renaissance or any of its Subsidiaries disposes, or agrees to dispose 
of  the  whole  or  a  substantial  part  of  the  Renaissance  Group’s  business  or 
property.
(Financial  Indebtedness):  Renaissance  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  incurs  any 
financial  indebtedness  or  issues  any  debt  securities,  other  than  in  the  ordinary 
course of business.
(Acquisitions, disposals or tenders): other than in the ordinary course of business 
and consistent with past practice, Renaissance or any of its Subsidiaries disposes 
of, acquires or agrees to dispose of or acquire, or creates or agrees to create an 
equity interest in respect of any assets  (including, without limitation, under any 
off-take, joint venture or similar deed), properties or businesses, or incurs, agrees 
to incur or enters into a commitment or a series of commitments involving capital 
expenditure  by  the  Renaissance  Group,  whether  in  one  or  more  transactions,
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
98
where  the  amounts  or  value  involved  in  such  transaction  or  transactions, 
commitments or series of commitments exceeds $100,000 in aggregate.
(Encumbrances):  other  than  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  and  consistent 
with  past  practice  Renaissance  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  creates,  or  agrees  to 
create, any Encumbrance over any part of its business or property.
(Employment arrangements): other than in the ordinary course of business and 
consistent with past practice Renaissance or any of its Subsidiaries:
(j)
(k)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
increases  the  remuneration  of,  or  otherwise  varies  the  employment 
arrangements with, any of its directors or employees;
its  directors  or  employees  to 
accelerates  the 
compensation or benefits or any kind (including under any Renaissance 
executive or employee share plans); or
rights  of  any  of
pays  any  of  its  directors  or  employees  a  termination  or  retention 
payment  (otherwise  than  in  accordance  with  an  existing  contract  in 
place at the date of the Bid Implementation Agreement).
(l)
(Commitments  and  settlements):  other  than  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business 
and consistent with past practice Renaissance or any of its Subsidiaries without 
the prior written approval of the Bidder (not to be unreasonably withheld):
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
into  any  contract  or  commitment
enters 
revenue  or 
expenditure  of  more  than  $50,000  over  the  term  of  the  contract  or 
commitment;
involving
terminates or amends in a material manner any contract material to the 
conduct of the Renaissance Group’s business or which involves revenue 
or expenditure of more than $50,000 over the term of the contract;
waives any material third party default; or
accepting as a settlement or compromise of a material matter (relating 
to an amount in excess of $50,000 less than the full compensation due to 
Renaissance or a Subsidiary.
(m)
(n)
(Insolvency): Renaissance or any of its Subsidiaries becomes insolvent.
(Unusual  contracts):  any  member  of  the  Renaissance  Group  enters  into  any 
unusual  or  abnormal  contract  or  commitment  which  is  outside  the  ordinary 
course of business and which could reasonably be expected to:
(i)
(ii)
change  the  nature  of  the  business  conducted  by  the  Renaissance 
Group; or
have  a  material  adverse  impact  on  the  business  conducted  by  the 
Renaissance Group.
(o)
(Agreements): any member of the Renaissance Group agrees or announces an 
intention to take any of the actions referred to in paragraphs (a) to (n) above.
A Renaissance Prescribed Occurrence will not include any matter:
99
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
required  or  permitted  to  be  done  or  procured  by  Renaissance  under  the  Bid 
Implementation  Agreement  or  which  is  otherwise  contemplated  by  the  Bid 
Implementation Agreement;
required to be done as a result of the Offer;
required  to  be  done  by  the  Renaissance  Board  in  order  to  comply  with  the 
fiduciary or statutory duties of its directors;
directly  resulting  from  any  actions  taken  (or  omitted  to  be  taken)  following  a 
written request from Emerald or with Emerald’s written consent; or
(e)
approved in writing by Emerald.
100
ANNEXURE C – EMERALD’S ASX ANNOUNCEMENTS
Emerald has lodged the following announcements with ASX since 1 October 2015:
Date
Announcement
29/07/2016
Quarterly Activities and Cashflow Report June 2016
20/07/2016
Change in substantial holding for RNS
19/07/2016
Emerald Resources and Renaissance Minerals to Merge
19/07/2016
RNS: Emerald Resources and Renaissance Minerals to Merge
18/07/2016
Trading Halt
10/06/2016
Change in substantial holding
17/05/2016
RNS: Drilling Commences Satisfaction of JV Conditions
17/05/2016
Emerald to Commence Works at Okvau Gold Deposit
13/05/2016
Statement of Confirmations to ASX
13/05/2016
Constitution
13/05/2016
Securities Trading Policy
13/05/2016
Information Form & Checklist
13/05/2016
Appendix 1A
13/05/2016
Top 20 Shareholders
13/05/2016
Distribution Schedule
13/05/2016
Pre-reinstatement Disclosure
13/05/2016
ASX Notice
13/05/2016
Reinstatement to Official Quotation - 17 May 2016
10/05/2016
Share Issue and Appendix 3B
26/04/2016
Quarterly Activities and Cashflow Report March 2016
01/04/2016
Prospectus Offer Closed Fully Subscribed
31/03/2016
Results of Meeting
31/03/2016
Suspension Request
31/03/2016
Suspension from Official Quotation
30/03/2016
Prospectus
101
30/03/2016
RNS: Execution of Joint Venture Agreement
30/03/2016
Joint Venture Agreement Signed With Renaissance
07/03/2016
Half Yearly Report and Accounts
29/02/2016
Notice of General Meeting/Proxy Form
22/02/2016
Change of Director's Interest Notice
15/02/2016
Revised Notice of Change of Substantial Holding
12/02/2016
Change in substantial holding
12/02/2016
Becoming a substantial holder
12/02/2016
Change of Director's Interest Notices
11/02/2016
Change in substantial holding
10/02/2016
Change of Director's Interest Notice
09/02/2016
Becoming a substantial holder for RNS
03/02/2016
Emerald To Earn Into Okvau Gold Deposit
03/02/2016
RNS: Renaissance Secures Funding and Development Partner
01/02/2016
Trading Halt Request
01/02/2016
Trading Halt
29/01/2016
Quarterly Activities and Cashflow Report December 2015
27/11/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
26/11/2015
Results of Meeting
23/11/2015
Change in substantial holding
20/11/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
13/11/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
09/11/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
30/10/2015
Quarterly Activities and Cashflow Report September 2015
23/10/2015
Notice of Annual General Meeting/Proxy Form
16/10/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
01/10/2015
Appendix 4G - Corporate Governance Disclosures
01/10/2015
Annual Report 2015
102
ANNEXURE D – RENAISSANCE’S ASX ANNOUNCEMENTS
Renaissance  has  lodged  the  following  announcements  with  ASX  since  28  September 
2015:
Date
Announcement
18/08/2016
Change in substantial holding
29/07/2016
Quarterly Cashflow Report – 30 June 2016
29/07/2016
Quarterly Cashflow Report – 30 June 2016
25/07/2016
Becoming a substantial holder
20/07/2016
Change in substantial holding from EMR
19/07/2016
EMR: Emerald Resources and Renaissance Minerals to Merge
19/07/2016
Emerald Resources and Renaissance Minerals to Merge
18/07/2016
Trading Halt
08/07/2016
Lapse of options
08/06/2016
Change of Director's Interest Notice
17/05/2016
Investor Presentation - May 2016
17/05/2016
Drilling Commences Following Satisfaction of JV Conditions
29/04/2016
Quarterly Cashflow Report - 31 March 2016
29/04/2016
Quarterly Activities Report - 31 March 2016
30/03/2016
Results of Meeting
30/03/2016
Execution of Joint Venture Agreement
30/03/2016
EMR: Joint Venture Agreement Signed With Renaissance
11/03/2016
Half Yearly Report and Accounts
29/02/2016
Lapse of Options
26/02/2016
Notice of General Meeting/Proxy Form
25/02/2016
Initial Director's Interest Notice
25/02/2016
Initial Director's Interest Notice
25/02/2016
Final Director's Interest Notice
25/02/2016
Renaissance Board Changes
103
09/02/2016
Becoming a substantial holder from EMR
09/02/2016
Completion of Placement
03/02/2016
EMR: Emerald To Earn Into Okvau Gold Deposit
03/02/2016
Renaissance Secures Funding and Development Partner
01/02/2016
Trading Halt
29/01/2016
Quarterly Cashflow Report - 31 December 2015
29/01/2016
Quarterly Activities Report - 31 December 2015
27/01/2016
Extensive Untested IP Anomaly Identified at Samnang Prospect
04/01/2016
Lapse of Options
17/11/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice x 3
16/11/2015
Appendix 3B
06/11/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
05/11/2015
Results of Annual General Meeting
30/10/2015
Quarterly Cashflow Report - September 2015
30/10/2015
Quarterly Activities Report - September 2015
12/10/2015
Exploration Review Highlights New Targets
02/10/2015
Notice of Annual General Meeting/Proxy Form
28/09/2015
Appendix 4G and Corporate Governance Statement
28/09/2015
Annual Report to shareholders
104