
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 2016
Champion Iron Limited (ASX: CIA, TSX: CIA)
Chairman’s Address at Shareholders Meeting
Montreal, 5.00pm Thursday 18th August, 2016
Welcome to the Annual General Meeting of Champion Iron Limited, the first meeting of shareholders to be held in 
Montreal.
Champion Iron Limited (“the Company” or “Champion Iron”)
During the year, we continued to work towards identifying and evaluating quality assets to add to the Company’s 
portfolio  of  assets.    At  the  Extraordinary  General  Meeting  on  31  March  2016,  shareholders  approved  the 
acquisition of the Bloom Lake mine and related rail assets (“Bloom Lake”), Quinto mineral claims (“Quinto claims”) 
and a Private Placement of shares to fund the acquisition of Bloom Lake and the Quinto claims and to provide 
ongoing working capital.
On 11 April, 2016, the Company, through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Québec Iron Ore Inc. (“QIO”), acquired the 
Bloom  Lake  mine  and  related  rail  assets  (“Bloom  Lake”)  from  affiliates  of  Cliffs  Natural  Resources  Inc.  for  cash 
consideration of $9.75m.
The  Bloom  Lake  mine  is  located  approximately  13  km  north  of  Fermont,  Quebec,  in  the  Labrador  Trough  and 
consists of Mining Lease BM877 and 114 mining claims. It is an open pit truck and shovel mine, a concentrator that 
utilizes single-stage crushing and an autogenous mill and gravity separation to produce iron concentrate. From the 
site, concentrate can be transported by rail, initially on the Bloom Lake Railway, to a ship loading port in Sept-Îles, 
Québec.
The  Bloom  Lake  rail  assets  consist  of  the  provincially  regulated  short-line  railway  comprising  a  32  km  rail  spur 
contained wholly within Newfoundland and Labrador that connects the Bloom Lake mine to the railway owned by 
Northern Land Company.
In order to fund the acquisition purchase price of Bloom Lake and to provide working capital, on 11 April 2016, the 
Company completed a private placement of shares for gross proceeds of $30m. At the same time, the Company’s 
wholly owned subsidiary, QIO, completed a private placement of ordinary shares to Ressources Québec Inc., acting 
as mandatory for the Government of Québec, for gross proceeds of $14m following which, the Company’s interest 
in QIO was reduced from 100% to 63.2%.
Review of Operations
Champion Iron recorded a loss of $7.3m for the period to 31 March 2016 of which $1.9m is attributable to the 
impairment  of  investments  and  $2.1m  is  attributable  to  transactions  costs  relating  to  the  acquisition  of  Bloom 
Lake, the Quinto claims and the Private Placement of shares.
The Company spent $682k on exploration and development activity on the Consolidated Fire Lake North (“CFLN”) 
project during the year ended 31 March, 2016 and following the completion of the exploration phase, the camp at 
the Fire Lake North site was dismantled.
On 25 October 2015 the Company made a final payment of $250k (total consideration of $300k) in respect of an 
arrangement to reduce the net smelter royalty on the Fermont Holdings, including CFLN, from 3% to 1.5%.
I informed shareholders at the last annual general meeting, that the Company is a founding partner in La Société 
ferroviaire  du  Nord  québécois,  société  en  commandite  (“SFNQ”).    The  other  limited  partners  in  SFNQ  are  the 
Government  of  Québec  and  Lac  Otelnuk  Mining  Ltd.,  a  joint  arrangement  between  Adriana  Resources  Inc.  and 
WISCO  International  Resources  Development  &  Investment  Limited.  SFNQ  was  formed  as  a  partnership  of 
government and industry to complete a feasibility study for the construction of a new multi-user rail link giving 
mining projects in the Labrador Trough access to the port at Sept-Ȋles at the lowest possible cost.  The Government 
of Québec has set aside a maximum of $20m from its Plan Nord Fund to contribute to SFNQ, while the Company’s 
contribution consisted of previously incurred costs of $5.6m.
Outlook for Champion
The Bloom Lake mine has been under care and maintenance since December 2014 and following its acquisition, 
the  Company  has  commenced  the  process  of  determining  the  optimum  restart  strategy  to  deliver  a  low  cost 
operating mine.  There is much work to be done including the preparation of a technical report under National 
Instrument  43-101,  plant  and  crusher  improvements  and  the  completion  of  a  new  mine  plan  to  determine 
operating and capital expenditures. As I have noted in previous announcements by the Company, the Bloom Lake 
mine has the potential to become one of the lowest capital cost iron ore mines in the world and I believe that 
Bloom Lake represents strong upside potential for our shareholders to leverage the significant level of investment 
in Bloom Lake made by previous owners.
As part of the ongoing maintenance and upgrade, Champion is initiating a dialogue with the local authorities and 
partners to share our work plan. And when it is time to start hiring, we will look to the local and First Nations 
community,  as  well  as  the  mine’s  former  employees.  In  addition,  we  intend  to  obtain  supplies  from  local 
entrepreneurs to maximize the economic flow-on for the local business communities in the regions in which we 
operate.
We recognise and appreciate the confidence and support shown by Ressources Québec, Wynnchurch, Resource 
Capital Fund and all of our other investors. I also acknowledge the effort and contribution of our employees in 
Australia and Canada and the traditional owners of the land and the local inhabitants for their continuing support 
of the Company’s activities.
I look forward with confidence to the Company’s future as we focus on the restart of Bloom Lake.   In delivering 
the above, directors and management remain committed to build shareholder value.
Michael O’Keeffe
Executive Chairman & Chief Executive Officer
Montreal, 18th August, 2016
ABOUT CHAMPION IRON LIMITED 
 
Champion has been working on the development of iron ore deposits in the Labrador Trough for more than 10 
years through acquisition of tenements, geological evaluation and development of a Feasibility study (Fire Lake 
North deposit). The management team has a vast experience from geotechnical work to green field development, 
brown field management including logistics development and financing of all stages in the mining industry. 
  
Prior to the acquisition of Bloom Lake, the main focus of Champion’s activities, holding over 3 billion tons of high 
quality iron ore resources, was concentrated on the effort to achieve an economical long term access from mine 
to ship. 
  
Following the acquisition of Bloom Lake the Company’s main focus is to implement upgrades to the mine and 
processing infrastructure it now owns whilst advancing projects associated with improving access to global 
markets. This includes progressing rail and port infrastructure initiatives with government and other key industry 
and community stakeholders. 
 
The Government of Québec has granted CAD $20 million for the feasibility study of a new rail linking Fire Lake / 
Bloom Lake area to the port of Sept-Îles. This study is being managed by Champion, and is expected to be 
finalised in 2016.
For    additional    information,    please    visit    our    website    at www.championiron.com.
information
includes,  but
legislation.  Forward-looking
This  news  release  includes  certain  information  that  may  constitute  "forward-looking  information"  under 
applicable  Canadian  securities 
is  not  limited  to, 
statements  about  planned  operations  at  the  Company’s  projects, 
including  its  joint  venture  projects. 
Forward-looking  information  is  necessarily  based  upon  a  number  of  estimates  and  assumptions  that,  while 
considered  reasonable,  are  subject  to  known  and  unknown  risks,  uncertainties,  and  other  factors  which may 
cause the actual results and future events to differ materially from those expressed or implied  by such forward-
looking  information,  including  the  risks  identified  in  Champion’s  annual  information  forms,  management 
discussion  and  analysis  and  other  securities  regulatory  filings  by  Champion  on  SEDAR  (including  under  the 
heading  "Risk  Factors"  therein)  and  the  risk  that  the  Arrangement  may  not  be  completed  or,  if  the 
Arrangement is completed, uncertainties regarding the combination of Champion and  Mamba and the ability to 
realize  growth  opportunities.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  such  information  will prove to be accurate, as 
in  such  forward-looking 
actual  results  and  future  events  could  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated 
information.  Accordingly,  readers  should  not  place  undue  reliance  on  forward- 
looking  information.  All  of 
Champion’s forward-looking information contained in this press release is given  as  of  the  date  hereof  and  is 
based  upon  the  opinions  and  estimates  of  Champion’s  management  and 
information  available  to 
management as at the date hereof. Champion disclaims any intention or  obligation to update or revise any of 
its forward-looking information, whether as a result of new 
information, future events or otherwise, except as 
required by law.  This  press  release  has  been  prepared  by  Champion  Iron  Limited  and  no  regulatory  authority 
has  approved or disapproved the information contained herein.