
F-3/A 1 d208868df3a.htm F-3/A F-3/A
Table of Contents
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 24, 2016
Registration No. 333-212667
United States
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
AMENDMENT NO. 1
TO
FORM F-3
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
ENCANA CORPORATION
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Canada
(Province or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
Not Applicable
(I.R.S. Employer Identification Number, if applicable)
Suite 4400, 500 Centre Street SE
Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P 2S5
(403) 645-2000
Attention: Corporate Secretary
(Address and telephone number of Registrant’s principal executive offices)
CT Corporation System
111 Eighth Avenue
New York, New York 10011
(212) 590-9330
(Name, address (including zip code) and telephone number (including area code) of agent
for service in the United States)
Copies to:
Terence Trinh
Andrew J. Foley
Chad C. Schneider
Encana Corporation
Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,
Blake, Cassels & Graydon
Suite 4400, 500 Centre Street
Wharton & Garrison LLP
LLP
SE
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
1285 Avenue of the
Americas
3500, 855 - 2nd Street S.W.
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
T2P 2S5
New York, N.Y. 10019-6064
T2P 4J8
(403) 645-2000
(212) 373-3000
(403) 260-9600
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public:
From time to time after the effective date of this Registration Statement.
If only securities being registered on this Form are being offered pursuant to dividend or
interest reinvestment plans, please check the following box. ¨
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or
continuous  basis  pursuant  to  Rule  415  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  check  the
following box. þ
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b)
under  the  Securities  Act,  please  check  the  following  box  and  list  the  Securities  Act
Registration Statement number of the earlier effective Registration Statement for the same
offering. ¨
Table of Contents
If  this  Form  is  a  post-effective  amendment  filed  pursuant  to  Rule  462(c)  under  the
Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act Registration Statement
number of the earlier effective Registration Statement for the same offering. ¨
If  this  Form  is  a  Registration  Statement  pursuant  to  General  Instruction  I.C.  or  a  post-
effective amendment thereto that shall become effective upon filing with the Commission
pursuant to Rule 462(e) under the Securities Act, check the following box. ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment to a Registration Statement filed pursuant to
General  Instruction  I.C.  filed  to  register  additional  securities  or  additional  classes  of
securities pursuant to Rule 413(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box. ¨
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of each
class of
securities to be
Amount to be
registered (1)
Proposed maximum
offering price
Proposed maximum
aggregate offering
Amount of
registration
fee (3) (5)
per unit
price (2)
registered
 
Debt Securities
  
Common Shares   
Class A Preferred
Shares
Subscription
Receipts
Warrants
Units
Share Purchase
Contracts
Share Purchase
Units
Total
 
 
(1)There are being registered under this Registration Statement such indeterminate number of
debt  securities,  common  shares,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,  warrants,
units, share purchase contracts and share purchase units of the Registrant as shall have an
aggregate initial offering price not to exceed US$1,155,607,082 (or its equivalent in any other
currency used to denominate the securities).
US$1,155,607,082  US$116,370
US$1,155,607,082
(4)
(2)Estimated solely for the purpose of determining the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(o)
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”).
The prospectus contained herein relates to an aggregate of US$6,000,000,000 of securities,
(3)
The prospectus contained herein relates to an aggregate of US$6,000,000,000 of securities,
including,  pursuant  to  Rule  429  under  the  Securities  Act,  US$4,844,392,918  of  unsold
securities  that  were  previously  registered  under  the  Registrant’s  Registration  Statement  on
Form F-10 (File No. 333-196927), initially filed on June 20, 2014.
(4)The proposed maximum initial offering price per security will be determined, from time to time,
by  the  Registrant  in  connection  with  the  sale  of  the  securities  under  this  Registration
Statement.
(5)Previously paid.
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may
be necessary to delay its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment
which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective
in  accordance  with  Section  8(a)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933  or  until  the  Registration
Statement  shall  become  effective  on  such  date  as  the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission (the “Commission”), acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Pursuant  to  Rule  429  under  the  Securities  Act,  the  prospectus  contained  in  this
Registration Statement relates to Registration Statement 333-196927.
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
PART I
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. This prospectus
is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting an offer to buy or sell these
securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted. These securities may
not  be  sold  until  the  Registration  Statement  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission is effective.
Subject to completion, dated August 24, 2016
PROSPECTUS
Encana Corporation
US$6,000,000,000
Debt Securities
Common Shares
Class A Preferred Shares
Subscription Receipts
Warrants
Units
Share Purchase Contracts
Share Purchase Units
We  may  from  time  to  time  offer  and  sell  our  debentures,  notes  or  other  evidence  of
indebtedness of any kind, nature or description (collectively, “Debt Securities”), common
shares, Class A preferred shares, subscription receipts, warrants, units, share purchase
contracts and share purchase units (collectively with the Debt Securities, the “Securities”)
having an aggregate offering amount of up to US$6,000,000,000 (or the equivalent in other
currencies). Securities may be offered separately or together, in amounts, at prices and on
terms to be determined based on market conditions at the time of sale and set forth in one
or more prospectus supplements. These Securities may be offered and sold in the United
States and elsewhere where permitted by law. We will provide the specific terms of these
Securities in supplements to this prospectus that will be delivered to purchasers together
with this prospectus. Unless otherwise provided in a prospectus supplement relating to a
series  of  Debt  Securities,  the  Debt  Securities  will  be  our  direct,  unsecured  and
unsubordinated obligations and will be issued under a trust indenture. You should read
this  prospectus  and  any  prospectus  supplement  carefully  before  you  invest  in  the
Securities.
Investment  in  the  Securities  involves  certain  risks  that  should  be  considered  by  a
prospective purchaser. See “Risk Factors” on page 26 of this prospectus along with the
risk  factors  described  in  the  applicable  prospectus  supplement  pertaining  to  the
Securities  and  the  other  information  contained  in  and  incorporated  by  reference  in  this
prospectus  and  in  the  applicable  prospectus  supplement  before  purchasing  the
Securities offered hereby. See “Where You Can Find More Information”.
We may sell the Securities to or through underwriters or dealers purchasing as principals
and may also sell the Securities to one or more purchasers directly or through agents. See
“Plan  of  Distribution”.  The  prospectus  supplement  relating  to  a  particular  offering  of
Securities will identify each underwriter, dealer or agent, as the case may be, engaged by
us in connection with the offering and sale of Securities, and will set forth the terms of the
offering  of  such  Securities,  including  the  method  of  distribution  of  such  Securities,  the
public  offering  price,  the  proceeds  to  us,  any  fees,  discounts  or  other  compensation
payable  to  underwriters,  dealers  or  agents,  and  any  other  material  terms  of  the  plan  of
distribution. Securities may be sold from time to time in one or more transactions at a fixed
price or fixed prices, or at non-fixed prices.
Our common shares are listed and posted for trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the
“TSX”) and on the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) under the symbol “ECA”. On
August 23, 2016, the last trading day before the date of this prospectus, the closing price
of the common shares on the TSX was C$13.18 per common share, and the closing price
of the common shares on the NYSE was US$10.19 per common share. Unless otherwise
specified in the applicable prospectus supplement, the Debt Securities, Class A preferred
shares,  subscription  receipts,  warrants,  units,  share  purchase contracts  and  share
purchase units will not be listed on any securities or stock exchange. There is no market
through  which  the  Debt  Securities,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,
warrants,  units,  share  purchase  contracts  and  share  purchase  units  may  be  sold  and
purchasers  may  not  be  able  to  resell  such  securities  purchased  under  this  prospectus
and  the  applicable  prospectus  supplement.  This  may  affect  the  pricing  of  the  Debt
Securities,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,  warrants,  units,  share
purchase contracts and share purchase units in the secondary market, the transparency
and  availability  of  trading  prices,  the  liquidity  of  the  Debt  Securities,  Class  A  preferred
shares,  subscription  receipts,  warrants,  units,  share  purchase  contracts  and  share
purchase units and the extent of our regulation. See “Risk Factors”.
Our  registered  and  principal  office  is  located  at  4400,  500  Centre  Street  S.E.,  Calgary,
Alberta T2P 2S5, Canada.
Neither the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) nor any state
securities commission has approved or disapproved these Securities or determined if this
prospectus  is  truthful  or  complete.  Any  representation  to  the  contrary  is  a  criminal
offence.
The date of this prospectus is                 , 2016.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
ENCANA CORPORATION
1  
     2  
     3
ENCANA CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
USE OF PROCEEDS
PRICE RANGE
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF SHARE CAPITAL
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
DESCRIPTION OF SHARE PURCHASE CONTRACTS AND SHARE PURCHASE
UNITS
RISK FACTORS
CERTAIN INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
ENFORCEABILITY OF CIVIL LIABILITIES
EXPENSES
5  
     5  
     5  
     6  
     7  
    21  
    24  
    24  
    25
25  
    26  
    28  
    28  
    29  
    29  
    30  
    30  
    30
Table of Contents
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
Except  as  set  forth  under  “Description  of  Debt  Securities”,  and  unless  the  context
otherwise requires, all references in this prospectus and any prospectus supplement to
“Encana”,  the  “Corporation”,  “we”,  “us”  and  “our”  mean  Encana  Corporation  and  its
consolidated subsidiaries and partnerships.
In this prospectus and in any prospectus supplement, unless otherwise specified or the
context  otherwise  requires,  all  dollar  amounts  are  expressed  in  United  States  dollars,
references  to  “dollars”,  “$”  or  “US$”  are  to  United  States  dollars  and  all  references  to
“C$” are to Canadian dollars.
Unless  otherwise  indicated,  all  financial  information  included  and  incorporated  by
reference  in  this  prospectus  or  included  in  any  prospectus  supplement  is  determined
using U.S. GAAP.
This prospectus is part of a Registration Statement on Form F-3 relating to the Securities
that has been filed with the SEC. Under the Registration Statement, we may, from time to
time, sell any combination of the Securities described in this prospectus in one or more
offerings  up  to  an  aggregate  offering  amount  of  US$6,000,000,000.  This  prospectus
provides you with a general description of the Securities that we may offer. Each time we
sell Securities under this prospectus, we will provide a prospectus supplement that will
contain specific information about the terms of that offering of Securities. The prospectus
supplement  may  also  add,  update  or  change  information  contained  in  this  prospectus.
Before  you  invest  in  the  Securities,  you  should  read  both  this  prospectus  and  any
applicable prospectus supplement together with additional information described under
the heading “Where You Can Find More Information”. This prospectus does not contain
all of the information set forth in the Registration Statement we have filed with the SEC of
which this prospectus forms a part, certain parts of which are omitted in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the SEC. You may refer to the Registration Statement of which
this  prospectus  forms  a  part  and  the  exhibits  to  the  Registration  Statement  for  further
information with respect to us and the Securities.
Certain disclosure of our reserves prepared in accordance with United States disclosure
requirements  is  set  forth  in  Appendix  D  to  our  AIF  (as  defined  below)  entitled  “U.S.
Protocol Disclosure of Reserves Data and Other Oil and Gas Information”.
This prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference in the prospectus contain,
and  a  prospectus  supplement  may  contain,  disclosure  respecting  oil  and  natural  gas
liquids  (“NGLs”  and,  together  with  oil  and  condensate,  “liquids”)  and  “barrels  of  oil
equivalent” or “BOE”. A conversion of natural gas volumes to BOE is on the basis of six
thousand  cubic  feet  to  one  barrel.  BOE  is  based  on  a  generic  energy  equivalency
conversion method primarily applicable at the burner tip and does not represent economic
value equivalency at the wellhead. Given that the value ratio based on the current price of
oil as compared to natural gas is significantly different from the energy equivalency of 6:1,
utilizing  a  conversion  on  a  6:1  basis  may  be  misleading  as  an  indication  of  value,
particularly if used in isolation.
The securities regulatory authorities in Canada have adopted National Instrument 51-101 -
Standards of Disclosure for Oil and Gas Activities (“NI 51-101”), which imposes oil and gas
disclosure standards for Canadian public issuers engaged in oil and gas activities. NI 51-
101  permits  oil  and  gas  issuers,  in  their  filings  with  Canadian  securities  regulatory
authorities,  to  disclose  not  only  proved,  probable  and  possible  reserves  but  also
resources, and to disclose reserves and production on a gross basis before deducting
royalties. Probable reserves, possible reserves and resources are of a higher risk and are
less likely to be accurately estimated or recovered than proved reserves. We are required
to  disclose  reserves  in  accordance  with  Canadian  securities  law  requirements  and  the
disclosure  in  the  documents  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  prospectus  includes
reserves designated as probable reserves and possible reserves. The SEC definitions of
proved, probable and possible reserves are different than the definitions contained in NI
51-101;  therefore,  proved,  probable  and  possible  reserves  disclosed  in  the  documents
incorporated by reference into this prospectus in compliance with NI 51-101 may not be
comparable  to  United  States  standards.  The  SEC  requires  United  States  oil  and  gas
reporting companies, in their filings with the SEC, to disclose only proved reserves after
the  deduction  of  royalties  and  production  due  to  others,  but  permits  the  optional
disclosure of probable and possible reserves.
Moreover, as permitted by NI 51-101, we have determined and disclosed the estimated net
present value of future net revenue from our reserves in our NI 51-101 compliant reserves
disclosure using forecast prices and costs. The SEC requires that reserves and related
future net revenue be estimated based on historical 12-month average prices, but permits
Table of Contents
1
the  optional  disclosure  of  revenue  estimates  based  on  different  price  and  cost  criteria,
including standardized future prices or management’s own forecasts.
In  addition,  certain  documents  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  prospectus  contain
estimates of contingent resources. The SEC does not permit the disclosure of contingent
resources  in  reports  filed  with  it  by  United  States  oil  and  gas  reporting  companies.
Contingent  resources  are  not,  and  should  not  be  confused  with,  reserves.  Additional
information  regarding  these  estimates  can  be  found  in  our  Supplemental  Disclosure
Document concerning our estimated reserves and economic contingent resources dated
February 29, 2016, which is incorporated by reference in this prospectus. The contingent
resource  estimates  provided  in  the  documents  incorporated  by  reference  in  this
prospectus are estimates only. Actual contingent resources (and any volumes that may be
reclassified as reserves) and future production from such contingent resources may be
greater than or less than the estimates provided herein or in the documents incorporated
by reference.
For  additional  information  regarding  the  presentation  of  our  reserves  and  other  oil  and
gas information, including the primary differences between Canadian and U.S. reporting
requirements, see the section entitled “Narrative Description of the Business – Reserves
and Other Oil and Gas Information” in our AIF, which is incorporated by reference in this
prospectus.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We are subject to the informational requirements of the United States Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) and, in accordance with the Exchange Act,
we  also  file  reports  with  and  furnish  other  information  to  the  SEC.  Under  the
multijurisdictional  disclosure  system  adopted  by  Canada  and  the  United  States,  these
reports and other information (including financial information) may be prepared, in part, in
accordance  with  the  disclosure  requirements  of  Canada,  which  differ  from  those  in  the
United States. You may read any document we file with or furnish to the SEC at the SEC’s
public reference room at Room 1580, 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. You may
also obtain copies of the same documents from the public reference room of the SEC at
100 F Street, N.E., Washington D.C. 20549 by paying a fee. Please call the SEC at 1-800-
SEC-0330 or contact them at www.sec.gov for further information on the public reference
room.  Our  filings  are  also  electronically  available  from  the  SEC’s  Electronic  Document
Gathering,  Analysis,  and  Retrieval  system  (“EDGAR”),  which  can  be  accessed  at
www.sec.gov, as well as from commercial document retrieval services.
Additionally, we file documents with securities commissions or similar authorities in each
of  the  provinces  and  territories  of  Canada.  These  documents  are  available  through  the
internet  on  the  Canadian  System  for  Electronic  Document  Analysis  and  Retrieval
(“SEDAR”), which can be accessed at www.sedar.com.
Information on or connected to our website, even if referred to in documents incorporated
by reference in the prospectus, do not constitute part of this prospectus.
The SEC allows us to incorporate by reference certain information that we file with them,
which means that we can disclose important information to you by referring you to those
documents.  Information  that  is  incorporated  by  reference  is  an  important  part  of  this
prospectus.  We  incorporate  by  reference  the  documents  listed  below,  which  were  filed
with the SEC:
(a)
(b)
Our Annual Report on Form 40-F for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015,
filed  with  the  SEC  on  February  29,  2016,  containing  our  (i)  Annual  Information
Form  dated  February  29,  2016  (our  “AIF”);  (ii)  audited  annual  consolidated
financial statements as at December 31, 2015 and 2014 and for each of the years
in the three-year period ended December 31, 2015, including the notes thereto and
the auditor’s report thereon; and (iii) Management’s Discussion and Analysis for
the year ended December 31, 2015 (our “2015 MD&A”);
Exhibits 99.1 and 99.2 to our Report on Form 6-K filed with the SEC on July 22,
2016,  containing  our  (i)  unaudited  interim  condensed  consolidated  financial
statements as at and for the three and six-month periods ended June 30, 2016,
including the notes thereto; and (ii) Management’s Discussion and Analysis for the
six-month period ended June 30, 2016 (our “2016 Q2 MD&A”); and
2
Table of Contents
(c)
Our Report on Form 6-K filed with the SEC on February 29, 2016, containing our
Supplemental  Disclosure  Document  relating  to  our  estimated  reserves  and
economic  contingent  resources  dated  February  29,  2016  (our  “Supplemental
Disclosure Document”).
We also incorporate by reference each of the following documents we file with the SEC
after the date of this prospectus and prior to the filing of a post-effective amendment that
indicates  that  all  Securities  offered  hereby  have  been  sold  or  which  deregisters  all
Securities then remaining unsold: (i) all annual reports on Form 40-F or Form 10-K; (ii) all
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q; (iii) all current reports on Form 8-K; and (iv) those portions
of any reports on Form 6-K that we indicate in such reports are to be deemed incorporated
by reference into this prospectus.
Any  statement  contained  in  this  prospectus  or  in  a  document  (or  part  thereof)
incorporated by reference, or deemed to be incorporated by reference, in this prospectus
shall be deemed to be modified or superseded, for  purposes  of  this  prospectus,  to  the
extent that a statement contained in the prospectus or in any subsequently filed document
(or  part  thereof)  that  also  is,  or  is  deemed  to  be,  incorporated  by  reference  in  this
prospectus  modifies  or  replaces  such  statement.  Any  statement  so  modified  or
superseded shall not be deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to constitute part
of  this  prospectus.  The  modifying  or  superseding  statement  need  not  state  that  it  has
modified or superseded a prior statement or include any other information set forth in the
document which it modifies or supersedes.
You may obtain a copy of any of any filings that are incorporated by reference into this
prospectus, at no cost, by writing to or telephoning us at the following address:
Encana Corporation
4400, 500 Centre Street S.E.
Calgary, Alberta T2P 2S5
Canada
(403) 645-2000
Attention: Corporate Secretary
All shelf information permitted under applicable law to be omitted from this prospectus will
be contained in one or more prospectus supplements that will be delivered to purchasers
together  with  this  prospectus.  A  prospectus  supplement  or  prospectus  supplements
containing the specific terms for an issue of Securities will be delivered to purchasers of
such Securities together with this prospectus and will be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into this prospectus as of the date of such prospectus supplement but only for
the purposes of the Securities issued thereunder.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus and documents incorporated herein by reference contain certain forward-
looking statements or information (collectively, “forward-looking statements”)  within  the
meaning of applicable securities legislation. In addition to the cautionary statement below,
with respect to forward-looking statements contained in the documents incorporated by
reference  herein,  prospective  purchasers  should  refer  to  “Note  Regarding  Forward-
Looking  Statements”  in  our  AIF  and  “Advisory  –  Forward-Looking  Statements”  in  our
2015  MD&A  and  2016  Q2  MD&A,  as  well  as  to  similar  sections  of  any  documents
incorporated by reference in this prospectus that are filed after the date hereof. Forward-
looking statements include: statements regarding anticipated cash flow; anticipated cash
and cash equivalents; expected proceeds from announced divestitures, use of proceeds
therefrom,  satisfaction  of  closing  conditions  and  timing  of  closing;  anticipated  hedging
and outcomes of risk management program; the projections and expectation of meeting
the  targets  contained  in  the  Corporation’s  corporate  guidance;  growth  in  long-term
shareholder  value;  anticipated  oil,  natural  gas  and  natural  gas  liquids  prices;  expected
future  interest  expense  savings;  anticipated  future  cost  and  operating  efficiencies;  the
Corporation’s  expectation  to  fund  its  commitments  and  obligations  from  cash  flow  and
cash and cash equivalents; managing risk, including the impact of changes to the royalty
structure;  flexibility  of  capital  spending  plans;  estimates  of  reserves  and  resources;
expected production and product types; anticipated drilling, number of drilling rigs and
the success thereof; anticipated drilling costs and cycle times; expected construction of
compression  and  processing  capacity;  anticipated  revenues  and  operating  expenses;
expansion  of 
impact  of
environmental legislation and changes in laws or regulations; adequacy of provisions for
abandonment  and  site  reclamation  costs;  financial  flexibility  and  discipline,  access  to
cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  other  methods  of  funding;  the  ability  to  meet  financial
obligations,
level  of  expenditures  and
future  midstream  services;
Table of Contents
3
manage  debt  and  financial  ratios,  finance  growth  and  compliance  with  financial
covenants;  ability  to  preserve  balance  sheet  strength;  impact  to  the  Corporation  as  a
result  of  a  downgrade  to  its  credit  rating;  access  to  the  Corporation’s  credit  facility;
planned annualized dividend and the declaration and payment of future dividends, if any;
potential  future  discounts,  if  any,  in  connection  with  the  Corporation’s  dividend
reinvestment  program;  statements  with  respect  to  future  ceiling  test  impairments;  the
continued  evolution  of  the  Corporation’s  resource  play  hub  model  to  drive  greater
productivity and cost efficiencies while reducing its environmental footprint; statements
with respect to the Corporation’s strategic objectives; the adequacy of the Corporation’s
provision for taxes and legal claims; anticipated proceeds and future benefits from various
joint venture, partnership and other agreements; and the possible impact and timing of
accounting pronouncements, rule changes and standards.
Readers  are  cautioned  against  unduly  relying  on  forward-looking  statements  which,  by
their nature, involve numerous assumptions, risks and uncertainties that may cause such
statements  not  to  occur,  or  results  to  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  or  implied.
These assumptions include: the Corporation’s ability to access its revolving credit facility;
achieving  average  production  as  specified  in  the  Corporation’s  corporate  guidance;
availability  of  attractive  hedges  and  enforceability  of  risk  management  program;
effectiveness  of  the  Corporation’s  resource  play  hub  model  to  drive  productivity  and
efficiencies; results from innovations; the expectation that counterparties will fulfill their
obligations  under  the  gathering,  midstream  and  marketing  agreements;  access  to
transportation  and  processing  facilities  where  Encana  operates;  the  ability  to  satisfy
certain closing conditions, the successful closing of, and the value of post-closing and
other  adjustments  associated  with  announced  divestitures;  and  expectations  and
projections made in light of, and generally consistent with, Encana’s historical experience
and its perception of historical trends, including with respect to the pace of technological
development, the benefits achieved and general industry expectations.
Risks and uncertainties that may affect these business outcomes include: the ability to
generate  sufficient  cash  flow  to  meet  the  Corporation’s  obligations;  risks  inherent  to
losses  or  unexpected
interruption  and  casualty
closing  announced  divestitures  on  a  timely  basis  or  at  all  and  adjustments  that  may
reduce the expected proceeds and value to Encana; commodity price volatility; ability to
secure adequate product transportation and potential pipeline curtailments; variability and
discretion of Encana’s board of  directors  (the  “Board  of  Directors”)  to  declare  and  pay
dividends,  if  any;  the  timing  and  costs  of  well,  facilities  and  pipeline  construction;
business 
technical  difficulties;
counterparty  and  credit  risk;  risk  and  effect  of  a  downgrade  in  credit  rating,  including
below an investment-grade credit rating, and its impact on access to capital markets and
other  sources  of  liquidity;  fluctuations  in  currency  and  interest  rates;  assumptions
inherent  in  the  Corporation’s  corporate  guidance;  failure  to  achieve  anticipated  results
from  cost  and  efficiency  initiatives;  risks  inherent  in  marketing  operations;  risks
associated  with  technology;  changes  in  or  interpretation  of  royalty,  tax,  environmental,
greenhouse gas, carbon, accounting and other laws or regulations; risks associated with
existing  and  potential  future 
lawsuits  and  regulatory  actions  made  against  the
Corporation;  impact  to  the  Corporation  as  a  result  of  disputes  arising  with  its  partners,
including the suspension by its partners of certain of their obligations and the inability to
dispose of assets or interests in certain arrangements; the Corporation’s ability to acquire
or  find  additional  reserves; 
imprecision  of  reserves  estimates  and  estimates  of
recoverable quantities of natural gas and liquids from resource plays and other sources
not currently classified as proved, probable or possible reserves or economic contingent
resources, including future net revenue estimates; risks associated with past and future
acquisitions or divestitures of certain assets or other transactions or receipt of amounts
contemplated  under  the  transaction  agreements  (such  transactions  may  include  third-
party capital investments, farm-outs or partnerships, which Encana may refer to from time
to  time  as  “partnerships”  or  “joint  ventures”  and  the  funds  received  in  respect  thereof
which  Encana  may  refer  to  from  time  to  time  as  “proceeds”,  “deferred  purchase  price”
and/or “carry capital”, regardless of the legal form) as a result of various conditions not
being met; and other risks described under “Risk Factors” in this prospectus and risks
and  uncertainties  impacting  Encana’s  business  as  described  from  time  to  time  in  the
Corporation’s annual report and management’s discussion and analysis incorporated by
reference in this prospectus and in the Corporation’s other periodic filings with the SEC
incorporated by reference in this prospectus.
Although the Corporation believes the expectations represented by such forward-looking
statements are reasonable, there can be no assurance that such expectations will prove to
be  correct.  Readers  are  cautioned  that  the  assumptions,  risks  and  uncertainties
referenced  above  and  in  the  documents  incorporated  by  reference  herein  are  not
exhaustive. Forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this document (or, in
the  case  of  a  document  incorporated  by  reference,  the  date  of  such  document
incorporated by reference) and, except as required by law, the Corporation undertakes no
obligation  to  update  publicly  or  revise  any  forward-looking  statements.  The  forward-
looking  statements  contained  or  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  prospectus  are
expressly qualified by these cautionary statements.
4
Table of Contents
You  should  read  carefully  the  risk  factors  described  in  the  documents  incorporated  by
reference  in  this  prospectus  for  a  description  of  certain  risks  that  could,  among  other
things, cause actual results to differ from these forward-looking statements.
ENCANA CORPORATION
Encana is a leading North American energy producer that is focused on developing its
strong portfolio of diverse resource plays producing natural gas, oil and NGLs. Encana’s
operations  also  include  the  marketing  of  natural  gas,  oil  and  NGLs.  All  of  Encana’s
reserves and production are located in North America.
Our  registered  and  principal  office  is  located  at  4400,  500  Centre  Street  S.E.,  Calgary,
Alberta T2P 2S5, Canada. Our common shares are listed  and  posted  for  trading  on  the
TSX and on the NYSE under the symbol “ECA”.
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
The  following  table  summarizes  our  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  consolidated
capitalization  at  June  30,  2016.  You  should  read  this  table  together  with  our  unaudited
interim condensed consolidated financial statements as at and for the three and six-month
periods ended June 30, 2016.
Cash and cash equivalents
Current portion of long-term debt
Long-term debt
Shareholders’ equity:
Share capital
Paid in surplus
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Retained earnings (Accumulated deficit)
Total shareholders’ equity
Total capitalization
$          -
5,690
As at June 30, 2016
  
   (millions of dollars)
  
$      293
3,622
1,358
1,134
(1,207)
Actual
4,907
$ 10,597
There  have  been  no  material  changes  in  the  share  and  loan  capital  of  Encana,  on  a
consolidated basis, since June 30, 2016.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, we will use the net
proceeds  we  receive  from  the  sale  of  the  Securities  to  finance  capital  expenditures,  to
reduce  our  outstanding  indebtedness,  to  finance  future  acquisitions,  or  for  general
corporate purposes. The amount of net proceeds to be used for any such purpose will be
described in an applicable prospectus supplement. We may invest funds that we do not
immediately require in short-term marketable securities.
Table of Contents
5
PRICE RANGE
Our common shares are listed and posted for trading on the TSX and NYSE under the
symbol “ECA”. The following table sets forth the price range of our common shares as
reported by the TSX and the NYSE for the periods indicated:
Annual
TSX
NYSE
High      Low     Close     Volume      High      Low     Close     Volume  
    (millions)
(millions)
(US$ per share)
(C$ per share)
Year ended
December 31, 2015    17.79      6.49      7.03     
Year ended
December 31, 2014    26.85     13.31     16.17     
Year ended
December 31, 2013    20.98     17.40     19.18     
Year ended
December 31, 2012    23.83     17.25     19.66     
Year ended
December 31, 2011    34.25     18.40     18.89
900.3     14.72      4.66      5.09
498.4
588.6     24.83     11.45     13.87
236.4
589.8     20.55     16.49     18.05
232.1
619.9     24.28     17.03     19.76
262.7
603.7     35.22     17.64     18.53
239.9
Quarterly
2016
Three-month period
ended
September 30, 2016
(through to and
including August 23,
2016)
Three-month period
ended June 30,
2016
Three-month period
ended March 31,
13.42      9.56     13.18
164.5     10.43      7.35     10.19
75.7
11.47      7.41     10.05
410.7      9.03      5.63      7.79
185.6
2016
8.26      4.14      7.92
460.4      6.37      3.01      6.09
205.2
2015
Three-month period
ended
December 31, 2015    11.97      6.49      7.03     
Three-month period
ended
September 30, 2015    13.94      7.44      8.59     
Three-month period
ended
June 30, 2015
Three-month period
ended
March 31, 2015
17.75     13.50     13.77
17.79     13.50     14.14
2014
Three-month period
ended
December 31, 2014    24.41     13.31     16.17     
Three-month period
ended
September 30, 2014    25.69     22.78     23.78     
Three-month period
ended
June 30, 2014
Three-month period
ended
March 31, 2014
26.85     23.21     25.28
23.87     18.52     23.61
Monthly
  
August 1-23, 2016    13.42     10.01     13.18     
   11.45      9.56     10.50     
July 2016
   11.47      9.46     10.05     
June 2016
May 2016
   10.57      7.66     10.41     
    9.98      7.41      9.60     
April 2016
    8.26      5.45      7.92     
March 2016
February 2016
    6.71      4.14      5.85     
    7.50      4.37      6.15     
January 2016
   11.29      6.49      7.03     
December 2015
November 2015
   11.60      9.43     11.12     
   11.97      8.63      9.95     
October 2015
   10.40      8.31      8.59     
September 2015
August 2015
    9.97      7.44      9.83
6
282.0      9.23      4.66      5.09
148.5
252.6     11.09      5.55      6.44
140.0
176.2     14.72     10.82     11.02
105.6
189.6     14.36     10.54     11.15
104.4
182.6     21.74     11.45     13.87
91.1
118.5     23.96     20.72     21.21
47.3
135.0     24.83     21.10     23.71
50.5
152.6     21.59     17.18     21.38
47.5
75.1     10.43      7.59     10.20     
89.4      8.77      7.35      8.05     
120.7      9.03      7.22      7.79     
149.5      8.08      5.90      7.96     
140.5      7.93      5.64      7.66     
199.5      6.37      4.04      6.09     
148.1      4.91      3.01      4.29     
112.8      5.37      3.01      4.37     
109.2      8.45      4.66      5.09     
80.5      8.72      7.07      8.34     
92.3      9.23      6.52      7.63     
85.7      7.94      6.22      6.44     
91.4      7.66      5.55      7.44
35.2  
40.4  
54.8  
73.4  
57.4  
74.0  
72.3  
59.0  
51.4  
43.4  
53.6  
44.8  
47.4
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
In  this  section  only,  “we”,  “us”,  “our”  or  “Encana”  refer  only  to  Encana  Corporation
without any of its subsidiaries or partnerships through which it operates. The following
description describes certain general terms and provisions of the Debt Securities. We will
provide the particular terms and provisions of a series of Debt Securities and a description
of how the general terms and provisions described below may apply to that series in a
supplement to this prospectus.
The Debt Securities will be issued under an indenture (the “Indenture”) dated November
14, 2011 and entered into between us and The Bank of New York Mellon, as “Trustee”. The
Indenture is subject to and governed by the U.S. Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  Indenture  which  describes  the  material  terms  and
provisions of the Debt Securities. However, it is the Indenture, and not this summary, that
governs your rights as a holder of our Debt Securities. The Indenture has been filed with
securities commissions or similar authorities in Canada and the SEC and is available on
SEDAR  and  EDGAR,  respectively.  See  “Where  You  Can  Find  More  Information”.  In
addition,  prospective  investors  should  rely  on  information  in  the  applicable  prospectus
supplement,  which  may  provide  information  that  is  different  from  this  prospectus.  The
Debt  Securities  of  any  series  issued  under  the  Indenture,  including  any  series  of  Debt
Securities issued pursuant to an applicable prospectus supplement, are referred to in this
prospectus as the “Indenture Securities”.
We may, from time to time, issue debt instruments and incur additional indebtedness other
than through the issuance of Debt Securities pursuant to this prospectus.
General
The Indenture does not limit the aggregate principal amount of Debt Securities (which may
include debentures, notes and other evidences of indebtedness) that we may issue under
the Indenture. It provides that Debt Securities may be issued from time to time in one or
more series and may be denominated and payable in U.S. dollars or any foreign currency.
The  Indenture  also  permits  us  to  increase  the  principal  amount  of  any  series  of  the
Indenture Securities previously issued and to issue that increased principal amount. The
applicable  prospectus  supplement  will  set  forth  the  following  terms  and  information
relating to the Debt Securities being offered by us:
•
•
the specific designation and the aggregate principal amount of the Debt Securities
of such series;
the  extent  and  manner,  if  any,  to  which  payment  on  or  in  respect  of  our  Debt
Securities of such series will be senior or will be subordinated to the prior payment
of our other liabilities and obligations;
the percentage or percentages of principal amount at which our Debt Securities of
such series will be issued;
the  date  or  dates  on  which  the  principal  of  (and  premium,  if  any,  on)  our  Debt
Securities of such series will be payable and the portion (if less than the principal
amount) of the Debt Securities of such series to be payable upon a declaration of
acceleration of maturity and/or the method by which such date or dates shall be
determined or extended;
the rate or rates (whether fixed or variable) at which our Debt Securities of such
series  will  bear  interest,  if  any,  and  the  date  or  dates  from  which  such  interest
will accrue;
the dates on which any interest will be payable and the regular record dates for the
payment of interest on our Debt Securities of such series in registered form;
the place or places where the principal of (and premium, if any, and interest, if any,
on) our Debt Securities will be payable, and each office or agency where our Debt
Securities of such series may be presented for registration of transfer or exchange;
if other than U.S. dollars, the currency in which our Debt Securities of such series
are denominated or in which currency payment of the principal of (and premium, if
any, and interest, if any, on) such Debt Securities of such series will be payable;
•
•
•
•
•
•
7
Table of Contents
•
•
•
whether our Debt Securities of such series will be issuable in the form of one or
more  global  securities  and,  if  so,  the  identity  of  the  depositary  for  the  global
securities;
any mandatory or optional redemption or sinking fund provisions;
the period or periods, if any, within which, the price or prices at which, the currency
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the period or periods, if any, within which, the price or prices at which, the currency
in  which  and  the  terms  and  conditions  upon  which  our  Debt  Securities  of  such
series may be redeemed or purchased by us;
the terms and conditions, if any, upon which you may redeem our Debt Securities
of such series prior to maturity and the price or prices at which and the currency in
which our Debt Securities of such series are payable;
any index used to determine the amount of payments of principal of (and premium,
if any, or interest, if any, on) our Debt Securities of such series;
the terms, if any, on which our Debt Securities may be converted or exchanged for
other of our Debt Securities or Debt Securities of other entities;
any  other  terms  of  our  Debt  Securities  of  such  series,  including  covenants  and
events of default which apply solely to a particular series of our Debt Securities
being  offered  which  do  not  apply  generally  to  other  Debt  Securities,  or  any
covenants or events of default generally applicable to our Debt Securities of such
series which do not apply to a particular series of our Debt Securities;
if  other  than  The  Depository  Trust  Company,  the  person  designated  as  the
depositary for the Debt Securities of such series;
any applicable material Canadian and U.S. federal income tax consequences;
whether and under what circumstances we will pay Additional Amounts (defined
below  under  “Payment  of  Additional  Amounts”)  on  the  Debt  Securities  of  such
series in respect of certain taxes (and the terms of any such payment) and, if so,
whether we will have the option to redeem the Debt Securities of such series rather
than pay the Additional Amounts (and the terms of any such option);
whether  the  payment  of  our  Debt  Securities  will  be  guaranteed  by  any  other
person; and
if other than denominations of US$2,000 and any integral multiple of US$1,000 in
if other than denominations of US$2,000 and any integral multiple of US$1,000 in
excess  thereof,  the  denominations  in  which  any  securities  of  the  series  shall
be issuable.
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, the Indenture does
not afford holders of our Debt Securities the right to tender such Debt Securities to us in
the event that we have a change in control.
Our  Debt  Securities  may  be  issued  under  the  Indenture  bearing  no  interest  or  at  a
discount below their stated principal amount. The Canadian and U.S. federal income tax
consequences and other special considerations applicable to any such discounted Debt
Securities  or  other  Debt  Securities  offered  and  sold  at  par  which  are  treated  as  having
been issued at a discount for Canadian and/or U.S. federal income tax purposes will be
described in the prospectus supplement relating to the Debt Securities.
Ranking
Unless otherwise indicated in an applicable prospectus supplement, the Debt Securities
issued  under  the  Indenture  will  be  unsecured  and  unsubordinated  obligations  and  will
rank  equally  with  all  of  our  other  unsecured  and  unsubordinated  indebtedness
outstanding from time to time. We conduct a substantial portion of our business through
corporate  and  partnership  subsidiaries.  The  Debt  Securities  will  be  structurally
subordinated  to  all  existing  and  future  indebtedness  and  liabilities,  including  trade
payables, of any of our corporate or partnership subsidiaries. See “Risk Factors — The
Debt Securities will be effectively subordinated to certain indebtedness of our corporate
and partnership subsidiaries and be subject to certain reorganization risk”.
8
Table of Contents
Debt Securities in Global Form
The Depositary, Book-Entry and Settlement
A  series  of  our  Debt  Securities  may  be  issued  in  whole  or  in  part  in  global  form  as  a
“global security” and will be registered in the name of and be deposited with a depositary,
or its nominee, each of which will be identified in the prospectus supplement relating to
that  series.  Unless  and  until  exchanged,  in  whole  or  in  part,  for  our  Debt  Securities  in
definitive registered form, a global security may not be transferred except as a whole by
the depositary for such global security to a nominee of the depositary, by a nominee of the
depositary to the depositary or another nominee of the depositary or by the depositary or
any such nominee to a successor of the depositary or a nominee of the successor.
The  specific  terms  of  the  depositary  arrangement  with  respect  to  any  portion  of  a
particular  series  of  our  Debt  Securities  to  be  represented  by  a  global  security  will  be
described  in  a  prospectus  supplement  relating  to  such  series.  We  anticipate  that  the
following provisions will apply to all depositary arrangements.
Upon the issuance of a global security, the depositary therefor or its nominee will credit,
on its book entry and registration system, the respective principal amounts of our Debt
Securities represented by the global security to the accounts of such persons, designated
as “participants”, having accounts with such depositary or its nominee. Such accounts
shall be designated by the underwriters, dealers or agents participating in the distribution
of our Debt Securities or by us if such Debt Securities are offered and sold directly by us.
Ownership  of  beneficial  interests  in  a  global  security  will  be  limited  to  participants  or
persons that may hold beneficial interests through participants. Ownership of beneficial
interests in a global security will be shown on, and the transfer of that ownership will be
effected only through, records maintained by the depositary therefor or its nominee (with
respect  to  interests  of  participants)  or  by  participants  or  persons  that  hold  through
participants (with respect to interests of persons other than participants).
So long as the depositary for a global security, or its nominee, is the registered owner of
the  global  security,  such  depositary  or  such  nominee,  as  the  case  may  be,  will  be
considered  the  sole  owner  or  holder  of  the  Debt  Securities  represented  by  the  global
security  for  all  purposes  under  the  Indenture.  Except  as  provided  below,  owners  of
beneficial  interests  in  a  global  security  will  not  be  entitled  to  have  a  series  of  our  Debt
Securities represented by the global security registered in their names and will not receive
or  be  entitled  to  receive  physical  delivery  of  such  series  of  our  Debt  Securities  in
definitive form.
Payments of Principal, Premium, if any, and Interest
Any payments of principal, premium, if any, and interest on global securities registered in
the name of a depositary or its nominee will be made to the depositary or its nominee, as
the case may be, as the registered owner of the global security representing such Debt
Securities.  None  of  us,  the  Trustee  or  any  paying  agent  for  our  Debt  Securities
represented by the global securities will have any responsibility or liability for any aspect
of the records relating to or payments made on account of beneficial ownership interests
of the global security or for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any records relating to
such beneficial ownership interests.
We  expect  that  the  depositary  for  a  global  security  or  its  nominee,  upon  receipt  of  any
payment  of  principal,  premium,  if  any,  or  interest,  will  credit  participants’  accounts  with
payments in amounts proportionate to their respective beneficial interests in the principal
amount of the global security as shown on the records of such depositary or its nominee.
We also expect that payments by participants to owners of beneficial interests in a global
security  held  through  such  participants  will  be  governed  by  standing  instructions  and
customary practices, as is now the case with securities held for the accounts of customers
registered in “street name”, and will be the responsibility of such participants.
Discontinuance of Depositary’s Services
If a depositary for a global security representing a particular series of our Debt Securities
is at any time unwilling or unable to continue as depositary and a successor depositary is
not  appointed  by  us  within  90  days,  we  will  issue  such  series  of  our  Debt  Securities  in
definitive  form  in  exchange  for  a  global  security  representing  such  series  of  our  Debt
Securities. In addition, we may at any time and in our sole discretion determine not to have
a series of our Debt Securities represented by a global security and, in such event, will
issue a series of our Debt Securities in definitive form in exchange for the global security
representing such series of Debt Securities.
9
Table of Contents
Debt Securities in Definitive Form
A  series  of  our  Debt  Securities  may  be  issued  solely  as  registered  securities  in
denominations of US$2,000 and any integral multiple of US$1,000 in excess thereof or in
such other denominations as may be set out in a prospectus supplement relating to any
particular series.
An applicable prospectus supplement will indicate the places to register a transfer of our
Debt Securities in definitive form. Except for certain restrictions set forth in the Indenture,
no service charge will be made for any registration of transfer or exchange of such Debt
Securities, but we may, in certain instances, require a sum sufficient to cover any tax or
other governmental charges payable in connection with these transactions.
We shall not be required to:
•
•
issue, register the transfer of or exchange any series of our Debt Securities during
a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of selection
for redemption of Debt Securities of that series and ending at the close of business
on the day of mailing of the relevant notice of redemption; or
register  the  transfer  of  or  exchange  any  security,  or  portion  thereof,  called  for
redemption,  except  the  unredeemed  portion  of  any  security  being  redeemed
in part.
Unless  otherwise  indicated  in  the  applicable  prospectus  supplement,  payment  of  any
interest will be made to the persons in whose name our Debt Securities are registered at
the close of business on the day or days specified by us.
Certain Definitions
Set forth below is a summary of certain of the defined terms used in the Indenture. The
Indenture contains the full definition of all such terms.  See  “Where  You  Can  Find  More
Information”.
“Consolidated Net Tangible Assets” means the total amount of assets of any person on a
consolidated  basis  (less  applicable  reserves  and  other  properly  deductible  items)  after
deducting therefrom:
•
•
•
all  current  liabilities  (excluding  any  indebtedness  classified  as  a  current  liability
and any current liabilities which are by their terms extendible or renewable at the
option of the obligor thereon to a time more than 12 months after the time as of
which the amount thereof is being computed);
all goodwill, trade names, trademarks, patents and other like intangibles; and
appropriate adjustments on account of minority interests of other persons holding
shares of the Subsidiaries of such person,
in  each  case,  as  shown  on  the  most  recent  annual  audited  or  quarterly  unaudited
consolidated balance sheet of such person computed in accordance with GAAP.
“Current Assets” means assets which in the ordinary course of business are expected to
be realized in cash or sold or consumed within 12 months.
facilities;
“Facilities” means any drilling equipment, production equipment and platforms or mining
equipment;  pipelines,  pumping  stations  and  other  pipeline 
terminals,
warehouses  and  storage  facilities;  bulk  plants;  production,  separation,  dehydration,
extraction,  treating  and  processing  facilities;  gasification  or  natural  gas  liquefying
facilities,  flares,  stacks  and  burning  towers;  natural  gas  distribution  facilities,  including
equipment for delivery to end users; floatation mills, crushers and ore handling facilities;
tank  cars,  tankers,  barges,  ships,  trucks,  automobiles,  airplanes  and  other  marine,
automotive,  aeronautical  and  other  similar  moveable  facilities  or  equipment;  computer
systems  and  associated  programs  or  office  equipment;  roads,  airports,  docks
(including drydocks); reservoirs and waste disposal facilities; sewers; generating plants
(including power plants) and electric lines; telephone and telegraph lines, radio and other
communications facilities; townsites, housing facilities, recreation halls, stores and other
related  facilities;  and  similar  facilities  and  equipment  of  or  associated  with  any  of
the foregoing.
Table of Contents
10
“Financial Instrument Obligations” means obligations arising under:
•
interest  rate  swap  agreements,  forward  rate  agreements,  floor,  cap  or  collar
agreements,  futures  or  options,  insurance  or  other  similar  agreements  or
arrangements,  or  any  combination  thereof,  entered  into  by  a  person  relating  to
•
•
interest rates or pursuant to which the price, value or amount payable thereunder is
dependent or based upon interest rates in effect from time to time or fluctuations in
interest rates occurring from time to time;
currency swap agreements, cross-currency agreements, forward agreements, floor,
cap or collar agreements, futures or options, insurance or other similar agreements
or arrangements, or any combination thereof, entered into by a person relating to
currency exchange rates or pursuant to which the price, value or amount payable
thereunder  is  dependent  or  based  upon  currency  exchange  rates  in  effect  from
time  to  time  or  fluctuations  in  currency  exchange  rates  occurring  from  time  to
time; and
commodity  swap  or  hedging  agreements,  floor,  cap  or  collar  agreements,
commodity futures or options or other similar agreements or arrangements, or any
combination thereof, entered into by a person relating to one or more commodities
or pursuant to which the price, value or amount payable thereunder is dependent
or based upon the price of one or more commodities in effect from time to time or
fluctuations in the price of one or more commodities occurring from time to time.
“GAAP”  means  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  in  Canada  which  are  in  effect
from  time  to  time,  unless  the  person’s  most  recent  audited  or  quarterly  financial
statements are not prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
in Canada, in which case GAAP shall mean generally accepted accounting principles in
the United States in effect from time to time.
“Lien”  means,  with  respect  to  any  properties  or  assets,  any  mortgage  or  deed  of  trust,
pledge,  hypothecation,  assignment,  security 
lien,  charge,  encumbrance,
preference, priority or other security agreement or preferential arrangement of any kind or
nature  whatsoever  on  or  with  respect  to  such  properties  or  assets  (including,  without
limitation, any conditional sale or other title retention agreement having substantially the
same economic effect as any of the foregoing).
interest,
“Non-Recourse  Debt”  means  indebtedness  to  finance  the  creation,  development,
construction  or  acquisition  of  properties  or  assets  and  any  increases  in  or  extensions,
renewals or refinancings of such indebtedness, provided that the recourse of the lender
thereof  (including  any  agent,  trustee,  receiver  or  other  person  acting  on  behalf  of  such
lender) in respect of such indebtedness is limited in all circumstances to the properties or
assets  created,  developed,  constructed  or  acquired 
in  respect  of  which  such
indebtedness  has  been  incurred  and  to  the  receivables,  inventory,  equipment,  chattels
payable,  contracts,  intangibles  and  other  assets,  rights  or  collateral  connected  with  the
properties  or  assets  created,  developed,  constructed  or  acquired  and  to  which  such
lender has recourse.
“Permitted Liens” of any person at any particular time means:
Liens  existing  as  of  the  date  of  the  Indenture,  or  arising  thereafter  pursuant  to
Liens  existing  as  of  the  date  of  the  Indenture,  or  arising  thereafter  pursuant  to
contractual commitments entered into prior to such date;
Liens on Current Assets given in the ordinary course of business to any financial
institution or others to secure any indebtedness payable on demand or maturing
(including any right of extension or renewal) within 12 months from the date such
indebtedness is incurred;
Liens in connection with indebtedness, which, by its terms, is Non-Recourse Debt
to us or any of our Subsidiaries;
Liens existing on property or assets at the time of acquisition (including by way of
lease) by such person, provided that such Liens were not incurred in anticipation of
such acquisition;
Liens  or  obligations  to  incur  Liens  (including  under  indentures,  trust  deeds  and
similar  instruments)  on  property  or  assets  of  another  person  existing  at  the  time
such other person becomes a Subsidiary of such
•
•
•
•
•
11
Table of Contents
person, or is liquidated or merged into, or amalgamated or consolidated with, such
person  or  Subsidiary  of  such  person  or  at  the  time  of  the  sale,  lease  or  other
disposition to such person or Subsidiary of such person of all or substantially all of
the properties and assets of such other person, provided that such Liens were not
incurred  in  anticipation  of  such  other  person  becoming  a  Subsidiary  of
such person;
Liens upon property or assets of whatsoever nature other than Restricted Property;
Liens  upon  property,  assets  or  facilities  used  in  connection  with,  or  necessarily
incidental to, the purchase, sale, storage, transportation or distribution of oil or gas,
or the products derived from oil or gas;
•
•
•
•
trust  agreements,  master
limited  partnership  agreements,
Liens arising under partnership agreements, oil and natural gas leases, overriding
royalty  agreements,  net  profits  agreements,  production  payment  agreements,
royalty 
farm-out
agreements, division orders, contracts for the sale, purchase, exchange, storage,
transportation,  distribution,  gathering  or  processing  of  Restricted  Property,
unitizations  and  pooling  designations,  declarations,  orders  and  agreements,
development  agreements,  operating  agreements,  production  sales  contracts
(including security in respect of take or pay or similar obligations thereunder), area
of  mutual  interest  agreements,  natural  gas  balancing  or  deferred  production
agreements, injection, repressuring and recycling agreements, salt water or other
disposal  agreements,  seismic  or  geophysical  permits  or  agreements,  which  in
each of the foregoing cases is customary in the oil and natural gas business, and
other  agreements  which  are  customary  in  the  oil  and  natural  gas  business,
provided in all instances that such Lien is limited to the property or assets that are
the subject of the relevant agreement;
Liens on assets or property securing (i) all or any portion of the cost of acquisition
(directly  or  indirectly),  surveying,  exploration,  drilling,  development,  extraction,
operation, production, construction, alteration, repair or improvement of all or any
part of such assets or property, the plugging and abandonment of wells and the
decommissioning  or  removal  of  structures  or  facilities  located  thereon,  and  the
reclamation  and  clean-up  of  such  properties,  facilities  and  interests  and
surrounding  lands  whether  or  not  owned  by  us  or  our  Restricted  Subsidiaries,
(ii)  all  or  any  portion  of  the  cost  of  acquiring  (directly  or  indirectly),  developing,
constructing,  altering,  improving,  operating  or  repairing  any  assets  or  property
(or  improvements  on  such  assets  or  property)  used  or  to  be  used  in  connection
with such assets or property, whether or not located (or located from time to time) at
or  on  such  assets  or  property,  (iii)  indebtedness  incurred  by  us  or  any  of  our
Subsidiaries to provide funds for the activities set forth in clauses (i) and (ii) above,
provided such indebtedness is incurred prior to, during or within two years after the
completion  of  acquisition,  construction  or  such  other  activities  referred  to  in
clauses  (i)  and  (ii)  above,  and  (iv)  indebtedness  incurred  by  us  or  any  of  our
Subsidiaries  to  refinance  indebtedness  incurred  for  the  purposes  set  forth  in
clauses  (i)  and  (ii)  above.  Without  limiting  the  generality  of  the  foregoing,  costs
incurred after the date hereof with respect to clauses (i) or (ii) above shall include
costs  incurred  for  all  facilities  relating  to  such  assets  or  property,  or  to  projects,
ventures  or  other  arrangements  of  which  such  assets  or  property  form  a  part  or
which  relate  to  such  assets  or  property,  which  facilities  shall  include,  without
limitation, Facilities, whether or not in whole or in part located (or from time to time
located) at or on such assets or property;
•
Liens  granted  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  in  connection  with  Financial
Instrument Obligations;
Purchase Money Mortgages;
Purchase Money Mortgages;
Liens in favor of us or any of our Subsidiaries to secure indebtedness owed to us
or any of our Subsidiaries; and
(or  successive  extensions,
any  extension,  renewal,  alteration,  refinancing,  replacement,  exchange  or
refunding 
refinancings,
replacements, exchanges or refundings) of all or part of any Lien referred to in the
foregoing clauses; provided, however, that (i) such new Lien shall be limited to all
or  part  of  the  property  or  assets  which  was  secured  by  the  prior  Lien  plus
improvements on such property or assets and (ii) the indebtedness, if any, secured
by the new Lien is not increased from the amount of the
renewals,  alterations,
•
•
•
12
Table of Contents
indebtedness secured by the prior Lien then existing at the time of such extension,
renewal,  alteration,  refinancing,  replacement,  exchange  or  refunding,  plus  an
amount necessary to pay fees and expenses, including premiums, related to such
extensions, 
replacements,  exchanges
or refundings.
renewals,  alterations,
refinancings,
“Purchase Money Mortgage” of any person means any Lien created upon any property or
assets of such person to secure or securing the whole or any part of the purchase price of
such property or assets or the whole or any part of the cost of constructing or installing
fixed improvements thereon or to secure or securing the repayment of money borrowed to
pay the whole or any part of such purchase price (including any lease payments) or cost
of any vendor’s privilege or Lien on such property or assets securing all or any part of
such purchase price or cost including title retention agreements and leases; provided that
(i)  the  principal  amount  of  money  borrowed  which  is  secured  by  such  Lien  does  not
exceed  100%  of  such  purchase  price  or  cost  and  any  fees  incurred  in  connection
therewith, and (ii) such Lien does not extend to or cover any other property other than
such item of property and any improvements on such item.
“Restricted Property” means any oil, gas or mineral property of a primary nature located in
the  United  States  or  Canada,  and  any  facilities  located  in  the  United  States  or  Canada
directly related to the mining, processing or manufacture of hydrocarbons or minerals, or
any of the constituents thereof, or the derivatives therefrom, and includes Voting Shares
or other interests of a corporation or other person which owns such property or facilities,
but does not include (i) any property or facilities used in connection with or necessarily
incidental  to  the  purchase,  sale,  storage,  transportation  or  distribution  of  Restricted
Property, (ii) any property which, in the opinion of our Board of Directors, is not materially
important to the total business conducted by us and our Subsidiaries as an entirety or
(iii) any portion of a particular property which, in the opinion of our Board of Directors, is
not materially important to the use or operation of such property.
“Restricted Subsidiary”  means  any  Subsidiary  of  ours  which  owns  Restricted  Property
which assets represent not less than the greater of (i) 5% of our Consolidated Net Tangible
Assets and (ii) $100,000,000 (or the equivalent thereof in any other currency), excluding
however  any  Subsidiary  if  the  amount  of  our  share  of  the  Shareholders’  Equity  therein
does not at the time exceed 2% of our Shareholders’ Equity.
“Shareholders’ Equity”  means  the  aggregate  amount  of  shareholders’  equity  (including
but not limited to share capital, contributed surplus and retained earnings) of a person as
shown on the most recent annual audited or unaudited interim consolidated balance sheet
of such person and computed in accordance with GAAP.
“Subsidiary” of any person means, on any date, any corporation or other person of which
Voting Shares or other interests carrying more than 50% of the voting rights attached to all
outstanding  Voting  Shares  or  other  interests  are  owned,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  or  for
such person or one or more Subsidiaries thereof.
“Voting  Shares”  means  shares  of  any  class  of  any  corporation  carrying  voting  rights
under  all  circumstances, provided that, for the purposes of this definition, shares which
only  carry  the  right  to  vote  conditionally  on  the  happening  of  any  event  shall  not  be
considered Voting Shares, nor shall any shares be deemed to cease to be Voting Shares
solely  by  reason  of  a  right  to  vote  accruing  to  shares  of  another  class  or  classes  by
reason of the happening of such an event, or solely because the right to vote may not be
exercisable under the charter of the corporation.
Covenants
Limitation on Liens
The  Indenture  provides  that  so  long  as  any  Indenture  Securities  are  outstanding  and
subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Indenture,  we  will  not,  and  will  not  permit  any  of  our
Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, assume or otherwise have outstanding any Lien
securing any indebtedness for borrowed money or interest thereon (or any liability of ours
or such Restricted Subsidiaries under any guarantee or endorsement or other instrument
under which we or such Restricted Subsidiaries are contingently liable, either directly or
indirectly,  for  borrowed  money  or  interest  thereon),  other  than  Permitted  Liens,  without
also simultaneously or prior thereto securing, or causing such Restricted Subsidiaries to
secure,  indebtedness  under  the  Indenture  so  that  the  Indenture  Securities  are  secured
equally  and  ratably  with  or  prior  to  such  other  indebtedness,  except  that  we  and  our
Restricted Subsidiaries may incur a Lien to secure indebtedness for borrowed money
Table of Contents
13
without  securing  the  Indenture  Securities  if,  after  giving  effect  thereto,  the  principal
amount  of  indebtedness  for  borrowed  money  secured  by  Liens  created,  incurred  or
assumed after the date of the Indenture and otherwise prohibited by the Indenture does
not exceed 10% of our Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, transactions such as the sale (including any forward sale)
or other transfer of (i) oil, gas, minerals or other resources of a primary nature, whether in
place  or  when  produced,  for  a  period  of  time  until,  or  in  an  amount  such  that,  the
purchaser will realize therefrom a specified amount of money or a specified rate of return
(however determined), or a specified amount of such oil, gas, minerals, or other resources
of a primary nature, or (ii) any other interest in property of the character commonly referred
to  as  a  “production  payment”,  will  not  constitute  a  Lien  and  will  not  result  in  us  or  a
Restricted Subsidiary of ours being required to secure the Indenture Securities.
Consolidation, Amalgamation, Merger and Sale of Assets
We  shall  not  consolidate  or  amalgamate  with  or  merge  into  or  enter  into  any  statutory
arrangement with any other corporation, partnership or trust or convey, transfer or lease
all or substantially all our properties and assets to any person, unless:
•
•
•
territory
the entity formed by or continuing from such consolidation or amalgamation or into
which we are merged or with which we enter into such statutory arrangement or the
person which acquires or leases all or substantially all of our properties and assets
is a corporation, partnership or trust organized and validly existing under the laws
of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia or the laws of
Canada  or  any  province  or 
if  such  consolidation,
amalgamation, merger, statutory arrangement or other transaction would not impair
the rights of the holders of the Indenture Securities, in any other country, provided
that if such successor entity is organized under the laws of a jurisdiction other than
the  United  States,  any  state  thereof  or  the  District  of  Columbia,  or  the  laws  of
Canada  or  any  province  or  territory  thereof,  the  successor  entity  assumes  our
obligations  under  the  Indenture  Securities  and  the  Indenture  to  pay  Additional
Amounts, with the name of such successor jurisdiction being included in addition
to  Canada  in  each  place  that  Canada  appears  in  “—  Payment  of  Additional
Amounts” and “— Tax Redemption” below;
thereof,  or,
the successor entity expressly assumes or assumes by operation of law all of our
obligations under the Indenture Securities and under the Indenture;
immediately before and after giving effect to such transaction, no event of default,
and no event which, after notice or lapse of time or both, would become an event of
default, shall have happened and be continuing; and
certain other conditions are met.
•
certain other conditions are met.
In addition, notwithstanding anything in the Indenture, we may consolidate or amalgamate
with or merge into or enter into a statutory arrangement with any direct or indirect wholly-
owned  Subsidiary  and  may  convey,  transfer  or  lease  all  or  substantially  all  of  our
properties and assets to any direct or indirect wholly-owned Subsidiary without complying
with the above provisions in a transaction or series of transactions in which we retain all of
our obligations under and in respect of all outstanding Indenture Securities (hereinafter a
“Permitted  Reorganization”)  provided  that  on  or  prior  to  the  date  of  the  Permitted
Reorganization we deliver to the Trustee an officer’s certificate confirming that, as of the
date of the Permitted Reorganization:
•
substantially all of our unsubordinated and unsecured indebtedness for borrowed
money  which  ranked  pari  passu  with  the  then  outstanding  Indenture  Securities
immediately  prior  to  the  Permitted  Reorganization  will  rank  no  better  than
pari  passu  with  the  then  outstanding  Indenture  Securities  after  the  Permitted
Reorganization;  for  certainty,  there  is  no  requirement  for  any  such  other
indebtedness  to  obtain  or  maintain  similar  ranking  to  the  then  outstanding
Indenture  Securities  and  such  other 
indebtedness  may  be  structurally
subordinated  or  otherwise  subordinated  to  the  then  outstanding  Indenture
Securities; or
14
Table of Contents
•
at  least  two  of  our  then  current  rating  agencies  (or  if  only  one  rating  agency
maintains ratings in respect of the Indenture Securities at such time, that one rating
agency) have affirmed that the rating assigned by them to the Indenture Securities
shall not be downgraded as a result of the Permitted Reorganization.
If,  as  a  result  of  any  such  transactions  referred  to  above,  any  of  our  or  our  Restricted
Subsidiaries’  Restricted  Properties  become  subject  to  a  Lien,  then,  unless  such  Lien
could be created pursuant to the Indenture provisions described under the “Limitation on
Liens” covenant above without equally and ratably securing the Indenture Securities, we,
simultaneously  with  or  prior  to  such  transaction,  will  secure,  or  cause  the  applicable
Restricted Subsidiary to secure, the Indenture Securities to be secured equally and ratably
with or prior to the indebtedness secured by such Lien.
Payment of Additional Amounts
Unless otherwise specified in the applicable prospectus supplement, all payments made
by or on behalf of us under or with respect to any series of the Indenture Securities will be
made  free  and  clear  of  and  without  withholding  or  deduction  for  or  on  account  of  any
present  or  future  tax,  duty,  levy,  impost,  assessment  or  other  governmental  charge
(including penalties, interest and other liabilities related thereto) imposed or levied by or
on  behalf  of  the  Government  of  Canada  or  any  province  or  territory  thereof  or  by  any
authority or agency therein or thereof having power to tax (hereinafter “Canadian Taxes”),
unless  we  are  required  to  withhold  or  deduct  Canadian  Taxes  by  law  or  by  the
interpretation  or  administration  thereof.  If  we  are  so  required  to  withhold  or  deduct  any
amount  for  or  on  account  of  Canadian  Taxes  from  any  payment  made  under  or  with
respect to the Indenture Securities, we will pay to each holder of such Indenture Securities
as  additional  interest  such  additional  amounts  (“Additional  Amounts”)  as  may  be
necessary so that the net amount received by each such holder (including the Additional
Amounts) after such withholding or deduction (and after deducting any Canadian Taxes
on such Additional Amounts) will not be less than the amount such holder would have
received  if  such  Canadian  Taxes  had  not  been  withheld  or  deducted.  However,  no
Additional  Amounts  will  be  payable  with  respect  to  a  payment  made  to  an  Indenture
Securities  holder  (such  holder,  an  “Excluded  Holder”)  in  respect  of  the  beneficial
owner thereof:
•
•
•
with which we do not deal at arm’s length (for the purposes of the Income Tax Act
(Canada)) at the time the amount is paid or payable;
which  is  subject  to  such  Canadian  Taxes  by  reason  of  the  Indenture  Securities
holder  being  a  resident,  domicile  or  national  of,  or  engaged  in  business  or
maintaining a permanent establishment or other physical presence in or otherwise
having some connection with Canada or any province or territory thereof otherwise
than  by  the  mere  holding  of  the  Indenture  Securities  or  the  receipt  of  payments
thereunder; or
which  is  subject  to  such  Canadian  Taxes  by  reason  of  the  Indenture  Securities
holder’s  failure  to  comply  with  any  certification,  identification,  information,
documentation  or  other  reporting  requirements  if  compliance  is  required  by  law,
regulation,  administrative  practice  or  an  applicable  treaty  as  a  precondition  to
exemption  from,  or  a  reduction  in  the  rate  of  deduction  or  withholding  of,  such
Canadian Taxes.
In addition, Additional Amounts will not be payable if the beneficial owner of, or person
ultimately  entitled  to  obtain  an  interest  in,  such  Indenture  Securities  is  not  the  sole
beneficial owner of such payments, or is a fiduciary or partnership, to the extent that any
beneficial  owner,  beneficiary  or  settlor  with  respect  to  such  fiduciary  or  any  partner  or
member  of  such  partnership  would  not  have  been  entitled  to  such  Additional  Amounts
with respect to such payments had such beneficial owner, beneficiary, settlor, partner or
member  received  directly  its  beneficial  or  distributive  shares  of  such  payments.  In
addition,  Additional  Amounts  will  not  be  payable  with  respect  to  any  Canadian  Taxes
which  are  payable  otherwise  than  by  withholding  from  payments  of,  or  in  respect  of,
principal of, or interest on, the Indenture Securities.
We will also:
•
•
make such withholding or deduction; and
remit the full amount deducted or withheld to the relevant authority in accordance
with applicable law.
We will furnish to the holders of the Indenture Securities, within 60 days after the date the
payment of any Canadian Taxes is due pursuant to applicable law, certified copies of tax
receipts or other documents evidencing such payment by us.
Table of Contents
15
We will indemnify and hold harmless each holder of Indenture Securities (other than an
Excluded Holder) and upon written request reimburse each such holder for the amount
(excluding  any  Additional  Amounts  that  have  previously  been  paid  by  us  with  respect
thereto) of:
•
•
the  payment  of  any  Canadian  Tax,  together  with  any  interest,  penalties  and
reasonable expenses in connection therewith; and
any  Canadian  Taxes  imposed  with  respect  to  any  reimbursement  under  the
preceding  clause,  but  excluding  any  such  Canadian  Taxes  on  such  holder’s
net income.
In any event, no Additional Amounts or indemnity amounts will be payable in excess of
Additional Amounts or the indemnity amounts which would be required if the holder and
beneficial owner of Indenture Securities was a resident of the United States for purposes
of the Canada-U.S. Income Tax Convention (1980), as amended.
Wherever  in  the  Indenture  there  is  mentioned,  in  any  context,  the  payment  of  principal
(and premium, if any), interest, if any, or any other amount payable under or with respect to
an Indenture Security, such mention shall be deemed to include mention of the payment of
Additional Amounts to the extent that, in such context, Additional Amounts are, were or
would be payable in respect thereof.
Tax Redemption
Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the  applicable  prospectus  supplement,  a  series  of  the
Indenture Securities will be subject to redemption at any time, in whole and not in part, at a
redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof together with accrued and unpaid
interest to the date fixed for redemption, upon the giving of a notice as described below, if:
•
•
as  a  result  of  any  change  in  or  amendment  to  the  laws  (or  any  regulations  or
rulings promulgated thereunder) of Canada or of any political subdivision or taxing
authority  thereof  or  therein  affecting  taxation,  or  any  change  in  official  position
regarding  the  application  or  interpretation  of  such  laws,  regulations  or  rulings
(including  a  holding  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction),  which  change  or
amendment is announced or becomes effective on or after the later of (i) the date
specified in the applicable prospectus supplement or (ii) if applicable, the date a
person organized in a jurisdiction other than Canada or the United States becomes
our successor pursuant to the consolidation covenant of the Indenture described
above under “ — Covenants — Consolidation, Amalgamation, Merger and Sale of
Assets”, we or our successor reasonably determines that we or our successor have
or will become obligated to pay, on the next succeeding date on which interest is
due, Additional Amounts with respect to any Indenture Security of such series as
described under “ — Payment of Additional Amounts”; or
on  or  after  the  later  of  (i)  the  date  specified  in  the  applicable  prospectus
supplement or (ii) if applicable, the date a person organized in a jurisdiction other
than  Canada  or  the  United  States  becomes  our  successor  pursuant  to  the
consolidation covenant of the Indenture, any action has been taken by any taxing
authority of, or any decision has been rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction
in  Canada,  or  any  political  subdivision  or  taxing  authority  thereof  or  therein,
including  any  of  those  actions  specified  in  the  paragraph  immediately  above,
whether or not such action was taken or decision was rendered with respect to us,
or our successor, or any change, amendment, application or interpretation shall be
officially proposed, which, in any such case, in the written opinion to us of legal
counsel of recognized standing, will likely result in us or our successor becoming
obligated to pay, on the next succeeding date on which interest is due, Additional
Amounts with respect to any Indenture Security of such series;
and, in any such case, we, or our successor, in our business judgment, determine that
such obligation cannot be avoided by the use of reasonable measures available to us or
our successor.
In the event that we elect to redeem a series of the Indenture Securities pursuant to the
provisions  set  forth  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  we  shall  deliver  to  the  Trustee  a
certificate,  signed  by  an  authorized  officer,  stating  that  we  are  entitled  to  redeem  such
series of the Indenture Securities pursuant to their terms.
16
Table of Contents
Notice of intention to redeem such series of the Indenture Securities will be given not more
than 60 nor less than 30 days prior to the date fixed for redemption and will specify the
date fixed for redemption.
Provision of Financial Information
We will furnish to the Trustee, within 30 days after we file them with or furnish them to the
SEC, copies, which may be in electronic format, of our annual and quarterly reports and of
the information, documents and other reports (or copies of such portions of any of the
foregoing as the SEC may by rules and regulations prescribe) which we are required to file
with or furnish to the SEC pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act.
Notwithstanding  that  we  may  not  be  required  to  remain  subject  to  the  reporting
requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act or otherwise report on an annual
and quarterly basis on forms provided for such annual and quarterly reporting pursuant to
rules and regulations promulgated by the SEC, we will continue to provide the Trustee:
•
•
within  140  days  after  the  end  of  each  fiscal  year,  the  information  required  to  be
contained in annual reports on Form 20-F, Form 40-F or Form 10-K as applicable
(or any successor form); and
within 65 days after the end of each of the first three fiscal quarters of each fiscal
year,  the  information  required  to  be  contained  in  reports  on  Form  6-K  (or  any
successor form) which, regardless of applicable requirements shall, at a minimum,
contain  such  information  required  to  be  provided  in  quarterly  reports  under  the
laws of Canada or any province thereof to security holders of a corporation with
securities listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange, whether or not we have any of our
securities  listed  on  such  exchange.  Such  information  will  be  prepared  in
accordance  with  Canadian  disclosure  requirements  and  GAAP,  to  the  extent
permitted by the rules and regulations of the SEC, provided, however, that we shall
not  be  obligated  to  file  such  report  with  the  SEC  if  the  SEC  does  not  permit
such filings.
Events of Default
The following are summaries of events of default under the Indenture with respect to any
series of the Indenture Securities:
•
default in the payment of any interest on any Indenture Security of that series when
such  interest  becomes  due  and  payable,  and  continuance  of  such  default  for  a
period of 30 days;
default in the payment of the principal of (or premium, if any, on), any Indenture
Security of that series when it becomes due and payable;
default in the performance, or breach, of any of our covenants or warranties in the
Indenture  in  respect  of  the  Indenture  Securities  of  that  series  (other  than  a
covenant or warranty a default in the performance of which or the breach of which
is  specifically  dealt  with  elsewhere  in  the  Indenture),  and  continuance  of  such
default or breach for a period of 60 days after receipt by us of written notice to us,
specifying such default or breach, by the Trustee or by the holders of at least 25%
in principal amount of all outstanding Indenture Securities of any series affected
thereby;
if an event of default (as defined in any indenture or instrument under which we or
one  of  our  Restricted  Subsidiaries  has  at  the  time  of  the  Indenture  or  shall
thereafter have outstanding any indebtedness for borrowed money) shall happen
and be continuing, or we or any of our Restricted Subsidiaries shall have failed to
pay  principal  amounts  with  respect  to  such  indebtedness  at  maturity  and  such
event of default or failure to pay shall result in such indebtedness being declared
due and payable or otherwise being accelerated, in either event so that an amount
in excess of the greater of US$200,000,000 and 2% of our Shareholders’ Equity
shall  be  or  become  due  and  payable  upon  such  declaration  or  otherwise
accelerated  prior  to  the  date  on  which  the  same  would  otherwise  have  become
due and payable (the “accelerated indebtedness”), and such acceleration shall
not be rescinded or annulled, or such event of default or failure to pay under such
indenture or instrument shall not be remedied or cured, whether by payment or
•
•
•
17
Table of Contents
otherwise, or waived by the holders of such accelerated indebtedness, then (i) if
the accelerated indebtedness shall be as a result of an event of default which is
not related to the failure to pay principal or interest on the terms, at the times, and
on  the  conditions  set  out  in  any  such  indenture  or  instrument,  it  shall  not  be
considered  an  event  of  default  for  purposes  of  the  Indenture  until  30  days  after
such indebtedness has been accelerated, or (ii) if the accelerated indebtedness
shall occur as a result of such failure to pay principal or interest or as a result of an
event of default which is related to the failure to pay principal or interest on the
terms,  at  the  times,  and  on  the  conditions  set  out  in  any  such  indenture  or
instrument,  then  (A)  if  such  accelerated  indebtedness  is,  by  its  terms,  Non-
Recourse Debt to us or our Restricted Subsidiaries, it shall not be considered an
event  of  default  for  purposes  of  the  Indenture;  or  (B)  if  such  accelerated
indebtedness is recourse to us or our Restricted Subsidiaries, any requirement in
connection with such failure to pay or event of default for the giving of notice or the
lapse of time or the happening of any further condition, event or act under such
other indenture or instrument in connection with such failure to pay principal or an
event of default shall be applicable together with an additional seven days before
being considered an event of default for purposes of the Indenture;
the  entry  of  a  decree  or  order  by  a  court  having  jurisdiction  in  the  premises
adjudging  us  a  bankrupt  or  insolvent,  or  approving  as  properly  filed  a  petition
seeking reorganization, arrangement, adjustment or composition of or in respect of
us under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (Canada) (the “Bankruptcy Act”), the
Companies’  Creditors  Arrangement  Act  (Canada)  (the  “CCAA”)  or  any  other
applicable insolvency law, or appointing a receiver, liquidator, assignee, trustee,
sequestrator (or other similar official) of us or of any substantial part of our property,
or ordering the winding up or liquidation of our affairs, and the continuance of any
such decree or order unstayed and in effect for a period of 90 consecutive days;
the institution by us of proceedings to be adjudicated a bankrupt or insolvent, or the
consent by us to the institution of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings against us,
or the filing by us of a petition or answer or consent seeking reorganization or relief
under the Bankruptcy Act, the CCAA or any other applicable insolvency law, or the
consent by us to the filing of any such petition or to the appointment of a receiver,
liquidator, assignee, trustee, sequestrator (or other similar official) of us or of any
substantial  part  of  our  property,  or  the  making  by  us  of  an  assignment  for  the
benefit  of  creditors,  or  the  admission  by  us  in  writing  of  our  inability  to  pay  our
debts generally as they become due; or
any  other  events  of  default  provided  with  respect  to  Indenture  Securities  of
that series.
•
•
•
If  an  event  of  default  under  the  Indenture  occurs  and  is  continuing  with  respect  to  any
series of the Indenture Securities, then and in every such case the Trustee or the holders
of not less than 25% in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Indenture Securities
of such affected series may, subject to any subordination provisions thereof, declare the
entire  principal  amount  (or,  if  the  Indenture  Securities  of  that  series  are  original  issue
discount Debt Securities, such portion of the principal amount as may be specified in the
terms of that series) of all Indenture Securities of such series and all accrued and unpaid
interest  thereon  to  be  immediately  due  and  payable.  However,  at  any  time  after  a
declaration of acceleration with respect to any series of the Indenture Securities has been
made, but before a judgment or decree for payment of the money due has been obtained,
the  holders  of  a  majority  in  principal  amount  of  the  outstanding  Indenture  Securities  of
that  series,  by  written  notice  to  us  and  the  Trustee  under  certain  circumstances,  may
rescind and annul such acceleration.
Reference is made to the applicable prospectus supplement or supplements relating to
each series of the Indenture Securities which are original issue discount Debt Securities
for  the  particular  provisions  relating  to  acceleration  of  the  maturity  of  a  portion  of  the
principal amount of such original issue discount securities upon the occurrence of any
event of default and the continuation thereof.
Subject to certain limitations set forth in the Indenture, the holders of a majority in principal
amount of the outstanding Indenture Securities of all series affected by an event of default
shall have the right to direct the time, method and place of conducting any proceeding for
any  remedy  available  to  the  Trustee,  or  exercising  any  trust  or  power  conferred  on  the
Trustee,  with  respect  to  the  Indenture  Securities  of  all  series  affected  by  such  event
of default.
Table of Contents
18
No  holder  of  an  Indenture  Security  of  any  series  will  have  any  right  to  institute  any
proceeding with respect to the Indenture, or for the appointment of a receiver or a Trustee,
or for any other remedy thereunder, unless:
•
•
•
such holder has previously given to the Trustee written notice of a continuing event
of default with respect to the Indenture Securities of such series affected by such
event of default;
the  holders  of  at  least  25%  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  outstanding
Indenture Securities of such series affected by such event of default have made
written request, and such holder or holders have offered reasonable indemnity, to
the Trustee to institute such proceeding as Trustee; and
the Trustee has failed to institute such proceeding, and has not received from the
holders  of  a  majority  or  more  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  outstanding
Indenture  Securities  of  such  series  affected  by  such  event  of  default  a  direction
inconsistent with such request, within 60 days after such notice, request and offer.
However, such above-mentioned limitations do not apply to a suit instituted by the holder
of an Indenture Security for the enforcement of payment of the principal of or any premium
or interest on such Indenture Security on or after the applicable due date specified in such
Indenture Security.
We will annually furnish to the Trustee a statement by certain of our officers as to whether
or  not  we,  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge,  are  in  compliance  with  all  conditions  and
covenants of the Indenture and, if not, specifying all such known defaults.
Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance
Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the  applicable  prospectus  supplement,  the  Indenture
provides that, at our option, we will be discharged from any and all obligations in respect
of  the  outstanding  Indenture  Securities  of  any  series  upon  irrevocable  deposit  with  the
Trustee, in trust, of money and/or government securities which will provide money in an
amount sufficient in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of independent chartered
accountants (as evidenced by an officer’s certificate delivered to the Trustee) to pay the
principal  of  (and  premium,  if  any,  and  each  instalment  of  interest,  if  any,  on)  the
outstanding Indenture Securities of such series (hereinafter referred to as a “defeasance”)
(except  with  respect  to  the  authentication,  transfer,  exchange  or  replacement  of  the
Indenture  Securities  or  the  maintenance  of  a  place  of  payment  and  certain  other
obligations  set  forth  in  the  Indenture).  Such  trust  may  only  be  established  if  among
other things:
•
•
•
•
we have delivered to the Trustee an opinion of counsel in the United States stating
that  (i)  we  have  received  from,  or  there  has  been  published  by,  the  Internal
Revenue Service a ruling, or (ii) since the date of execution of the Indenture, there
has been a change in the applicable U.S. federal income tax law, in either case to
the effect that the holders of the outstanding Indenture Securities of such series will
not recognize income, gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a result
of such defeasance and will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on the same
amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case
if such defeasance had not occurred;
we have delivered to the Trustee an opinion of counsel in Canada or a ruling from
the Canada Revenue Agency (the “CRA”) (or successor agency) to the effect that
the  holders  of  the  outstanding  Indenture  Securities  of  such  series  should  not
recognize  income,  gain  or  loss  for  Canadian  federal  or  provincial  income  tax
purposes  as  a  result  of  such  defeasance  and  should  be  subject  to  Canadian
federal or provincial income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and at
the same times as would have been the case had such defeasance not occurred
(and for the purposes of such opinion, such Canadian counsel shall assume that
holders of the outstanding Indenture Securities of such series include holders who
are not resident in Canada);
no event of default or event that, with the passing of time or the giving of notice, or
both, shall constitute an event of default shall have occurred and be continuing on
the date of such deposit; and
we are not an “insolvent person” within the meaning of the Bankruptcy Act on the
date  of  such  deposit  or  at  any  time  during  the  period  ending  on  the  91st  day
following such deposit.
Table of Contents
19
We  may  exercise  our  defeasance  option  notwithstanding  our  prior  exercise  of  our
covenant  defeasance  option  described  in  the  following  paragraph  if  we  meet  the
conditions described in the preceding sentence at the time we exercise the defeasance
option.
The  Indenture  provides  that,  at  our  option,  unless  and  until  we  have  exercised  our
defeasance option described in the preceding paragraph, we may omit to comply with the
“Limitation  on  Liens”  covenant,  certain  aspects  of  the  “Consolidation,  Amalgamation,
Merger  and  Sale  of  Assets”  covenant  and  certain  other  covenants  and  such  omission
shall not be deemed to be an event of default under the Indenture and the outstanding
Indenture Securities upon irrevocable deposit with the Trustee, in trust, of money and/or
government securities which will provide money in an amount sufficient in the opinion of a
nationally  recognized  firm  of  independent  chartered  accountants  (as  evidenced  by  an
officer’s certificate delivered to the Trustee) to pay the principal of (and premium, if any,
and  each  installment  of  interest,  if  any,  on)  the  outstanding  Indenture  Securities
(hereinafter  referred  to  as  “covenant  defeasance”).  If  we  exercise  our  covenant
defeasance option, the obligations under the Indenture other than with respect to such
covenants  and  the  events  of  default  other  than  with  respect  to  such  covenants  shall
remain in full force and effect. Such trust may only be established if, among other things:
•
•
we have delivered to the Trustee an opinion of counsel in the United States to the
effect  that  the  holders  of  the  outstanding  Indenture  Securities  will  not  recognize
income,  gain  or  loss  for  U.S.  federal  income  tax  purposes  as  a  result  of  such
covenant defeasance and will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on the same
amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case
if such covenant defeasance had not occurred;
we have delivered to the Trustee an opinion of counsel in Canada or a ruling from
the  CRA  to  the  effect  that  the  holders  of  the  outstanding  Indenture  Securities
should  not  recognize  income,  gain  or  loss  for  Canadian  federal  or  provincial
income or other tax purposes as a result of such covenant defeasance and should
be  subject  to  Canadian  federal  or  provincial  income  and  other  tax  on  the  same
amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case
had such covenant defeasance not occurred (and for the purposes of such opinion,
such  Canadian  counsel  shall  assume  that  holders  of  the  outstanding  Indenture
Securities include holders who are not resident in Canada);
•
•
no event of default or event that, with the passing of time or the giving of notice, or
both, shall constitute an event of default shall have occurred and be continuing on
the date of such deposit; and
we are not an “insolvent person” within the meaning of the Bankruptcy Act on the
date  of  such  deposit  or  at  any  time  during  the  period  ending  on  the  91st  day
following such deposit.
Modification and Waiver
Modifications and amendments of the Indenture may be made by us and the Trustee with
the consent of the holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding Indenture
Securities  of  each  series  issued  under  the  Indenture  affected  by  such  modification  or
amendment  (voting  as  one  class); provided,  however,  that  no  such  modification  or
amendment may, without the consent of the holder of each outstanding Indenture Security
of such affected series:
•
•
•
•
•
•
change the stated maturity of the principal of (or premium, if any), or any installment
of interest, if any, on any Indenture Security;
reduce  the  principal  amount  of  (or  premium,  if  any,  or  interest,  if  any,  on)  any
Indenture Security;
reduce the amount of principal of an Indenture Security payable upon acceleration
of the maturity thereof;
change the place of payment;
change the currency of payment of principal of (or premium, if any, or interest, if
any, on) any Indenture Security;
impair  the  right  to  institute  suit  for  the  enforcement  of  any  payment  on  or  with
respect to any Indenture Security;
20
Table of Contents
•
•
reduce the percentage of principal amount of outstanding Indenture Securities of
such  series,  the  consent  of  the  holders  of  which  is  required  for  modification  or
amendment  of  the  applicable  Indenture  or  for  waiver  of  compliance  with  certain
provisions of the Indenture or for waiver of certain defaults; or
modify any provisions of the Indenture relating to the modification and amendment
of the Indenture or the waiver of past defaults or covenants except as otherwise
specified in the Indenture.
The holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding Indenture Securities of
any series may on behalf of the holders of all Indenture Securities of that series waive,
insofar as that series is concerned, compliance by us with certain restrictive provisions of
the  Indenture.  The  holders  of  a  majority  in  principal  amount  of  outstanding  Indenture
Securities of any series may waive any past default under the Indenture with respect to
that  series,  except  a  default  in  the  payment  of  the  principal  of  (or  premium,  if  any,  and
interest, if any, on) any Indenture Security of that series or in respect of a provision which
under the Indenture cannot be modified or amended without the consent of the holder of
each outstanding Indenture Security of that series.
The Indenture or the Indenture Securities may be amended or supplemented, without the
consent of any holder of such Indenture Securities, in order to, among other things, cure
any ambiguity or inconsistency or to make any change, in any case, that does not have a
materially adverse effect on the rights of any holder of such Indenture Securities.
Consent to Jurisdiction and Service
Under the Indenture, we irrevocably appoint CT Corporation System, 111 – 8th  Avenue,
New York, New York, 10011 as our authorized agent for service of process in any suit or
proceeding arising out of or relating to our Debt Securities or the Indenture and for actions
brought  under  federal  or  state  securities  laws  in  any  federal  or  state  court  located  in
New  York,  New  York  and  irrevocably  submit  to  the  non-exclusive  jurisdiction  of  any
such court.
Governing Law
Our Debt Securities and the Indenture will be governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of the State of New York.
Enforceability of Judgments
Since  many  of  our  assets,  as  well  as  many  of  the  assets  of  some  of  our  officers  and
directors,  are  outside  the  United  States,  any  judgment  obtained  in  the  United  States
against us or certain of our officers or directors, including judgments with respect to the
payment  of  principal  on  any  Debt  Securities,  may  not  be  collectible  within  the
United States.
DESCRIPTION OF SHARE CAPITAL
Authorized Capital
The  following  sets  forth  the  terms  and  provisions  of  our  existing  capital.  The  particular
terms and provisions of the common shares and/or Class A preferred shares offered by a
prospectus supplement and the extent to which these general terms and provisions apply
will be described in such prospectus supplement. Our authorized capital consists of an
unlimited number of common shares and Class A preferred shares limited to a number
equal  to  not  more  than  20  percent  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  number  of  common
shares  at  the  time  of  the  issuance.  As  at  August  23,  2016,  approximately  849.9  million
common  shares  were  issued  and  outstanding,  and  no  Class  A  preferred  shares  were
outstanding. All of our shares have no par value.
Common Shares
The  following  description  is  subject  to,  and  qualified  by  reference  to,  the  terms  and
provisions of Encana’s articles and by-laws.
The holders of common shares are entitled to receive notice of and to attend all meetings
of shareholders and are entitled to one vote per common share held at all such meetings,
except at separate meetings of or on separate votes by the
Table of Contents
21
holders  of  another  class  or  series  of  shares  of  the  Corporation.  Holders  of  common
shares  are  also  entitled  to  receive  dividends  if,  as  and  when  declared  by  the  Board  of
Directors.  In  the  event  of  a  liquidation,  dissolution  or  winding  up  of  the  Corporation  or
other distribution of assets of the Corporation among its shareholders for the purpose of
winding up its affairs, the holders of the common shares will, subject to the rights of the
holders of any other class of shares of the Corporation entitled to receive the assets of the
Corporation upon such a distribution in priority to or rateably with the holders of common
shares, be entitled to participate rateably in any distribution of the assets of Encana.
The transfer agent and registrar for the common shares is CST Trust Company.
Class A Preferred Shares
Class A preferred shares may be issued in one or more series. The Board of Directors
shall fix the number of shares in each series and may determine the designation, rights,
privileges, restrictions and conditions attached to each series of Class A preferred shares
before the issue of such series. The Class A preferred shares are entitled to priority over
the  common  shares  of  the  Corporation  with  respect  to  redemption,  the  payment  of
dividends,  the  return  of  capital  and  the  distribution  of  assets  of  the  Corporation  in  the
event of the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Corporation’s affairs. Each Class
A preferred share will have certain restrictions, including that holders are not entitled to
vote at any meeting of the shareholders of the Corporation, but may be entitled to vote if
the  Corporation  fails  to  pay  a  certain  number  of  dividends  on  that  series  of  Class  A
preferred shares, and Class A preferred shares may, if applicable, only be convertible into
another series of Class A preferred shares (and not common shares of the Corporation).
The specific terms of a series of Class A preferred shares as described in a prospectus
supplement will supplement and, if applicable, may modify or replace the general terms
described in this section. Thus, the statements made in this section may not apply to a
particular series of Class A preferred shares.
Corporate Governance
Objects and Purposes of the Corporation
Encana  is  incorporated  under  the Canada  Business  Corporations  Act  (the  “CBCA”).
Encana’s articles place no restrictions on the Corporation’s objects and purposes.
Directors
A  director  who  is,  in  any  way,  directly  or  indirectly  interested  in  a  proposed  material
contract or material transaction, must disclose the nature and extent of such interest to
Encana in accordance with the provisions of the CBCA. Subject to certain exceptions set
out in the CBCA, a director shall not vote in respect of any material contract or material
transaction with Encana in which such director has an interest.
The  remuneration  of  the  directors  is  from  time  to  time  determined  by  the  Board  of
Directors, acting upon the recommendation of the Corporation’s Human Resources and
Compensation  Committee  (the  “HRC  Committee”).  The  HRC  Committee  is  comprised
entirely of independent directors.
Pursuant to our by-laws and subject to the provisions of the CBCA, the Board of Directors
may: (a) borrow money upon the credit of the Corporation, (b) issue, reissue, sell, pledge
or hypothecate debt obligations of the Corporation, (c) give a guarantee on behalf of the
Corporation  to  secure  performance  of  an  obligation  of  any  person,  or  give  financial
assistance  to  any  person  on  behalf  of  the  Corporation  by  means  of  loan,  guarantee  or
otherwise, and (d) mortgage, hypothecate, pledge or otherwise create a security interest in
all  or  any  property  of  the  Corporation,  owned  or  subsequently  acquired,  to  secure  any
obligation  of  the  Corporation.  The  Board  of  Directors  may,  by  resolution,  delegate  the
powers referred to in this section to one or more director or officer of the Corporation as
specified in our by-laws.
Encana’s  articles  and  by-laws  contain  no  provisions  with  respect  to  the  retirement  of  a
director  or  the  non-retirement  of  a  director  under  an  age  requirement.  The  Board  of
Directors  has  a  Director  Retirement  Policy  which  provides  that,  except  in  exceptional
circumstances, directors may not stand for re-election upon reaching age 71.
22
Table of Contents
Redemption Provisions, Sinking Fund Provisions, Liability to Further Capital Calls and
Discrimination
There are no redemption provisions or sinking fund provisions attached to any class of
shares  of  the  Corporation.  There  is  no  liability  to  further  capital  calls  by  the  company
provision  attached  to  the  shares  of  the  Corporation.  There  are  no  provisions
discriminating against any existing or prospective holder of such securities as a result of
such shareholder owning a substantial number of shares, attached to any class of shares
of the Corporation.
Meetings of Shareholders
Under the CBCA, an annual general meeting (“AGM”) of shareholders must be held once
every fiscal year, within 15 months of the previous AGM, but no later than six months after
the end of the Corporation’s preceding fiscal year. We must give our shareholders written
notice of the time and place of an AGM not less than 21 days and not more than 60 days
before  the  date  of  the  AGM.  For  the  purpose  of  determining  shareholders  entitled  to
receive notice of, and to vote at, an AGM, the directors may fix in advance a date as the
record date for such determination, but such record date shall not proceed by more than
60 days or by less than 21 days the date of the AGM.
Under  the  CBCA,  our  directors  may,  whenever  they  think  fit,  convene  a  meeting  of
shareholders, other than an AGM, at any time.
Under the CBCA, a shareholder meeting may also be called by one or more shareholders
of the Corporation so long as such shareholders own not less than 5% of the issued and
outstanding  shares  of  the  Corporation.  After  receiving  such  requisition,  our  directors
must,  subject  to  certain  exceptions  set  out  in  the  CBCA,  call  a  shareholder  meeting  to
transact the business stated in the requisition. If our directors do not call such meeting
within 21 days after receiving the requisition, any shareholder who signed the requisition
may call the meeting.
Pursuant  to  our  by-laws,  the  only  persons  entitled  to  be  present  at  a  meeting  of
shareholders  shall  be  those  entitled  to  vote  thereat,  the  directors,  the  auditor  of  the
Corporation and others who, although not entitled to vote, are entitled or required under
any provision of the CBCA, our articles or by-laws to be present. Any other person may be
admitted with the consent of the meeting or of the chairman of the meeting.
Share Transfers
Our articles and by-laws do not contain any restrictions on transfers of our shares.
No Limitation on Foreign Ownership
There are no limitations on the rights of non-resident or foreign shareholders to hold or
exercise voting rights associated with our common shares.
Change in Control
There are no provisions in our articles or by-laws that would have the effect of delaying,
deferring  or  preventing  a  change  in  control  of  the  Corporation,  and  that  would  operate
only  with  respect  to  a  merger,  acquisition  or  corporate  restructuring  involving  the
Corporation.
The  CBCA  does  not  contain  any  provisions  that  would  have  the  effect  of  delaying,
deferring or preventing a change of control of the Corporation.
The Corporation has an amended and restated shareholder rights plan (the “Plan”) that
was adopted to ensure, to the extent possible, that any take-over bid for the Corporation’s
securities is conducted in accordance with Canadian take-over bid rules, which allows all
shareholders of the Corporation to benefit from the acquisition of a control position of 20
percent or more of the common shares and also allows the Board of Directors to have
sufficient time to explore and develop all options for maximizing shareholder value in the
event a person tries to acquire a control position in Encana. The Plan creates a right that
attaches  to  each  present  and  subsequently  issued  common  share.  Until  the  separation
time, which typically occurs
Table of Contents
23
at  the  time  of  an  unsolicited  take-over  bid,  whereby  a  person  acquires  or  attempts  to
acquire 20 percent or more of Encana’s common shares, the rights are not separable from
the  common  shares,  are  not  exercisable  and  no  separate  rights  certificates  are  issued.
Each  right  entitles  the  holder,  other  than  the  20  percent  acquirer,  from  and  after  the
separation time and before certain expiration times, to acquire one common share at 50
percent of the market price at the time of exercise. The Plan was amended, reconfirmed
and approved at an annual meeting of shareholders held on May 3, 2016.
Ownership Threshold
There are no provisions in our articles, by-laws or in the CBCA governing the threshold
above which shareholder ownership must be disclosed.
Changes in the Capital of the Corporation
There  are  no  conditions  imposed  by  our  by-laws  which  are  more  stringent  than  those
required by the CBCA.
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
Subscription receipts may be offered separately or together with common shares and/or
other  securities  of  Encana,  including  warrants.  The  subscription  receipts  will  be  issued
under one or more subscription receipt agreements that will be entered into by Encana
and an escrow agent at the time of issuance of the subscription receipts.
A  subscription  receipt  will  entitle  the  holder  thereof  to  receive  a  common  share  and/or
other  securities  of  Encana,  for  no  additional  consideration,  upon  the  completion  of  a
particular  transaction  or  event,  typically  an  acquisition  of  the  assets  or  securities  of
another entity by Encana or one or more of its subsidiaries. The subscription proceeds
from  an  offering  of  subscription  receipts  will  be  held  in  escrow  by  an  escrow  agent
pending the completion of the transaction or the termination time (the time at which the
escrow terminates regardless of whether the transaction or event has occurred). Holders
of  subscription  receipts  will  receive  common  shares  and/or  other  securities  of  Encana
upon the completion of the particular transaction or event or, if the transaction or event
does  not  occur  by  the  termination  time,  a  return  of  the  subscription  funds  for  their
subscription  receipts  together  with  any  interest  or  other  income  earned  thereon,  as
determined by the terms of the applicable escrow.
Holders of subscription receipts are not shareholders of Encana. The particular terms and
provisions of subscription receipts offered by any prospectus supplement, and the extent
to  which  the  general  terms  and  provisions  described  below  may  apply  to  them,  will  be
described  in  the  prospectus  supplement  filed  in  respect  of  such  subscription  receipts.
This  description  will  include,  where  applicable:  (i)  the  number  of  subscription  receipts
offered;  (ii)  the  price  at  which  the  subscription  receipts  will  be  offered;  (iii)  the  terms,
conditions  and  procedures  pursuant  to  which  the  holders  of  subscription  receipts  will
become  entitled  to  receive  common  shares  and/or  other  securities  of  Encana;  (iv)  the
number of common shares and/or other securities of Encana that may be obtained upon
exercise of each subscription receipt; (v) the designation and terms of any other securities
with which the subscription receipts will be offered, if any, and the number of subscription
receipts that will be offered with each such security; (vi) the terms relating to the holding
and  release  of  the  gross  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  the  subscription  receipts  plus  any
interest  and  income  earned  thereon;  (vii)  the  material  income  tax  consequences  of
owning, holding and disposing of the subscription receipts; and (viii) any other material
terms  and  conditions  of  the  subscription  receipts 
limitation,
transferability and adjustment terms and whether the subscription receipts will be listed on
a stock exchange.
including,  without
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
Warrants will typically be offered with common shares, with such securities often referred
to collectively as a “unit”, but may be offered with subscription receipts or separately or
together with other Securities and may be attached to or separate from other Securities.
The  warrants  either  will  be  issued  under  a  warrant  indenture  or  agreement  that  will  be
entered  into  by  Encana  and  a  trustee  or  warrant  agent  at  the  time  of  issuance  of  the
warrants or will be represented by warrant certificates issued by Encana.
Holders of warrants are not shareholders of Encana. The particular terms and provisions
of warrants offered by any prospectus supplement, and the extent to which the general
terms and provisions described below may apply to them, will be
Table of Contents
24
described in the prospectus supplement filed in respect of such warrants. This description
will include, where applicable: (i) the title or designation of the warrants; (ii) the number of
warrants  offered;  (iii)  the  number  of  common  shares  and/or  other  securities  of  Encana
purchasable  upon  exercise  of  the  warrants  and  the  procedures  for  exercise;  (iv)  the
exercise  price  of  the  warrants;  (v)  the  dates  or  periods  during  which  the  warrants  are
exercisable and when they expire; (vi) the designation and terms of any other securities
with  which  the  warrants  will  be  offered,  if  any,  and  the  number  of  warrants  that  will  be
offered  with  each  such  security;  (vii)  the  material  income  tax  consequences  of  owning,
holding and disposing of the warrants; and (viii) any other material terms and conditions
of  the  warrants  including,  without  limitation,  transferability  and  adjustment  terms  and
whether the warrants will be listed on a stock exchange.
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
Encana may issue units comprised of one or more of the other Securities described in this
prospectus in any combination. Each unit will be issued so that the holder of the unit is
also the holder of each Security included in the unit. Thus, the holder of a unit will have the
rights  and  obligations  of  a  holder  of  each  included  Security.  The  unit  agreement  under
which a unit is issued may provide that the Securities included in the unit may not be held
or transferred separately, at any time or at any time before a specified date.
The particular terms and provisions of units offered by any prospectus supplement, and
the extent to which the general terms and provisions described below may apply to them,
will  be  described  in  the  prospectus  supplement  filed  in  respect  of  such  units.  This
description will include, where applicable: (i) the designation and terms of the units and of
the  Securities  comprising  the  units,  including  whether  and  under  what  circumstances
those Securities may be held or transferred separately; (ii) any provisions for the issuance,
payment, settlement, transfer or exchange of the units or of the Securities comprising the
units; (iii) whether the units will be issued in fully registered or global form; and (iv) any
other material terms and conditions of the units.
DESCRIPTION OF SHARE PURCHASE CONTRACTS AND SHARE PURCHASE UNITS
Encana may issue share purchase contracts, representing contracts obligating holders to
purchase from or sell to us, and obligating us to purchase from or sell to the holders, a
specified number of common shares or Class A preferred shares, as applicable, at a future
date or dates, and including by way of instalment. The price per common share or Class A
preferred  share  and  the  number  of  common  shares  or  Class  A  preferred  shares,  as
applicable, may be fixed at the time the share purchase contracts are issued or may be
determined by reference to a specific formula or method set forth in the share purchase
contracts. Share purchase contracts will require the purchase price to be paid either at the
time share purchase contracts are issued or at a specified future date. We may issue share
purchase  contracts  in  accordance  with  applicable  laws  and  in  such  amounts  and  in  as
many distinct series as we may determine. The share purchase contracts may require us
to make periodic payments to the holders of the share purchase units or vice versa, and
these payments may be unsecured or prefunded and may be paid on a current or on a
deferred  basis.  The  share  purchase  contracts  may  require  holders  to  secure  their
obligations under those contracts in a specified manner.
The  share  purchase  contracts  may  be  issued  separately  or  as  part  of  units,  which  are
referred to in this prospectus as “share purchase units”, consisting of a share purchase
contract  and  beneficial  interests  in  Debt  Securities,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  or  other
securities of Encana, securing the holders’ obligations to purchase the common shares or
Class A preferred shares under the share purchase contracts.
Holders  of  share  purchase  contracts  or  share  purchase  units  are  not  shareholders  of
Encana.  The  particular  terms  and  provisions  of  share  purchase  contracts  or  share
purchase  units  offered  by  any  prospectus  supplement,  and  the  extent  to  which  the
general terms and provisions described below may apply to them, will be described in the
prospectus  supplement  filed  in  respect  of  such  share  purchase  contracts  or  share
purchase units. This description will include, where applicable: (i) whether the holder is
obligated  to  purchase  or  sell,  or  both  purchase  and  sell,  common  shares  or  Class  A
preferred shares, as applicable, and the nature and amount of each of those securities, or
the method of determining those amounts; (ii) whether the share purchase contracts or
share purchase units are to be prepaid or not or paid in instalments; (iii) any conditions
upon  which  the  purchase  or  sale  will  be  contingent  and  the  consequences  if  such
conditions are not satisfied; (iv) whether settlement will be by delivery, or by reference or
linkage to the value or performance of common shares or Class A preferred
Table of Contents
25
shares; (v) any acceleration, cancellation, termination or other provisions relating to the
settlement; (vi) the date or dates on which the sale or purchase must be made, if any; (vii)
whether  the  share  purchase  contracts  or  share  purchase  units  will  be  issued  in  fully
registered or global form; (viii) the material income tax consequences of owning, holding
and  disposing;  and  (ix)  any  other  material  terms  and  conditions  including,  without
limitation, transferability and adjustment terms and whether the share purchase contracts
or share purchase units will be listed on a stock exchange.
RISK FACTORS
In  addition  to  the  risk  factors  set  forth  below,  additional  risk  factors  relating  to  our
business  are  discussed  in  our  annual  report  and  our  management’s  discussion  and
analysis, which risk factors are incorporated herein by reference. Prospective purchasers
of the Securities should consider carefully the risk factors set forth below as well as the
other information contained in and incorporated by reference in this prospectus and in the
applicable prospectus supplement before purchasing the Securities offered hereby. If any
event arising from these risks occurs, our business, prospects, financial condition, results
of  operations  or  cash  flows,  or  your  investment  in  the  Securities  could  be  materially
adversely affected.
The  common  shares  may  be  subject  to  price  and  volume  fluctuations,  and  the  market
price for the common shares following an offering may drop below the offering price.
In  recent  years,  securities  markets  –  and  particularly  securities  of  oil  and  gas  industry
participants – have experienced considerable price and volume volatility, which may have
been unrelated to the operating performance of the affected companies. The market price
of  publicly  traded  stock,  including  our  common  shares,  is  affected  by  many  variables,
including  the  strength  of  the  economy  generally,  commodity  prices,  the  availability  and
attractiveness  of  alternative  investments  and  the  breadth  of  the  public  market  for  the
stock. The effect of these and other factors on the market price of securities on the stock
exchanges on which we trade suggests that the trading price of the common shares may
continue  to  be  volatile.  These  fluctuations  may  affect  the  price  of  the  common  shares
following  an  offering,  and  the  market  price  of  the  common  shares  may  drop  below  the
offering price. As a result of this volatility, you may not be able to sell your common shares
at or above the offering price.
The  decision  to  pay  dividends  and  the  amount  of  such  dividends  is  subject  to  the
discretion of Encana’s Board of Directors based on numerous factors and may vary from
time to time.
Although Encana currently intends to pay quarterly cash dividends to its shareholders,
these  cash  dividends  may  be  reduced  or  suspended.  The  amount  of  cash  available  to
Encana to pay dividends, if any, can vary significantly from period to period for a number
of  reasons, 
including,  among  other  things:  Encana’s  operational  and  financial
performance; fluctuations in the realized prices for, and costs to produce, natural gas, oil
and  NGLs;  the  amount  of  cash  required  or  retained  for  debt  service  or  repayment;
amounts required to fund capital expenditures and working capital requirements; access
to equity and debt markets; foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates; and the
risk factors set herein and documents incorporated by reference herein.
The decision whether or not to pay dividends and the amount of any such dividends are
subject  to  the  discretion  of  the  Board  of  Directors,  which  regularly  evaluates  Encana’s
proposed  dividend  payments  and  the  solvency  test  requirements  of  the  CBCA.  In
addition,  the  level  of  dividends  per  common  share  will  be  affected  by  the  number  of
outstanding  common  shares  and  other  securities  that  may  be  entitled  to  receive  cash
dividends  or  other  payments.  Dividends  may  be  increased,  reduced  or  suspended
depending  on  Encana’s  operational  success  and  the  performance  of  its  assets.  The
market value of the common shares may deteriorate if Encana is unable to meet dividend
expectations in the future, and that deterioration may be material.
There can be no assurance as to the liquidity of the trading market for the Debt Securities,
Class A preferred shares, subscription receipts, warrants, units, share purchase contracts
or share purchase units or that a trading market for such securities will develop.
Prior  to  an  offering  of  Debt  Securities,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,
warrants, units, share purchase contracts or share purchase units, there will be no public
market for such securities. There can be no assurance that
Table of Contents
26
an active trading market for the Debt Securities, Class A preferred shares, subscription
receipts, warrants, units, share purchase contracts or share purchase units will develop or
be sustained. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable prospectus supplements, there
is no market through which the Debt Securities, Class A preferred shares, subscription
receipts, warrants, units, share purchase contracts or share purchase units may be sold
and  purchasers  may  not  be  able  to  resell  such  securities  purchased  under  this
prospectus  and  the  relevant  prospectus  supplement.  This  may  affect  the  pricing  of  the
Debt  Securities,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,  warrants,  units,  share
purchase  contracts  or  share  purchase  units  in  the  secondary  market,  the  transparency
and availability of trading prices and the liquidity of such securities.
Credit ratings may not reflect all risks of an investment in the Debt Securities or the Class
A preferred shares and may change.
Credit ratings may not reflect all risks associated with an investment in the Debt Securities
or the Class A preferred shares. Any credit ratings applied to the Debt Securities or the
Class  A  preferred  shares  are  an  assessment  of  our  ability  to  pay  our  obligations.
Consequently,  real  or  anticipated  changes  in  the  credit  ratings  will  generally  affect  the
market value of the Debt Securities or the Class  A  preferred  shares.  The  credit  ratings,
however, may not reflect the potential impact of risks related to structure, market or other
factors  discussed  herein  on  the  value  of  the  Debt  Securities  or  the  Class  A  preferred
shares. There is no assurance that any credit rating assigned to the Debt Securities or the
Class A preferred shares will remain in effect for any given period of time or that any rating
will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by the relevant rating agency. In addition, real or
anticipated changes in the credit ratings can affect the cost of or terms on which we can
issue the Debt Securities or the Class A preferred shares or obtain alternative financing.
Changes in interest rates may cause the market price or value of the Debt Securities and
the Class A preferred shares to change.
Prevailing interest rates will affect the market price or value of the Debt Securities and the
Class A preferred shares. The market price or value of the Debt Securities and the Class A
preferred shares may decline as prevailing interest rates for comparable debt instruments
rise, and increase as prevailing interest rates for comparable debt instruments decline.
The Debt Securities may be subject to foreign currencies risk.
Debt Securities denominated or payable in foreign currencies may entail significant risk.
These  risks  include,  without  limitation,  the  possibility  of  significant  fluctuations  in  the
foreign currency markets, the imposition or modification of foreign exchange controls and
potential  liquidity  in  the  secondary  market.  These  risks  will  vary  depending  on  the
currency  or  currencies  involved  and  will  be  more  fully  described  in  the  applicable
prospectus supplement.
The  Debt  Securities  will  be  effectively  subordinated  to  certain  indebtedness  of  our
corporate and partnership subsidiaries and be subject to certain reorganization risk.
The Indenture permits us, at any time and from time to time, to complete reorganizations
with  any  of  our wholly-owned  direct  or  indirect  subsidiaries  provided  that  certain
conditions  are  met.  In  the  event  of  any  such  reorganization,  the  Debt  Securities  may
continue  to  be  obligations  of  us  in  circumstances  where  our  assets  comprise  (and  are
potentially  limited  to)  our  ownership  interest  in  the  subsidiaries  through  which  our
operations are thereafter conducted. Such subsidiaries, which following completion of a
reorganization may hold all of the assets formerly held by us, are not restricted under the
Indenture with respect to subsequent asset dispositions or incurring indebtedness. See
“Description  of  Debt  Securities  —  Covenants  —  Consolidation,  Amalgamation,  Merger
and Sale of Assets”.
The  Debt  Securities  will  be  our  unsubordinated  and  unsecured  obligations  and,  unless
otherwise provided with respect to a series of Debt Securities, will rank equally with all of
our other unsecured, unsubordinated obligations. We conduct a substantial portion of our
business through corporate and partnership subsidiaries. Our obligations under the Debt
Securities  will  be  structurally  subordinate  to  all  existing  and  future  indebtedness  and
liabilities, including trade payables, of any of our corporate and partnership subsidiaries.
In the event that any of the Securities are redeemable, purchasers of such Securities may
be adversely impacted.
If  any  of  the  Securities  are  redeemable  at  our  option,  as  set  forth  in  the  applicable
prospectus supplement, we may choose to redeem such Securities from time to time, in
accordance with our rights, including when prevailing interest rates
Table of Contents
27
are lower than the rates borne by such securities. If prevailing rates are lower at the time of
redemption,  a  purchaser  may  not  be  able  to  reinvest  the  redemption  proceeds  in  a
comparable  security  at  an  effective  interest  rate  as  high  as  the  interest  rate  on  the
Securities being redeemed. Redemption rights may also adversely impact a purchaser’s
ability to sell such Securities as the optional redemption date or period approaches.
CERTAIN INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The  applicable  prospectus  supplement  will  describe  certain  U.S.  federal  income  tax
consequences  of  the  acquisition,  ownership  and  disposition  of  any  Securities  offered
thereunder  by  an  initial  investor  who  is  a  U.S.  person  (within  the  meaning  of  the
U.S. Internal Revenue Code).
The applicable prospectus supplement will also describe certain Canadian federal income
tax consequences to an investor of acquiring any Securities offered thereunder, including,
for investors who are non-residents of Canada, whether the payments of principal, interest
or  distributions,  if  any,  on  the  Securities  will  be  subject  to  Canadian  non-resident
withholding tax.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We may offer and sell Securities to or through underwriters or dealers and also may sell
Securities  directly  to  purchasers  or  through  agents.  The  Securities  may  be  offered  and
sold in the United States and elsewhere where permitted by law.
The  distribution  of  Securities  may  be  effected  from  time  to  time  in  one  or  more
transactions:
•
•
•
at a fixed price or prices, which may be changed;
at market prices prevailing at the time of sale; or
at prices related to such prevailing market prices to be negotiated with purchasers.
If offered on a non-fixed price basis, Securities may be offered at market prices prevailing
at the time of sale or at prices to be negotiated with purchasers at the time of sale, which
prices may vary as between purchasers and during the period of distribution and which
may include sales of our common shares in transactions that are deemed to be “at-the-
market”  distributions,  including  sales  made  directly  on  the  TSX  and  the  NYSE  or  other
existing  trading  markets  for  our  common  shares,  and  as  may  be  set  forth  in  an
accompanying  prospectus  supplement.  If  Securities  are  offered  on  a  non-fixed  price
basis, the underwriters’, dealers’ or agents’ compensation will be increased or decreased
by the amount by which the aggregate price paid for Securities by the purchasers exceeds
or is less than the gross proceeds paid to us by the underwriters, dealers or agents.
Subject  to  any  applicable  securities  legislation,  and  other  than  in  relation  to  an  “at-the-
market”  distribution,  in  connection  with  any  offering  of  Securities,  the  underwriters,
dealers  or  agents  may  over-allot  or  effect  transactions  which  stabilize,  maintain  or
otherwise affect the market price of the Securities at a level above that which otherwise
might prevail on the open market. Such transactions may be commenced, interrupted or
discontinued at any time.
In connection with the sale of Securities, underwriters may receive compensation from us
or  from  purchasers  of  Securities  for  whom  they  may  act  as  agents  in  the  form  of
concessions  or  commissions.  Underwriters,  dealers  and  agents  that  participate  in  the
distribution  of  Securities  may  be  deemed  to  be  underwriters  and  any  commissions
received  by  them  from  us  and  any  profit  on  the  resale  of  Securities  by  them  may  be
deemed to be underwriting commissions under the United States Securities Act of 1933,
as amended (the “Securities Act”).
If so indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, we may authorize dealers or other
persons  acting  as  our  agents  to  solicit  offers  by  certain  institutions  to  purchase  the
Securities directly from us pursuant to contracts providing for payment and delivery on a
future  date.  These  contracts  will  be  subject  only  to  the  conditions  set  forth  in  the
applicable  prospectus  supplement  or  supplements,  which  will  also  set  forth  the
commission payable for solicitation of these contracts.
Table of Contents
28
The applicable prospectus supplement will also set forth the terms of the offering relating
to  particular  Securities,  including  to  the  extent  applicable,  the  initial  offering  price,  our
proceeds from the offering, the underwriting concessions or commissions, and any other
discounts or concessions to be allowed or reallowed to dealers. Underwriters with respect
to the particular Securities sold to or through underwriters will be named in the prospectus
supplement relating to such Securities.
Under agreements which may be entered into by us, underwriters, dealers and agents who
participate in the distribution of Securities may be entitled to indemnification by us against
certain  liabilities,  including  liabilities  under  the  Securities  Act,  or  to  contributions  with
respect to payments which such underwriters, dealers or agents may be required to make
in  respect  thereof.  The  underwriters,  dealers  and  agents  with  whom  we  enter  into
agreements may be customers of, engage in transactions with or perform services for us
in the ordinary course of business.
Any offering of Debt Securities, Class A preferred shares, subscription receipts, warrants,
units, share purchase contracts or share purchase units will be a new issue of securities
with  no  established  trading  market.  Unless  otherwise  specified  in  a  prospectus
supplement,  the  Debt  Securities,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,
warrants, units, share purchase contracts or share purchase units will not be listed on any
securities  exchange  or  on  any  automated  dealer  quotation  system.  This  may  affect  the
pricing of the Debt Securities, Class A preferred shares, subscription receipts, warrants,
units,  share  purchase  contracts  or  share  purchase  units  in  the  secondary  market,  the
transparency and availability of trading prices, the liquidity of the Debt Securities, Class A
preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,  warrants,  units,  share  purchase  contracts  or
share purchase units and the extent of issuer regulation. Certain broker-dealers may make
a market in the Debt Securities, Class A preferred shares, subscription receipts, warrants,
units, share purchase contracts or share purchase units, but will not be obligated to do so
and may discontinue any market making at any time without notice. We cannot assure you
that any broker-dealer will make a market in the Debt Securities, Class A preferred shares,
subscription receipts, warrants, units, share purchase contracts or share purchase units
of any series or as to the liquidity of the trading market, if any, for such securities.
In  compliance  with  the  guidelines  of  the  United  States  Financial  Industry  Regulatory
Authority, Inc. (“FINRA”), the maximum underwriting compensation to be received by any
FINRA  member  or  independent  broker-dealer  may  not  exceed  eight  percent  of  the
aggregate gross sales proceeds of any Securities offered hereby. In addition, if more than
five percent of the net proceeds of any offering of Securities made under this prospectus
will  be  received  by  any  FINRA  member  participating  in  the  offering  or  by  affiliates  or
associated persons of such FINRA member or any participating member otherwise would
have  a  “conflict  of  interest”  under  FINRA  Rules,  the  offering  will  be  conducted  in
accordance with FINRA Rule 5121.
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
This table sets forth our consolidated ratio of earnings to fixed charges for the periods
indicated.
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
(1), (2)
2011     2012
Year Ended December 31
2013     2014     2015
Six Months
Ended June 30
2016
1.0x       (6.9)x    1.0x      7.4x      (10.5)x
(6.3)x
(1) For purposes of calculating the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, (i) “earnings” means:
net  income  (loss)  before  income  taxes,  income/loss  from  equity  investees,  fixed
charges  and  noncontrolling  interest  in  pre-tax  income  of  subsidiaries  that  have  not
incurred fixed charges and (ii) “fixed charges” consists of interest expensed, amortized
premiums,  discounts  and  capitalized  expenses  relating  to  indebtedness  and  an
estimate  of  interest  in  rental  expense.  Estimate  of  interest  in  rental  expense  is
calculated  as  30  percent  of  rental-related  commitments  which  we  believe  is  a
reasonable approximation of interest factor.
(2) The  amount  by  which  earnings  were  insufficient  to  cover  fixed  charges  was
approximately $4,831 million for the year ended December 31, 2012; $8,007 million for
the year ended December 31, 2015; and $1,746 million for the six months ended June
30, 2016.
LEGAL MATTERS
The  validity  of  the  Debt  Securities  offered  hereby  and  certain  other  United  States  legal
matters related to the Securities being offered hereby will be passed upon for us by Paul,
Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP. The validity of
Table of Contents
29
the  common  shares,  Class  A  preferred  shares,  subscription  receipts,  warrants,  units,
share  purchase  contracts  and  share  purchase  units  offered  hereby  and  certain  other
Canadian legal matters related to the Securities being offered hereby will be passed upon
for us by Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP.
EXPERTS
PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP  are  our  auditors  and  have  advised  that  they  are
independent  with  respect  to  Encana  within  the  meaning  of  the  Rules  of  Professional
Conduct of the Chartered Professional Accountants of Alberta and within the meaning of
the  Securities  Act  and  the  applicable  rules  and  regulations  thereunder  adopted  by  the
SEC  and 
(United  States).
PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP  is  located  at:  111  5  Avenue  S.W.,  Suite  3100,  Calgary,
Alberta, Canada T2P 5L3.
the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board
The audited annual consolidated financial statements of Encana Corporation incorporated
by reference in this prospectus have been so incorporated in reliance on the audit reports
which 
of
PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP,  Chartered  Professional  Accountants,  as  experts  in
auditing and accounting.
incorporated
prospectus,
reference
in
this
are
also
by
Information relating to reserves in our AIF and contingent resources in our Supplemental
Disclosure Document was calculated based on evaluations of and reports on our natural
gas, oil and NGLs reserves conducted and prepared by GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd.,
McDaniel  &  Associates  Consultants  Ltd.  and  Netherland,  Sewell  &  Associates,  Inc.  as
independent qualified reserves evaluators. GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. is located at:
4100,  400  –  3  Avenue  S.W.,  Calgary,  Alberta,  Canada  T2P  4H2.  McDaniel  &  Associates
Consultants Ltd. is located at: 2200, Bow Valley Square 3, 255 – 5 Avenue S.W., Calgary,
Alberta, Canada T2P 3G6. Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. is located at: 2100 Ross
Avenue, Suite 2200, Dallas, Texas, USA 75201-2737.
ENFORCEABILITY OF CIVIL LIABILITIES
We are a corporation incorporated under and governed by the CBCA. Some of our officers
and directors, and some of the experts named in this prospectus, are Canadian residents,
and  many  of  our  assets  or  the  assets  of  our  officers  and  directors  and  the  experts  are
located outside the United States. We have appointed an agent for service of process in
the  United  States,  but  it  may  be  difficult  for  holders  of  Securities  who  reside  in  the
United States to effect service within the United States upon those directors, officers and
experts who are not residents of the United States. It may also be difficult for holders of
Securities who reside in the United States to realize in the United States upon judgments
of courts of the United States predicated upon our civil liability and the civil liability of our
officers and directors and experts under the United States federal securities laws. We have
been advised by our Canadian counsel, Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP, that a judgment of
a United States court predicated solely upon civil liability under U.S. federal securities laws
would probably be enforceable in Canada if the United States court in which the judgment
was  obtained  has  a  basis  for  jurisdiction  in  the  matter  that  would  be  recognized  by  a
Canadian court for the same purposes. We have also been advised by Blake, Cassels &
Graydon LLP, however, that there is substantial doubt whether an action could be brought
in Canada in the first instance on the basis of liability predicated solely upon U.S. federal
securities laws.
EXPENSES
The  following  is  a  statement  of  the  estimated  expenses,  other  than  any  underwriting
discounts and commissions, that we expect to incur in connection with the issuance and
distribution of the Securities registered under this Registration Statement:
SEC registration fee
SEC registration fee
Printing expenses
Legal fees and expenses
Accountants’ fees and expenses
Miscellaneous
Total
US$    116,370  
*  
 
 
*  
*  
 
*  
 
 
 
US$
    *
*        Information regarding the issuance and distribution of the Securities is not currently
known, and will be provided in a prospectus supplement or as an exhibit to a Form 6-K or
Form 8-K that is incorporated by reference into this Registration Statement.
Table of Contents
30
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 8. Indemnification
Under  Section  124  of  the Canada  Business  Corporations  Act  (the  “CBCA”),  Encana
Corporation (“Encana”) may indemnify a present or former director or officer of Encana or
another  individual  who  acts  or  acted  at  Encana’s  request  as  a  director  or  officer,  or  an
individual  acting  in  a  similar  capacity,  of  another  entity,  against  all  costs,  charges  and
expenses, including an amount paid to settle an action or satisfy a judgment, reasonably
incurred by the individual in respect of any civil, criminal, administrative, investigative or
other  proceeding  in  which  the  individual  is  involved  because  of  that  association  with
Encana or other entity. Encana may not indemnify an individual unless the individual (i)
acted honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of Encana, or, as the case
may be, to the best interests of the other entity for which the individual acted as a director
or officer or in a similar capacity at Encana’s request and (ii) in the case of a criminal or
administrative action or proceeding that is enforced by a monetary penalty, the individual
had  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  the  conduct  was  lawful.  The  aforementioned
individuals are entitled to the indemnification described above from Encana as a matter of
right if they were not judged by the court or other competent authority to have committed
any  fault  or  omitted  to  do  anything  that  the  individual  ought  to  have  done  and  if  the
individual fulfills conditions (i) and (ii) above. Encana may advance moneys to a director,
officer or other individual for the costs, charges and expenses of a proceeding; however,
the individual shall repay the moneys if the individual does not fulfill the conditions set out
in (i) and (ii) above. The indemnification or the advance of any moneys may be made in
connection with a derivative action only with court approval and only if the conditions in (i)
and (ii) above are met. Under the CBCA, Encana may purchase and maintain insurance for
the benefit of any of the aforementioned individuals against any liability incurred by the
individual  in  their  capacity  as  a  director  or  officer  of  Encana,  or  in  their  capacity  as  a
director  or  officer,  or  similar  capacity,  of  another  entity,  if  the  individual  acted  in  such
capacity at Encana’s request.
The by-laws of Encana provide that, subject to the limitations contained in the CBCA but
without limit to the right of Encana to indemnify any person under the CBCA or otherwise,
Encana  shall  indemnify  a  director  or  officer  of  Encana,  a  former  director  or  officer  of
Encana,  or  another  individual  who  acts  or  acted  at  Encana’s  request  as  a  director  or
officer,  or  an  individual  acting  in  a  similar  capacity,  of  another  entity,  against  all  costs,
charges and expenses, including an amount paid to settle an action or satisfy a judgment,
reasonably  incurred  by  the  individual  in  respect  of  any  civil,  criminal,  administrative,
investigative  or  other  proceeding  in  which  the  individual  is  involved  because  of  that
association with Encana or other entity, if the individual acted honestly and in good faith
with a view to the best interests of Encana, or, as the case may be, to the best interests of
the other entity for which the individual acted as director or officer or in a similar capacity
at Encana’s request, and in the case of a criminal or administrative action or proceeding
that  is  enforced  by  a  monetary  penalty,  the  individual  had  reasonable  grounds  for
believing  that  the  individual’s  conduct  was  lawful.  Encana  has  entered  into  agreements
with its directors and officers to indemnify them, to the extent permitted by law and subject
to certain limitations, against all costs, charges and expenses, including an amount paid
to settle an action or satisfy a judgment, reasonably incurred by such director or officer in
respect of any civil, criminal, administrative, investigative or other proceeding to which the
director or officer was made a party by reason of being a director or officer.
The  by-laws  of  Encana  provide  that  Encana  may,  subject  to  the  CBCA,  purchase,
maintain,  or  participate  in  insurance  for  the  benefit  of  any  director  or  officer  of
Encana, former director or officer of Encana, or another individual who acts or acted at
Encana’s request as a director or officer, or an individual acting in a similar capacity, of
another entity, as such against any liability incurred by him in his capacity as a director or
officer of Encana or as a director or officer of another entity where he acts or acted in that
capacity  at  Encana’s  request.  Encana  has  purchased  third  party  director  and  officer
liability insurance.
Insofar  as  indemnification  for  liabilities  arising  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as
amended  (the  “Securities  Act”),  may  be  permitted  to  directors,  officers  or  persons
controlling Encana pursuant to the foregoing provisions, Encana has been informed that
in  the  opinion  of  the  Commission  such  indemnification  is  against  public  policy  as
expressed in the Securities Act and is therefore unenforceable.
Reference  is  made  to  Item  10  for  the  undertakings  of  the  Registrant  with  respect  to
indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
Table of Contents
II-1
Item 9. Exhibits
(a)
EXHIBITS: The following exhibits have been filed as part of this Registration Statement:
Exhibit
Number  
1.1†
  
4.1*
4.2*
4.3†
4.4†
4.5†
4.6†
4.7†
4.8†
5.1*
5.2
23.1
23.2*
23.3
23.4*
23.5*
23.6*
24.1*
25.1*
Description
Form of Underwriting Agreement
Trust Indenture, dated November 14, 2011, between Encana and The Bank of
New York Mellon, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Encana’s Form F-10
filed with the Commission on May 7, 2012).
Specimen Common Share Certificate.
Specimen Class A Preferred Share Certificate.
Form of Subscription Receipt Agreement.
Form of Warrant Agreement.
Form of Unit Agreement.
Form of Share Purchase Contract.
Form of Share Purchase Unit Agreement.
Opinion of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP.
Opinion of Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP.
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
Consent of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1
above).
Consent of Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP (included in Exhibit 5.2 above).
Consent of GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd.
Consent of McDaniel & Associates Consultants Ltd.
Consent of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc.
Powers of Attorney (included on the signature page to the initial Registration
Statement).
Statement of Eligibility of the Trustee on Form T-1.
*Previously filed or incorporated by reference herein.
† To be filed as an exhibit to a post-effective amendment to this Registration Statement or
as an exhibit to a report filed on Form 6-K or Form 8-K under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934 and incorporated herein by reference.
Item 10. Undertakings
(a)
The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective
amendment to this Registration Statement:
(i)
(ii)
to  include  any  prospectus  required  by  Section  10(a)(3)  of  the  Securities
Act;
to  reflect  in  the  prospectus  any  facts  or  events  arising  after  the  effective
date  of  this  Registration  Statement  (or  the  most  recent  post-effective
amendment  thereof)  which,  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  represent  a
fundamental  change  in  the  information  set  forth  in  this  Registration
Statement.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  any  increase  or  decrease  in
volume  of  securities  offered  (if  the  total  dollar  value  of  securities  offered
would not exceed that which was registered)
II-2
Table of Contents
and  any  deviation  from  the  low  or  high  end  of  the  estimated  maximum
offering  range  may  be  reflected  in  the  form  of  prospectus  filed  with  the
Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b), if, in the aggregate, the changes in
volume and price represent no more than a 20% change in the maximum
aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee”
table in the effective Registration Statement; and
(iii)
to include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution
not  previously  disclosed  in  this  Registration  Statement  or  any  material
change to such information in this Registration Statement;
provided, however, that paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii) and (a)(1)(iii) above do not apply if the
information required to be included in a post-effective amendment by those paragraphs is
contained in reports filed with or furnished to the Commission by the Registrant pursuant
to section 13 or section 15(d) of the U.S. Exchange Act that are incorporated by reference
in the Registration Statement, or is contained in the form of prospectus filed pursuant to
Rule 424(b) that is part of the Registration Statement.
(2)
(3)
(4)
That,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  liability  under  the  Securities  Act,  each
such  post-effective  amendment  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  new  Registration
Statement  relating  to  the  securities  offered  therein,  and  the  offering  of  such
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the
securities being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
To file a post-effective amendment to this Registration Statement to include any
financial statements required by Item 8.A of Form 20-F at the start of any delayed
offering or throughout a continuous offering. Financial statements and information
otherwise required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act need not be furnished,
provided  that  the  Registrant  includes  in  the  prospectus,  by  means  of  a  post-
effective amendment, financial statements required pursuant to this paragraph (a)
(4)  and  other  information  necessary  to  ensure  that  all  other  information  in  the
prospectus  is  at  least  as  current  as  the  date  of  those  financial  statements.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  a  post-effective  amendment  need  not  be  filed  to
include  financial  statements  and  information  required  by  Section  10(a)(3)  of  the
Securities  Act  or  Rule  3-19  of  Regulation  S-X  if  such  financial  statements  and
information  are  contained  in  periodic  reports  filed  with  or  furnished  to  the
Commission  by  the  Registrant  pursuant  to  section  13  or  section  15(d)  of  the
Exchange Act that are incorporated by reference in this Registration Statement.
(5)
That,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  liability  under  the  Securities  Act  to  any
purchaser:
(i)
(ii)
Each prospectus filed by the Registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) shall be
deemed to be part of this Registration Statement as of the date the filed
prospectus  was  deemed  part  of  and  included  in  this  Registration
Statement; and
Each prospectus required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2), (b)(5) or
(b)(7) as part of a Registration Statement in reliance on Rule 430B relating
to an offering made pursuant to Rule 415(a)(1)(i), (vii), or (x) for the purpose
of providing the information required by Section 10(a) of the Securities Act
shall be deemed to be part of and included in this Registration Statement
as  of  the  earlier  of  the  date  such  form  of  prospectus  is  first  used  after
effectiveness  or  the  date  of  the  first  contract  of  sale  of  securities  in  the
offering described in the prospectus. As provided in Rule 430B, for liability
purposes of the issuer and any person that is at that date an underwriter,
such date shall be deemed to be a new effective date of this Registration
Statement relating to the securities in this Registration Statement to which
that prospectus relates, and the offering of such securities at that time shall
be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof. Provided, however,
that no statement made in a Registration Statement or prospectus that is
part of this Registration Statement or made in a document incorporated or
deemed  incorporated  by  reference  into  this  Registration  Statement  or
prospectus that is part of this Registration Statement will, as to
II-3
Table of Contents
a  purchaser  with  a  time  of  contract  of  sale  prior  to  such  effective  date,
supersede  or  modify  any  statement  that  was  made  in  this  Registration
Statement  or  prospectus  that  was  part  of  this  Registration  Statement  or
made in any such document immediately prior to such effective date.
(6)
That, for the purpose of determining liability of the Registrant under the Securities
Act  to  any  purchaser  in  the  initial  distribution  of  the  securities,  the  undersigned
Registrant  undertake  that  in  a  primary  offering  of  securities  of  the  undersigned
Registrant pursuant to this Registration Statement, regardless of the underwriting
method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or
sold  to  such  purchaser  by  means  of  any  of  the  following  communications,  the
undersigned Registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to
offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Any  preliminary  prospectus  or  prospectus  of  the  undersigned  Registrant
relating to the offering required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf
of  the  undersigned  Registrant  or  used  or  referred  to  by  the  undersigned
Registrant;
The  portion  of  any  other  free  writing  prospectus  relating  to  the  offering
containing  material  information  about  the  undersigned  Registrant  or  its
securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned Registrant; and
(iv)
Any  other  communication  that  is  an  offer  in  the  offering  made  by  the
undersigned Registrant to the purchaser.
The  undersigned  Registrant  hereby  undertakes  that,  for  purposes  of  determining  any
liability under the Securities Act, each filing of the Registrant’s annual report pursuant to
section 13(a) or section 15(d) of the Exchange Act (and, where applicable, each filing of
an employee benefit plan’s annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act)
that is incorporated by reference in the Registration Statement shall be deemed to be a
new Registration Statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of
such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted
to  directors,  officers  and  controlling  persons  of  the  Registrant  pursuant  to  the  foregoing
provisions,  or  otherwise,  the  Registrant  have  been  advised  that  in  the  opinion  of  the
Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities
Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against
such liabilities (other than the payment by the Registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a
director,  officer  or  controlling  person  of  the  Registrant  in  the  successful  defense  of  any
action,  suit  or  proceeding)  is  asserted  by  such  director,  officer  or  controlling  person  in
connection with the securities being registered, the Registrant will, unless in the opinion of
its  counsel  the  matter  has  been  settled  by  controlling  precedent,  submit  to  a  court  of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of
such issue.
(b)
(c)
Table of Contents
II-4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  Encana
Corporation  certifies  that  it  has  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  it  meets  all  of  the
requirements  for  filing  on  Form  F-3  and  has  duly  caused  this  Amendment  No.  1  to  the
Registration  Statement  to  be  signed  on  its  behalf  by  the  undersigned,  thereunto  duly
authorized, in the City of Calgary, Province of Alberta, Canada, on this 24th day of August,
2016.
ENCANA CORPORATION
By: /s/ Douglas J. Suttles
By:
/s/ Douglas J. Suttles
 
 Name:   Douglas J. Suttles
Title: 
 
Executive Officer
President  &  Chief
By: /s/ Sherri A. Brillon
Name:   Sherri A. Brillon
Title:     Executive Vice-President
 
& Chief
               Financial Officer
Table of Contents
II-5
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Amendment
No.  1  to  the  Registration  Statement  has  been  signed  by  the  following  persons  in  the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Capacity
Douglas J. Suttles
Officer and Director (Principal
*
Clayton H. Woitas
*
/s/ Sherri A. Brillon
Sherri A. Brillon
*
Peter A. Dea
*
Fred J. Fowler
*
Chairman of the Board
of Directors
President & Chief Executive
Executive Officer)
Executive Vice-President
& Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer and
Principal Accounting Officer)
Corporate Director
Corporate Director
Date
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
Corporate Director
August 24, 2016
Howard J. Mayson
*
Corporate Director
Lee A. McIntire
*
Corporate Director
Margaret A. McKenzie
*
Corporate Director
Suzanne P. Nimocks
*
Jane L. Peverett
Table of Contents
Signature
Corporate Director
II-6
Capacity
*
Corporate Director
Brian G. Shaw
*
Corporate Director
Bruce G. Waterman
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
Date
August 24, 2016
August 24, 2016
*By:
/s/ Sherri A. Brillon
Attorney-in-Fact
August 24, 2016
Sherri A. Brillon
Table of Contents
II-7
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 6(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the
Authorized  Representative  has  duly  caused  this  Amendment  No.  1  to  the  Registration
Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, solely in its capacity as the duly
authorized representative of Encana Corporation in the United States, on this 24th day of
August, 2016.
Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number   Description
ALENCO INC.
By: /s/ Sherri A. Brillon
Name: Sherri A. Brillon
  Title:
President
II-8
EXHIBITS
1.1†
4.1*
4.2*
4.3†
4.4†
4.5†
4.6†
4.7†
4.8†
5.1*
5.2
Form of Underwriting Agreement
Trust Indenture, dated November 14, 2011, between Encana and The Bank of New
York Mellon, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Encana’s Form F-10 filed with
the Commission on May 7, 2012).
Specimen Common Share Certificate.
Specimen Class A Preferred Share Certificate.
Form of Subscription Receipt Agreement.
Form of Warrant Agreement.
Form of Unit Agreement.
Form of Share Purchase Contract.
Form of Share Purchase Unit Agreement.
Opinion of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP.
Opinion of Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP.
23.1
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
23.2*
Consent of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1
above).
23.3
Consent of Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP (included in Exhibit 5.2 above).
23.4*
23.4*
Consent of GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd.
23.5*
Consent of McDaniel & Associates Consultants Ltd.
23.6*
Consent of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc.
24.1*
Powers of Attorney (included on the signature page to the initial Registration
Statement).
25.1*
Statement of Eligibility of the Trustee on Form T-1.
*Previously filed or incorporated by reference herein.
† To be filed as an exhibit to a post-effective amendment to this Registration Statement or
as an exhibit to a report filed on Form 6-K or Form 8-K under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934 and incorporated herein by reference.
II-9