
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One) 
  ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2015
OR
  TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD FROM                      TO
Commission File Number 001-36908
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its Charter)
Nevada
( State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
665 Anderson Street
Winnemucca, NV
(Address of principal executive offices)
98-0138393 
(I.R.S. Employer 
Identification No.)
89445 
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (775) 625-3600
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: Common Stock, Par Value $0.01 Per Share; Common stock traded on the NYSE MKT stock market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.    YES      NO  
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Act.    YES      NO  
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the 
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 
90 days.    YES      NO  
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be 
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Registrant 
was required to submit and post such files).    YES      NO  
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§229.405) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the 
best of Registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-
K.  
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definition 
of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer”, and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer

Non-accelerated filer
  (Do not check if a small reporting company)
Accelerated filer
Small reporting company


Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    YES      NO  
As of December 31, 2014, the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second quarter, there was no public market for the registrant’s common 
equity.
The number of shares of Registrant’s Common Stock outstanding as of September 11, 2015 was 8,518,791.
Portions of the Registrant’s Definitive Proxy Statement relating to the Annual Meeting of Shareholders (the “2015 Proxy Statement”) are incorporated by reference into 
Part III of this Report where indicated.  The 2015 Proxy Statement will be filed with the U.S. Securities Exchange Commission within 120 days after the end of the 
fiscal year to which this report relates.
Page
4 
6 
12 
12 
16 
17 
 
 
18 
18 
19 
21 
21 
22 
22 
22 
 
 
23 
23 
23 
23 
23 
 
 
24
Table of Contents
Business
PART I 
Item 1. 
Item 1A.   Risk Factors 
Item 1B.   Unresolved Staff Comments 
Item 2. 
Item 3. 
Item 4.
Properties 
  Legal Proceedings 
  Mine Safety Disclosures 
  
    
PART II
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
  Selected Financial Data 
  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Item 5. 
Item 6. 
Item 7. 
Item 7A.   Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 
Item 8. 
Item 9. 
Item 9A.   Controls and Procedures 
Item 9B.   Other Information
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 
  Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
PART III
Item 10.   Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 
Item 11.   Executive Compensation 
Item 12.   Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters 
Item 13.   Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 
Item 14.   Principal Accounting Fees and Services
PART IV
Item 15.   Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
i
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of applicable securities laws relating to 
Paramount Gold Nevada Corp. (“Paramount”, “we”, “us”, “our”, or the “Company”) which represent our current expectations or 
beliefs including, but not limited to, statements concerning our operations, performance, and financial condition. These statements by 
their nature involve substantial risks and uncertainties, credit losses, dependence on management and key personnel, variability of 
quarterly results, and our ability to continue growth. Statements in this annual report regarding planned drilling activities and any 
other statements about Paramount’s future expectations, beliefs, goals, plans or prospects constitute forward-looking statements. You 
should also see our risk factors beginning on page 6. For this purpose, any statements contained in this Form 10-K that are not 
statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, words such as “may”, 
“anticipate”, “intend”, “could”, “estimate”, or “continue” or the negative or other comparable terminology are intended to identify 
forward-looking statements. Other matters such as our growth strategy and competition are beyond our control. Should one or more of 
these risks or uncertainties materialize or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual outcomes and results could differ 
materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements.
Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we undertake no obligation to update 
any forward-looking statement or statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made or to 
reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. New factors emerge from time to time and it is not possible for us to predict all of such 
factors, nor can we assess the impact of each such factor on the business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, 
may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
In this report, the following terms have the following meanings:
GLOSSARY OF MINING TERMS
alteration – any change in the mineral composition of a rock brought about by physical or chemical means.
assay – a measure of the valuable mineral content.
development stage – a “development stage” project is one which is undergoing preparation of an established commercially mineable 
deposit for its extraction but which is not yet in production. This stage occurs after completion of a feasibility study.
diamond drilling – rotary drilling using diamond-set or diamond-impregnated bits, to produce a solid continuous core of rock sample.
dip – the angle that a structural surface, a bedding or fault plane, makes with the horizontal, measured perpendicular to the strike of the 
structure.
disseminated – where minerals occur as scattered particles in the rock.
exploration stage – an “exploration stage” prospect is one which is not in either the development or production stage.
fault – a surface or zone of rock fracture along which there has been displacement.
feasibility study – a comprehensive study of a mineral deposit in which all geological, engineering, legal, operating, economic, social, 
environmental and other relevant factors are considered in sufficient detail that it could reasonably serve as the basis for a final 
decision by a financial institution to finance the development of the deposit for mineral production.
formation – a distinct layer of sedimentary rock of similar composition.
geochemistry – the study of the distribution and amounts of the chemical elements in minerals, ores, rocks, solids, water, and the 
atmosphere.
geophysical surveys – a survey method used primarily in the mining industry as an exploration tool, applying the methods of physics 
and engineering to the earth’s surface.
geophysics – the study of the mechanical, electrical and magnetic properties of the earth’s crust.
geotechnology – the study of ground stability.
1
grade – quantity of metal per unit weight of host rock.
heap leach – a mineral processing method involving the crushing and stacking of an ore on an impermeable liner upon which solutions 
are sprayed to dissolve metals, e.g., gold, copper etc.; the solutions containing the metals are then collected and treated to recover the 
metals.
host rock – the rock in which a mineral or an ore body may be contained.
in-situ – in its natural position.
lithology – the character of a rock described in terms of its structure, color, mineral composition, grain size and arrangement of its 
component parts, all those visible features that in the aggregate impart individuality to the rock.
mapped or geological mapping – the recording of geologic information including rock units and the occurrence of structural features, 
attitude of bedrock, and mineral deposits on maps.
mineral – a naturally occurring inorganic crystalline material having a definite chemical composition.
mineralization – a natural accumulation or concentration in rocks or soil of one or more potentially economic minerals; also the 
process by which minerals are introduced or concentrated in a rock.
mineralized material – refers to material that is not included in the reserve as it does not meet all of the criteria for adequate 
demonstration for economic or legal extraction.
open pit or open cut – surface mining in which the ore is extracted from a pit or quarry, the geometry of the pit may vary with the 
characteristics of the ore body.
ore – mineral bearing rock that can be mined and treated profitably under current or immediately foreseeable economic conditions.
ore body – a mostly solid and fairly continuous mass of mineralization estimated to be economically mineable.
ore grade – the average weight of the valuable metal or mineral contained in a specific weight of ore, e.g., grams per metric ton of ore.
outcrop – that part of a geologic formation or structure that appears at the surface of the earth.
oxide – gold-bearing ore that results from the oxidation of near surface sulfide ore.
Preliminary economic assessment – a study that includes an economic analysis of the potential viability of mineral resources taken at 
an early stage of the project prior to the completion of a preliminary feasibility study.
probable reserve – refers to reserves for which quantity and grade and/or quality are computed from information similar to that used 
for proven (measured) reserves, but the sites for inspection, sampling, and measurement are farther apart or are otherwise less 
adequately spaced. The degree of assurance, although lower than that for proven reserves, is high enough to assume continuity 
between points of observation.
production stage – a “production stage” project is actively engaged in the process of extraction and beneficiation of mineral reserves to 
produce a marketable metal or mineral product.
proven reserve – refers to reserves for which (a) quantity is computed from dimensions revealed in outcrops, trenches, workings or 
drill holes; grade and/or quality are computed from the results of detailed sampling and (b) the sites for inspection, sampling and 
measurement are spaced so closely and the geologic character is so well defined that size, shape, depth and mineral content of reserves 
are well-established.
QA/QC – Quality Assurance/Quality Control is the process of controlling and assuring data quality for assays and other exploration 
and mining data.
quartz – a mineral composed of silicon dioxide, SiO2 (silica)
2
RC (reverse circulation) drilling – a drilling method using a tri-cone bit or hammer bit, during which rock cuttings are pushed from the 
bottom of the drill hole to the surface through an inner tube, by liquid and/or air pressure moving through an outer tube.
reserve – refers to that part of a mineral deposit which could be economically and legally extracted or produced at the time of the 
reserve determination. Reserves must be supported by a feasibility study done to bankable standards that demonstrates the economic 
extraction. (“Bankable standards” implies that the confidence attached to the costs and achievements developed in the study is 
sufficient for the project to be eligible for external debt financing.) A reserve includes adjustments to the in-situ tons and grade to 
include diluting materials and allowances for losses that might occur when the material is mined.
rock – indurated naturally occurring mineral matter of various compositions.
sampling and analytical variance/precision – an estimate of the total error induced by sampling, sample preparation and analysis.
sediment – particles transported by water, wind, gravity or ice.
sedimentary rock – rock formed at the earth’s surface from solid particles, whether mineral or organic, which have been moved from 
their position of origin and re-deposited.
strike – the direction or trend that a structural surface, e.g. a bedding or fault plane, takes as it intersects the horizontal.
strip – to remove barren rock or overburden in order to expose ore.
sulfide – a mineral including sulfur (S) and iron (Fe) as well as other elements; metallic sulfur-bearing mineral often associated with 
gold mineralization.
3
Item 1. Business.
PART I
Paramount Gold Nevada Corp. is a Nevada corporation formed on June 15, 1992 under the name X-Cal (USA), Inc.   Paramount Gold 
Nevada Corp. common stock trades on the NYSE MKT LLC under the symbol “PZG.”  Unless the context otherwise requires, 
reference to “we,” “us,” “our,” “Paramount,” the “Company” and other similar references refer to Paramount Gold Nevada Corp.
INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERING AND ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSACTIONS
On April 17, 2015, we entered into the previously disclosed separation and distribution agreement (the “Separation Agreement”) with 
Paramount Gold and Silver Corp. (“PGSC”), to effect the separation (the “separation”) of the Company from PGSC, and to provide 
for the allocation between the Company and PGSC of the Company’s and PGSC’s assets, liabilities and obligations attributable to 
periods prior to, at and after the separation.
We filed a registration statement on Form S-1 in connection with the distribution (the “distribution”) by PGSC to its stockholders of 
all the outstanding shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.01 per share. The registration statement was declared 
effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on April 9, 2015. On April 6, 2015, the Company filed a Form 8-A 
with the SEC to register its shares of common stock under Section 12(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The 
distribution, which effected a spin-off of the Company from PGSC, was made on April 17, 2015, to PGSC stockholders of record on 
April 14, 2015. On the distribution date, stockholders of PGSC received one share of Company common stock for every 20 shares of 
PGSC common stock held. Up to and including the distribution date, PGSC common stock traded on the “regular-way” market; that 
is, with an entitlement to shares of Company common stock distributed pursuant to the distribution. As a result of the distribution, the 
Company is now a publicly traded company independent from PGSC. On April 20, 2015, the Company’s shares of common stock 
commenced trading on the NYSE MKT LLC under the symbol “PZG”. An aggregate of 8,101,371 shares of Company common stock 
were distributed in the distribution. In connection with our separation from PGSC and PGSC’s merger with and into Coeur Mining, 
Inc. (“Coeur”), PGSC contributed approximately $8.45 million to us as an equity contribution, and we issued 417,420 shares of our 
common stock, par value $0.01 per share, to Coeur in exchange for a cash payment by Coeur in the amount of $1.47 million.
OVERVIEW OF PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
We are an emerging growth company engaged in the business of precious metals exploration primarily in Nevada, USA. Our business 
strategy is to acquire and develop known precious metals deposits in mineralized geological environments in North America. This 
strategy helps reduce discovery risks as exploration programs can be designed using existing geological drilling data and significantly 
increases the efficiency and effectiveness of exploration programs. By developing known deposits, we spend less time trying to 
discover new areas of mineralization. Our projects are located near successful operating mines. This greatly reduces the related costs 
for infrastructure requirements at the exploration stage and eventually for mine construction and operation.
The Company’s principal Nevada interest, the Sleeper Gold Project, is located in Humboldt County, Nevada, and was a producing 
mine until 1996.
INTER-CORPORATE RELATIONSHIPS
We currently have two active wholly owned direct subsidiaries, New Sleeper Gold LLC and Sleeper Mining Company, LLC, which 
operate our mining interests in Nevada.
COMPETITION
The mineral exploration industry is highly competitive. We compete with junior and senior mineral exploration companies, 
independent producers and institutional and individual investors who are actively seeking to acquire mineral exploration properties 
throughout Nevada together with the equipment, labor and materials required to explore on those properties. Competition for the 
acquisition of mineral exploration interests is intense with many mineral exploration leases or concessions available through a 
competitive bidding process in which we may lack the technological information or expertise available to other bidders. Accordingly, 
these competitors may be able to spend greater amounts on acquiring mineral exploration interests of merit or on exploring or 
developing their mineral exploration properties. This advantage could enable our competitors to acquire mineral exploration properties 
of greater quality and interest to prospective investors who may choose to finance their exploration and development projects instead 
of the Company’s. Such competition could adversely impact our ability to attain the financing necessary for us to acquire further 
mineral exploration interests.
4
We do not compete with anyone with respect to our existing mineral claims because there is no competition for the exploration and we 
believe we have or can acquire on reasonable terms the equipment, labor and materials necessary to explore our current properties. 
Because there is presently no known mineral reserve at this time on our existing properties, we cannot determine the impact of any 
capital expenditures on our earnings or competitive position in the event a potentially commercially mineable ore deposit is 
discovered.
UNITED STATES REGULATIONS
Mining Claims: Exploration activities on our properties in Nevada are conducted upon federally-owned land. Most federally-owned 
land is administered by the Bureau of Land Management (“BLM”). On existing claims, we are required to pay annual claim 
maintenance fees of $155 per claim on or before September 1st at the State Office of the BLM. In addition, in Nevada, we are required 
to pay the county recorder of the county in which the claim is situated an annual fee of $10.50 per claim. On certain claims, we are 
required to pay a fee for each 20 acres of an association placer. For any new claims we acquire by staking, we must file a certificate of 
location with the State Office of the BLM within 90 days of making the claim along with a fee equal to the amount of the annual claim 
maintenance fee.
Annual Payments made to federal and other state agencies to maintain claims
Property 
Sleeper Gold Project 
Mill Creek 
Spring Valley 
Total Annual Payment to Maintain
Mining Claims
Number of
Federal
payments to
Bureau of
Payment to
Claims
Land Management
Local County
2322     $ 
36     $ 
38     $
370,450     $ 
5,580     $ 
5,890     $
24,397     $ 
382     $ 
406     $
$
Total Annual 
Payment to
Maintain Claims
394,847  
5,960  
6,296
407,103
Mining Exploration: BLM regulations require, and we have obtained, permits for surface disturbances to conduct our exploration 
activities. There are also numerous permits in place that are maintained from the previous mine operations. We maintain these permits 
for ease in updating should a decision be made to reinitiate production at the Sleeper Gold mine. Maintenance of these permits 
includes monthly, quarterly and annual monitoring and reporting to various government agencies and departments.
Environmental and Reclamation: Our Sleeper Gold Project is currently operated as an advanced exploration project and is subject to 
various permit requirements. We are required to submit a plan of operation, obtain permitting and post bonds that guarantee that 
reclamation is performed on lands associated with exploration.
We are also responsible for managing the reclamation requirements from the previous mine operations and have a bond posted with 
the BLM to guarantee that reclamation is performed on the associated mine facilities and activities.
We expect that our annual obligations to satisfy reclamation requirements to be approximately $100,000 per year for the next five 
years. Annual outlays are reimbursed by the existing reclamation bond and reimbursements are expected to approximate the actual 
outlays. In June 2013, the Company’s mine closure plan and existing plan was determined to be sufficient by the BLM.
EMPLOYEES
As of June 30, 2015 we employed six total employees, all of whom are full-time, and one consultant.
FACILITIES
Our principal office is located at 665 Anderson Street, 89445, Winnemucca, Nevada.
5
Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Described below are certain risks that we believe apply to our business and the industry in which we operate.  You should carefully 
consider each of the following risk factors in conjunction with other provided in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in our other 
public disclosure.  The risks described below highlight potential events, trends or other circumstances that could adversely affect our 
business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity or access to sources of financing, and consequently, the 
market value of our common stock.  These risks could cause our future results to differ materially from historical results.  The risks 
described below are those that we have identified as material and is not an exhaustive list of all the risks we face.  There may be others 
that we have not identified or that we have deemed to be immaterial.  All forward-looking statements made by us or on our behalf are 
qualified by the risks described below.
We have no operating history as a separate public company, and our historical financial information is not necessarily indicative 
of our future prospects.
The historical information in this report refers to our business as operated by and integrated with PGSC prior to April 20, 2015. Our 
historical financial information included in this report is derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of 
PGSC. Therefore, the historical information included in this report does not necessarily reflect the financial condition, results of 
operations or cash flows that we would have achieved as a separate publicly traded company during that period or those that we will 
achieve in the future, primarily as a result of the following factors:



Prior to the separation, our assets were operated by PGSC, rather than as a separate company. PGSC or one of its affiliates 
performed various corporate functions for us and/or our assets, including tax administration, cash management, 
accounting, information services, human resources, ethics and compliance programs, real estate management, investor and 
public relations, certain governance functions (including internal audit) and external reporting. Our historical financial 
results reflect allocations of corporate expenses from PGSC for these and similar functions. These allocations may be less 
than the comparable expenses we would have incurred had we operated as a separate publicly traded company.
After the completion of the separation, the cost of capital for our business may be higher than PGSC’s cost of capital prior 
to the separation.
Other significant changes may occur in our cost structure, management, financing and business operations as a result of 
our operations as a company separate from PGSC managed by our board of directors.
If we fail to develop or maintain an effective system of internal controls, we may not be able to accurately report our financial 
results or prevent fraud. As a result, current and potential stockholders could lose confidence in our financial reporting, which 
would harm our business and the trading price of our common stock.
Effective internal controls are necessary for us to provide reliable financial reports, prevent fraud and operate successfully as a public 
company. If we cannot provide reliable financial reports or prevent fraud, our reputation and operating results would be harmed. We 
cannot be certain that our efforts to develop and maintain our internal controls will be successful, that we will be able to maintain 
adequate controls over our financial processes and reporting in the future or that we will be able to comply with our obligations under 
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Any failure to develop or maintain effective internal controls, or difficulties 
encountered in implementing or improving our internal controls, could harm our operating results or cause us to fail to meet our 
reporting obligations. Ineffective internal controls could also cause investors to lose confidence in our reported financial information, 
which would likely have a negative effect on the trading price of our common stock.
We may not achieve some or all of the expected benefits of the separation.
We may not be able to achieve the full strategic and financial benefits expected to result from the separation, or such benefits may be 
delayed or not occur at all. These expected benefits include the following:





initial funding allows for the advancement of the Sleeper Gold Project, the main asset held by the Company;
the potential opportunity to acquire additional gold exploration assets in Nevada at a time when valuations are at historic 
lows;
a lower cost corporate structure focused on operating in the United States only that is expected to result from operating in 
what is generally considered to be one of the safest mining jurisdictions in the world;
the risks of political instability in the United States are extremely low; and
potential joint venture partners interested in Nevada mining assets might be easier to identify.
6
We may not achieve the anticipated benefits for a variety of reasons, including potential loss of synergies (if any) from operating as 
one company, potential for increased costs, potential disruptions to the businesses as a result of the separation, risks of being unable to 
achieve the benefits expected to be achieved by the separation, and both the one-time and ongoing costs of the separation. If we fail to 
achieve some or all of the benefits expected to result from the separation, or if such benefits are delayed, our business, financial 
condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Risks Related to our Business Operations
It is possible investors may lose their entire investment in the Company.
Prospective investors should be aware that if we are not successful in our endeavors, your entire investment in the Company could 
become worthless. Even if we are successful in identifying mineral reserves that can be commercially developed, there can be no 
assurances that we will generate any revenues and therefore our losses will continue.
No revenue generated from operations.
We have not generated any revenues from operations. Our net loss for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2015 totaled $5,231,207. We 
have incurred losses in the past and we will likely continue to incur losses in the future. Even if our drilling programs identify gold, 
silver or other mineral reserves, there can be no assurance that we will be able to commercially exploit these resources, generate any 
revenues or generate sufficient revenues to operate profitably.
We will require significant additional capital to continue our exploration activities, and, if warranted, to develop mining 
operations.
None of our projects currently have proven or probable reserves. Substantial expenditures will be required to determine if proven and 
probable mineral reserves exist at any of our properties, to develop metallurgical processes to extract metal, to develop the mining and 
processing facilities and infrastructure at any of our properties or mine sites and, in certain circumstances, to acquire additional 
property rights. We have spent and will be required to continue to expend significant amounts of capital for drilling, geological and 
geochemical analysis, assaying, and, when warranted, feasibility studies with regard to the results of our exploration. We may not 
benefit from these investments if we are unable to identify commercially exploitable mineralized material. If we decide to put one or 
more of our properties into production, we will require significant amounts of capital to develop and construct the mining and 
processing facilities and infrastructure required for mining operations. Our ability to obtain necessary funding for these purposes, in 
turn, depends upon a number of factors, including the status of the national and worldwide economy and the price of gold, silver and 
other precious metals. We may not be successful in obtaining the required financing, or if we can obtain such financing, such 
financing may not be on terms that are favorable to us. Failure to obtain such additional financing could result in delay or indefinite 
postponement of further exploration or development and the possible, partial or total loss of our potential interest in certain properties. 
Any such delay could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition.
We may acquire additional exploration stage properties, and we may face negative reactions if reserves are not located on acquired 
properties.
We may acquire additional exploration stage properties. There can be no assurance that we will be able to identify and complete the 
acquisition of such properties at reasonable prices or on favorable terms or that reserves will be identified on any properties that we 
acquire. We may also experience negative reactions from the financial markets if we are unable to successfully complete acquisitions 
of additional properties or if reserves are not located on acquired properties. These factors may adversely affect the trading price of 
our common stock or our financial condition or results of operations.
Our industry is highly competitive, attractive mineral lands are scarce, and we may not be able to obtain quality properties.
We compete with many companies in the mining industry, including large, established mining companies with substantial capabilities, 
personnel and financial resources. There is a limited supply of desirable mineral lands available for claim staking, lease or acquisition 
in the United States where we may conduct exploration activities. We may be at a competitive disadvantage in acquiring mineral 
properties because we compete with these individuals and companies, many of which have greater financial resources and larger 
technical staffs.
Title to mineral properties can be uncertain, and we are at risk of loss of ownership of one or more of our properties. Our ability to 
explore and operate our properties depends on the validity of our title to that property. Our mineral properties consist of leases of 
unpatented mining claims. Unpatented mining claims provide only possessory title and their validity is often subject to contest by third 
parties or the federal government, which makes the validity of unpatented mining claims uncertain and generally more risky. These 
uncertainties relate to such things as the sufficiency of mineral discovery, proper posting and marking of boundaries, assessment work
7
and possible conflicts with other claims not determinable from public record. Since a substantial portion of all mineral exploration, 
development and mining in the United States now occurs on unpatented mining claims, this uncertainty is inherent in the mining 
industry. We have not obtained title opinions covering our entire property, with the attendant risk that title to some claims, particularly 
title to undeveloped property, may be defective. There may be valid challenges to the title to our property which, if successful, could 
impair development and/or operations.
There are no confirmed commercially mineable ore deposits on any properties from which we may derive any financial benefit.
Neither we nor PGSC, nor any independent geologist, has confirmed commercially mineable ore deposits on any of our properties. In 
order to carry out additional exploration programs of any potential ore body and to place it into commercial production, we will 
require substantial additional funding.
We have no mining operations and no history as a mining company.
We are an exploration stage mining company and have no ongoing mining operations of any kind. We have interests in mineral 
concessions and mining claims which may or may not lead to production.
We have no history of earnings or cash flow from mining operations. If we are able to proceed to production, commercial viability 
will be affected by factors that are beyond our control such as the particular attributes of the deposit, the fluctuation in metal prices, 
the cost of constructing and the operation of a mine, prices and refining facilities, the availability of economic sources for energy, 
government regulations including regulations relating to prices, royalties, restrictions on production, quotas on exploration of 
minerals, as well as the costs of protection of the environment.
If our exploration costs are higher than anticipated, then our profitability will be adversely affected.
We are currently proceeding with plans to explore our mineral properties on the basis of estimated exploration costs. If our exploration 
costs are greater than anticipated, then we will have fewer capital resources for other expenses. Factors that could cause exploration 
costs to increase include adverse weather conditions, difficult terrain, increased government regulation and shortages of qualified 
personnel.
Assuming no adverse developments outside of the ordinary course of business, our exploration budget following the completion of the 
spin-off will be approximately $1 million for the next twelve months. Exploration will be funded by our available cash reserves and 
future issuances of common stock, warrants or units. Our drilling program may vary significantly from what we have budgeted 
depending upon drilling results. Even if we identify mineral reserves which have the potential to be commercially developed, we will 
not generate revenues until such time as we undertake mining operations. Mining operations will involve a significant capital infusion. 
Mining costs are speculative and dependent on a number of factors including mining depth, terrain and necessary equipment. We do 
not believe that we will have sufficient funds to implement mining operations without a joint venture partner, of which there can be no 
assurance.
Our continuing reclamation obligations at the Sleeper Gold Project could require significant additional expenditures.
We are responsible for the reclamation obligations related to disturbances located on all of our properties, including the Sleeper Gold 
Project. We have posted a bond in the amount of the estimated reclamation obligation at the Sleeper Gold Project. Every three years, 
we are required to submit a mine closure plan to the BLM for the Sleeper Gold Project. Based on a review by the BLM of our mine 
closure that PGSC submitted in June 2013, the BLM determined that our existing bond was sufficient. There is a risk that any cash 
bond, even if increased based on the analysis and work performed to update the reclamation obligations, could be inadequate to cover 
the actual costs of reclamation when carried out. The satisfaction of bonding requirements and continuing reclamation obligations will 
require a significant amount of capital. There is a risk that we will be unable to fund these additional bonding requirements, and 
further, that the regulatory authorities may increase reclamation and bonding requirements to such a degree that it would not be 
commercially reasonable to continue exploration activities, which may adversely affect our results of operations, financial 
performance and cash flows.
Mining operations are hazardous, raise environmental concerns and raise insurance risks.
The development and operation of a mine or mineral property involves many risks, which even a combination of experience, 
knowledge and careful evaluation may not be able to overcome. These risks include, among other things, ground fall, flooding, 
environmental hazards and the discharge of toxic chemicals, explosions and other accidents. Such occurrences may result in work 
stoppages, delays in production, increased production costs, damage to or destruction of mines and other producing facilities, injury or 
loss of life, damage to property, environmental damage and possible legal liability for such damages as well. Although the Company 
maintains liability coverage in an amount which it considers adequate for its operations, such occurrences, against which the Company
8
may not be able, or may elect not to insure, may result in a material adverse change in the Company’s financial position. The nature of 
these risks is such that liabilities may exceed policy limits, in which event the Company would incur substantial uninsured losses.
There may be insufficient mineral reserves to develop any of our properties, and our estimates may be inaccurate.
There is no certainty that any expenditures made in the exploration of any properties will result in discoveries of commercially 
recoverable quantities of ore. Most exploration projects do not result in the discovery of commercially mineable deposits of ore and no 
assurance can be given that any particular level of recovery of precious metals from discovered mineralization will in fact be realized 
or that any identified mineral deposit will ever qualify as a commercially mineable ore body which can be legally and economically 
exploited. Estimates of reserves, mineral deposits and production costs can also be affected by such factors as environmental 
regulations and requirements, weather, environmental factors, unforeseen technical difficulties, unusual or unexpected geological 
formations and work interruptions. In addition, the grade of ore ultimately mined may differ from that indicated by drilling results. 
Short term factors relating to reserves, such as the need for orderly development of ore bodies or the processing of new or different 
grades, may also have an adverse effect on mining operations and on the results of operations. There can be no assurance that precious 
metals recovered in small scale laboratory tests will be duplicated in large scale tests under on-site production conditions. Material 
changes in estimated reserves, grades, stripping ratios or recovery rates may affect the economic viability of any project.
We have no proven reserves.
All of our properties are in the exploration stages only and are without known bodies of commercial ore. Development of these 
properties will follow only upon obtaining satisfactory exploration results. The long-term profitability of the Company’s operations 
will be in part directly related to the cost and success of its exploration and development programs. Mineral exploration and 
development are highly speculative businesses, involving a high degree of risk. Few properties which are explored are ultimately 
developed into producing mines. There is no assurance that our mineral exploration and development activities will result in any 
discoveries of commercial quantities of ore. There is also no assurance that, even if commercial quantities of ore are discovered, a 
mineral property will be brought into commercial production. Discovery of mineral deposits is dependent upon a number of factors, 
not the least of which is the technical skill of the exploration personnel involved. The commercial viability of a mineral deposit once 
discovered is also dependent upon a number of factors, many of which are beyond the Company’s control, such as the particular 
attributes of the deposit (such as size, grade and proximity to infrastructure), metal prices and government regulations, including 
regulations relating to royalties, allowable production, importing and exporting of minerals, and environmental protection.
In the course of exploration, development, and mining of mineral properties, certain unanticipated conditions may arise or unexpected 
or unusual events may occur, including rock bursts, cave-ins, fires, floods, or earthquakes. It is not always possible to fully insure 
against such risks and we may decide not to take out insurance against such risks as a result of high premiums or for other reasons.   
Should such liabilities arise, they may reduce or eliminate any future profitability and may result in a decline in the value of the 
securities of the Company.
We face fluctuating gold and mineral prices.
The value of any mineral reserves we develop, and consequently the value of our common stock, depends significantly on the value of 
such minerals. The price of gold and silver as well as other precious and base metals have experienced volatile and significant price 
movements over short periods of time and are affected by numerous factors beyond our control, including international economic and 
political trends, expectations of inflation, interest rates, global or regional consumption patterns, speculative activities and increases in 
production due to improved mining and production methods. The supply of and demand for gold and silver, as well as other precious 
and base metals, are affected by various factors, including political events, economic conditions and production costs in major mineral 
producing regions.
Our estimates of mineralized material and other mineral resources are subject to uncertainty.
Estimates of mineralized material and other mineral resources are subject to considerable uncertainty. Such estimates are arrived at 
using standard acceptable geological techniques, and are based on the interpretations of geological data obtained from drill holes and 
other sampling techniques. Engineers use feasibility studies to derive estimates of cash operating costs based on anticipated tonnage 
and grades of ore to be mined and processed, the predicted configuration of the ore bodies, expected recovery rates of metal from ore, 
comparable facility and operating costs and other factors. Actual cash operating costs and economic returns on projects may differ 
significantly from the original estimates, primarily due to fluctuations in the current prices of metal commodities extracted from the 
deposits, changes in fuel costs, labor rates, changes in permit requirements, and unforeseen variations in the characteristics of the ore 
body. Due to the presence of these factors, there is no assurance that any geological reports will accurately reflect actual quantities of 
gold, silver or other metals that can be economically processed and mined by us.
9
If we are unable to obtain all of our required governmental permits, our operations could be negatively impacted.
Our future operations, including exploration and development activities, required permits from various governmental authorities. Such 
operations are and will be governed by laws and regulations governing prospecting, development, mining, production, exports, taxes, 
labor standards, occupational health, waste disposal, toxic substances, land use, environmental protection, mine safety and other 
matters. There can be no assurance that we will be able to acquire all required licenses or permits or to maintain continued operations 
at our properties.
We are subject to numerous environmental and other regulatory requirements.
All phases of mining and exploration operations are subject to governmental regulation including environmental regulation. 
Environmental legislation is becoming stricter, with increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent environmental 
assessments of proposed projects and heightened responsibility for companies and their officers, directors and employees. There can 
be no assurance that possible future changes in environmental regulation will not adversely affect our operations. As well, 
environmental hazards may exist on a property in which we hold an interest that was caused by previous or existing owners or 
operators of the properties and of which the Company is not aware at present.
Government approvals and permits are required to be maintained in connection with our mining and exploration activities. Although 
we believe we currently have all required permits for our operations as currently conducted, there is no assurance that delays will not 
occur in connection with obtaining all necessary renewals of such permits for the existing operations or additional permits for any 
possible future changes to the Company’s operations, including any proposed capital improvement programs. Failure to comply with 
applicable laws, regulations and permitting requirements may result in enforcement actions thereunder, including orders issued by 
regulatory or judicial authorities causing operations to cease or be curtailed, and may include corrective measures requiring capital 
expenditures, installation of additional equipment, or remedial actions. Parties engaged in mining operations may be required to 
compensate those suffering loss or damage by reason of the mining activities and may be liable for civil or criminal fines or penalties 
imposed for violations of applicable laws or regulations. Amendments to current laws, regulations and permitting requirements, or 
more stringent application of existing laws, may have a material adverse impact on the Company resulting in increased capital 
expenditures or production costs, reduced levels of production at producing properties or abandonment or delays in development of 
properties.
There is no assurance that there will not be title or boundary disputes.
Although we have investigated the right to explore and exploit our properties and obtained records from government offices with 
respect to all of the mineral claims comprising our properties, this should not be construed as a guarantee of title. Other parties may 
dispute the title to any of our properties or any property may be subject to prior unregistered agreements and transfers or land claims 
by aboriginal, native, or indigenous peoples. The title may be affected by undetected encumbrances or defects or governmental 
actions.
Local infrastructure may impact our exploration activities and results of operations.
Mining, processing, development and exploration activities depend, to one degree or another, on adequate infrastructure. Reliable 
roads, bridges, power and water supplies are important determinants that affect capital and operating costs. Unusual or infrequent 
weather phenomena, sabotage or government or other interference in the maintenance or provision of such infrastructure could 
adversely affect our activities and profitability.
Because of the speculative nature of exploration for gold and silver properties, there is substantial risk that our business will fail.
The search for precious metals as a business is extremely risky. We cannot provide any assurances that the gold or silver mining 
interests that we acquired will contain commercially exploitable reserves of gold or silver. Exploration for minerals is a speculative 
venture necessarily involving substantial risk. Any expenditure that we make may not result in the discovery of commercially 
exploitable reserves of precious metals.
The precious metals markets are volatile markets. This will have a direct impact on our revenues (if any) and profits (if any) and 
could have an adverse effect on our ongoing operations.
The price of both gold and silver has fluctuated significantly over the past few years. Despite a recent significant decline in the price 
of gold, there continues to be interest in gold and silver mining and companies engaged in that business, including the exploration for 
both gold and silver. However, in the event that the price of these metals continues to fall, the interest in the gold and silver mining 
industry may decline and the value of our business could be adversely affected. Even if we are able to generate revenues, there can be 
no assurance that any of our operations will prove to be profitable. Finally, in recent decades, there have been periods of both
10
overproduction and underproduction of both gold and silver resources. Such conditions have resulted in periods of excess supply of 
and reduced demand on a worldwide basis and on a domestic basis. These periods have been followed by periods of short supply of 
and increased demand for both gold and silver. The excess or short supply of gold has placed pressure on prices and has resulted in 
dramatic price fluctuations even during relatively short periods of seasonal market demand. We cannot predict what the market for 
gold or silver will be in the future.
Government regulation or changes in such regulation may adversely affect our business.
We have and will in the future engage experts to assist us with respect to our operations. We deal with various regulatory and 
governmental agencies and the rules and regulations of such agencies. No assurances can be given that we will be successful in our 
efforts or dealings with these agencies. Further, in order for us to operate and grow our business, we need to continually conform to 
the laws, rules and regulations of the jurisdictions in which we operate. It is possible that the legal and regulatory environment 
pertaining to the exploration and development of precious metals mining properties will change. Uncertainty and new regulations and 
rules could increase our cost of doing business or prevent us from conducting our business.
We are in competition with companies that are larger, more established and better capitalized than we are.
Many of our potential competitors have greater financial and technical resources, as well as longer operating histories and greater 
experience in mining.
Exploration for economic deposits of minerals is speculative.
The business of mineral exploration is very speculative, since there is generally no way to recover any of the funds expended on 
exploration unless the existence of mineable reserves can be established. We can exploit those reserves by either commencing mining 
operations, selling or leasing our interest in the property or entering into a joint venture with a larger resource company that can 
further develop the property to the production stage. Unless we can establish and exploit reserves before our funds are exhausted, we 
will have to discontinue operations, which could make our stock valueless.
The loss of key members of our senior management team could adversely affect the execution of our business strategy and our 
financial results.
We believe that the successful execution of our business strategy and our ability to move beyond the exploratory stages depends on 
the continued employment of key members of our senior management team. If any members of our senior management team become 
unable or unwilling to continue in their present positions, our financial results and our business could be materially adversely affected.
We operate in a regulated industry and changes in regulations or violations of regulations may result in increased costs or 
sanctions that could reduce our revenues.
Our organization is subject to extensive and complex foreign, federal and state laws and regulations. If we fail to comply with the laws 
and regulations that are directly applicable to our business, we could suffer civil and/or criminal penalties or be subject to injunctions 
or cease and desist orders. While we believe that we are currently compliant with applicable rules and regulations, if there are changes 
in the future, there can be no assurance that we will be able to comply in the future, or that future compliance will not significantly 
adversely impact our operations.
We rely on independent analysis to analyze our drilling results and planned exploration activities.
We rely on independent geologists to analyze our drilling results and to prepare resource reports on several of our mining concessions. 
While these geologists rely on standards established by the Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum, Standards on 
Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves and other standards established by various licensing bodies, there can be no assurance that 
their estimates or results will be accurate. Analyzing drilling results and estimating reserves or targeted drilling sites is not a certainty. 
Miscalculations and unanticipated drilling results may cause the geologists to alter their estimates. If this should happen, we would 
have devoted resources to areas where resources could have been better allocated.
We are an “emerging growth company”, and we cannot be certain if the reduced disclosure requirements applicable to emerging 
growth companies will make our common stock less attractive to investors.
As an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act, we intend to take advantage of certain exemptions from various 
reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies” including not being 
required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and reduced disclosure
11
obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements. Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS 
Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until 
private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of 
securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The 
JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply 
to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended 
transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private 
companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new 
or revised standard. This may make our financial statements not comparable with those of another public company which is neither an 
emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period because of 
the potential differences in accounting standards used.
We cannot predict if investors will find our common stock less attractive if we rely on these exemptions. If some investors find our 
common stock less attractive as a result, there may be a less active trading market for our common stock and our stock price may be 
more volatile.
The JOBS Act allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public 
and private companies.
We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 
102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act. This election allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different 
effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our 
financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Risks Related to Our Common Stock
Our stock price may be volatile.
The market price of our common stock has been volatile. We believe investors should expect continued volatility in our stock price. 
Such volatility may make it difficult or impossible for you to obtain a favorable selling price for our shares.
We do not intend to pay dividends for the foreseeable future.
We have never declared or paid any dividends on our common stock. We intend to retain all of our earnings, if any, for the foreseeable 
future to finance the operation and expansion of our business, and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the future. As a 
result, you may only receive a return on your investment in our common stock if the market price of our common stock increases. Our 
board of directors retains discretion to change this policy.
The exercise of our outstanding options may depress our stock price.
The exercise of outstanding options, and the subsequent sale of the underlying common stock in the public market, or the perception 
that future sales of these shares could occur, could have the effect of lowering the market price of our common stock below current 
levels and make it more difficult for us and our stockholders to sell our equity securities in the future.
Sales or the availability for sale of shares of common stock by stockholders could cause the market price of our common stock to 
decline and could impair our ability to raise capital through an offering of additional equity securities. 
 
 
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.
Not applicable as a smaller reporting company.
Item 2. Properties.
SLEEPER GOLD PROJECT
Overview and Location
Sleeper is a material exploration property of the Company. The Company has the rights to explore, develop and mine the property 
through our 100% ownership of unpatented lode mining claims. Sleeper is located 26 miles northwest of Winnemucca, Nevada. 
Automobile and truck access to the property is by Interstate Highway 80 to Winnemucca, north on Highway 95 for 32 miles, west on 
Highway 140 for 14 miles, and then south for 6 miles on the maintained gravel Sod House Road to the project site. An office building,
12
heavy equipment enclosure and warehousing facility are present on the Sleeper Gold Property. Necessary supplies, equipment and 
services to carry out full sequence exploration and mining development projects are available in Winnemucca, Reno, and Elko, 
Nevada.
Mining Claims
The Sleeper Gold mine and its 1,044 unpatented lode mining claims were acquired by PGSC through its acquisition of X-Cal 
Resources Ltd. in August 2010. Additional mining claims have been staked or acquired which now comprise the Sleeper Gold Project.
The 100% owned mining claims are summarized in the following table:
The Sleeper Gold Project Properties 
Sleeper Gold Mine 
Dunes 
Mimi
Total
Claims
Approx sq. miles   
34   
13   
29   
76
1,044       
394       
884       
2,322
The following map illustrates the general location of the Sleeper Gold Project and the associated mining claims:
History of Previous Operations
The Sleeper Gold Project includes a historic open pit mine (the “Sleeper Gold mine”) operated by AMAX Gold Inc. (“Amax”) from 
1986 until 1996, which produced 1.66 million ounces of gold and 2.3 million ounces of silver. All processing facilities and equipment 
related to the mining operations conducted by Amax have been removed from the site.
13
Power and Water
As a result of Amax’s mine operation from 1986 to 1996, electrical power is provided to the property by power lines. Water is 
available by two deep wells located on the property.
Paramount’s Exploration History at Sleeper Gold Project
PGSC conducted its first exploration program at the Sleeper Gold mine in October 2010. It consisted of 19 drill holes totaling 18,065 
feet and focused on verifying data on existing models and confirming continuity and strike extension of known mineralized zones. 
From July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2012, PGSC completed 79 drill holes totaling 21,013 feet and followed that up in the period from 
July 1, 2012, through June 30, 2013, with 38 drill holes totaling 55,104 feet.
In August 2011, PGSC announced the acquisition of 606 unpatented lode mining claims (the “Dunes Project”) located eleven miles 
south of the Sleeper Gold mine from ICN Resources Ltd. (“ICN”). In consideration, PGSC issued 400,000 shares of its common stock 
to ICN.
In September 2011, PGSC announced the results of a new material estimate on the Sleeper Gold mine prepared by SRK Consulting 
(“SRK”). Such estimate was conducted in accordance with the Canadian standards set forth in National Instrument 43-101. Based on 
the results of the report, the Company commissioned Scott E. Wilson Consulting Inc. (“SEWC”) to prepare a Preliminary Economic 
Assessment (“PEA”) for the project. The PEA is designed to evaluate both the technical and financial aspects of various production 
scenarios using the material estimate developed by SRK.
Also, in July 2012, PGSC announced the staking of 920 new lode mining claims (the “Mimi Project”) adjacent to the west and 
immediately south, of the Sleeper Gold mine. The Mimi Project totals 18,400 acres.
In July 2012, PGSC announced the results of the PEA completed by SEWC on the Sleeper Gold mine property. SEWC concluded that 
the most attractive development scenario consists of a large-scale open pit mining operation with a heap leach processing plant 
handling both oxide and sulfide material, producing a gold-silver dore. The PEA assumes an 81,000 ton per day operation resulting in 
a projected 17-year operation with an average annual production of 172,000 ounces of gold and 263,000 ounces of silver. Paramount 
received the completed PEA report in September 2012.
In 2013, PGSC announced several results of a drilling campaign which was focused in and around the existing resource and pit areas. 
Assay results extended the mineralization east and south of the existing resource, opened up new depth potential below the existing 
sleeper pit and intercepted exceptional results in several zones. Additionally, PGSC undertook an extensive database review and as a 
result, a total of 473 core and RC holes have been re-logged and new cross-sections were generated. Paramount completed a re-
interpreted lithological and structural model which will allow us to plan a new drill program and to update our mineralized material 
estimate model.
In August 2014, PGSC dropped a total of 212 mining claims from its Sleeper Gold Project. These claims no longer had any geological 
value to the Company.
In May 2015, Paramount announced the results of its updated mineralized material estimate for its Sleeper Gold Project.  The estimate 
incorporated all new drilling since the last mineralized material estimate that was completed in September 2011.  Both estimations 
were completed by SRK Consulting.
There is no certainty that the scenarios or estimated economics in the PEA will be realized.
Geology and Mineralization
The Sleeper Gold Project is situated within the western, apparently older, part of the Northern Nevada Rift geologic province of 
Miocene age, along the western flank of the Slumbering Hills within Desert Valley. The geological structures that underlie Desert 
Valley appear to have been down-dropped 3,000 to 3,300 ft. along the north-to northeast-trending normal faults along the western 
edge of the Slumbering Hills.
Four main types of gold mineralization are found within the Sleeper Gold Project deposit and may represent a continuum as the 
system evolved from a high level, high sulfidation system dominated by intrusion related fluids and volatiles to a low sulfidation 
meteoric water dominant system. In this setting the paragenetic relationships of the differing mineralization styles are as follows:


Early – quartz-pyrite-marcasite stockwork;
Intermediate – medium-grade, silica-pyrite-marcasite cemented breccias localized on zones of structural weakness;
14


Late – high-grade, banded, quartz-adularia-electrum-(sericite) veins; and
Post – alluvial gold-silver deposits in Pliocene gravels.
Mill Creek Property
The Mill Creek property is not a material property to the Company. It comprises a contiguous block of 36 unpatented lode mining 
claims. The claims total approximately 720 acres and are located in the NW part of the Shoshone Range, 33 km south of Battle 
Mountain. Access from Battle Mountain is south by paved Highway 305 for 33 km., then eastward on the graded dirt Mill Creek Road 
for 6 miles, and then northeast for 2 miles on a secondary dirt road to the property.
The Mill Creek property is in hilly, grass, sagebrush, juniper and pinyon-covered mountain brush high desert terrain, on the lower 
western slopes of the Shoshone Range. The climate is favorable for year-round mining, with all supplies and services needed for an 
exploration program available in the Battle Mountain - Elko area.
Also, the Mill Creek property is an early-stage gold exploration project. The main exploration target on the Mill Creek Property will 
be the Carlin-Style gold-silver ores found in altered, metamorphosed, and locally skarnified Lower Plate carbonate and limy to 
dolomitic clastic sedimentary rocks of the Devonian Wenban Limestone, Silurian Roberts Mountain Formation, and the Ordovician 
Hanson Creek Formations. A secondary target host rock type is mafic volcanic rock of the Upper Plate rock sequence, similar to 
Newmont’s Twin Creeks Mine. The economic Battle Mountain - Cortez - Eureka Trend gold deposits were deposited as mineralized 
hydrothermal sedimentary-host replacement horizons and breccia zones along major fault structural zones where alteration and 
anomalous gold-silver-arsenic-antimony-thallium mineralization are present. Marbles in metamorphic aureoles and iron-rich skarns 
appear to be favored sites for gold mineralization in these deposits, perhaps due to the rheological character, permeability after 
fracturing, and chemical reactivity of those rocks to alteration by hydrothermal fluids.
15
This property is without a known mineral reserve, and there is no current exploratory work being performed.
Spring Valley Property
The Spring Valley property is not a material property to the Company. It consists of 38 lode mineral claims in the Spring Valley Area, 
Pershing County, Nevada. The project is located approximately 2.5 km northwest of the Rochester mine in the Humboldt Range, 30 
km. northeast of Lovelock, Nevada. The property covers rocks folded into a broad anticline broken into large blocks by major north-
trending faults. Midway Gold Corporation’s Spring Valley project operated by Barrick Gold Corporation is approximately 2 km to the 
northeast.
This property is without a known mineral reserve, and there is no current exploratory work being performed.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Since the announcement of the merger of PGSC and Coeur on December 17, 2014, the Company, PGSC, members of PGSC’s board, 
Coeur, and Hollywood Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”) have been named as defendants in six putative stockholder class action suits 
brought by purported stockholders of PGSC, challenging the proposed Merger (the “Complaints”). The Complaints were filed in the 
Court of Chancery in the State of Delaware (Fernando Gamboa v. Paramount Gold and Silver Corp., et al., No.: 10499; Jerry Panning 
v. Paramount Gold and Silver Corp., et al., No.: 10507; Jonah Weiss v. Christopher Crupi, et al., No.: 10517; Justin Beaston v. 
Paramount Gold and Silver Corporation, et al., No.: 10538; Rob Byers v. Christopher Crupi, et al., No.: 10551; James H. Alston v. 
Paramount Gold and Silver Corp., et al., No.: 10531.
The plaintiffs generally claim that the PGSC board members breached their fiduciary duties to PGSC stockholders by: (i) authorizing 
the merger with Coeur for what the plaintiffs asserts is inadequate consideration and pursuant to an allegedly inadequate process, and 
(ii) failing to disclose sufficient information in its Form S-4 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to allow the 
shareholders to make an informed vote. The plaintiffs also claim that the Company, PGSC, Coeur, and Merger Sub aided and abetted 
the other defendants’ alleged breach of duties. In the Complaints, the plaintiffs seek, among other things, to enjoin the merger, rescind 
the transaction or obtain rescissory damages if the merger is consummated, obtain other unspecified damages and recover attorneys’ 
fees and costs. The merger was consummated on April 17, 2015.
We, PGSC, members of PGSC board, Coeur, and Merger Sub deny any wrongdoing and are vigorously defending all of the actions.
16
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures.
Not applicable.
17
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
MARKET INFORMATION
Our common stock began trading on the NYSE MKT LLC under the symbol “PZG” on April 20, 2015.  Prior to that time, there was 
no public market for our stock.  The following table sets forth for the indicated periods the high and low intra-day sales prices per 
share for our common stock on the NYSE MKT LLC.
HOLDERS
Fourth Quarter (from April 20, 2015)
Year Ended June 30,
2015
High
Low
$  1.85
$  1.48
As of September 11 2015, there were 18,000 shareholders of record and 140 beneficial holders of our common stock.
DIVIDENDS
We currently do not anticipate paying cash dividends for the foreseeable future.
RECENT SALE OF UNREGISTERED SECURITIES AND USE OF PROCEEDS
During the year ended June 30, 2015, the Company did not issue any unregistered shares of common stock. As previously disclosed in 
the Company’s current report on Form 8-K filed April 17, 2015, in connection with the consummation of the merger of PGSC and 
Coeur, the Company issued 417,420 shares of its common stock, par value $0.01 per share, to Coeur in exchange for a cash payment 
by Coeur in the amount of $1.47 million.
EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN
Set out below is information as of June 30, 2015 with respect to compensation plans (including individual compensation 
arrangements) under which our equity securities are authorized for issuance under our Equity Incentive Plan.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
Plan Category 
Equity compensation plans approved by
security holders
Equity compensation plans not approved by
security holders
TOTAL
Item 6. Selected Financial Data.
Not applicable as a smaller reporting company.
Number of
securities to be
issued upon 
exercise of 
outstanding
options
Weighted-
average exercise 
price per share of
outstanding
options
Number of 
securities 
remaining 
available for 
future issuance
under equity 
compensation
plans
995,000     $
1.53
282,818
—     $ 
995,000
—
—   
282,818
18
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
We are an emerging growth company engaged in the business of exploring mining claims in Nevada, USA. We have no proven 
reserves at our Sleeper Gold Project in Nevada. The following discussion updates our plan of operations for the foreseeable future. It 
also analyzes our financial condition and summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 and 
compares each year’s results to the results of the prior year.
Plan of Operation – Exploration:
Our work on the Sleeper Gold Project is consistent with Paramount’s strategy of expanding and upgrading known, large-scale 
precious metal occurrences in established mining camps, defining their economic potential and then partnering them with nearby 
producers.
Exploration activities in Nevada are focused on our Sleeper Gold Project. Our exploration budget will be approximately $1.0 million. 
The main budget activities will include consulting, completing a new NI-43101 compliant preliminary economic assessment (“PEA”) 
and completing a geophysical survey program on the Sleeper Gold project mining claims. We will also evaluate acquisitions 
opportunities and have budgeted approximately $0.1 million for these activities.
The geophysical survey may include but not limited to magnetometry study or Induced Polarization programs. The Company believes 
that the resulting data derived from the geophysical program will produce valuable drilling targets.   Drill programs will be designed 
with the aim identifying new zones of mineralization with an emphasis on areas covered with overburden. Included in our exploration 
budget is approximately $0.4 million required to pay our annual mining claims.
Comparison of Operating Results for the year ended June 30, 2015 as compared to June 30, 2014
Results of Operations
We did not earn any revenue from operations for the years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014. Our on-going exploration program included 
bio-oxidation metallurgical testing and updating material estimate models for our Sleeper Gold Project. Other normal course of 
business activities included filing annual mining claim fees with the BLM, reclamation work at the Sleeper mine site and on-going 
geological reviews of its mining claims.
Expenses
Our operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2015 compared to the year ended June 30, 2014 increased by approximately 18% 
or by $487,910. Our exploration expenses decreased by 41% or by $622,048, as the Company did not perform any significant 
exploration programs and concluded a metallurgical testing program that commenced in 2013. Insurance expenses decreased by 62% 
or by $171,031 resulting from a change in amortization estimate. Reductions in exploration and insurance expenses were offset by 
increases in professional fees of $475,186, increases in salaries and benefits of $202,465 and increases in general and administration 
of $161,416.  Increases in these categories were driven by the spin-off transaction from PGSC and the Company operating as a stand-
alone company.  We also dropped mining claims that no longer had any exploration potential and recorded an expense in the amount 
of $337,400.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the year ended June 30, 2015 was $5,231,207 compared to a net loss of $5,034,744 in the previous year. The increase 
of approximately four percent (4%) was primarily due to the increases in expenses of $487,910 as described above which were offset 
by the reduction of imputed interest charged on debt owed to PGSC of $199,941.  We will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable 
future as we continue with our planned exploration programs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At June 30, 2015, we had cash and cash equivalents of $9,282,534 compared to $452,436 as at June 30, 2014. This increase of 
$8,830,098 was a result of the spin-off from PGSC in where the Company received and equity contribution of $8,445,860 from PGSC 
and issued 417,420 shares to Coeur Mining in exchange for a cash payment of $1,470,000
At June 30, 2015, we had net working capital of $9,348,781. Prior to the spin-off from PGSC any debt we owed PGSC was converted 
to equity. We anticipate our twelve month cash expenditures for our fiscal year ending June 30, 2016 to fund exploration programs 
and general corporate expenses to be approximately $2.8 million. These anticipated cash outlays will be funded by our cash on hand.
19
A breakdown of our proposed expenditures for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2016 are as follows:





$110,000 on preparation of a new compliant NI-43-101 preliminary economic assessment for the Sleeper Gold Project;
230,000 on general exploration, exploration management and reclamation activities
$225,000 on a geophysical survey at the Sleeper Gold Project;
$435,000 on annual mining claim fees; and
$1,800,000 on general and administration expenses (expenses include management and employee salary and wages, legal, 
audit, and marketing).
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our obligations and commitments as of June 30, 2015 to make future payments under certain 
contracts, aggregated by category of contractual obligation, for specified time periods:
Payments due by period
Contractual Obligations 
Accounts Payable & Accrued Liabilities 
Asset Retirement Obligations 
Total
Critical Accounting Policies
Total
$  233,200     $ 
    1,294,497       
  $ 1,489,697     $
1-3 years
year 
—   
233,200       
106,120       
797,401   
301,320     $  274,959     $  116,017     $  797,401
—       
116,017
—       
274,959
4-5 years
5years
Less than 1
More than
Management considers the following policies to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the 
Company’s consolidated financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact the results of operations, financial condition and 
cash flows. Our financial statements are affected by the accounting policies used and the estimates and assumptions made by 
management during their preparation. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies are those related to mineral 
property acquisition costs, exploration and development cost, stock based compensation, derivative accounting and foreign currency 
translation.
Estimate
The Company prepares its consolidated financial statements and notes in conformity to United States Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and 
liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates 
these estimates, including those related to allowances for doubtful accounts receivable and long-lived assets. Management bases these 
estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the 
results of which form the basis of making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from 
other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Mineral property acquisition costs
The Company capitalizes the cost of acquiring mineral properties and will amortize these costs over the useful life of a property 
following the commencement of production or expense these costs if it is determined that the mineral property has no future economic 
value or the properties are sold or abandoned. Costs include cash consideration and the fair market value of shares issued on the 
acquisition of mineral properties. Properties acquired under option agreements, whereby payments are made at the sole discretion of 
the Company, are recorded in the accounts of the specific mineral property at the time the payments are made.
The amounts recorded as mineral properties reflect actual costs incurred to acquire the properties and do not indicate any present or 
future value of economically recoverable reserves.
Exploration expenses
We record exploration expenses as incurred. When we determine that precious metal resource deposit can be economically and legally 
extracted or produced based on established proven and probable reserves, further exploration expenses related to such reserves 
incurred after such a determination will be capitalized. To date, we have not established any proven or probable reserves and will 
continue to expense exploration expenses as incurred.
20
Stock Based Compensation
For stock option grants with market conditions that affect vesting, the Company uses a lattice approach incorporating a Monte Carlo 
simulation to value stock option granted.
For stock option grants that have no market conditions that affect vesting, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option valuation 
model to value stock options granted. The Black-Scholes option valuation model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of 
traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. The model requires management to make estimates which 
are subjective and may not be representative of actual results. Changes in assumptions can materially affect estimates of fair values. 
For purposes of the calculation, the following assumptions were used for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014:
WA Risk free interest rate 
WA Expected dividend yield 
WA Expected stock price volatility 
WA Expected life of options
Reclassification
2015
0.98 %    
   
0%  
   
108%  
3.75
2014 
  
0.12%  
0%  
58%  
2 years
Certain comparative figures have been reclassified to conform to the current year-end presentation.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not currently a party to, or otherwise involved with, any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to 
have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of 
operations, liquidity, or capital resources. 
 
 
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
The Company holds cash balances in both U.S. and Canadian dollars. We transact most of our business in U.S. dollars. We do not 
manage our foreign currency exchange rate risk through the use of financial or derivative instruments, forward contracts or hedging 
activities.
In general, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar will positively impact our expenses transacted in Canadian dollars. Conversely, any 
weakening of the U.S dollar will increase our expenses transacted in Canadian dollars. We do not believe that any weakening of the 
U.S. dollar as compared to the compared to the Canadian dollar will have an adverse material effect on our operations.
Interest Rate Risk
The Company’s investment policy for its cash and cash equivalents is focused on the preservation of capital and supporting the 
liquidity requirements of the Company. The Company’s interest earned on its cash balances is impacted on the fluctuations of U.S. 
interest rates. We do not use interest rate derivative instruments to manage exposure to interest rate changes. We do not believe that 
interest rate fluctuations will have any effect on our operations.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Our financial statements, accompanying notes and Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm are included in this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K beginning on page F-1, which are incorporated in this Item 8 by reference.
21
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures.
DISCLOSURE CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including the Principal Executive Officer and Chief Financial 
Officer, we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as such term is defined in Rules 
13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) as of the end of the period covered by this report. Based on this evaluation, our 
Principal Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of 
such date. Our disclosure controls and procedures are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the reports we 
file or submit under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s 
rules and forms and that such information is accumulated and communicated to management, including the Principal Executive 
Officer and Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
MANAGEMENT'S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
This Annual Report on Form 10-K does not include a report of management's assessment regarding internal control over financial 
reporting due to a transition period established by the SEC for newly public companies.
In addition, because we are an "emerging growth company" under the JOBS Act, our independent registered public accounting firm 
will not be required to attest to the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting for so long as we are an emerging 
growth company.
CHANGES IN INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
There were no changes to our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the year ended June 30, 2015 that have 
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information.
None.
22
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance.
PART III
The information required by Items 401, 405, 406, 407(c)(3), (d)(4) and (d)(5) of Regulation S-K will be contained in the Company’s 
2015 Proxy Statement, to be filed with the SEC 120 days following the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended June 30, 2015 (the 
“2015 Proxy Statement”) and is hereby incorporated by reference thereto.
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
The information required by Item 402 and paragraph (e)(4) and (e)(5) of Item 407 of Regulation S-K will be contained in the 
Company’s 2015 Proxy Statement, to be filed with the SEC 120 days following the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended June 30, 
2015 and is hereby incorporated by reference thereto.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.
The information required by Item 201(d) and Item 403 of Regulation S-K will be contained in the Company’s 2015 Proxy Statement, 
to be filed with the SEC 120 days following the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended June 30, 2015 and is hereby incorporated by 
reference thereto.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
The information required by Item 404 and Item 407(a) of Regulation S-K will be contained in the Company’s 2015 Proxy Statement, 
to be filed with the SEC 120 days following the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended June 30, 2015 and is hereby incorporated by 
reference thereto.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
The information required by Item 9(e) of Schedule 14A will be filed in the company’s 2015 Proxy Statement, to be filed with the SEC 
within 120 days following the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended June 30, 2015 and is hereby incorporated by reference thereto.
23
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
(a)  The following report and financial statements are filed together with this Annual Report:
(1)  Audited Consolidated Financial Statements of Paramount Gold Nevada Corp.
PART IV
Included in Part II of this report:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2015 and 2014
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended June 30, 2015, 2014
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’s Equity for the years ended June 30, 2015, 2014
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(b)
Index to Exhibits
Exhibit 
Number
2.1
2.2 
3.1 
3.2 
10.1 
10.2 
21.1* 
23.1* 
31.1*
Form of Separation and Distribution Agreement by and between Paramount Gold and Silver Corp. and the Registrant.1
Description
Agreement and Plan of Merger among Coeur Mining, Inc., Hollywood Merger Sub, Inc., Paramount Gold and Silver 
Corp., and the Registrant, Dated as of December 16, 2014.1
Certificate of Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation.2 
   Amended and Restated Bylaws.2 
    2015 Stock Incentive and Equity Compensation Plan.2 
   Form of Stock Subscription Agreement between Coeur Mining, Inc. and the Registrant.3 
   List of subsidiaries. 
  Consent of MNP LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
   Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
31.2*
Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.1*
Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.2*
Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
101.INS*     XBRL Instance Document 
101.SCH*   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document 
101.CAL*   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document 
101.DEF*   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document 
101.LAB*   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document 
101.PRE*   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
Filed herewith. 
Incorporated by reference to the exhibit filed in the Registrant’s Amendment No. 1 to Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed 
on February 23, 2015. 
Incorporated by reference to the exhibit filed in the Registrant’s Form 10-Q filed on May 22, 2015. 
Incorporated by reference to the exhibit filed in the Registrant’s Amendment No. 3 to Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed 
on April 2, 2015.
* 
1
2 
3
24
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Registrant has duly 
caused this Report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. 
  
 
  
Date:  September 17, 2015 
  
  
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this Report has been signed below by the following 
persons on behalf of the Registrant in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Company Name 
    
  
  By:
/s/ Glen Van Treek 
Glen Van Treek
(Director and President)
Name
/s/ Glen Van Treek 
Glen Van Treek
/s/ Carlo Buffone 
Carlo Buffone
/s/ David Smith 
David Smith
/s/ John Carden 
John Carden
/s/ Eliseo Gonzalez-Urien
Eiseo Gonzalez-Urien
/s/ Christopher Reynolds 
Christopher Reynolds
Title
Director and President (Principal Executive Officer)    September 17, 2015
Date
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer
and Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Director
September 17, 2015 
    
     
  September 17, 2015 
    
     
  September 17, 2015 
    
     
  September 17, 2015 
    
     
  September 17, 2015
25
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
  
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2015 and 2014 
  
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 
  
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity for the Years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 
  
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 
  
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
F-Error! 
Bookmark 
not 
defined. 
 
F-3 
 
F-4 
 
F-5 
 
F-6 
 
F-7
F-1
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Paramount Gold Nevada Corp.: 
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Paramount Gold Nevada Corp. (the "Company") as of June 30, 2015 
and 2014, and the related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the two-
year  period  ended  June  30,  2015.    The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  these  consolidated  financial  statements.    Our 
responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of 
material  misstatement.  The  company  is  not  required  to  have,  nor  were  we  engaged  to  perform,  an  audit  of  its  internal  control  over 
financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures 
that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the company’s internal 
control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence 
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant  estimates 
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable 
basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, these consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the company as 
at June 30, 2015 and 2014 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the years in the two year period ended June 30, 
2015 in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America.
Vancouver, BC, Canada 
September 17, 2015
Chartered Accountants
F-2
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
as of June 30, 2015 and 2014
Assets 
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Prepaid and deposits 
Accounts receivable 
Prepaid insurance, current portion (Note 10) 
Marketable securities (Note 3)
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets 
Mineral properties (Note 8) 
Prepaid insurance, non-current portion (Note 10) 
Property and equipment (Note 9) 
Reclamation bond (Note 10)
Total Non-Current Assets 
Total Assets
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity 
Liabilities 
Current Liabilities 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Due to PGSC (Note 7)
Total Current Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilities 
Reclamation and environmental obligation (Note 10)
Total Liabilities
Stockholders' Equity 
Common stock, par value $0.01, 50,000,000 authorized shares, 8,518,791 issued and 
   outstanding at June 30, 2015 and Common stock, no par value, 25,000 authorized 
   shares, 1,000 issued and outstanding at June 30, 2014 
Additional paid in capital 
Deficit 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
Total Stockholders' Equity 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
$ 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
  $
$
$
As at June 30,
2015
9,282,534     $ 
198,676       
37,071       
49,043       
14,657       
9,581,981       
        
28,036,135       
24,518       
7,996       
2,499,396       
30,568,045       
40,150,026     $
As at June 30,
2014
452,436   
107,639   
—   
122,605   
560,099   
1,242,779   
    
28,373,535   
—   
—   
2,626,538   
31,000,073   
32,242,852
233,200     $ 
—       
233,200       
        
1,294,497       
1,527,697
29,654   
15,363,799   
15,393,453   
    
1,291,066   
16,684,519
85,188       
64,572,546       
(25,980,212 )     
(55,193 )     
38,622,329       
40,150,026     $
29,701,475   
6,545,714   
(20,749,005 ) 
60,149   
15,558,333   
32,242,852
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-3
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
for the Years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014
Revenue
Other income (Note 11)
Total Revenue 
Expenses
Exploration 
Land holding costs 
Professional fees 
Salaries and benefits 
Directors compensation 
General and administrative 
Insurance 
Depreciation 
Accretion (Note 10) 
Write down of mineral properties (Note 8)
Total Expenses 
Net Loss before other items 
Other items
Interest income 
Interest and service charges (Note 7) 
Gain on sale of marketable securities (Note 3)
Net Loss 
Other comprehensive loss
Unrealized loss (gain) on available-for-sale-securities
Total Comprehensive Loss for the Period
Loss per Common share 
Basic 
Diluted 
Weighted Average Number of Common 
Shares Used in Per Share Calculations 
Basic 
Diluted
For the Year Ended
For the Year Ended
$
$ 
  $
June 30, 2015
136,437       
136,437       
        
910,215       
444,756       
508,711       
373,345       
123,149       
211,277       
106,333       
1,333       
134,768       
337,400       
3,151,287       
3,014,850       
        
(4,195 )     
2,252,527       
(31,975 )     
5,231,207       
        
115,342       
5,346,549     $
June 30, 2014
77,697   
77,697   
    
1,532,263   
349,041   
33,525   
170,880   
127,711   
49,861   
277,364   
—   
122,732   
—   
2,663,377   
2,585,680   
    
(3,404 ) 
2,452,468   
—   
5,034,744   
    
(60,149 ) 
4,974,595
0.64     $ 
0.64     $ 
        
        
8,185,999       
8,185,999
0.62   
0.62   
    
    
8,101,371   
8,101,371
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-4
Balance at June 30, 2013
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity
for the Years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014
Shares
Common Stock     
1,000        29,701,475
Deficit
3,845,164       (15,714,261 )
Additional Paid-
In Capital
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive 
Income (Loss)
Total Stockholders' 
    
  
Equity 
—       
17,832,378
Stock based compensation 
Imputed interest on loans due to PGSC 
Unrealized gain on available for sale 
   securities 
Net loss 
Balance at June 30, 2014
—       
—
—       
—
248,450       
2,452,100
—       
—
—       
—
248,450   
2,452,100
—       
—
—       
—       
1,000        29,701,475
—       
—       
—        (5,034,744 )     
6,545,714       (20,749,005 )
60,149       
—       
60,149
60,149   
(5,034,744 ) 
15,558,333
Returned to treasury by PGSC for Spin-
off 
Capital issued for Spin-off transaction 
Contributed capital by PGSC - Cash 
Contributed capital by PGSC - Loan 
reclassified to equity 
Capital issued for financing 
Stock based compensation 
Imputed interest on loans due to PGSC 
Unrealized loss on marketable securities 
Transfer on realized gain on sale of 
marketable securities 
Net loss 
Balance at June 30, 2015
(1,000 )      (29,701,475 )
8,101,371       
    
—
—       
81,014        29,620,461       
8,445,860
—
—       
     417,420       
    
—       
—       
    
    
—
—        15,866,870       
1,465,826       
375,788       
2,252,027       
—
4,174       
—       
—       
—
—       
—       
—
—       
—       
—       
—       
—
—       
—       
—
(29,701,475 ) 
29,701,475   
8,445,860
—       
—       
—       
—       
(8,711 )
15,866,870   
1,470,000   
375,788   
2,252,027   
(8,711 )
—       
    
—       
    8,518,791
—       
—
—       
—       
—        (5,231,207 )     
85,188        64,572,546       (25,980,212 )
(106,631 )     
—       
(55,193 )
(106,631 ) 
(5,231,207 ) 
38,622,329
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-5
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP. 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
for the Years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014
Net Loss 
Adjustment for: 
Depreciation 
Stock based compensation 
Write-down of mineral properties (Note 8) 
Interest expense on loans due to PGSC (Note 7) 
Accretion expense (Note 10) 
Change in reclamation 
Insurance expense 
Gain on sale of marketable securities (Note 3)
(Increase) decrease in accounts receivable 
(Increase) decrease in prepaid expenses 
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable 
Cash (used in) operating activities 
Sale (purchase) of marketable securities 
Purchase of equipment 
Cash provided by (used in) investing activities 
Contributed capital by PGSC (Note 6) 
Issuance of capital stock (Note 6) 
Loan from PGSC (Note 7) 
Cash provided by financing activities 
  
  
Change in cash during year 
Cash at beginning of year 
Cash at end of year
For the Year Ended
For the Year Ended
$ 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
  $
June 30, 2015
(5,231,207 )   $ 
        
1,333       
375,788       
337,400       
2,252,027       
134,768       
(4,195 )     
49,044       
(31,975 )     
(37,071 )     
(91,037 )     
203,546       
(2,041,579 )     
462,075       
(1,329 )     
460,746       
8,445,860       
1,470,000       
495,071       
10,410,931       
        
        
8,830,098       
452,436       
9,282,534     $
June 30, 2014
(5,034,744 ) 
    
—   
248,450   
—   
2,452,100   
122,732   
(3,404 ) 
245,217   
—   
—   
(23,380 ) 
(53,029 ) 
(2,046,058 ) 
(49,950 ) 
—   
(49,950 ) 
—   
—   
2,473,152   
2,473,152   
    
    
377,144   
75,292   
452,436
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-6
Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP. 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Paramount Gold Nevada Corp. (the “Company” or “Paramount”), incorporated under the General Corporation Law of the State of 
Nevada, and its wholly-owned subsidiaries are engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of  precious metal properties. 
The Company’s wholly owned subsidiaries include New Sleeper Gold LLC and Sleeper Mining Company, LLC.   The Company is in 
the process of exploring its mineral properties in Nevada, United States. The Company’s activities are subject to significant risks and 
uncertainties, including failing to secure additional funding to advance its projects and to date has not determined whether these 
properties contain reserves that are economically recoverable.
Spin-Off from Paramount Gold and Silver Corp.  Paramount Gold and Silver Corp. (“PGSC”) owned, prior to the separation (defined 
below), 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of the Company.   On April 17, 2015, we entered into the previously disclosed 
separation and distribution agreement (the “Separation Agreement”) with PGSC, to effect the separation (the “Separation”) of the 
Company from PGSC, and to provide for the allocation between the Company and PGSC of the Company’s and PGSC’s assets, 
liabilities and obligations attributable to periods prior to, at and after the Separation.
We filed a registration statement on Form S-1 in connection with the distribution (the “Distribution”) by PGSC to its stockholders of 
all the outstanding shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.01 per share. The registration statement was declared 
effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on April 9, 2015. On April 6, 2015, the Company filed a Form 8-A 
with the SEC to register its shares of common stock under Section 12(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The 
distribution, which effected a spin-off of the Company from PGSC, was made on April 17, 2015, to PGSC stockholders of record on 
April 14, 2015. On the distribution date, stockholders of PGSC received one share of Company common stock for every twenty shares 
of PGSC common stock held. Up to and including the distribution date, PGSC common stock traded on the “regular-way” market; that 
is, with an entitlement to shares of Company common stock distributed pursuant to the distribution. As a result of the distribution, the 
Company is now a publicly traded company independent from PGSC. On April 20, 2015, the Company’s shares of common stock 
commenced trading on the NYSE MKT LLC under the symbol “PZG”. An aggregate of 8,101,371 shares of Company common stock 
were issued in the Distribution.
Basis of Presentation and Preparation
The consolidated financial statements are prepared by management in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles 
(U.S. GAAP”.)  The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries.  All 
significant intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated in consolidation.
Marketable Securities
The Company classifies its marketable securities as available-for-sale securities.  The securities are measured at fair market value in 
the financial statements with unrealized gains and temporary losses on investments classified as available for sale are included within 
accumulated other comprehensive income, net of any related tax effect. Upon realization, such amounts are reclassified from 
accumulated other comprehensive income to other income, net, realized gains and losses and other than temporary impairments, if 
any, are reflected in the statements of operations as other income or expenses. The Company does not recognize changes in the fair 
value of its investments in income unless a decline in value is considered other than temporary.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and 
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the 
consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could 
differ from those estimates.
Significant estimates made by management in the accompanying consolidated financial statements include the adequacy of the 
Company’s asset retirement obligations, valuation of deferred tax asset, estimation of market rates of interest, and allocations of 
administrative overhead costs from PGSC.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are classified as cash and cash equivalents. 
The carrying amount of these securities approximates fair value because of the short-term maturity of these instruments.
F-7
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to a concentration of credit risk consist principally of cash and cash 
equivalents and amounts receivable.  The Company maintains cash in accounts which may, at times, exceed federally insured limits.  
At June 30, 2015, the balances of approximately $8.9 million were in excess of federally insured limits.  We deposit our cash with 
financial institutions which we believe have sufficient credit quality to minimize the risk of loss.
Allocations
PGSC, prior to the Separation,provided administrative support to the Company for executive management, information systems and 
certain accounting, legal and other administrative functions.  The costs of these services were allocated to the Company based 
primarily on a percentage of the Company’s exploration costs as compared to PGSC’s consolidated exploration costs.  The allocations 
may not reflect the expense the Company would have incurred as an independent, publicly traded company for the periods presented.
The consolidated financial statements for the years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 also reflect interest expense imputed by the 
Company on the non-interest bearing loans from PGSC (Note 7).
Management believes that its allocations are reasonable and based on a systematic and rational method; however, they are not 
necessarily indicative of the actual financial results of the Company, including such expenses that would have been incurred by the 
Company had it been operating as a separate, stand-alone entity for the periods presented.  As a stand-alone entity, the Company 
expects to incur expenses that may not be comparable in future periods to what is presented for the historical periods presented in the 
condensed consolidated interim financial statements.  Consequently, the financial information herein may not reflect the financial 
position, results of operations and cash flows of the Company in the future or if the Company had been an independent stand-alone 
entity during all of the periods presented.  In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements include all adjustments necessary for a 
fair presentation of the Company’s results of operations.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company has adopted FASB ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, which defines fair value, establishes 
guidelines for measuring fair value and expands disclosures regarding fair value measurements. The Company applies fair value 
accounting for all financial assets and liabilities and non – financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair value 
in the financial statements on a recurring basis. The Company defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling an 
asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
The Company has adopted FASB ASC 825, Financial Instruments, which allows companies to choose to measure eligible financial 
instruments and certain other items at fair value that are not required to be measured at fair value. The Company has not elected the 
fair value option for any eligible financial instruments.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company has adopted the provisions of FASB ASC 718, “Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”), which establishes accounting for 
equity instruments exchanged for employee services. Under the provisions of ASC 718, stock-based compensation cost is measured at 
the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense over the employee’s requisite service 
period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant).  New shares of the Company’s common stock will be issued for any options 
exercised or awards granted.
Mineral Properties
Mineral property acquisition costs are capitalized when incurred and will be amortized using the units-of-production method over the 
estimated life of the reserve following the commencement of production.  If a mineral property is subsequently abandoned or 
impaired, any capitalized costs will be expensed in the period of abandonment or impairment.
Acquisition costs include cash consideration and the fair market value of shares issued on the acquisition of mineral properties.
F-8
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
Exploration Costs
Exploration costs, which include maintenance, development and exploration of mineral claims, are expensed as incurred.  When it is 
determined that a mineral deposit can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves, the costs 
incurred after such determination will be capitalized and amortized over their useful lives.  To date, the Company has not established 
the commercial feasibility of its exploration prospects; therefore, all exploration costs are being expensed.
Property and Equipment
Equipment is recorded at cost less accumulated depreciation. All equipment is depreciated over its estimated useful life at the 
following annual rates:
Computer equipment 
 Equipment
30% declining balance   
  20% declining balance
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company follows the provisions of ASC 440, “Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations”, which establishes the standards 
for the initial measurement and subsequent accounting for obligations associated with the sale, abandonment, or other disposal of 
long-lived tangible assets arising from the acquisition, construction or development and for normal operations of such assets.  The 
Company’s asset retirement obligations are further described in Note 10.
Net Loss per Share
Basic loss per share is computed by dividing net loss available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of shares 
outstanding during each period.  Diluted loss per share reflect the potential dilution that could occur if securities or other contracts to 
issue common stock were exercised or converted into common stock.
For the years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014, the shares of common stock equivalents related to outstanding stock options have not 
been included in the diluted per share calculation as they are anti-dilutive as the Company has recorded a net loss from continuing 
oeprations for each year.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when persuasive evidence that an agreement exists, the risks and rewards of ownership pass to the purchaser, 
the selling price is fixed and determinable; or collection is reasonably assured. The passing of title to the purchaser is based on the 
terms of the purchase and sale agreement.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are determined using assets and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax 
consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their 
respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in 
the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities 
of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. In addition, a valuation allowance is established to 
reduce any deferred tax asset for which it is determined that it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will 
not be realized.
Potential benefits of income tax losses are not recognized in the accounts until realization is more likely than not. The Company has 
adopted FASB ASC 740 as of its inception. Pursuant to FASB ASC 740 the Company is required to compute tax asset benefits for net 
operating losses carried forward. Potential benefits of net operating losses have not been recognized in these financial statements 
because the Company cannot be assured it is more likely than not it will utilize the net operating losses carried forward in future 
periods; and accordingly is offset by a valuation allowance. FIN No.48 prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute 
for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken in tax returns.
To the extent interest and penalties may be assessed by taxing authorities on any underpayment of income tax, such amounts would be 
accrued and classified as a component of income tax expense in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
F-9
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
The Company elected this accounting policy, which is a continuation of our historical policy, in connection with our adoption of FIN 
48. 
 
 
Note 2. Recent Accounting Guidance
In August 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-15, 
“Presentation of Financial Statements- Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40)”, this update provides U.S GAAP guidance on 
management’s responsibility in evaluating whether there is substantial doubt about a company’s ability to continue as a going concern 
and about related footnote disclosures.  For each reporting period, management will be required to evaluate whether there are 
conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about a company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the 
date the financial statements are issued.  This amendment in this update is effective for the annual period ending after December 15, 
2016, and for annual periods and interim periods thereafter.  The adoption of this ASU is not expected to have a material impact on the 
Company’s consolidated financial statements.  The Company has evaluated all other recently issued accounting pronouncements and 
believes such pronouncements do not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Note 3. Marketable Securities and Investments
The following table summarizes the Company’s available-for sale securities on hand as of June 30, 2015 and June 30, 2014:
Gross
Gross
Marketable securities at June 30, 2015 
Marketable securities at June 30, 2014
Cost Basis      Impairment Charge     Adjusted Cost     
  $  69,850       
  $  499,950
—       
—
499,950
69,850        55,193
Losses
Unrealized
Unrealized
Gains
Fair Value   
—     $  14,657   
—        60,149     $  560,099
During the year ended June 30, 2015, the Company sold marketable securities with a cost basis of $430,100 for net proceeds of 
$462,075.  The gain on sale of securities of $31,975 was recorded on the statement of operations.  As a result of the transaction, the 
Company reversed from comprehensive income $106,631 it had previously recorded as an unrealized gain. The Company also 
recorded an unrealized loss of $8,711 (2014 – $60,149 gain). 
 
The marketable securities reflected in the table above includes stock purchase warrants of a single entity involved in the exploration of 
precious metals.  Each stock purchase warrant is exercisable for a common share of the entity.  The Company performs a quarterly 
assessment on its marketable securities with unrealized losses to determine if the security is other than temporarily impaired. 
 
 
Note 4. Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between 
market participants at the measurement date.  Fair value is estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs 
used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization with the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is 
available and significant to the fair value measurement:
The fair value hierarchy consists of three broad levels, which gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets 
for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3).
The three levels of the fair value hierarchy under ASC 820 are described below:
Level 1
Level 2
Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or 
liabilities.
Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or 
indirectly, including quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar 
assets or liabilities in markets that are not active; inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or 
liability (e.g., interest rates); and inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by 
correlation or other means.
F-10
Level 3
Inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
The following table sets forth the Company’s financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value by level within the fair value 
hierarchy. As required by ASC 820, assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is 
significant to the fair value measurement.
Fair Value at June 30, 2015
Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Marketable Securities
Total
Level 1
$ 9,282,534        9,282,534       
  $ 
—
14,657
Level 2
Level 3
—       
—
June 30, 2014   
     
  
—     $  452,436   
14,657     $  560,099
Total
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents are classified within Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy because they are valued using 
quoted market prices. The cash and cash equivalents that are valued based on quoted market prices in active markets are primarily 
comprised of commercial paper, short-term certificates of deposit and U.S. Treasury securities.
At June 30, 2015, the Company’s marketable securities are comprised of stock purchase warrants. The stock purchase warrants’ fair 
value is recorded using a Black Scholes options model using inputs such as contractual terms, stock volatility and implied interest 
rates. The Company’s marketable securities are classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. 
 
 
Note 5. Non-Cash Transactions
During the year ended June 30, 2015, the Company reclassified $15,866,870 from due to PGSC to additional paid in capital in 
connection with the Separation Agreement executed with PGSC (Note 6). 
 
Note 6. Capital Stock
Authorized Capital
Authorized capital stock consists of 50,000,000 common shares with par value of $0.01 per common share (2014- 25,000 common 
shares with no par value).  At June 30, 2015 there were 8,518,791 shares issued and outstanding (2014- 1,000 common shares).
On February 19, 2015, the Company amended its articles of incorporation to replace its authorized capital of 25,000 common shares 
with no par value (“Old Common Shares”) with 50,000,000 common shares with par value of $0.01 per common share (“New 
Common Shares”).  In connection with the amendment PGSC returned 1,000 Old Common Shares to treasury for cancellation in 
exchange for 8,101,371 New Common Shares.
Distribution of Shares
The spin-off of the Company from PGSC was effected on April 17, 2015. On that date, an aggregate of 8,101,371 of shares of the 
Company’s common stock were distributed to PGSC stockholders of record on April 14, 2015. On April 20, 2015, the Company’s 
shares began trading on the NYSE MKT LLC under the symbol "PZG"(see Note 1).
Equity Contribution
Prior to the Separation and Distribution, and in connection with merger of PGSC, PGSC made a cash equity contribution into the 
Company of $8.45 million.
Pursuant to the Separation Agreement the loans from PGSC were no longer repayable to PGSC.  Accordingly, the Company 
reclassified $15,866,870 from Due to Parent Company to additional paid in capital.
Sales of Equity Securities
In connection with the consummation of the merger of PGSC and Coeur, the Company issued 417,420 shares of its common stock, 
with par value $0.01 per share, to Coeur in exchange for a cash payment by Coeur in the amount of $1.47 million.
F-11
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
Stock Options and Stock Based Compensation
Paramount’s 2015 Stock Incentive and Compensation Plan, which is shareholder-approved, permits the grant of share options and 
shares to its employees for up to 1.278 million shares of common stock. Option awards are generally granted with an exercise price 
equal to the market price of Paramount’s stock at the date of grant and have contractual lives of 5 years.  To better align the interests 
of its key executives and employees with those of its shareholders a significant portion of those share option awards will vest 
contingent upon meeting certain stock price appreciation performance goals. Option and share awards provide for accelerated vesting 
if there is a change in control (as defined in the employee share option plan).
The fair value of option awards that have market conditions are estimated on the date of grant using a Monte-Carlo Simulation 
valuation model.  The award’s grant date fair value is determined by taking the average of the grant date fair values under each of 
many Monte Carlo trials.  The key assumptions used in the simulations were as follows:
Weighted average risk-free interest rate 
Weighted-average volatility 
Weighted average fair value
$
2015
0.61 %     
108.70 %     
1.16
2014
-   
-   
-
The fair value of option awards that do not have market conditions are estimated on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option 
valuation model that uses the assumptions noted in the following table. Because Black-Scholes option valuation models incorporate 
ranges of assumptions for inputs, those ranges are disclosed. Given Paramount’s short history as a public company, expected 
volatilities are based on, historical volatilities from five proxy companies’ stock. Paramount uses historical data to estimate option 
exercise and employee termination within the valuation model; separate groups of employees that have similar historical exercise 
behavior are considered separately for valuation purposes. The expected term of options granted is derived from the output of the 
option valuation model and represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding; the range given below 
results from certain groups of employees exhibiting different behavior. The risk-free rate for periods within the contractual life of the 
option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
Weighted average risk-free interest rate 
Weighted-average volatility 
Expected dividends 
Weighted average expected term (years) 
Weighted average fair value
$ 
    
  $
2015
2014
0.98 %     
107.47 %     
0.00        
3.75        
1.08
-   
-   
-   
-   
-
A summary of option activity under the Stock Incentive and Compensation Plan  as of June 30, 2015, and changes during the year 
then ended is presented below.
Options 
Outstanding at July 1, 2014 
Granted 
Exercised 
Forfeited or expired 
Outstanding at June 30, 2015
Exercisable at June 30, 2015
Weighted 
Average
Weighted-Average
Aggregate
Remaining Contactual
Intrinsic Value
Term
($)
Shares
—     $ 
     995,000       
—       
    
    
—       
     995,000     $
Exercise Price     
—       
1.53       
—       
—       
1.53
5.00
—
331,670     $
1.53
5.00
—
The weighted-average grant-date fair value of options granted during the year 2015 was $1.13.
F-12
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
A summary of the status of Paramount’s non-vested shares as of June 30, 2015 and changes during the year ended June 30, 2015 is 
presented below.
Weighted-
Average Grant-
Nonvested Options 
Nonvested at July 1, 2014 
Granted 
Vested 
Forfeited 
Nonvested at June 30, 2015
Shares
—     $ 
995,000       
331,670       
—       
663,330
Date Fair
Value
—   
1.13   
1.16
As of June 30, 2015, there was $737,368 of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested share-based compensation 
arrangements granted under the employee share option plan. That cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 
1.5 years. The total fair value of shares vested during the years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014, was $360,519 and $0, respectively. 
 
 
Note 7. Related Party Transactions
The Company’s expenses includes allocations from PGSC of costs associated with administrative support functions which included 
executive management, information systems, finance, legal, accounting and certain other administrative functions and stock-based 
compensation.  Allocated stock-based compensation includes equity awards granted to employees of the Company as well as allocated 
stock-based compensation expense associated with PGSC employees that provided administrative support to the Company.  For the 
years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014, the Company’s allocated expenses from PGSC were as follows:
Allocated expenses included in:
Exploration 
Professional fees 
Directors compensation
Total
2015
Year Ended 
  
    
  $ 
    
    
  $
Year Ended 
    
        
11,100     $ 
197,738       
31,060       
239,898     $
2014
116,305   
179,976   
127,711   
423,992
In connection with the spinoff of the Company from PGSC, all inter-company debt owed to PGSC was settled and re-characterized as 
an equity contribution from PGSC (Note 6).  As of June 30, 2015 and June 30, 2014, respectively, the Company owed a total of $ nil  
and $15,363,799 to PGSC.    The advances from PGSC were non-interest bearing in nature and have no fixed terms of repayment.  
The Company has imputed interest on these sums at the rate of 17.5% per annum and has recorded interest expense related to these 
balances in the amount of $2,252,027 and $2,452,100 for the years ended June 30, 2015 and June 30, 2014.
As discussed in Note 1, the Company believes the assumptions and methodologies underlying the allocation of administrative 
expenses and stock-based compensation are reasonable.  However, such expenses may not be indicative of the actual expenses that 
would have been incurred by the Company as a stand-alone company.  As such, the financial information herein may not necessarily 
reflect the consolidated financial position, results of operation, and cash flows of the Company in the future or if the Company had 
been a stand-alone entity during the periods presented.
During the year ended June 30, 2015, directors were paid or accrued $10,565 (2014- $nil) for their services as directors of the 
Company’s Board.  During the year ended June 30, 2015, the Company also recorded a non-cash transaction to recognize stock based 
compensation for directors in the amount of $81,524 (2014 - $nil).  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities includes $10,565 (2014 - 
$nil) due to directors for their services.
All transactions with related parties are made in the normal course of operations and are measured at exchange value.
F-13
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
Note 8. Mineral Properties
The Company has capitalized acquisition costs on mineral properties as follows:
Sleeper 
Mill Creek 
Spring Valley
Sleeper:
June 30, 2015       June 30, 2014    
  $  25,554,090     $  25,891,490   
     2,096,616        2,096,616   
    
385,429   
  $  28,036,135     $  28,373,535
385,429
Sleeper is located in northern Nevada approximately 26 miles northwest of the town of Winnemucca.  The Sleeper Gold Mine consists 
of 2,322 unpatented mining claims.
During the year ended June 30, 2015, the Company dropped 212 mining claims it acquired in 2011 with a recorded value of $337,400. 
The Company determined that these mining claims no longer had any exploration potential.
Mill Creek:
The Mill Creek property consists of 36 unpatented lode mining claims totaling 720 acres south of Battle Mountain Nevada.
Spring Valley:
The Spring Valley property consists of 38 unpatented lode mining claims located in Pershing County, Nevada. 
 
 
Note 9. Property and Equipment:
At June 30, 2015, and 2014, property and equipment consisted of the following:
Computer equipment 
Equipment 
Subtotal
Accumulated  depreciation
Total
$ 
    
    
    
    
  $
2015
2014
8,000      $ 
1,329        
9,329        
         
(1,333 )     
7,996      $
—   
—   
—   
    
—   
—
During the year ended June 30, 2015, net additions to property, and equipment were $9,329 (2014- $Nil). During the year ended June 
30, 2015 the Company recorded depreciation of $1,333 (2014-$Nil). 
 
 
Note 10. Reclamation and Environmental:
The Company holds an insurance policy related to its Sleeper Gold Project that covers reclamation costs in the event the Company 
defaults on payments of its reclamation costs up to an aggregate of $25 million.  The unamortized insurance premium is being 
amortized to December 31, 2016 and the current and non-current prepaid insurance balance at June 30, 2015 is $73,561 (June 30, 
2014 - $122,605).
As a part of its insurance policy, the Company has funds in a commutation account which is used to reimburse reclamation costs and 
indemnity claims.  The balance of the commutation account at June 30, 2015 is $2,499,396 (June 30, 2014 - $2,626,538).
Reclamation and environmental costs are based principally on legal requirements.  Management estimates costs associated with 
reclamation of mineral properties and properties under mine closure.  On an ongoing basis the Company evaluates its estimates and 
assumptions; however, actual amounts could differ from those based on estimates and assumptions.
F-14
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
The asset retirement obligation at the Sleeper Gold Project has been measured using the following variables:  1) Expected costs for 
earthwork, re-vegetation, in-pit water treatment, on-going monitoring, labor and management, 2) Inflation adjustment, and 3) Market 
risk premium.  The sum of the expected costs by year is discounted using the Company’s credit adjusted risk free interest rate from the 
time it expects to pay the retirement obligation to the time it incurs the obligation.    The reclamation and environmental obligation 
recorded on the balance sheet is equal to the present value of the estimated costs.
The current undiscounted estimate of the reclamation costs for existing disturbances at the Sleeper Gold Project is $3,915,626 as 
required by U.S Bureau of Land Management and the Nevada Department of Environmental Protection. Assumptions used to compute 
the asset retirement obligations for the year ended June 30, 2015 for the Sleeper Gold Project included a credit adjusted risk free rate 
and inflation rate of 9.76% (2013 – 9.76%) and 2.0% (2013 – 2.0%), respectively. Expenses are expected to be incurred between the 
years 2014 and 2053.
Changes to the Company’s asset retirement obligations for the year ended June 30, 2015 are as follows:
Balance at beginning of period 
Accretion expense 
Payments 
Balance at end of period
Note 11. Other Income
The Company’s other income details were as follows:
Re-imbursement of reclamation costs 
Leasing of water rights to third party 
Workers compensation insurance
Total
Note 12. Income Taxes
June 30, 2015       June 30, 2014    
  $  1,291,066     $  1,263,584   
122,732   
    
    
(95,250 ) 
  $  1,294,497     $  1,291,066
134,768       
(131,337 )
Year Ended 
  
  $ 
    
    
  $
2015 
131,337     $ 
5,100       
-       
136,437     $
Year Emded
2014
70,102   
5,000   
2,595   
77,697
At June 30, 2015, the Company has net operating loss carry forwards of $10,812,747 (2014 - $8,343,049) expiring between the years 
2031 and 2035 which are available to reduce future taxable income. The tax effects of the significant components within the 
Company’s deferred tax asset (liability) at June 30, 2015 are as follows:
2015
2014
440,129
$  3,132,277        2,374,033   
    
438,963   
18,766        1,377,000   
    
    
—   
     3,676,333        2,836,636   
  $  7,395,273     $  7,026,632   
     (7,395,273 )      (7,026,632 ) 
  $ 
—
127,768
—
United States
Mineral properties 
Asset Retirement obligation 
Marketable securities 
Stock options 
Net operating losses
Valuation allowance 
Net deferred tax asset
F-15
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
The income tax recovery differs from the amounts computed by applying statutory tax to pre-tax losses as a result of the following:
Income (Loss) Before taxes 
US Statutory tax rate 
Expected income tax (recovery) 
Non-deductible items 
Change in estimates 
OCI impact 
Change in Valuation Allowance 
Total income taxes (recovery)
Current tax expense (recovery 
Deferred tax expense (recovery)
2015
2014
34.00%
(5,231,207 )      (5,034,744 ) 
  
34.00%   
     (1,778,610 )      (1,711,813 ) 
765,850        1,230,685   
    
683,335        (1,384,413 ) 
    
(39,216 )     
    
—   
    
368,641        1,865,541   
—
—
—       
—
—   
—
The potential tax benefits of net operating and non capital losses have not been recognized in these financial statements because the 
Company cannot be assured it is more likely than not it will utilize the net operating or non capital losses carried forward in future 
years.
Accounting for uncertainty for Income Tax
Income taxes are determined using assets and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax 
consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their 
respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in 
the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities 
of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. In addition, a valuation allowance is established to 
reduce any deferred tax asset for which it is determined that it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will 
not be realized.
Effective July 1, 2009, the Company adopted the interpretation for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes which was an 
interpretation of the accounting standard accounting for income taxes. This interpretation created a single model to address accounting 
for uncertainty in tax positions. This interpretation clarifies the accounting for income taxes, by prescribing a minimum recognition 
threshold a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements.
As at June 30, 2015 and 2014, the Company’s consolidated balance sheets did not reflect a liability for uncertain tax positions, nor any 
accrued penalties or interest associated with income tax uncertainties. The Company is subject to income taxation at the federal and 
state levels. The Company is subject to US federal tax examinations for the tax years 2010 through 2015. Loss carryforwards 
generated or utilized in years earlier than 2010 are also subject to examination and adjustment. The Company has no income tax 
examinations in process.
F-16
PARAMOUNT GOLD NEVADA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements — Continued
Note 13. Summary of Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
The following table sets forth a summary of the unaudited quarterly results of operations for the years ended June 30, 2015 and 2014:
2015 
Revenue 
Net loss before other items 
Net loss 
Net loss per Common Share
Basic 
Diluted
2014 
Revenue 
Net loss before other items 
Net loss 
Net loss per Common Share
Basic 
Diluted
Note 14. Commitments and Contingencies:
Q3
—      $
Q1 
30,486      $ 
813,337
Q2 
67,049      $ 
385,064
0.18      $ 
0.18      $
Q4 
  
38,902   
  $ 
    
495,234        1,321,215   
     1,467,214        1,094,320        1,214,312        1,455,361   
    
    
  $ 
0.18   
0.18   
  $ 
  
    
  
Q4 
  
  $ 
33,837   
    
659,870   
     1,263,609        1,321,410        1,218,863        1,230,862   
    
    
0.15   
  $ 
  $ 
0.15
0.13      $ 
0.13      $ 
        
     
—        
686,159
0.15      $ 
0.15      $
Q3 
38,860      $ 
569,555
0.16      $ 
0.16      $
0.15      $ 
0.15      $
Q1
Q2
5,000      $ 
670,096
0.16      $ 
0.16      $
Since the announcement of the merger of PGSC and Coeur on December 17, 2014, the Company, PGSC, members of PGSC’s board, 
Coeur, and Hollywood Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”) have been named as defendants in six putative stockholder class action suits 
brought by purported stockholders of PGSC, challenging the proposed Merger (the “Complaints”). The Complaints were filed in the 
Court of Chancery in the State of Delaware (Fernando Gamboa v. Paramount Gold and Silver Corp., et al., No.: 10499; Jerry Panning 
v. Paramount Gold and Silver Corp., et al., No.: 10507; Jonah Weiss v. Christopher Crupi, et al., No.: 10517; Justin Beaston v. 
Paramount Gold and Silver Corporation, et al., No.: 10538; Rob Byers v. Christopher Crupi, et al., No.: 10551; James H. Alston v. 
Paramount Gold and Silver Corp., et al., No.: 10531.
The plaintiffs generally claim that the PGSC board members breached their fiduciary duties to PGSC stockholders by: (i) authorizing 
the merger with Coeur for what the plaintiffs assert is inadequate consideration and pursuant to an allegedly inadequate process, and 
(ii) failing to disclose sufficient information in its Form S-4 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to allow the 
shareholders to make an informed vote. The plaintiffs also claim that the Company, PGSC, Coeur, and Merger Sub aided and abetted 
the other defendants’ alleged breach of duties. In the Complaints, the plaintiffs seek, among other things, to enjoin the merger, rescind 
the transaction or obtain rescissory damages if the merger is consummated, obtain other unspecified damages and recover attorneys’ 
fees and costs. The merger was consummated on April 17, 2015.
We, PGSC, members of PGSC board, Coeur, and Merger Sub deny any wrongdoing and are vigorously defending all of the actions.
F-17
Exhibit 
Number
Exhibit Index
Description
2.1 
2.2
Form of Separation and Distribution Agreement by and between Paramount Gold and Silver Corp. and the Registrant.1 
  Agreement and Plan of Merger among Coeur Mining, Inc., Hollywood Merger Sub, Inc., Paramount Gold and Silver Corp.,
and the Registrant, Dated as of December 16, 2014.1
3.1 
3.2 
10.1 
10.2 
21.1* 
23.1* 
31.1*
Certificate of Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation.2 
  Amended and Restated Bylaws.2 
  2015 Stock Incentive and Equity Compensation Plan.2 
  Form of Stock Subscription Agreement between Coeur Mining, Inc. and the Registrant.3 
  List of subsidiaries. 
  Consent of MNP LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
  Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
31.2*
Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.1*
Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.2*
Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
101.INS    XBRL Instance Document 
101.SCH   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document 
101.CAL   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document 
101.DEF   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document 
101.LAB   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document 
101.PRE   XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
Filed herewith.
Incorporated by reference to the exhibit filed in the Registrant’s Amendment No. 1 to Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed 
on February 23, 2015.
Incorporated by reference to the exhibit filed in the Registrant’s Form 10-Q filed on May 22, 2015.
Incorporated by reference to the exhibit filed in the Registrant’s Amendment No. 3 to Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed 
on April 2, 2015.
*
1
2
3