
EX-10.4 2 ex10-4.htm SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT
Code Green Apparel Corporation 10-Q
Exhibit 10.4
SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT
This SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT (the “Agreement”), dated as of June 15, 2016,
by and between Code Green Apparel Corporation, a Nevada, with headquarters located
31642 Pacific Coast Highway, Suite 102, Laguna Beach, CA, 92651 (the “Company”), and
CAREBOURN CAPITAL, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (the “Buyer”).
WHEREAS:
A.
The Company and the Buyer are executing and delivering this Agreement in reliance upon the
exemption from securities registration afforded by the rules and regulations as promulgated by
the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) under the Securities Act of
1933, as amended (the “1933 Act”);
B.
Buyer desires to purchase and the Company desires to issue and sell, upon the terms and
conditions set forth in this Agreement a 12% convertible note of the Company, in the form
attached hereto as Exhibit A, in the aggregate principal amount of US$121,325.00 (together with
any note(s) issued in replacement thereof or as a dividend thereon or otherwise with respect
thereto in accordance with the terms thereof, the “Note”), that may be convertible into shares of
common stock, $0.001 par value per share, of the Company (the “Common Stock”), upon the
terms and subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in such Note.
C.
The Buyer wishes to purchase, upon the terms and conditions stated in this Agreement, such
principal amount of Note as is set forth immediately below its name on the signature pages
hereto; and
NOW THEREFORE, the Company and the Buyer severally (and not jointly) hereby agree as
follows:
1.
PURCHASE AND SALE OF NOTE.
a.
Purchase of Note. On the Closing Date (as defined below), the Company shall issue and sell to
the Buyer and the Buyer agrees to purchase from the Company such principal amount of Note as
is set forth immediately below the Buyer’s name on the signature pages hereto.
b.
Form of Payment. On the Closing Date (as defined below), (i) the Buyer shall pay the purchase
price for the Note to be issued and sold to it at the Closing (as defined below) (the “Purchase
Price”) by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the Company, in accordance with the
Company’s written wiring instructions, against delivery of the Note in the principal amount equal
to the Purchase Price as is set forth immediately below the Buyer’s name on the signature pages
hereto, and (ii) the Company shall deliver such duly executed Note on behalf of the Company, to
he Buyer, against delivery of such Purchase Price.
c.
Closing Date. Subject to the satisfaction (or written waiver) of the conditions thereto set forth in
Section 6 and Section 7 below, the date and time of the issuance and sale of the Note pursuant
to this Agreement (the “Closing Date”) shall be 4:30 P.M., Eastern Standard Time on or about
June 15, 2016, or such other mutually agreed upon time. The closing of the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement (the “Closing”) shall occur on the Closing Date at such location
as may be agreed to by the parties.
2.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE BUYER. The Buyer represents and
warrants to the Company that:
a.
Investment Purpose. As of the date hereof, the Buyer is purchasing the Note and any potential
shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of or otherwise pursuant to the Note
(including, without limitation, such additional shares of Common Stock, if any, as are issuable
(i) on account of interest on the Note or (ii) as a result of the events described in Sections 1.3 and
1.4(g) of the Note, such shares of Common Stock being collectively referred to herein as the
“Conversion Shares” and, collectively with the Note, the “Securities”) for its own account and not
with a present view towards the public sale or distribution thereof, except pursuant to sales
registered or exempted from registration under the 1933 Act; provided, however, that by making
the representations herein, the Buyer does not agree to hold any of the Securities for any
minimum or other specific term and reserves the right to dispose of the Securities at any time in
accordance with or pursuant to a registration statement or an exemption under the 1933 Act.
b.
Accredited Investor Status. The Buyer is an “accredited investor” as that term is defined in Rule
501(a) of Regulation D (an “Accredited Investor”).
c.
Reliance on Exemptions. The Buyer understands that the Securities are being offered and sold
to it in reliance upon specific exemptions from the registration requirements of United States
federal and state securities laws and that the Company is relying upon the truth and accuracy of,
and the Buyer’s compliance with, the representations, warranties, agreements,
acknowledgments and understandings of the Buyer set forth herein in order to determine the
availability of such exemptions and the eligibility of the Buyer to acquire the Securities.
2
d.
Information. The Buyer and its advisors, if any, have been, and for so long as the Note remain
outstanding will continue to be, furnished with all materials relating to the business, finances and
operations of the Company and materials relating to the offer and sale of the Securities which
have been requested by the Buyer or its advisors and which are available to the public. The
Buyer and its advisors, if any, have been, and for so long as the Note remain outstanding will
continue to be, afforded the opportunity to ask questions of the Company. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Company has not disclosed to the Buyer any material nonpublic information and
will not disclose such information unless such information is disclosed to the public prior to or
promptly following such disclosure to the Buyer. Neither such inquiries nor any other due
diligence investigation conducted by Buyer or any of its advisors or representatives shall modify,
amend or affect Buyer’s right to rely on the Company’s representations and warranties contained
in Section 3 below. The Buyer understands that its investment in the Securities involves a
significant degree of risk. The Buyer is not aware of any facts that may constitute a breach of any
of the Company’s representations and warranties made herein.
e.
Governmental Review. The Buyer understands that no United States federal or state agency or
any other government or governmental agency has passed upon or made any recommendation
or endorsement of the Securities.
f.
Transfer or Re-sale. The Buyer understands that (i) the sale or re-sale of the Securities has not
been and is not being registered under the 1933 Act or any applicable state securities laws, and
the Securities may not be transferred unless (a) the Securities are sold pursuant to an effective
registration statement under the 1933 Act, (b) the Buyer shall have delivered to the Company, at
the cost of the Buyer, an opinion of counsel that shall be in form, substance and scope customary
for opinions of counsel in comparable transactions to the effect that the Securities to be sold or
transferred may be sold or transferred pursuant to an exemption from such registration, which
opinion shall be accepted by the Company, (c) the Securities are sold or transferred to an
“affiliate” (as defined in Rule 144 promulgated under the 1933 Act (or a successor rule) (“Rule
144”)) of the Buyer who agrees to sell or otherwise transfer the Securities only in accordance with
this Section 2(f) and who is an Accredited Investor, (d) the Securities are sold pursuant to Rule
144, or (e) the Securities are sold pursuant to Regulation S under the 1933 Act (or a successor
rule) (“Regulation S”), and the Buyer shall have delivered to the Company, at the cost of the
Buyer, an opinion of counsel that shall be in form, substance and scope customary for opinions of
counsel in corporate transactions, which opinion shall be accepted by the Company; (ii) any sale
of such Securities made in reliance on Rule 144 may be made only in accordance with the terms
of said Rule and further, if said Rule is not applicable, any re-sale of such Securities under
circumstances in which the seller (or the person through whom the sale is made) may be deemed
to be an underwriter (as that term is defined in the 1933 Act) may require compliance with some
other exemption under the 1933 Act or the rules and regulations of the SEC thereunder; and (iii)
neither the Company nor any other person is under any obligation to register such Securities
under the 1933 Act or any state securities laws or to comply with the terms and conditions of any
exemption thereunder (in each case).
g.
Legends. The Buyer understands that the Note and, until such time as the Conversion Shares
have been registered under the 1933 Act may be sold pursuant to Rule 144 or Regulation S
without any restriction as to the number of securities as of a particular date that can then be
immediately sold, the Conversion Shares may bear a restrictive legend in substantially the
following form (and a stop-transfer order may be placed against transfer of the certificates for
such Securities):
3
“NEITHER THE ISSUANCE AND SALE OF THE SECURITIES REPRESENTED BY THIS
CERTIFICATE NOR THE SECURITIES INTO WHICH THESE SECURITIES ARE
EXERCISABLE HAVE BEEN REGISTERED UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933, AS
AMENDED, OR APPLICABLE STATE SECURITIES LAWS. THE SECURITIES MAY NOT BE
OFFERED FOR SALE, SOLD, TRANSFERRED OR ASSIGNED (I) IN THE ABSENCE OF (A)
AN EFFECTIVE REGISTRATION STATEMENT FOR THE SECURITIES UNDER THE
SECURITIES ACT OF 1933, AS AMENDED, OR (B) AN OPINION OF COUNSEL (WHICH
COUNSEL SHALL BE SELECTED BY THE HOLDER), IN A GENERALLY ACCEPTABLE
FORM, THAT REGISTRATION IS NOT REQUIRED UNDER SAID ACT OR (II) UNLESS
SOLD PURSUANT TO RULE 144 OR RULE 144A UNDER SAID ACT. NOTWITHSTANDING
THE FOREGOING, THE SECURITIES MAY BE PLEDGED IN CONNECTION WITH A BONA
FIDE MARGIN ACCOUNT OR OTHER LOAN OR FINANCING ARRANGEMENT SECURED
BY THE SECURITIES.”
The legend set forth above shall be removed and the Company shall issue a certificate without
such legend to the holder of any Security upon which it is stamped, if, unless otherwise required
by applicable state securities laws, (a) such Security is registered for sale under an effective
registration statement filed under the 1933 Act or otherwise may be sold pursuant to Rule 144 or
Regulation S without any restriction as to the number of securities as of a particular date that can
then be immediately sold, or (b) such holder provides the Company with an opinion of counsel, in
form, substance and scope customary for opinions of counsel in comparable transactions, to the
effect that a public sale or transfer of such Security may be made without registration under the
1933 Act, which opinion shall be accepted by the Company so that the sale or transfer is
affected. The Buyer agrees to sell all Securities, including those represented by a certificate(s)
from which the legend has been removed, in compliance with applicable prospectus delivery
requirements, if any. In the event that the Company does not accept the opinion of counsel
provided by the Buyer with respect to the transfer of Securities pursuant to an exemption from
registration, such as Rule 144 or Regulation S, at the Deadline, it will be considered an Event of
Default pursuant to Section 3.2 of the Note.
h.
Authorization; Enforcement. This Agreement has been duly and validly authorized. This
Agreement has been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Buyer, and this Agreement
constitutes a valid and binding agreement of the Buyer enforceable in accordance with its terms.
i.
Residency. The Buyer is a resident of the jurisdiction set forth immediately below the Buyer’s
name on the signature pages hereto.
4
3.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE COMPANY. The Company represents and
warrants to the Buyer that:
a.
Organization and Qualification. The Company and each of its Subsidiaries (as defined below), if
any, is a corporation duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the laws of the
jurisdiction in which it is incorporated, with full power and authority (corporate and other) to own,
lease, use and operate its properties and to carry on its business as and where now owned,
leased, used, operated and conducted. Schedule 3(a) sets forth a list of all of the Subsidiaries of
the Company and the jurisdiction in which each is incorporated. The Company and each of its
Subsidiaries is duly qualified as a foreign corporation to do business and is in good standing in
every jurisdiction in which its ownership or use of property or the nature of the business
conducted by it makes such qualification necessary except where the failure to be so qualified or
in good standing would not have a Material Adverse Effect. “Material Adverse Effect” means any
material adverse effect on the business, operations, assets, financial condition or prospects of the
Company or its Subsidiaries, if any, taken as a whole, or on the transactions contemplated
hereby or by the agreements or instruments to be entered into in connection herewith.
“Subsidiaries” means any corporation or other organization, whether incorporated or
unincorporated, in which the Company owns, directly or indirectly, any equity or other ownership
interest.
b.
Authorization; Enforcement. (i) The Company has all requisite corporate power and authority to
enter into and perform this Agreement, the Note and to consummate the transactions
contemplated hereby and thereby and to issue the Securities, in accordance with the terms
hereof and thereof, (ii) the execution and delivery of this Agreement, the Note by the Company
and the consummation by it of the transactions contemplated hereby and thereby (including
without limitation, the issuance of the Note and the issuance and reservation for issuance of the
Conversion Shares issuable upon conversion or exercise thereof) have been duly authorized by
the Company’s Board of Directors and no further consent or authorization of the Company, its
Board of Directors, or its shareholders is required, (iii) this Agreement has been duly executed
and delivered by the Company by its authorized representative, and such authorized
representative is the true and official representative with authority to sign this Agreement and the
other documents executed in connection herewith and bind the Company accordingly, and (iv)
this Agreement constitutes, and upon execution and delivery by the Company of the Note, each
of such instruments will constitute, a legal, valid and binding obligation of the Company
enforceable against the Company in accordance with its terms.
5
c.
Capitalization. As of the date hereof, the authorized capital stock of the Company consists of: (i)
1,000,000,000 shares of Common Stock, $0.001 par value per share, of which 382,849,646
shares are issued and outstanding; and (ii) 200,000 shares of preferred stock A & B , $0.001 par
value per share, of which 66,000 shares are issued and outstanding; Except as disclosed in the
SEC Documents, no shares are reserved for issuance pursuant to the Company’s stock option
plans, no shares are reserved for issuance pursuant to securities (other than the Note)
exercisable for, or convertible into or exchangeable for shares of Common Stock and
152,000,000 shares are reserved for issuance upon conversion of the Note. All of such
outstanding shares of capital stock are, or upon issuance will be, duly authorized, validly issued,
fully paid and non-assessable. No shares of capital stock of the Company are subject to
preemptive rights or any other similar rights of the shareholders of the Company or any liens or
encumbrances imposed through the actions or failure to act of the Company. Except as disclosed
in the SEC Documents, as of the effective date of this Agreement, (i) there are no outstanding
options, warrants, scrip, rights to subscribe for, puts, calls, rights of first refusal, agreements,
understandings, claims or other commitments or rights of any character whatsoever relating to, or
securities or rights convertible into or exchangeable for any shares of capital stock of the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries, or arrangements by which the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries is or may become bound to issue additional shares of capital stock of the Company
or any of its Subsidiaries, (ii) there are no agreements or arrangements under which the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries is obligated to register the sale of any of its or their securities
under the 1933 Act and (iii) there are no anti-dilution or price adjustment provisions contained in
any security issued by the Company (or in any agreement providing rights to security holders)
that will be triggered by the issuance of the Note or the Conversion Shares. The Company has
filed in its SEC Documents true and correct copies of the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation
as in effect on the date hereof (“Certificate of Incorporation”), the Company’s By-laws, as in effect
on the date hereof (the “By-laws”), and the terms of all securities convertible into or exercisable
for Common Stock of the Company and the material rights of the holders thereof in respect
thereto. The Company shall provide the Buyer with a written update of this representation signed
by the Company’s Chief Executive on behalf of the Company as of the Closing Date.
d.
Issuance of Shares. The Conversion Shares are duly authorized and reserved for issuance
pursuant to the terms of the Note and, upon conversion of the Note in accordance with its
respective terms, will be validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable, and free from all taxes,
liens, claims and encumbrances with respect to the issue thereof and shall not be subject to
preemptive rights or other similar rights of shareholders of the Company and will not impose
personal liability upon the holder thereof.
e.
Acknowledgment of Dilution. The Company understands and acknowledges the potentially
dilutive effect to the Common Stock if the issuance of the Conversion Shares upon conversion of
the Note occurs. The Company further acknowledges that its obligation to issue Conversion
Shares upon conversion of the Note in accordance with this Agreement, the Note is absolute and
unconditional regardless of the dilutive effect that such issuance may have on the ownership
interests of other shareholders of the Company.
6
f.
No Conflicts. The execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement, the Note by the
Company and the consummation by the Company of the transactions contemplated hereby and
thereby (including, without limitation, the issuance and reservation for issuance of the
Conversion Shares) will not (i) conflict with or result in a violation of any provision of the
Certificate of Incorporation or By-laws, or (ii) violate or conflict with, or result in a breach of any
provision of, or constitute a default (or an event which with notice or lapse of time or both could
become a default) under, or give to others any rights of termination, amendment, acceleration or
cancellation of, any agreement, indenture, patent, patent license or instrument to which the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party, or (iii) result in a violation of any law, rule,
regulation, order, judgment or decree (including federal and state securities laws and regulations
and regulations of any self-regulatory organizations to which the Company or its securities are
subject) applicable to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or by which any property or asset of
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is bound or affected (except for such conflicts, defaults,
terminations, amendments, accelerations, cancellations and violations as would not, individually
or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect). Neither the Company nor any of its
Subsidiaries is in violation of its Certificate of Incorporation, By-laws or other organizational
documents and neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is in default (and no event has
occurred which with notice or lapse of time or both could put the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries in default) under, and neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has taken
any action or failed to take any action that would give to others any rights of termination,
amendment, acceleration or cancellation of, any agreement, indenture or instrument to which the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which any property or assets of the Company
or any of its Subsidiaries is bound or affected, except for possible defaults as would not,
individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect. The businesses of the Company
and its Subsidiaries, if any, are not being conducted, and shall not be conducted so long as the
Buyer owns any of the Securities, in violation of any law, ordinance or regulation of any
governmental entity. Except as specifically contemplated by this Agreement and as required
under the 1933 Act and any applicable state securities laws, the Company is not required to
obtain any consent, authorization or order of, or make any filing or registration with, any court,
governmental agency, regulatory agency, self-regulatory organization or stock market or any third
party in order for it to execute, deliver or perform any of its obligations under this Agreement, the
Note in accordance with the terms hereof or thereof or to issue and sell the Note in accordance
with the terms hereof and to issue the Conversion Shares upon conversion of the Note. All
consents, authorizations, orders, filings and registrations which the Company is required to
obtain pursuant to the preceding sentence have been obtained or effected on or prior to the date
hereof. The Company is not in violation of the listing requirements of the Over-the-Counter
Bulletin Board (the “OTCBB”), the OTCQB or any similar quotation system, and does not
reasonably anticipate that the Common Stock will be delisted by the OTCBB, the OTCQB or any
similar quotation system, in the foreseeable future. The Company and its Subsidiaries are
unaware of any facts or circumstances which might give rise to any of the foregoing.
7
g.
SEC Documents; Financial Statements. The Company has timely filed all reports, schedules,
forms, statements and other documents required to be filed by it with the SEC pursuant to the
reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “1934 Act”) (all
of the foregoing filed prior to the date hereof and all exhibits included therein and financial
statements and schedules thereto and documents (other than exhibits to such documents)
incorporated by reference therein, being hereinafter referred to herein as the “SEC Documents”).
The Company has delivered to the Buyer true and complete copies of the SEC Documents or
they have been publically available, except for such exhibits and incorporated documents. As of
their respective dates, the SEC Documents complied in all material respects with the
requirements of the 1934 Act and the rules and regulations of the SEC promulgated thereunder
applicable to the SEC Documents, and none of the SEC Documents, at the time they were filed
with the SEC, contained any untrue statement of a material fact or omitted to state a material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading. None of the statements made in any
such SEC Documents is, or has been, required to be amended or updated under applicable law
(except for such statements as have been amended or updated in subsequent filings prior the
date hereof). As of their respective dates, the financial statements of the Company included in the
SEC Documents complied as to form in all material respects with applicable accounting
requirements and the published rules and regulations of the SEC with respect thereto. Such
financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted
accounting principles, consistently applied, during the periods involved and fairly present in all
material respects the consolidated financial position of the Company and its consolidated
Subsidiaries as of the dates thereof and the consolidated results of their operations and cash
flows for the periods then ended (subject, in the case of unaudited statements, to normal year-
end audit adjustments). Except as set forth in the financial statements of the Company included
in the SEC Documents, the Company has no liabilities, contingent or otherwise, other than (i)
liabilities incurred in the ordinary course of business subsequent to November 14, 2012, and (ii)
obligations under contracts and commitments incurred in the ordinary course of business and not
required under generally accepted accounting principles to be reflected in such financial
statements, which, individually or in the aggregate, are not material to the financial condition or
operating results of the Company. The Company is subject to the reporting requirements of the
1934 Act. For the avoidance of doubt, filing of the documents required in this Section 3(g) via the
SEC’s Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system (“EDGAR”) shall satisfy all
delivery requirements of this Section 3(g).
h.
Absence of Certain Changes. Since November 14, 2012, there has been no material adverse
change and no material adverse development in the assets, liabilities, business, properties,
operations, financial condition, results of operations, prospects or 1934 Act reporting status of the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
i.
Absence of Litigation. There is no action, suit, claim, proceeding, inquiry or investigation before
or by any court, public board, government agency, self-regulatory organization or body pending
or, to the knowledge of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, threatened against or affecting
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, or their officers or directors in their capacity as such, that
could have a Material Adverse Effect. Schedule 3(i) contains a complete list and summary
description of any pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened proceeding against
or affecting the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, without regard to whether it would have a
Material Adverse Effect. The Company and its Subsidiaries are unaware of any facts or
circumstances which might give rise to any of the foregoing.
8
j.
Patents, Copyrights, etc. The Company and each of its Subsidiaries owns or possesses the
requisite licenses or rights to use all patents, patent applications, patent rights, inventions, know-
how, trade secrets, trademarks, trademark applications, service marks, service names, trade
names and copyrights (“Intellectual Property”) necessary to enable it to conduct its business as
now operated (and, as presently contemplated to be operated in the future); Except as disclosed
in the SEC Documents, there is no claim or action by any person pertaining to, or proceeding
pending, or to the Company’s knowledge threatened, which challenges the right of the Company
or of a Subsidiary with respect to any Intellectual Property necessary to enable it to conduct its
business as now operated (and, as presently contemplated to be operated in the future); to the
best of the Company’s knowledge, the Company’s or its Subsidiaries’ current and intended
products, services and processes do not infringe on any Intellectual Property or other rights held
by any person; and the Company is unaware of any facts or circumstances which might give rise
to any of the foregoing. The Company and each of its Subsidiaries have taken reasonable
security measures to protect the secrecy, confidentiality and value of their Intellectual Property.
k.
No Materially Adverse Contracts, Etc. Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is subject
to any charter, corporate or other legal restriction, or any judgment, decree, order, rule or
regulation which in the judgment of the Company’s officers has or is expected in the future to
have a Material Adverse Effect. Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party to any
contract or agreement which in the judgment of the Company’s officers has or is expected to
have a Material Adverse Effect.
l.
Tax Status. The Company and each of its Subsidiaries has made or filed all federal, state and
foreign income and all other tax returns, reports and declarations required by any jurisdiction to
which it is subject (unless and only to the extent that the Company and each of its Subsidiaries
has set aside on its books provisions reasonably adequate for the payment of all unpaid and
unreported taxes) and has paid all taxes and other governmental assessments and charges that
are material in amount, shown or determined to be due on such returns, reports and declarations,
except those being contested in good faith and has set aside on its books provisions reasonably
adequate for the payment of all taxes for periods subsequent to the periods to which such returns,
reports or declarations apply. There are no unpaid taxes in any material amount claimed to be
due by the taxing authority of any jurisdiction, and the officers of the Company know of no basis
for any such claim. The Company has not executed a waiver with respect to the statute of
limitations relating to the assessment or collection of any foreign, federal, state or local tax. None
of the Company’s tax returns is presently being audited by any taxing authority.
9
m.
Certain Transactions. Except for arm’s length transactions pursuant to which the Company or any
of its Subsidiaries makes payments in the ordinary course of business upon terms no less
favorable than the Company or any of its Subsidiaries could obtain from third parties and other
than the grant of stock options disclosed on Schedule 3(c), none of the officers, directors, or
employees of the Company is presently a party to any transaction with the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries (other than for services as employees, officers and directors), including any contract,
agreement or other arrangement providing for the furnishing of services to or by, providing for
rental of real or personal property to or from, or otherwise requiring payments to or from any
officer, director or such employee or, to the knowledge of the Company, any corporation,
partnership, trust or other entity in which any officer, director, or any such employee has a
substantial interest or is an officer, director, trustee or partner.
n.
Disclosure. All information relating to or concerning the Company or any of its Subsidiaries set
forth in this Agreement and provided to the Buyer pursuant to Section 2(d) hereof and otherwise
in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby is true and correct in all material
respects and the Company has not omitted to state any material fact necessary in order to make
the statements made herein or therein, in light of the circumstances under which they were made,
not misleading. No event or circumstance has occurred or exists with respect to the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries or its or their business, properties, prospects, operations or financial
conditions, which, under applicable law, rule or regulation, requires public disclosure or
announcement by the Company but which has not been so publicly announced or disclosed
(assuming for this purpose that the Company’s reports filed under the 1934 Act are being
incorporated into an effective registration statement filed by the Company under the 1933 Act).
o.
Acknowledgment Regarding Buyer’ Purchase of Securities. The Company acknowledges and
agrees that the Buyer is acting solely in the capacity of arm’s length purchasers with respect to
this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby. The Company further acknowledges
that the Buyer is not acting as a financial advisor or fiduciary of the Company (or in any similar
capacity) with respect to this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby and any
statement made by the Buyer or any of its respective representatives or agents in connection with
this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby is not advice or a recommendation
and is merely incidental to the Buyer’ purchase of the Securities. The Company further
represents to the Buyer that the Company’s decision to enter into this Agreement has been
based solely on the independent evaluation of the Company and its representatives.
p.
No Integrated Offering. Neither the Company, nor any of its affiliates, nor any person acting on its
or their behalf, has directly or indirectly made any offers or sales in any security or solicited any
offers to buy any security under circumstances that would require registration under the 1933 Act
of the issuance of the Securities to the Buyer. The issuance of the Securities to the Buyer will not
be integrated with any other issuance of the Company’s securities (past, current or future) for
purposes of any shareholder approval provisions applicable to the Company or its securities.
q.
No Brokers. The Company has taken no action which would give rise to any claim by any person
for brokerage commissions, transaction fees or similar payments relating to this Agreement or the
transactions contemplated hereby, with the exception of the fees identified in the Placement
Agent Agreement entered into by the Company with Moody Capital Solutions, Inc.
10
r.
Permits; Compliance. The Company and each of its Subsidiaries is in possession of all
franchises, grants, authorizations, licenses, permits, easements, variances, exemptions,
consents, certificates, approvals and orders necessary to own, lease and operate its properties
and to carry on its business as it is now being conducted (collectively, the “Company Permits”),
and there is no action pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened regarding
suspension or cancellation of any of the Company Permits. Neither the Company nor any of its
Subsidiaries is in conflict with, or in default or violation of, any of the Company Permits, except for
any such conflicts, defaults or violations which, individually or in the aggregate, would not
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect. Since November 14, 2012, neither the
Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has received any notification with respect to possible
conflicts, defaults or violations of applicable laws, except for notices relating to possible conflicts,
defaults or violations, which conflicts, defaults or violations would not have a Material Adverse
Effect.
s.
Environmental Matters.
(i)
There are, to the Company’s knowledge, with respect to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
or any predecessor of the Company, no past or present violations of Environmental Laws (as
defined below), releases of any material into the environment, actions, activities, circumstances,
conditions, events, incidents, or contractual obligations which may give rise to any common law
environmental liability or any liability under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 or similar federal, state, local or foreign laws and neither
the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has received any notice with respect to any of the
foregoing, nor is any action pending or, to the Company’s knowledge, threatened in connection
with any of the foregoing. The term “Environmental Laws” means all federal, state, local or foreign
laws relating to pollution or protection of human health or the environment (including, without
limitation, ambient air, surface water, groundwater, land surface or subsurface strata), including,
without limitation, laws relating to emissions, discharges, releases or threatened releases of
chemicals, pollutants contaminants, or toxic or hazardous substances or wastes (collectively,
“Hazardous Materials”) into the environment, or otherwise relating to the manufacture,
processing, distribution, use, treatment, storage, disposal, transport or handling of Hazardous
Materials, as well as all authorizations, codes, decrees, demands or demand letters, injunctions,
judgments, licenses, notices or notice letters, orders, permits, plans or regulations issued,
entered, promulgated or approved thereunder.
11
(ii)
Other than those that are or were stored, used or disposed of in compliance with applicable law,
no Hazardous Materials are contained on or about any real property currently owned, leased or
used by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, and no Hazardous Materials were released on
or about any real property previously owned, leased or used by the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries during the period the property was owned, leased or used by the Company or any of
its Subsidiaries, except in the normal course of the Company’s or any of its Subsidiaries’
business.
(iii)
There are no underground storage tanks on or under any real property owned, leased or used by
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries that are not in compliance with applicable law.
t.
Title to Property. Except as disclosed in the SEC Documents the Company and its Subsidiaries
have good and marketable title in fee simple to all real property and good and marketable title to
all personal property owned by them which is material to the business of the Company and its
Subsidiaries, in each case free and clear of all liens, encumbrances and defects or such as
would not have a Material Adverse Effect. Any real property and facilities held under lease by the
Company and its Subsidiaries are held by them under valid, subsisting and enforceable leases
with such exceptions as would not have a Material Adverse Effect.
u.
Internal Accounting Controls. Except as disclosed in the SEC Documents the Company and
each of its Subsidiaries maintain a system of internal accounting controls sufficient, in the
judgment of the Company’s board of directors, to provide reasonable assurance that (i)
transactions are executed in accordance with management’s general or specific authorizations,
(ii) transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles and to maintain asset accountability,
(iii) access to assets is permitted only in accordance with management’s general or specific
authorization and (iv) the recorded accountability for assets is compared with the existing assets
at reasonable intervals and appropriate action is taken with respect to any differences.
v.
Foreign Corrupt Practices. Neither the Company, nor any of its Subsidiaries, nor any director,
officer, agent, employee or other person acting on behalf of the Company or any Subsidiary has,
in the course of his actions for, or on behalf of, the Company, used any corporate funds for any
unlawful contribution, gift, entertainment or other unlawful expenses relating to political activity;
made any direct or indirect unlawful payment to any foreign or domestic government official or
employee from corporate funds; violated or is in violation of any provision of the U.S. Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, as amended, or made any bribe, rebate, payoff, influence
payment, kickback or other unlawful payment to any foreign or domestic government official or
employee.
12
w.
Solvency. The Company (after giving effect to the transactions contemplated by this Agreement)
is solvent (i.e., its assets have a fair market value in excess of the amount required to pay its
probable liabilities on its existing debts as they become absolute and matured) and currently the
Company has no information that would lead it to reasonably conclude that the Company would
not, after giving effect to the transaction contemplated by this Agreement, have the ability to, nor
does it intend to take any action that would impair its ability to, pay its debts from time to time
incurred in connection therewith as such debts mature. The Company did not receive a qualified
opinion from its auditors with respect to its most recent fiscal year end and, after giving effect to
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, does not anticipate or know of any basis upon
which its auditors might issue a qualified opinion in respect of its current fiscal year. For the
avoidance of doubt any disclosure of the Borrower’s ability to continue as a “going concern” shall
not, by itself, be a violation of this Section 3(w).
x.
No Investment Company. The Company is not, and upon the issuance and sale of the Securities
as contemplated by this Agreement will not be an “investment company” required to be registered
under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (an “Investment Company”). The Company is not
controlled by an Investment Company.
y.
Breach of Representations and Warranties by the Company. If the Company breaches any of the
representations or warranties set forth in this Section 3 and in addition to any other remedies
available to the Buyer pursuant to this Agreement, it will be considered an Event of default under
Section 3.4 of the Note.
4.
COVENANTS.
a.
Best Efforts. The parties shall use their commercially reasonable best efforts to satisfy timely
each of the conditions described in Section 6 and 7 of this Agreement.
b.
Form D; Blue Sky Laws. The Company agrees to file a Form D with respect to the Securities as
required under Regulation D and to provide a copy thereof to the Buyer promptly after such filing.
The Company shall, on or before the Closing Date, take such action as the Company shall
reasonably determine is necessary to qualify the Securities for sale to the Buyer at the applicable
closing pursuant to this Agreement under applicable securities or “blue sky” laws of the states of
the United States (or to obtain an exemption from such qualification), and shall provide evidence
of any such action so taken to the Buyer on or prior to the Closing Date.
c.
Use of Proceeds. The Company shall use the proceeds from the sale of the Note for working
capital and other general corporate purposes and shall not, directly or indirectly, use such
proceeds for any loan to or investment in any other corporation, partnership, enterprise or other
person (except in connection with its currently existing direct or indirect Subsidiaries or pending
merging partner(s)).
d.
{Removed}
13
e.
Expenses. At the Closing, the Company shall reimburse Buyer in an amount not to exceed
$5,000.00 for expenses incurred by them in connection with the negotiation, preparation,
execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and the other agreements to be executed
in connection herewith (“Documents”), including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys’ and
consultants’ fees and expenses, transfer agent fees, fees for stock quotation services, fees
relating to any amendments or modifications of the Documents or any consents or waivers of
provisions in the Documents, fees for the preparation of opinions of counsel, escrow fees, and
costs of restructuring the transactions contemplated by the Documents. The Company’s
obligation to reimburse Buyer’s expenses with respect to this transaction shall be limited to the
above identified $5,000.00, which such amount shall be withheld from the proceeds paid to the
Company upon the closing of this transaction.
f.
Financial Information. The Company agrees to send or make available the following reports to
the Buyer until the Buyer transfers, assigns, or sells all of the Securities: (i) within ten (10) days
after the filing with the SEC, a copy of its Annual Report on Form 10-K its Quarterly Reports on
Form 10-Q and any Current Reports on Form 8-K; (ii) within one (1) day after release, copies of
all press releases issued by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries; and (iii) contemporaneously
with the making available or giving to the shareholders of the Company, copies of any notices or
other information the Company makes available or gives to such shareholders. For the
avoidance of doubt, filing the documents required in (i) above via EDGAR or releasing any
documents set forth in (ii) above via a recognized wire service shall satisfy the delivery
requirements of this Section 4(f).
g.
Listing. The Company shall promptly secure the listing of the Conversion Shares upon each
national securities exchange or automated quotation system, if any, upon which shares of
Common Stock are then listed (subject to official notice of issuance) and, so long as the Buyer
owns any of the Securities, shall maintain, so long as any other shares of Common Stock shall
be so listed, such listing of all Conversion Shares from time to time issuable upon conversion of
the Note. The Company will obtain and, so long as the Buyer owns any of the Securities,
maintain the listing and trading of its Common Stock on the OTCBB, OTCQB or any equivalent
replacement exchange, the Nasdaq National Market (“Nasdaq”), the Nasdaq SmallCap Market
(“Nasdaq SmallCap”), the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”), or the NYSE MKT and will
comply in all respects with the Company’s reporting, filing and other obligations under the bylaws
or rules of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) and such exchanges, as
applicable. The Company shall promptly provide to the Buyer copies of any material notices it
receives from the OTCBB, OTCQB and any other exchanges or quotation systems on which the
Common Stock is then listed regarding the continued eligibility of the Common Stock for listing
on such exchanges and quotation systems.
h.
Corporate Existence. So long as the Buyer beneficially owns any Note, the Company shall
maintain its corporate existence and shall not sell all or substantially all of the Company’s assets,
except in the event of a merger or consolidation or sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s
assets, where the surviving or successor entity in such transaction (i) assumes the Company’s
obligations hereunder and under the agreements and instruments entered into in connection
herewith and (ii) is a publicly traded corporation whose Common Stock is listed for trading on the
OTCBB, OTCQB, Nasdaq, Nasdaq, SmallCap, NYSE or AMEX, or any applicable trading
exchange.
14
i.
Failure to Comply with the 1934 Act. So long as the Buyer beneficially owns the Note, the
Company shall comply with the reporting requirements of the 1934 Act; and the Company shall
continue to be subject to the reporting requirements of the 1934 Act.
j.
Trading Activities. Neither the Buyer nor its affiliates has an open short position (or other hedging
or similar transactions) in the common stock of the Company and the Buyer agree that it shall not,
and that it will cause its affiliates not to, engage in any short sales of or hedging transactions with
respect to the common stock of the Company.
k.
Breach of Covenants. If the Company breaches any of the covenants set forth in this Section 4,
and in addition to any other remedies available to the Buyer pursuant to this Agreement, it will be
considered an event of default under Section 3.3 of the Note.
5.
Transfer Agent Instructions. Prior to registration of the Conversion Shares under the 1933 Act or
the date on which the Conversion Shares may be sold pursuant to Rule 144 without any
restriction as to the number of Securities as of a particular date that can then be immediately sold,
all such certificates shall bear the restrictive legend specified in Section 2(g) of this Agreement. 
The Company warrants that: (i) no stop transfer instructions to give effect to Section 2(f) hereof (in
the case of the Conversion Shares, prior to registration of the Conversion Shares under the 1933
Act or the date on which the Conversion Shares may be sold pursuant to Rule 144 without any
restriction as to the number of Securities as of a particular date that can then be immediately
sold), will be given by the Company to its transfer agent and that the Securities shall otherwise
be freely transferable on the books and records of the Company as and to the extent provided in
this Agreement and the Note; (ii) it will not direct its transfer agent not to transfer or delay, impair,
and/or hinder its transfer agent in transferring (or issuing) (electronically or in certificated form)
any certificate for Conversion Shares to be issued to the Buyer upon conversion of or otherwise
pursuant to the Note as and when required by the Note and this Agreement; and (iii) it will not fail
to remove (or directs its transfer agent not to remove or impairs, delays, and/or hinders its transfer
agent from removing) any restrictive legend (or to withdraw any stop transfer instructions in
respect thereof) on any certificate for any Conversion Shares issued to the Buyer upon
conversion of or otherwise pursuant to the Note as and when required by the Note and this
Agreement.  Nothing in this Section shall affect in any way the Buyer’s obligations and
agreement set forth in Section 2(g) hereof to comply with all applicable prospectus delivery
requirements, if any, upon re-sale of the Securities.  If the Buyer provides the Company, at the
cost of the Buyer, with (i) an opinion of counsel in form, substance and scope customary for
opinions in comparable transactions, to the effect that a public sale or transfer of such Securities
may be made without registration under the 1933 Act and such sale or transfer is effected or (ii)
the Buyer provides reasonable assurances that the Securities can be sold pursuant to Rule 144,
the Company shall permit the transfer, and, in the case of the Conversion Shares, promptly
instruct its transfer agent to issue one or more certificates, free from restrictive legend, in such
name and in such denominations as specified by the Buyer.  The Company acknowledges that a
breach by it of its obligations hereunder will cause irreparable harm to the Buyer, by vitiating the
intent and purpose of the transactions contemplated hereby.  Accordingly, the Company
acknowledges that the remedy at law for a breach of its obligations under this Section may be
inadequate and agrees, in the event of a breach or threatened breach by the Company of the
provisions of this Section, that the Buyer shall be entitled, in addition to all other available
remedies, to an injunction restraining any breach and requiring immediate transfer, without the
necessity of showing economic loss and without any bond or other security being required.
15
6.
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO THE COMPANY’S OBLIGATIONS TO SELL. The obligation of
the Company hereunder to issue and sell the Note to the Buyer at the Closing is subject to the
satisfaction, at or before the Closing Date of each of the following conditions thereto, provided
that these conditions are for the Company’s sole benefit and may be waived by the Company at
any time in its sole discretion:
a.
The Buyer shall have executed this Agreement and delivered the same to the Company.
b.
The Buyer shall have delivered the Purchase Price in accordance with Section 1(b) above.
c.
The representations and warranties of the Buyer shall be true and correct in all material respects
as of the date when made and as of the Closing Date as though made at that time (except for
representations and warranties that speak as of a specific date), and the Buyer shall have
performed, satisfied and complied in all material respects with the covenants, agreements and
conditions required by this Agreement to be performed, satisfied or complied with by the Buyer at
or prior to the Closing Date.
d.
No litigation, statute, rule, regulation, executive order, decree, ruling or injunction shall have been
enacted, entered, promulgated or endorsed by or in any court or governmental authority of
competent jurisdiction or any self-regulatory organization having authority over the matters
contemplated hereby which prohibits the consummation of any of the transactions contemplated
by this Agreement.
7.
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO THE BUYER’S OBLIGATION TO PURCHASE. The obligation
of the Buyer hereunder to purchase the Note at the Closing is subject to the satisfaction, at or
before the Closing Date of each of the following conditions, provided that these conditions are for
the Buyer’s sole benefit and may be waived by the Buyer at any time in its sole discretion:
a.
The Company shall have executed this Agreement and delivered the same to the Buyer.
16
b.
The Company shall have delivered to the Buyer duly executed Note (in such denominations as
the Buyer shall request) in accordance with Section 1(b) above.
c.
The representations and warranties of the Company shall be true and correct in all material
respects as of the date when made and as of the Closing Date as though made at such time
(except for representations and warranties that speak as of a specific date) and the Company
shall have performed, satisfied and complied in all material respects with the covenants,
agreements and conditions required by this Agreement to be performed, satisfied or complied
with by the Company at or prior to the Closing Date. The Buyer shall have received a certificate
or certificates, executed by the chief executive officer of the Company, dated as of the Closing
Date, to the foregoing effect and as to such other matters as may be reasonably requested by the
Buyer including, but not limited to certificates with respect to the Company’s Certificate of
Incorporation, By-laws and Board of Directors’ resolutions relating to the transactions
contemplated hereby.
d.
No litigation, statute, rule, regulation, executive order, decree, ruling or injunction shall have been
enacted, entered, promulgated or endorsed by or in any court or governmental authority of
competent jurisdiction or any self-regulatory organization having authority over the matters
contemplated hereby which prohibits the consummation of any of the transactions contemplated
by this Agreement.
e.
No event shall have occurred which could reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse
Effect on the Company including but not limited to a change in the 1934 Act reporting status of
the Company or the failure of the Company to be timely in its 1934 Act reporting obligations.
f.
The Conversion Shares shall have been authorized for quotation on the OTCBB, OTCQB or any
similar quotation system and trading in the Common Stock on the OTCBB, OTCQB or any similar
quotation system shall not have been suspended by the SEC or the OTCBB, OTCQB or any
similar quotation system.
g.
The Buyer shall have received an officer’s certificate described in Section 3(c) above, dated as of
the Closing Date.
17
8.
GOVERNING LAW; MISCELLANEOUS.
a.
Governing Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the
laws of the State of Florida without regard to principles of conflicts of laws. Any action brought by
either party against the other concerning the transactions contemplated by this Agreement shall
be brought only in the state courts of Florida or in the federal courts located in the state of Florida.
The parties to this Agreement hereby irrevocably waive any objection to jurisdiction and venue of
any action instituted hereunder and shall not assert any defense based on lack of jurisdiction or
venue or based upon forum non conveniens. The Company and Buyer waive trial by jury. The
prevailing party shall be entitled to recover from the other party its reasonable attorney’s fees and
costs. In the event that any provision of this Agreement or any other agreement delivered in
connection herewith is invalid or unenforceable under any applicable statute or rule of law, then
such provision shall be deemed inoperative to the extent that it may conflict therewith and shall
be deemed modified to conform with such statute or rule of law. Any such provision which may
prove invalid or unenforceable under any law shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any
other provision of any agreement. Each party hereby irrevocably waives personal service of
process and consents to process being served in any suit, action or proceeding in connection
with this Agreement or any other Transaction Document by mailing a copy thereof via registered
or certified mail or overnight delivery (with evidence of delivery) to such party at the address in
effect for notices to it under this Agreement and agrees that such service shall constitute good
and sufficient service of process and notice thereof. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
limit in any way any right to serve process in any other manner permitted by law.
b.
Counterparts; Signatures by Facsimile. This Agreement may be executed in one or more
counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original but all of which shall constitute one and
the same agreement and shall become effective when counterparts have been signed by each
party and delivered to the other party. This Agreement, once executed by a party, may be
delivered to the other party hereto by facsimile transmission of a copy of this Agreement bearing
the signature of the party so delivering this Agreement.
c.
Headings. The headings of this Agreement are for convenience of reference only and shall not
form part of, or affect the interpretation of, this Agreement.
d.
Severability. In the event that any provision of this Agreement is invalid or unenforceable under
any applicable statute or rule of law, then such provision shall be deemed inoperative to the
extent that it may conflict therewith and shall be deemed modified to conform with such statute or
rule of law. Any provision hereof which may prove invalid or unenforceable under any law shall
not affect the validity or enforceability of any other provision hereof.
e.
Entire Agreement; Amendments. This Agreement and the instruments referenced herein contain
the entire understanding of the parties with respect to the matters covered herein and therein and,
except as specifically set forth herein or therein, neither the Company nor the Buyer makes any
representation, warranty, covenant or undertaking with respect to such matters. No provision of
this Agreement may be waived or amended other than by an instrument in writing signed by the
majority in interest of the Buyer.
18
f.
Notices. All notices, demands, requests, consents, approvals, and other communications
required or permitted hereunder shall be in writing and, unless otherwise specified herein, shall
be (i) personally served, (ii) deposited in the mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested,
postage prepaid, (iii) delivered by reputable air courier service with charges prepaid, or (iv)
transmitted by hand delivery, telegram, or facsimile, addressed as set forth below or to such other
address as such party shall have specified most recently by written notice. Any notice or other
communication required or permitted to be given hereunder shall be deemed effective (a) upon
hand delivery or delivery by facsimile, with accurate confirmation generated by the transmitting
facsimile machine, at the address or number designated below (if delivered on a business day
during normal business hours where such notice is to be received), or the first business day
following such delivery (if delivered other than on a business day during normal business hours
where such notice is to be received) or (b) on the second business day following the date of
mailing by express courier service, fully prepaid, addressed to such address, or upon actual
receipt of such mailing, whichever shall first occur. The addresses for such communications shall
be:
If to the Company, to:
Code Green Apparel Corporation
31642 Pacific Coast Highway
Suite 102
Laguna Beach, CA, 92651
ATTN: George@codegreenapparel.com
With a copy by fax only to (which copy shall not constitute notice):
CAREBOURN CAPITAL, L.P.
8700 Black Oaks Lane N.
Maple Grove MN 55311
Attn: Chip Rice, Managing Member
ATT: info@carebourncapital.com
Each party shall provide notice to the other party of any change in address.
g.
Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the
parties and their successors and assigns. Neither the Company nor the Buyer shall assign this
Agreement or any rights or obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of the other.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, subject to Section 2(f), the Buyer may assign its rights hereunder
to any person that purchases Securities in a private transaction from the Buyer or to any of its
“affiliates,” as that term is defined under the 1934 Act, without the consent of the Company.
19
h.
Third Party Beneficiaries. This Agreement is intended for the benefit of the parties hereto and
their respective permitted successors and assigns, and is not for the benefit of, nor may any
provision hereof be enforced by, any other person.
i.
Survival. The representations and warranties of the Company and the agreements and
covenants set forth in this Agreement shall survive the closing hereunder. The Company agrees
to indemnify and hold harmless the Buyer and all their officers, directors, employees and agents
for loss or damage arising as a result of or related to any breach by the Company of any of its
representations, warranties and covenants set forth in this Agreement or any of its covenants and
obligations under this Agreement, including advancement of expenses as they are incurred.
j.
Further Assurances. Each party shall do and perform, or cause to be done and performed, all
such further acts and things, and shall execute and deliver all such other agreements,
certificates, instruments and documents, as the other party may reasonably request in order to
carry out the intent and accomplish the purposes of this Agreement and the consummation of the
transactions contemplated hereby.
k.
No Strict Construction. The language used in this Agreement will be deemed to be the language
chosen by the parties to express their mutual intent, and no rules of strict construction will be
applied against any party.
l.
Remedies.
(i)
The Company acknowledges that a breach by it of its obligations hereunder will cause
irreparable harm to the Buyer by vitiating the intent and purpose of the transaction contemplated
hereby. Accordingly, the Company acknowledges that the remedy at law for a breach of its
obligations under this Agreement will be inadequate and agrees, in the event of a breach or
threatened breach by the Company of the provisions of this Agreement, that the Buyer shall be
entitled, in addition to all other available remedies at law or in equity, and in addition to the
penalties assessable herein, to an injunction or injunctions restraining, preventing or curing any
breach of this Agreement and to enforce specifically the terms and provisions hereof, without the
necessity of showing economic loss and without any bond or other security being required.
(ii)
In addition to any other remedy provided herein or in any document executed in connection
herewith, Borrower shall pay Holder for all costs, fees and expenses in connection with any
litigation, contest, dispute, suit or any other action to enforce any rights of Holder against
Borrower in connection herewith, including, but not limited to, costs and expenses and attorneys’
fees, and costs and time charges of counsel to Holder.
20
m.
Publicity. The Company, and the Buyer shall have the right to review a reasonable period of time
before issuance of any press releases, SEC, OTCQB or FINRA filings, or any other public
statements with respect to the transactions contemplated hereby; provided, however, that the
Company shall be entitled, without the prior approval of the Buyer, to make any press release or
SEC, OTCQB (or other applicable trading market) or FINRA filings with respect to such
transactions as is required by applicable law and regulations (although the Buyer shall be
consulted by the Company in connection with any such press release prior to its release and
shall be provided with a copy thereof and be given an opportunity to comment thereon).
[- Signature page follows -]
21
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned Buyer and the Company have caused this
Agreement to be duly executed as of the date first above written.
/s/ George Powell, III
Code Green Apparel Corporation 
 
 
 
 
By:
  
 
Name: George Powell, III
 
Title: CEO
CAREBOURN CAPITAL, L.P. 
 
 
 
 
   
By:
 
Name: Chip Rice
Title: Managing Member
/s/ Chip Rice
AGGREGATE SUBSCRIPTION AMOUNT:
Aggregate Principal Amount of Note:$121,325.00
 
Aggregate Purchase Price:
$105,500.00
22