
ALLOYCORP MINING INC.
(the “Company”)
The Company has as its articles the following articles.
Full Names and Signature of Director 
 
 
“Graham du Preez”  
Name: Graham du Preez
Date of Signing 
 
 
August 9, 2016
Incorporation number:
ALLOYCORP MINING INC.
(the “Company”)
ARTICLES
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27.
INTERPRETATION ....................................................................................................................................... 2 
SHARES AND SHARE CERTIFICATES ..................................................................................................... 3 
ISSUE OF SHARES ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
SHARE REGISTERS ..................................................................................................................................... 5 
SHARE TRANSFERS .................................................................................................................................... 5 
TRANSMISSION OF SHARES ..................................................................................................................... 6 
ACQUISITION OF COMPANY’S SHARES ................................................................................................ 7 
BORROWING POWERS ............................................................................................................................... 7 
ALTERATIONS ............................................................................................................................................. 8 
MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS .............................................................................................................. 9 
PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS .......................................................................... 10 
VOTES OF SHAREHOLDERS.................................................................................................................... 14 
DIRECTORS ................................................................................................................................................. 17 
ELECTION AND REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS ........................................................................................ 19 
ALTERNATE DIRECTORS ........................................................................................................................ 21 
POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTORS ................................................................................................. 22 
INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS........................................................................................ 22 
PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS .............................................................................................................. 23 
EXECUTIVE AND OTHER COMMITTEES .............................................................................................. 26 
OFFICERS .................................................................................................................................................... 27 
INDEMNIFICATION ................................................................................................................................... 27 
DIVIDENDS ................................................................................................................................................. 29 
ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND AUDITOR ............................................................................................. 30 
NOTICES ...................................................................................................................................................... 30 
SEAL ............................................................................................................................................................. 32 
PROHIBITIONS ........................................................................................................................................... 33 
SPECIAL RIGHTS OR RESTRICTIONS ATTACHING TO THE COMMON SHARES 
AND THE CLASS A REDEEMABLE PREFERRED SHARES ................................................................. 33
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
1.
1.1
INTERPRETATION
Definitions
- 2 -
In these Articles, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
1.2
“appropriate person” has the meaning assigned in the Securities Transfer Act;
“board of directors”, “directors” and “board” mean the directors or sole director of the Company for the 
time being;
“Business Corporations Act” means the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) from time to time 
in force and all amendments thereto and includes all regulations and amendments thereto made pursuant to 
that Act;
“Interpretation Act” means the Interpretation Act (British Columbia) from time to time in force and all 
amendments thereto and includes all regulations and amendments thereto made pursuant to that Act;
“legal personal representative” means the personal or other legal representative of a shareholder;
“protected purchaser” has the meaning assigned in the Securities Transfer Act;
“registered address” of a shareholder means the shareholder’s address as recorded in the central securities 
register;
“seal” means the seal of the Company, if any;
“securities  legislation”  means  statutes  concerning  the  regulation  of  securities  markets  and  trading  in 
securities and the regulations, rules, forms and schedules under those statutes, all as amended from time to 
time,  and  the  blanket  rulings  and  orders,  as  amended  from  time  to  time,  issued  by  the  securities 
commissions  or  similar  regulatory  authorities  appointed  under  or  pursuant  to  those  statutes;  “Canadian 
securities legislation” means the securities legislation in any province or territory of Canada and includes 
the Securities Act (British Columbia); and “U.S. securities legislation” means the securities legislation in 
the federal jurisdiction of the United States and in any state of the United States and includes the Securities 
Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934;
“Securities Transfer Act” means the Securities Transfer Act (British Columbia) from time to time in force 
and all amendments thereto and includes all regulations and amendments thereto made pursuant to that Act.
Business Corporations Act and Interpretation Act Definitions Applicable
The definitions in the Business Corporations Act and the definitions and rules of construction in the Interpretation 
Act,  with  the  necessary  changes,  so  far  as  applicable,  and  unless  the  context  requires  otherwise,  apply  to  these 
Articles as if they were an enactment. If there is a conflict or inconsistency between a definition in the Business 
Corporations  Act  and  a  definition  or  rule  in  the  Interpretation  Act  relating  to  a  term  used  in  these  Articles,  the 
definition in the Business Corporations Act will prevail in relation to the use of the term in these Articles. If there is 
a conflict or inconsistency between these Articles and the Business Corporations Act, the Business Corporations Act 
will prevail.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
2.
2.1
SHARES AND SHARE CERTIFICATES
Authorized Share Structure
- 3 -
The authorized share structure of the Company consists of shares of the class or classes and series, if any, described 
in the Notice of Articles of the Company.
2.2
Form of Share Certificate
Each  share  certificate  issued  by  the  Company  must  comply  with,  and  be  signed  as  required  by,  the  Business 
Corporations Act.
2.3
Shareholder Entitled to Certificate or Acknowledgment
Unless  the  shares  of  which  the  shareholder  is  the  registered  owner  are  uncertificated  shares,  each  shareholder  is 
entitled, upon request and without charge, to (a) one share certificate representing the shares of each class or series 
of  shares  registered  in  the  shareholder’s  name  or  (b)  a  non-transferable  written  acknowledgment  (an 
“Acknowledgment”) of the shareholder’s right to obtain such a share certificate, provided that in respect of a share 
held  jointly  by  several  persons,  the  Company  is  not  bound  to  issue  more  than  one  share  certificate  or 
Acknowledgment and delivery of a share certificate or Acknowledgment to one of several joint shareholders or to a 
duly authorized agent of one of the joint shareholders will be sufficient delivery to all.
2.4
Delivery by Mail
Any share certificate or Acknowledgment of a shareholder’s right to obtain a share certificate may be sent to the 
shareholder by  mail  at  the  shareholder’s  registered  address  and neither  the Company  nor  any director, officer  or 
agent of the Company is liable for any loss to the shareholder because the share certificate or acknowledgement is 
lost in the mail or stolen.
2.5
Replacement of Worn Out or Defaced Certificate or Acknowledgement
If the directors are satisfied that a share certificate or Acknowledgment of the shareholder’s right to obtain a share 
certificate is worn out or defaced, they must, on production to them of the share certificate or Acknowledgment, as 
the case may be, and on such other terms, if any, as they think fit:
(1)
(2)
2.6
order the share certificate or Acknowledgment, as the case may be, to be cancelled; and
issue a replacement share certificate or Acknowledgment, as the case may be.
Replacement of Lost, Destroyed or Wrongfully Taken Certificate
If a person entitled to a share certificate claims that the share certificate has been lost, destroyed or wrongfully taken, 
the Company must issue a new share certificate, if that person:
(1)
(2)
(3)
so  requests  before  the  Company  has  notice  that  the  share  certificate  has  been  acquired  by  a  protected 
purchaser;
provides  the  Company  with  an  indemnity  bond  sufficient  in  the  Company’s  judgment  to  protect  the 
Company from any loss that the Company may suffer by issuing a new certificate; and
satisfies any other reasonable requirements imposed by the directors.
A person entitled to a share certificate may not assert against the Company a claim for a new share certificate where 
a share certificate has been lost, apparently destroyed or wrongfully taken if that person fails to notify the Company 
of that fact within a reasonable time after that person has notice of it and the Company registers a transfer of the
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 4 -
shares represented by the certificate before receiving a notice of the loss, apparent destruction or wrongful taking of 
the share certificate.
2.7
Recovery of New Share Certificate
If,  after  the  issue  of  a  new  share  certificate,  a  protected  purchaser  of  the  original  share  certificate  presents  the 
original share certificate for the registration of transfer, then in addition to any rights on the indemnity bond, the 
Company may recover the new share certificate from a person to whom it was issued or any person taking under that 
person other than a protected purchaser.
2.8
Splitting Share Certificates
If a shareholder surrenders a share certificate to the Company with a written request that the Company issue in the 
shareholder’s  name  two  or  more  share  certificates,  each  representing  a  specified  number  of  shares  and  in  the 
aggregate  representing  the  same  number  of  shares  as  represented  by  the  share  certificate  so  surrendered,  the 
Company must cancel the surrendered share certificate and issue replacement share certificates in accordance with 
that request.
2.9
Certificate Fee
There must be paid to the Company, in relation to the issue of any share certificate under Articles 2.5, 2.6 or 2.8, the 
amount, if any and which must not exceed the amount prescribed under the Business Corporations Act, determined 
by the directors.
2.10
Recognition of Trusts
Except as required by law or statute or these Articles, no person will be recognized by the Company as holding any 
share upon any trust, and the Company is not bound by or compelled in any way to recognize (even when having 
notice thereof) any equitable, contingent, future or partial interest in any share or fraction of a share or (except as 
required by law or statute or these Articles or as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction) any other rights in 
respect of any share except an absolute right to the entirety thereof in the shareholder.
3.
3.1
ISSUE OF SHARES
Directors Authorized
Subject to the Business Corporations Act and the rights, if any, of the holders of issued shares of the Company, the 
Company may issue, allot, sell or otherwise dispose of the unissued shares, and issued shares held by the Company, 
at the times, to the persons, including directors, in the manner, on the terms and conditions and for the issue prices 
(including any premium at which shares with par value may be issued) that the directors may determine. The issue 
price for a share with par value must be equal to or greater than the par value of the share.
3.2
Commissions and Discounts
The  Company  may  at  any  time  pay  a  reasonable  commission  or  allow  a  reasonable  discount  to  any  person  in 
consideration of that person purchasing or agreeing to purchase shares of the Company from the Company or any 
other person or procuring or agreeing to procure purchasers for shares of the Company.
3.3
Brokerage
The Company may pay such brokerage fee or other consideration as may be lawful for or in connection with the sale 
or placement of its securities.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 5 -
3.4
Conditions of Issue
Except as provided for by the Business Corporations Act, no share may be issued until it is fully paid. A share is 
fully paid when:
(1)
consideration is provided to the Company for the issue of the share by one or more of the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
past services performed for the Company;
property;
money; and
(2)
3.5
the value of the consideration received by the Company equals or exceeds the issue price set for the share 
under Article 3.1.
Share Purchase Warrants and Rights
Subject to the Business Corporations Act, the Company may issue share purchase warrants, options and rights upon 
such  terms  and  conditions  as  the  directors  determine,  which  share  purchase  warrants,  options  and  rights  may  be 
issued  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  debentures,  debenture  stock,  bonds,  shares  or  any  other  securities  issued  or 
created by the Company from time to time.
4.
4.1
SHARE REGISTERS
Central Securities Register
As  required  by  and  subject  to  the  Business  Corporations  Act,  the  Company  must  maintain  a  central  securities 
register.  The  directors  may,  subject  to  the  Business  Corporations  Act,  appoint  an  agent  to  maintain  the  central 
securities register. The directors may also appoint one or more agents, including the agent which keeps the central 
securities register, as transfer agent for its shares or any class or series of its shares, as the case may be, and the same 
or another agent as registrar for its shares or such class or series of its shares, as the case may be. The directors may 
terminate such appointment of any agent at any time and may appoint another agent in its place.
4.2
Closing Register
The Company must not at any time close its central securities register.
5.
5.1
SHARE TRANSFERS
Registering Transfers
Subject to the Business Corporations Act and the Securities Transfer Act, a transfer of a share of the Company must 
not  be  registered  unless  the  Company  or  the  transfer  agent  or  registrar  for  the  class  or  series  of  share  to  be 
transferred has received:
(1)
(2)
in  the  case  of  a  share  certificate  that  has  been  issued  by  the  Company  in  respect  of  the  share  to  be 
transferred, that share certificate and a written instrument of transfer (which may be on a separate document 
or endorsed on the share certificate) made by the shareholder or other appropriate person or by an agent 
who has actual authority to act on behalf of that person;
in the case of an Acknowledgment as defined in Article 2.3, in respect of the share to be transferred, a 
written  instrument  of  transfer  that  directs  that  the  transfer  of  the  shares  be  registered,  made  by  the 
shareholder or other appropriate person or by an agent who has actual authority to act on behalf of that 
person;
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
(3)
(4)
- 6 -
in the case of a share that is an uncertificated share, a written instrument of transfer that directs that the 
transfer of the share be registered, made by the shareholder or other appropriate person or by an agent who 
has actual authority to act on behalf of that person; and
such other evidence, if any, as the Company or the transfer agent or registrar for the class or series of share 
to be transferred may require to prove the title of the transferor or the transferor’s right to transfer the share, 
that  the  written  instrument  of  transfer  is  genuine  and  authorized  and  that  the  transfer  is  rightful  or  to  a 
protected purchaser.
5.2
Form of Instrument of Transfer
The instrument of transfer in respect of any share of the Company must be either in the form, if any, on the back of 
the Company’s share certificates or in any other form that may be approved by the directors or the transfer agent for 
the class or series of shares to be transferred.
5.3
Transferor Remains Shareholder
Except to the extent that the Business Corporations Act otherwise provides, the transferor of shares is deemed to 
remain the holder of the shares until the name of the transferee is entered in a securities register of the Company in 
respect of the transfer.
5.4
Signing of Instrument of Transfer
If a shareholder, or his or her duly authorized attorney, signs an instrument of transfer in respect of shares registered 
in the name of the shareholder, the signed instrument of transfer constitutes a complete and sufficient authority to 
the Company and its directors, officers and agents to register the number of shares specified in the instrument of 
transfer  or  specified  in  any  other  manner,  or,  if  no  number  is  specified,  all  the  shares  represented  by  the  share 
certificates or set out in the Acknowledgments as defined in Article 2.3, deposited with the instrument of transfer:
(1)
(2)
5.5
in the name of the person named as transferee in that instrument of transfer; or
if no person is named as transferee in that instrument of transfer, in the name of the person on whose behalf 
the instrument is deposited for the purpose of having the transfer registered.
Enquiry as to Title Not Required
Neither  the  Company  nor  any  director,  officer  or  agent  of  the  Company  is  bound  to  inquire  into  the  title  of  the 
person named in the instrument of transfer as transferee or, if no person is named as transferee in the instrument of 
transfer, of the person on whose behalf the instrument is deposited for the purpose of having the transfer registered 
or is liable for any claim related to registering the transfer by the shareholder or by any intermediate owner or holder 
of  the  shares,  of  any  interest  in  the  shares,  of  any  share  certificate  representing  such  shares  or  any 
Acknowledgement, as defined in Article 2.3, in respect of a share certificate for such shares.
5.6
Transfer Fee
There must be paid to the Company, in relation to the registration of any transfer, the amount, if any, determined by 
the directors.
6.
6.1
TRANSMISSION OF SHARES
Legal Personal Representative Recognized on Death
In the case of the death of a shareholder, the legal personal representative of the shareholder, or in the case of shares 
registered in the shareholder’s name and the name of another person in joint tenancy, the surviving joint holder, will 
be the only person recognized by the Company as having any title to the shareholder’s interest in the shares. Before
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 7 -
recognizing a person as a legal personal representative of a shareholder, the directors may require the original grant 
of  probate  or  letters  of  administration  or  a  court  certified  copy  of  them  or  the  original  or  a  court  certified  or 
authenticated copy of the grant of representation, will, order or other instrument or other evidence of the death under 
which title to the shares or securities is claimed to vest.
6.2
Rights of Legal Personal Representative
The legal personal representative of a shareholder has the same rights, privileges and obligations that attach to the 
shares  held  by  the  shareholder,  including  the  right  to  transfer  the  shares  in  accordance  with  these  Articles,  if 
appropriate evidence of appointment or incumbency within the meaning of s. 87 of the Securities Transfer Act has 
been deposited with the Company. This Article 6.2 does not apply in the case of the death of a shareholder with 
respect to shares registered in the shareholder’s name and the name of another person in joint tenancy.
7.
7.1
ACQUISITION OF COMPANY’S SHARES
Company Authorized to Purchase or Otherwise Acquire Shares
Subject to Article 7.2, the special rights or restrictions attached to the shares of any class or series of shares and the 
Business Corporations Act, the Company may, if authorized by the directors, purchase or otherwise acquire any of 
its shares at the price and upon the terms determined by the directors.
7.2
No Purchase, Redemption or Other Acquisition When Insolvent
The  Company  must  not  make  a  payment  or  provide  any  other  consideration  to  purchase,  redeem  or  otherwise 
acquire any of its shares if there are reasonable grounds for believing that:
(1)
(2)
7.3
the Company is insolvent; or
making the payment or providing the consideration would render the Company insolvent.
Sale and Voting of Purchased, Redeemed or Otherwise Acquired Shares
If  the  Company  retains  a  share  redeemed,  purchased or otherwise  acquired  by  it,  the  Company  may  sell,  gift  or 
otherwise dispose of the share, but, while such share is held by the Company, it:
(1)
(2)
(3)
8.
is not entitled to vote the share at a meeting of its shareholders;
must not pay a dividend in respect of the share; and
must not make any other distribution in respect of the share.
BORROWING POWERS
The Company, if authorized by the directors, may:
(1)
(2)
(3)
borrow money in the manner and amount, on the security, from the sources and on the terms and conditions 
that the directors consider appropriate;
issue  bonds,  debentures  and  other  debt  obligations  either  outright  or  as  security  for  any  liability  or 
obligation of the Company or any other person and at such discounts or premiums and on such other terms 
as the directors consider appropriate;
guarantee the repayment of money by any other person or the performance of any obligation of any other 
person; and
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
(4)
9.
9.1
- 8 -
mortgage, charge, whether by way of specific or floating charge, grant a security interest in, or give other 
security on, the whole or any part of the present and future assets and undertaking of the Company.
ALTERATIONS
Alteration of Authorized Share Structure
Subject to Article 9.2 and the Business Corporations Act, the Company may by special resolution:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
create one or more classes or series of shares or, if none of the shares of a class or series of shares are 
allotted or issued, eliminate that class or series of shares;
increase, reduce or eliminate the maximum number of shares that the Company is authorized to issue out of 
any class or series of shares or establish a maximum number of shares that the Company is authorized to 
issue out of any class or series of shares for which no maximum is established;
subdivide or consolidate all or any of its unissued, or fully paid issued, shares;
if the Company is authorized to issue shares of a class of shares with par value:
(a)
(b)
decrease the par value of those shares; or
if none of the shares of that class of shares are allotted or issued, increase the par value of those 
shares;
change all or any of its unissued, or fully paid issued, shares with par value into shares without par value or 
any of its unissued shares without par value into shares with par value;
alter the identifying name of any of its shares; or
otherwise alter its shares or authorized share structure when required or permitted to do so by the Business 
Corporations Act;
and, if applicable, alter its Articles and Notice of Articles, accordingly.
9.2
Special Rights or Restrictions
Subject to the Business Corporations Act, the Company may by special resolution:
(1)
(2)
create special rights or restrictions for, and attach those special rights or restrictions to, the shares of any 
class or series of shares, whether or not any or all of those shares have been issued; or
vary  or  delete  any  special  rights  or  restrictions  attached  to  the  shares  of  any  class  or  series  of  shares, 
whether or not any or all of those shares have been issued;
and alter its Articles and Notice of Articles accordingly.
9.3
Change of Name
The Company may by special resolution authorize an alteration to its Notice of Articles in order to change its name 
and may, by ordinary resolution or directors’ resolution, adopt or change any translation of that name.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 9 -
9.4
Other Alterations
If the Business Corporations Act does not specify the type of resolution and these Articles do not specify another 
type of resolution, the Company may by special resolution alter these Articles.
10.
10.1
MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS
Annual General Meetings
Unless  an  annual  general  meeting  is  deferred  or  waived  in  accordance  with  the  Business  Corporations  Act,  the 
Company must hold its first annual general meeting within 18 months after the date on which it was incorporated or 
otherwise recognized, and after that must hold an annual general meeting at least once in each calendar year and not 
more  than  15  months  after  the  last  annual  reference  date  at  such  time  and  place  as  may  be  determined  by  the 
directors.
10.2
Resolution Instead of Annual General Meeting
If all the shareholders who are entitled to vote at an annual general meeting consent by a unanimous resolution to all 
of the business that is required to be transacted at that annual general meeting, the annual general meeting is deemed 
to  have  been held on  the  date  of  the unanimous  resolution.  The  shareholders  must, in  any  unanimous resolution 
passed under this Article 10.2, select as the Company’s annual reference date a date that would be appropriate for 
the holding of the applicable annual general meeting.
10.3
Calling of Meetings of Shareholders
The  directors  may,  at  any  time,  call  a  meeting  of  shareholders  to  be  held  at  such  time  and  place  as  may  be 
determined by the directors.
10.4
Notice for Meetings of Shareholders
The Company must send notice of the date, time and location of any meeting of shareholders (including, without 
limitation,  any  notice  specifying  the  intention  to  propose  a  resolution  as  an  exceptional  resolution,  a  special 
resolution  or  a  special  separate  resolution  and  any  notice  to  consider  approving  an  amalgamation  into  a  foreign 
jurisdiction, an arrangement or the adoption of an amalgamation agreement, and any notice of a general meeting, 
class meeting or series meeting), in the manner provided in these Articles, or in such other manner, if any, as may be 
prescribed  by  ordinary  resolution  (whether  previous  notice  of  the  resolution  has  been  given  or  not),  to  each 
shareholder entitled to attend the meeting, to each director and to the auditor of the Company, unless these Articles 
otherwise provide, at least the following number of days before the meeting:
(1)
(2)
if and for so long as the Company is a public company, 21 days;
otherwise, 10 days.
10.5
Notice of Resolution to Which Shareholders May Dissent
The Company must send to each of its shareholders, whether or not their shares carry the right to vote, a notice of 
any meeting of shareholders at which a resolution entitling shareholders to dissent is to be considered specifying the 
date of the meeting and containing a statement advising of the right to send a notice of dissent together with a copy 
of the proposed resolution at least the following number of days before the meeting:
(1)
(2)
if and for so long as the Company is a public company, 21 days;
otherwise, 10 days.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 10 -
10.6
Record Date for Notice
The directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining shareholders entitled to notice of any 
meeting of shareholders. The record date must not precede the date on which the meeting is to be held by more than 
two months or, in the case of a general meeting requisitioned by shareholders under the Business Corporations Act, 
by more than four months. The record date must not precede the date on which the meeting is held by fewer than:
(1)
(2)
if and for so long as the Company is a public company, 21 days;
otherwise, 10 days.
If no record date is set, the record date is 5 p.m. on the day immediately preceding the first date on which the notice 
is sent or, if no notice is sent, the beginning of the meeting.
10.7
Record Date for Voting
The directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining shareholders entitled to vote at any 
meeting of shareholders. The record date must not precede the date on which the meeting is to be held by more than 
two months or, in the case of a general meeting requisitioned by shareholders under the Business Corporations Act, 
by more than four months. If no record date is set, the record date is 5 p.m. on the day immediately preceding the 
first date on which the notice is sent or, if no notice is sent, the beginning of the meeting.
10.8
Failure to Give Notice and Waiver of Notice
The accidental omission to send notice of any meeting of shareholders to, or the non-receipt of any notice by, any of 
the persons entitled to notice does not invalidate any proceedings at that meeting. Any person entitled to notice of a 
meeting of shareholders may, in writing or otherwise, waive that entitlement or agree to reduce the period of that 
notice. Attendance of a person at a meeting of shareholders is a waiver of entitlement to notice of the meeting unless 
that person attends the meeting for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of any business on the grounds 
that the meeting is not lawfully called.
10.9
Notice of Special Business at Meetings of Shareholders
If a meeting of shareholders is to consider special business within the meaning of Article 11.1, the notice of meeting 
must:
(1)
(2)
11.
11.1
state the general nature of the special business; and
if the special business includes considering, approving, ratifying, adopting or authorizing any document or 
the signing of or giving of effect to any document, have attached to it a copy of the document or state that a 
copy of the document will be available for inspection by shareholders:
(a)
(b)
at  the  Company’s  records  office,  or  at  such  other  reasonably  accessible  location  in  British 
Columbia as is specified in the notice; and
during  statutory  business  hours  on  any  one  or  more  specified  days  before  the  day  set  for  the 
holding of the meeting.
PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS
Special Business
At a meeting of shareholders, the following business is special business:
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
(1)
(2)
- 11 -
at a meeting of shareholders that is not an annual general meeting, all business is special business except 
business relating to the conduct of or voting at the meeting;
at an annual general meeting, all business is special business except for the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
business relating to the conduct of or voting at the meeting;
consideration of any financial statements of the Company presented to the meeting;
consideration of any reports of the directors or auditor;
the setting or changing of the number of directors;
the election or appointment of directors;
the appointment of an auditor;
the setting of the remuneration of an auditor;
business arising out of a report of the directors not requiring the passing of a special resolution or 
an exceptional resolution;
any  other  business  which,  under  these  Articles  or  the  Business  Corporations  Act,  may  be 
transacted  at  a  meeting  of  shareholders  without  prior  notice  of  the  business  being  given  to  the 
shareholders.
11.2
Special Majority
The majority of votes required for the Company to pass a special resolution at a general meeting of shareholders is 
two-thirds of the votes cast on the resolution.
11.3
Quorum
Subject to the special rights or restrictions attached to the shares of any class or series of shares and to Article 11.4, 
the quorum for the transaction of business at a meeting of shareholders is two persons who are, or who represent by 
proxy, shareholders who, in the aggregate, hold at least 5% of the issued shares entitled to be voted at the meeting.
11.4
One Shareholder May Constitute Quorum
If there is only one shareholder entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders:
(1)
(2)
the quorum is one person who is, or who represents by proxy, that shareholder, and
that shareholder, present in person or by proxy, may constitute the meeting.
11.5
Persons Entitled to Attend Meeting
In addition to those persons who are entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders, the only other persons entitled to 
be present at the meeting are the directors, the president (if any), the secretary (if any), the assistant secretary (if 
any), any lawyer for the Company, the auditor of the Company, any persons invited to be present at the meeting by 
the directors or by the chair of the meeting and any persons entitled or required under the Business Corporations Act 
or these Articles to be present at the meeting; but if any of those persons does attend the meeting, that person is not 
to be counted in the quorum and is not entitled to vote at the meeting unless that person is a shareholder or proxy 
holder entitled to vote at the meeting.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 12 -
11.6
Requirement of Quorum
No business, other than the election of a chair of the meeting and the adjournment of the meeting, may be transacted 
at any meeting of shareholders unless a quorum of shareholders entitled to vote is present at the commencement of 
the meeting, but such quorum need not be present throughout the meeting.
11.7
Lack of Quorum
If, within one-half hour from the time set for the holding of a meeting of shareholders, a quorum is not present:
(1)
(2)
in the case of a general meeting requisitioned by shareholders, the meeting is dissolved, and
in the case of any other meeting of shareholders, the meeting stands adjourned to the same day in the next 
week at the same time and place.
11.8
Lack of Quorum at Succeeding Meeting
If, at the meeting to which the meeting referred to in Article 11.7(2) was adjourned, a quorum is not present within 
one-half  hour  from  the  time  set  for  the  holding  of  the  meeting,  the  person  or  persons  present  and  being,  or 
representing by proxy, one or more shareholders entitled to attend and vote at the meeting constitute a quorum.
11.9
Chair
The following individual is entitled to preside as chair at a meeting of shareholders:
(1)
(2)
the chair of the board, if any; or
if the chair of the board is absent or unwilling to act as chair of the meeting, the president, if any.
11.10  Selection of Alternate Chair
If, at any meeting of shareholders, there is no chair of the board or president present within 15 minutes after the time 
set for holding the meeting, or if the chair of the board and the president are unwilling to act as chair of the meeting, 
or  if  the  chair  of  the  board  and  the  president  have  advised  the  secretary,  if  any,  or  any  director  present  at  the 
meeting, that they will not be present at the meeting, the directors present must choose one of their number to be 
chair of the meeting or if all of the directors present decline to take the chair or fail to so choose or if no director is 
present,  the  shareholders  entitled  to  vote  at  the  meeting  who  are  present  in  person  or  by  proxy  may  choose  any 
person present at the meeting to chair the meeting.
11.11  Adjournments
The chair of a meeting of shareholders may, and if so directed by the meeting must, adjourn the meeting from time 
to time and from place to place, but no business may be transacted at any adjourned meeting other than the business 
left unfinished at the meeting from which the adjournment took place.
11.12  Notice of Adjourned Meeting
It is not necessary to give any notice of an adjourned meeting of shareholders or of the business to be transacted at 
an adjourned meeting of shareholders except that, when a meeting is adjourned for 30 days or more, notice of the 
adjourned meeting must be given as in the case of the original meeting.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 13 -
11.13  Decisions by Show of Hands or Poll
Subject to the Business Corporations Act, every motion put to a vote at a meeting of shareholders will be decided on 
a show of hands unless a poll, before or on the declaration of the result of the vote by show of hands, is directed by 
the chair or demanded by any shareholder entitled to vote who is present in person or by proxy.
11.14  Declaration of Result
The chair of a meeting of shareholders must declare to the meeting the decision on every question in accordance 
with the result of the show of hands or the poll, as the case may be, and that decision must be entered in the minutes 
of the meeting. A declaration of the chair that a resolution is carried by the necessary majority or is defeated is, 
unless a poll is directed by the chair or demanded under Article 11.13, conclusive evidence without proof of the 
number or proportion of the votes recorded in favour of or against the resolution.
11.15  Motion Need Not be Seconded
No motion proposed at a meeting of shareholders need be seconded unless the chair of the meeting rules otherwise, 
and the chair of any meeting of shareholders is entitled to propose or second a motion.
11.16  Casting Vote
In the case of an equality of votes, the chair of a meeting of shareholders does not, either on a show of hands or on a 
poll,  have  a  second  or  casting  vote  in  addition  to  the  vote  or  votes  to  which  the  chair  may  be  entitled  as  a 
shareholder.
11.17  Manner of Taking Poll
Subject to Article 11.18, if a poll is duly demanded at a meeting of shareholders:
(1)
the poll must be taken:
(a)
(b)
at  the  meeting,  or  within  seven  days  after  the  date  of  the  meeting,  as  the  chair  of  the  meeting 
directs; and
in the manner, at the time and at the place that the chair of the meeting directs;
the result of the poll is deemed to be the decision of the meeting at which the poll is demanded; and
the demand for the poll may be withdrawn by the person who demanded it.
(2)
(3)
11.18  Demand for Poll on Adjournment
A  poll  demanded  at  a  meeting  of  shareholders  on  a  question  of  adjournment  must  be  taken  immediately  at  the 
meeting.
11.19  Chair Must Resolve Dispute
In the case of any dispute as to the admission or rejection of a vote given on a poll, the chair of the meeting must 
determine the dispute, and his or her determination made in good faith is final and conclusive.
11.20  Casting of Votes
On a poll, a shareholder entitled to more than one vote need not cast all the votes in the same way.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 14 -
11.21  No Demand for Poll on Election of Chair
No poll may be demanded in respect of the vote by which a chair of a meeting of shareholders is elected.
11.22  Demand for Poll Not to Prevent Continuance of Meeting
The demand for a poll at a meeting of shareholders does not, unless the chair of the meeting so rules, prevent the 
continuation of the meeting for the transaction of any business other than the question on which a poll has been 
demanded.
11.23  Retention of Ballots and Proxies
The Company must, for at least three months after a meeting of shareholders, keep each ballot cast on a poll and 
each proxy voted at the meeting, and, during that period, make them available for inspection during normal business 
hours by any shareholder or proxyholder entitled to vote at the meeting. At the end of such three month period, the 
Company may destroy such ballots and proxies.
12.
12.1
VOTES OF SHAREHOLDERS
Number of Votes by Shareholder or by Shares
Subject  to  any  special  rights  or  restrictions  attached  to  any  shares  and  to  the  restrictions  imposed  on  joint 
shareholders under Article 12.3:
(1)
(2)
on a vote by show of hands, every person present who is a shareholder or proxy holder and entitled to vote 
on the matter has one vote; and
on a poll, every shareholder entitled to vote on the matter has one vote in respect of each share entitled to 
be voted on the matter and held by that shareholder and may exercise that vote either in person or by proxy.
12.2
Votes of Persons in Representative Capacity
A person who is not a shareholder may vote at a meeting of shareholders, whether on a show of hands or on a poll, 
and  may  appoint  a  proxy  holder  to  act  at  the  meeting,  if,  before  doing  so,  the  person  satisfies  the  chair  of  the 
meeting,  or  the  directors,  that  the  person  is  a  legal  personal  representative  or  a  trustee  in  bankruptcy  for  a 
shareholder who is entitled to vote at the meeting.
12.3
Votes by Joint Holders
If there are joint shareholders registered in respect of any share:
(1)
(2)
any  one  of  the  joint  shareholders  may  vote  at  any  meeting  of  shareholders,  personally  or  by  proxy,  in 
respect of the share as if that joint shareholder were solely entitled to it; or
if more than one of the joint shareholders is present at any meeting of shareholders, personally or by proxy, 
and more than one of them votes in respect of that share, then only the vote of the joint shareholder present 
whose name stands first on the central securities register in respect of the share will be counted.
12.4
Legal Personal Representatives as Joint Shareholders
Two or more legal personal representatives of a shareholder in whose sole name any share is registered are, for the 
purposes of Article 12.3, deemed to be joint shareholders registered in respect of that share.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 15 -
12.5
Representative of a Corporate Shareholder
If a corporation that is not a subsidiary of the Company is a shareholder, that corporation may appoint a person to 
act as its representative at any meeting of shareholders of the Company, and:
(1)
for that purpose, the instrument appointing a representative must be received:
(a)
(b)
at the registered office of the Company or at any other place specified, in the notice calling the 
meeting, for the receipt of proxies, at least the number of business days specified in the notice for 
the receipt of proxies, or if no number of days is specified, two business days before the day set 
for the holding of the meeting or any adjourned meeting; or
at the meeting or any adjourned meeting, by the chair of the meeting or adjourned meeting or by a 
person designated by the chair of the meeting or adjourned meeting;
(2)
if a representative is appointed under this Article 12.5:
(a)
(b)
the representative is entitled to exercise in respect of and at that meeting the same rights on behalf 
of the corporation that the representative represents as that corporation could exercise if it were a 
shareholder who is an individual, including, without limitation, the right to appoint a proxy holder; 
and
the representative, if present at the meeting, is to be counted for the purpose of forming a quorum 
and is deemed to be a shareholder present in person at the meeting.
Evidence of the appointment of any such representative may be sent to the Company by written instrument, fax or 
any other method of transmitting legibly recorded messages.
12.6  When Proxy Holder Need Not Be Shareholder
A person must not be appointed as a proxy holder unless the person is a shareholder, although a person who is not a 
shareholder may be appointed as a proxy holder if:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
the person appointing the proxy holder is a corporation or a representative of a corporation appointed under 
Article 12.5;
the  Company  has  at  the  time  of  the  meeting  for  which  the  proxy  holder  is  to  be  appointed  only  one 
shareholder entitled to vote at the meeting;
the shareholders present in person or by proxy at and entitled to vote at the meeting for which the proxy 
holder is to be appointed, by a resolution on which the proxy holder is not entitled to vote but in respect of 
which the proxy holder is to be counted in the quorum, permit the proxy holder to attend and vote at the 
meeting; or
the Company is a public company or is a pre-existing reporting company which has the Statutory Reporting 
Company  Provisions  as  part  of  these  Articles  or  to  which  the  Statutory  Reporting  Company  Provisions 
apply.
12.7  When Proxy Provisions Do Not Apply to the Company
If  and  for  so  long  as  the  Company  is  a  public  company  or  is  a  pre-existing  reporting  company  which  has  the 
Statutory  Reporting  Company  Provisions as  part of  these  Articles  or  to  which  the  Statutory  Reporting  Company 
Provisions apply, Articles 12.8 to 12.16 apply only insofar as they are not inconsistent with any Canadian securities 
legislation applicable to the Company, any U.S. securities legislation applicable to the Company or any rules of an 
exchange on which securities of the Company are listed.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 16 -
12.8
Appointment of Proxy Holders
Every  shareholder  of  the  Company,  including  a  corporation  that  is  a  shareholder  but  not  a  subsidiary  of  the 
Company, entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders may, by proxy, appoint one or more proxy holders to attend 
and act at the meeting in the manner, to the extent and with the powers conferred by the proxy.
12.9
Alternate Proxy Holders
A shareholder may appoint one or more alternate proxy holders to act in the place of an absent proxy holder.
12.10  Deposit of Proxy
A proxy for a meeting of shareholders must:
(1)
(2)
be received at the registered office of the Company or at any other place specified, in the notice calling the 
meeting, for the receipt of proxies, at least the number of business days specified in the notice, or if no 
number of days is specified, two business days before the day set for the holding of the meeting or any 
adjourned meeting; or
unless the notice provides otherwise, be received at the meeting or any adjourned meeting, by the chair of 
the  meeting  or  adjourned  meeting  or  by  a  person  designated  by  the  chair  of  the  meeting  or  adjourned 
meeting.
A  proxy  may  be  sent  to  the  Company  by  written  instrument,  fax  or  any  other  method  of  transmitting  legibly 
recorded messages.
12.11  Validity of Proxy Vote
A  vote  given  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  a  proxy  is  valid  notwithstanding  the  death  or  incapacity  of  the 
shareholder giving the proxy and despite the revocation of the proxy or the revocation of the authority under which 
the proxy is given, unless notice in writing of that death, incapacity or revocation is received:
(1)
(2)
at the registered office of the Company, at any time up to and including the last business day before the day 
set for the holding of the meeting or any adjourned meeting at which the proxy is to be used; or
at the meeting or any adjourned meeting, by the chair of the meeting or adjourned meeting, before any vote 
in respect of which the proxy has been given has been taken.
12.12  Form of Proxy
A proxy, whether for a specified meeting or otherwise, must be either in the following form or in any other form 
approved by the directors or the chair of the meeting:
[name of company] (the “Company”)
The  undersigned,  being  a  shareholder  of  the  Company,  hereby  appoints  [name]  or,  failing  that 
person, [name], as proxy holder for the undersigned to attend, act and vote for and on behalf of 
the undersigned at the meeting of shareholders of the Company to be held on [month, day, year] 
and at any adjournment of that meeting.
Number  of  shares  in  respect  of  which  this  proxy  is  given  (if  no  number  is  specified,  then  this 
proxy is given in respect of all shares registered in the name of the undersigned):
Signed [month, day, year]
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 17 -
____________________________ 
[Signature of shareholder]
_____________________________ 
[Name of shareholder—printed]
12.13  Revocation of Proxy
Subject to Article 12.14, every proxy may be revoked by an instrument in writing that is received:
(1)
(2)
at the registered office of the Company at any time up to and including the last business day before the day 
set for the holding of the meeting or any adjourned meeting at which the proxy is to be used; or
at the meeting or any adjourned meeting by the chair of the meeting or adjourned meeting, before any vote 
in respect of which the proxy has been given has been taken.
12.14  Revocation of Proxy Must Be Signed
An instrument referred to in Article 12.13 must be signed as follows:
(1)
(2)
if the shareholder for whom the proxy holder is appointed is an individual, the instrument must be signed 
by the shareholder or his or her legal personal representative or trustee in bankruptcy;
if the shareholder for whom the proxy holder is appointed is a corporation, the instrument must be signed 
by the corporation or by a representative appointed for the corporation under Article 12.5.
12.15  Chair May Determine Validity of Proxy
The chair of any meeting of shareholders may determine whether or not a proxy deposited for use at the meeting, 
which  may  not  strictly  comply  with  the  requirements  of  this  Part  12  as  to  form,  execution,  accompanying 
documentation, time of filing or otherwise, shall be valid for use at such meeting and any such determination made 
in good faith shall be final, conclusive and binding upon such meeting.
12.16  Production of Evidence of Authority to Vote
The chair of any meeting of shareholders may, but need not, inquire into the authority of any person to vote at the 
meeting and may, but need not, demand from that person production of evidence as to the existence of the authority 
to vote.
13.
13.1
DIRECTORS
First Directors; Number of Directors
The first directors are the persons designated as directors of the Company in the Notice of Articles that applies to the 
Company when it is recognized under the Business Corporations Act. The number of directors, excluding additional 
directors appointed under Article 14.8, is set at:
(1)
(2)
subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the number of directors that is equal to the number of the Company’s first 
directors;
if the Company is a public company, the greater of three and the most recently set of:
(a)
the  number  of  directors  set  by  directors’  resolution  (whether  or  not  previous  notice  of  the 
resolution was given); and
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 18 -
(b)
the number of directors set under Article 14.4;
(3)
if the Company is not a public company, the most recently set of:
(a)
(b)
the number of directors set by ordinary resolution (whether or not previous notice of the resolution 
was given); and
the number of directors set under Article 14.4.
13.2
Change in Number of Directors
If the number of directors is set under Articles 13.1(2)(a) or 13.1(3)(a):
(1)
(2)
the shareholders may elect or appoint the directors needed to fill any vacancies in the board of directors up 
to that number; or
if the shareholders do not elect or appoint the directors needed to fill any vacancies in the board of directors 
up to that number contemporaneously with the setting of that number, then the directors, subject to Article 
14.8, may appoint, or the shareholders may elect or appoint, directors to fill those vacancies.
13.3
Directors’ Acts Valid Despite Vacancy
An  act  or  proceeding  of  the  directors  is  not  invalid  merely  because  fewer  than  the  number  of  directors  set  or 
otherwise required under these Articles is in office.
13.4
Qualifications of Directors
A director is not required to hold a share of the Company as qualification for his or her office but must be qualified 
as required by the Business Corporations Act to become, act or continue to act as a director.
13.5
Remuneration of Directors
The directors are entitled to the remuneration for acting as directors, if any, as the directors may from time to time 
determine.  If  the  directors  so  decide,  the  remuneration  of  the  directors,  if  any,  will  be  determined  by  the 
shareholders.  That  remuneration  may  be  in  addition  to  any  salary  or  other  remuneration  paid  to  any  officer  or 
employee of the Company as such, who is also a director.
13.6
Reimbursement of Expenses of Directors
The Company must reimburse each director for the reasonable expenses that he or she may incur in and about the 
business of the Company.
13.7
Special Remuneration for Directors
If any director performs any professional or other services for the Company that in the opinion of the directors are 
outside the ordinary duties of a director, or if any director is otherwise specially occupied in or about the Company’s 
business,  he  or  she  may  be  paid  remuneration  fixed  by  the  directors,  or,  at  the  option  of  that  director,  fixed  by 
ordinary  resolution,  and  such  remuneration  may  be  either  in  addition  to,  or  in  substitution  for,  any  other 
remuneration that he or she may be entitled to receive.
13.8
Gratuity, Pension or Allowance on Retirement of Director
Unless otherwise determined by ordinary resolution, the directors on behalf of the Company may pay a gratuity or 
pension  or  allowance  on  retirement  to  any  director  who  has  held  any  salaried  office  or  place  of  profit  with  the
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 19 -
Company or to his or her spouse or dependants and may make contributions to any fund and pay premiums for the 
purchase or provision of any such gratuity, pension or allowance.
14.
14.1
ELECTION AND REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS
Election at Annual General Meeting
At every annual general meeting and in every unanimous resolution contemplated by Article 10.2:
(1)
(2)
the shareholders entitled to vote at the annual general meeting for the election of directors must elect, or in 
the unanimous resolution appoint, a board of directors consisting of the number of directors for the time 
being set under these Articles; and
all  the  directors  cease  to  hold  office  immediately  before  the  election  or  appointment  of  directors  under 
paragraph (1), but are eligible for re-election or re-appointment.
14.2
Consent to be a Director
No election, appointment or designation of an individual as a director is valid unless:
(1)
(2)
(3)
14.3
If:
(1)
(2)
that individual consents to be a director in the manner provided for in the Business Corporations Act;
that individual is elected or appointed at a meeting at which the individual is present and the individual 
does not refuse, at the meeting, to be a director; or
with respect to first directors, the designation is otherwise valid under the Business Corporations Act.
Failure to Elect or Appoint Directors
the Company fails to hold an annual general meeting, and all the shareholders who are entitled to vote at an 
annual general meeting fail to pass the unanimous resolution contemplated by Article 10.2, on or before the 
date by which the annual general meeting is required to be held under the Business Corporations Act; or
the shareholders fail, at the annual general meeting or in the unanimous resolution contemplated by Article 
10.2, to elect or appoint any directors;
then each director then in office continues to hold office until the earlier of:
(3)
(4)
when his or her successor is elected or appointed; and
when he or she otherwise ceases to hold office under the Business Corporations Act or these Articles.
14.4
Places of Retiring Directors Not Filled
If, at any meeting of shareholders at which there should be an election of directors, the places of any of the retiring 
directors are not filled by that election, those retiring directors who are not re-elected and who are asked by the 
newly elected directors to continue in office will, if willing to do so, continue in office to complete the number of 
directors  for  the  time  being  set  pursuant  to  these  Articles  until  further  new  directors  are  elected  at  a  meeting  of 
shareholders  convened  for  that  purpose.  If  any  such  election  or  continuance  of  directors  does  not  result  in  the 
election or continuance of the number of directors for the time being set pursuant to these Articles, the number of 
directors of the Company is deemed to be set at the number of directors actually elected or continued in office.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 20 -
14.5
Directors May Fill Casual Vacancies
Any casual vacancy occurring in the board of directors may be filled by the directors.
14.6
Remaining Directors’ Power to Act
The directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in the board of directors, but if the Company has fewer directors 
in office than the number set pursuant to these Articles as the quorum of directors, the directors may only act for the 
purpose of appointing directors up to that number or of calling a meeting of shareholders for the purpose of filling 
any vacancies on the board of directors or, subject to the Business Corporations Act, for any other purpose.
14.7
Shareholders May Fill Vacancies
If the Company has no directors or fewer directors in office than the number set pursuant to these Articles as the 
quorum of directors, the shareholders may elect or appoint directors to fill any vacancies on the board of directors.
14.8
Additional Directors
Notwithstanding Articles 13.1 and 13.2, between annual general meetings or unanimous resolutions contemplated 
by Article 10.2, the directors may appoint one or more additional directors, but the number of additional directors 
appointed under this Article 14.8 must not at any time exceed:
(1)
(2)
one-third  of  the  number  of  first  directors,  if,  at  the  time  of  the  appointments,  one  or  more  of  the  first 
directors have not yet completed their first term of office; or
in  any  other  case,  one-third  of  the  number  of  the  current  directors  who  were  elected  or  appointed  as 
directors other than under this Article 14.8.
Any director so appointed ceases to hold office immediately before the next election or appointment of directors 
under Article 14.1(1), but is eligible for re-election or re-appointment.
14.9
Ceasing to be a Director
A director ceases to be a director when:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
the term of office of the director expires;
the director dies;
the  director  resigns  as  a  director  by  notice  in  writing  provided  to  the  Company  or  a  lawyer  for  the 
Company; or
the director is removed from office pursuant to Articles 14.10 or 14.11.
14.10  Removal of Director by Shareholders
The Company may remove any director before the expiration of his or her term of office by special resolution. In 
that event, the shareholders may elect, or appoint by ordinary resolution, a director to fill the resulting vacancy. If 
the shareholders do not elect or appoint a director to fill the resulting vacancy contemporaneously with the removal, 
then the directors may appoint or the shareholders may elect, or appoint by ordinary resolution, a director to fill that 
vacancy.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 21 -
14.11  Removal of Director by Directors
The directors may remove any director before the expiration of his or her term of office if the director is convicted 
of  an  indictable  offence, or  if  the  director ceases  to be  qualified  to  act  as  a director of  a  company  and  does  not 
promptly resign, and the directors may appoint a director to fill the resulting vacancy.
15.
15.1
ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
Appointment of Alternate Director
Any  director  (an  “appointor”)  may  by  notice  in  writing  received  by  the  Company  appoint  any  person  (an 
“appointee”) who is qualified to act as a director to be his or her alternate to act in his or her place at meetings of the 
directors or committees of the directors at which the appointor is not present unless (in the case of an appointee who 
is not a director) the directors have reasonably disapproved the appointment of such person as an alternate director 
and have given notice to that effect to his or her appointor within a reasonable time after the notice of appointment is 
received by the Company.
15.2
Notice of Meetings
Every  alternate  director  so  appointed  is  entitled  to  notice  of  meetings  of  the  directors  and  of  committees  of  the 
directors of which his or her appointor is a member and to attend and vote as a director at any such meetings at 
which his or her appointor is not present.
15.3
Alternate for More Than One Director Attending Meetings
A person may be appointed as an alternate director by more than one director, and an alternate director:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
will be counted in determining the quorum for a meeting of directors once for each of his or her appointors 
and, in the case of an appointee who is also a director, once more in that capacity;
has  a  separate  vote  at  a  meeting  of  directors  for  each  of  his  or  her  appointors  and,  in  the  case  of  an 
appointee who is also a director, an additional vote in that capacity;
will be counted in determining the quorum for a meeting of a committee of directors once for each of his or 
her appointors who is a member of that committee and, in the case of an appointee who is also a member of 
that committee as a director, once more in that capacity; and
has  a  separate  vote  at  a  meeting of  a  committee  of directors for  each of his or her  appointors  who  is  a 
member of that committee and, in the case of an appointee who is also a member of that committee as a 
director, an additional vote in that capacity.
15.4
Consent Resolutions
Every alternate director, if authorized by the notice appointing him or her, may sign in place of his or her appointor 
any resolutions to be consented to in writing.
15.5
Alternate Director Not an Agent
Every alternate director is deemed not to be the agent of his or her appointor.
15.6
Revocation of Appointment of Alternate Director
An appointor may at any time, by notice in writing received by the Company, revoke the appointment of an alternate 
director appointed by him or her.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 22 -
15.7
Ceasing to be an Alternate Director
The appointment of an alternate director ceases when:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
his or her appointor ceases to be a director and is not promptly re-elected or re-appointed;
the alternate director dies;
the alternate director resigns as an alternate director by notice in writing provided to the Company or a 
lawyer for the Company;
the alternate director ceases to be qualified to act as a director; or
his or her appointor revokes the appointment of the alternate director.
15.8
Remuneration and Expenses of Alternate Director
The Company may reimburse an alternate director for the reasonable expenses that would be properly reimbursed if 
he or she were a director, and the alternate director is entitled to receive from the Company such proportion, if any, 
of the remuneration otherwise payable to the appointor as the appointor may from time to time direct.
16.
16.1
POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTORS
Powers of Management
The  directors  must,  subject  to  the  Business  Corporations  Act  and  these  Articles,  manage  or  supervise  the 
management of the business and affairs of the Company and have the authority to exercise all such powers of the 
Company  as  are  not,  by  the  Business  Corporations  Act  or  by  these  Articles,  required  to  be  exercised  by  the 
shareholders of the Company.
16.2
Appointment of Attorney of Company
The directors may from time to time, by power of attorney or other instrument, under seal if so required by law, 
appoint  any person  to be  the  attorney of  the  Company  for  such  purposes,  and with such powers, authorities  and 
discretions  (not  exceeding  those  vested  in  or  exercisable  by  the  directors  under  these  Articles  and  excepting  the 
power to fill vacancies in the board of directors, to remove a director, to change the membership of, or fill vacancies 
in, any committee of the directors, to appoint or remove officers appointed by the directors and to declare dividends) 
and for such period, and with such remuneration and subject to such conditions as the directors may think fit. Any 
such power of attorney may contain such provisions for the protection or convenience of persons dealing with such 
attorney as the directors think fit. Any such attorney may be authorized by the directors to sub-delegate all or any of 
the powers, authorities and discretions for the time being vested in him or her.
17.
17.1
INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
Obligation to Account for Profits
A director or senior officer who holds a disclosable interest (as that term is used in the Business Corporations Act) 
in  a  contract  or  transaction  into  which  the  Company  has  entered  or  proposes  to  enter  is  liable  to  account  to  the 
Company for any profit that accrues to the director or senior officer under or as a result of the contract or transaction 
only if and to the extent provided in the Business Corporations Act.
17.2
Restrictions on Voting by Reason of Interest
A  director  who  holds  a  disclosable  interest  in  a  contract  or  transaction  into  which  the  Company  has  entered  or 
proposes to enter is not entitled to vote on any directors’ resolution to approve that contract or transaction, unless all
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 23 -
the directors have a disclosable interest in that contract or transaction, in which case any or all of those directors may 
vote on such resolution.
17.3
Interested Director Counted in Quorum
A  director  who  holds  a  disclosable  interest  in  a  contract  or  transaction  into  which  the  Company  has  entered  or 
proposes to enter and who is present at the meeting of directors at which the contract or transaction is considered for 
approval  may  be  counted  in  the  quorum  at  the  meeting  whether  or  not  the  director  votes  on  any  or  all  of  the 
resolutions considered at the meeting.
17.4
Disclosure of Conflict of Interest or Property
A  director  or  senior  officer  who  holds  any  office  or  possesses  any  property,  right  or  interest  that  could  result, 
directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  creation  of  a  duty  or  interest  that  materially  conflicts  with  that  individual’s  duty  or 
interest as a director or senior officer, must disclose the nature and extent of the conflict as required by the Business 
Corporations Act.
17.5
Director Holding Other Office in the Company
A director may hold any office or place of profit with the Company, other than the office of auditor of the Company, 
in addition to his or her office of director for the period and on the terms (as to remuneration or otherwise) that the 
directors may determine.
17.6
No Disqualification
No director or intended director is disqualified by his or her office from contracting with the Company either with 
regard to the holding of any office or place of profit the director holds with the Company or as vendor, purchaser or 
otherwise, and no contract or transaction entered into by or on behalf of the Company in which a director is in any 
way interested is liable to be voided for that reason.
17.7
Professional Services by Director or Officer
Subject to the Business Corporations Act, a director or officer, or any person in which a director or officer has an 
interest, may act in a professional capacity for the Company, except as auditor of the Company, and the director or 
officer or such person is entitled to remuneration for professional services as if that director or officer were not a 
director or officer.
17.8
Director or Officer in Other Corporations
A director or officer may be or become a director, officer or employee of, or otherwise interested in, any person in 
which the Company may be interested as a shareholder or otherwise, and, subject to the Business Corporations Act, 
the director or officer is not accountable to the Company for any remuneration or other benefits received by him or 
her as director, officer or employee of, or from his or her interest in, such other person.
18.
PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS
18.1  Meetings of Directors
The directors may meet together for the conduct of business, adjourn and otherwise regulate their meetings as they 
think fit, and meetings of the directors held at regular intervals may be held at the place, at the time and on the 
notice, if any, as the directors may from time to time determine.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 24 -
18.2
Voting at Meetings
Questions arising at any meeting of directors are to be decided by a majority of votes and, in the case of an equality 
of votes, the chair of the meeting does not have a second or casting vote.
18.3
Chair of Meetings
The following individual is entitled to preside as chair at a meeting of directors:
(1)
(2)
(3)
the chair of the board, if any;
in the absence of the chair of the board, the president, if any, if the president is a director; or
any other director chosen by the directors if:
(a)
(b)
(c)
neither the chair of the board nor the president, if a director, is present at the meeting within 15 
minutes after the time set for holding the meeting;
neither the chair of the board nor the president, if a director, is willing to chair the meeting; or
the chair of the board and the president, if a director, have advised the secretary, if any, or any 
other director, that they will not be present at the meeting.
18.4  Meetings by Telephone or Other Communications Medium
A director may participate in a meeting of the directors or of any committee of the directors:
(1)
(2)
(3)
in person;
by telephone; or
with the consent of all directors who wish to participate in the meeting, by other communications medium;
if all directors participating in the meeting, whether in person or by telephone or other communications medium, are 
able to communicate with each other. A director who participates in a meeting in a manner contemplated by this 
Article  18.4  is  deemed  for  all  purposes of the Business Corporations Act  and  these Articles  to be present  at  the 
meeting and to have agreed to participate in that manner.
18.5
Calling of Meetings
A director may, and the secretary or an assistant secretary of the Company, if any, on the request of a director must, 
call a meeting of the directors at any time.
18.6
Notice of Meetings
Other  than  for  meetings  held  at  regular  intervals  as  determined  by  the  directors  pursuant  to  Article  18.1  or  as 
provided in Article 18.7, reasonable notice of each meeting of the directors, specifying the place, day and time of 
that meeting must be given to each of the directors and the alternate directors by any method set out in Article 24.1 
or orally or by telephone.
18.7  When Notice Not Required
It is not necessary to give notice of a meeting of the directors to a director or an alternate director if:
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
(1)
(2)
- 25 -
the  meeting  is  to  be  held  immediately  following  a  meeting  of  shareholders  at  which  that  director  was 
elected or appointed, or is the meeting of the directors at which that director is appointed; or
the director or alternate director, as the case may be, has waived notice of the meeting.
18.8  Meeting Valid Despite Failure to Give Notice
The  accidental  omission  to  give  notice  of  any  meeting  of  directors  to,  or  the  non-receipt  of  any  notice  by,  any 
director or alternate director, does not invalidate any proceedings at that meeting.
18.9  Waiver of Notice of Meetings
Any director or alternate director may send to the Company a document signed by him or her waiving notice of any 
past, present or future meeting or meetings of the directors and may at any time withdraw that waiver with respect to 
meetings held after that withdrawal. After sending a waiver with respect to all future meetings and until that waiver 
is  withdrawn,  no  notice  of  any  meeting  of  the  directors  need  be  given  to  that  director  or,  unless  the  director 
otherwise  requires  by  notice  in  writing  to  the  Company,  to  his  or  her  alternate  director,  and  all  meetings  of  the 
directors so held are deemed not to be improperly called or constituted by reason of notice not having been given to 
such director or alternate director. Attendance of a director or alternate director at a meeting of the directors is a 
waiver of notice of the meeting unless that director or alternate director attends the meeting for the express purpose 
of objecting to the transaction of any business on the grounds that the meeting is not lawfully called.
18.10  Quorum
The quorum necessary for the transaction of the business of the directors may be set by the directors and, if not so 
set,  is  deemed  to  be  set  at  two  directors  or,  if  the  number  of  directors  is  set  at  one,  is  deemed  to  be  set  at  one 
director, and that director may constitute a meeting.
18.11  Validity of Acts Where Appointment Defective
Subject  to  the  Business  Corporations  Act,  an  act  of  a  director  or  officer  is  not  invalid  merely  because  of  an 
irregularity in the election or appointment or a defect in the qualification of that director or officer.
18.12  Consent Resolutions in Writing
A resolution of the directors or of any committee of the directors may be passed without a meeting:
(1)
(2)
in all cases, if each of the directors entitled to vote on the resolution consents to it in writing; or
in the case of a resolution to approve a contract or transaction in respect of which a director has disclosed 
that he or she has or may have a disclosable interest, if each of the other directors who have not made such 
a disclosure consents in writing to the resolution.
A consent in writing under this Article 18.12 may be by any written instrument, fax, e-mail or any other method of 
transmitting  legibly  recorded  messages  in  which  the  consent  of  the  director  is  evidenced,  whether  or  not  the 
signature of the director is included in the record. A consent in writing may be in two or more counterparts which 
together are deemed to constitute one consent in writing. A resolution of the directors or of any committee of the 
directors passed in accordance with this Article 18.12 is effective on the date stated in the consent in writing or on 
the latest date stated on any counterpart and is deemed to be a proceeding at a meeting of the directors or of the 
committee of the directors and to be as valid and effective as if it had been passed at a meeting of the directors or of 
the  committee  of  the  directors  that  satisfies  all  the  requirements  of  the  Business  Corporations  Act  and  all  the 
requirements of these Articles relating to meetings of the directors or of a committee of the directors.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
19.
19.1
- 26 -
EXECUTIVE AND OTHER COMMITTEES
Appointment and Powers of Executive Committee
The directors may, by resolution, appoint an executive committee consisting of the director or directors that they 
consider appropriate, and during the intervals between meetings of the board of directors all of the directors’ powers 
are delegated to the executive committee, except:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
the power to fill vacancies in the board of directors;
the power to remove a director;
the power to change the membership of, or fill vacancies in, any committee of the directors; and
such other powers, if any, as may be set out in the resolution or any subsequent directors’ resolution.
19.2
Appointment and Powers of Other Committees
The directors may, by resolution:
(1)
(2)
appoint one or more committees (other than the executive committee) consisting of the director or directors 
that they consider appropriate;
delegate to a committee appointed under paragraph (1) any of the directors’ powers, except:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the power to fill vacancies in the board of directors;
the power to remove a director;
the power to change the membership of, or fill vacancies in, any committee of the directors; and
the power to appoint or remove officers appointed by the directors; and
(3)
make any delegation referred to in paragraph (2) subject to the conditions set out in the resolution or any 
subsequent directors’ resolution.
19.3
Obligations of Committees
Any committee appointed under Articles 19.1 or 19.2, in the exercise of the powers delegated to it, must:
(1)
(2)
conform to any rules that may from time to time be imposed on it by the directors; and
report every act or thing done in exercise of those powers at such times as the directors may require.
19.4
Powers of Board
The directors may, at any time, with respect to a committee appointed under Articles 19.1 or 19.2:
(1)
(2)
(3)
revoke or alter the authority given to the committee, or override a decision made by the committee, except 
as to acts done before such revocation, alteration or overriding;
terminate the appointment of, or change the membership of, the committee; and
fill vacancies in the committee.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 27 -
19.5
Committee Meetings
Subject to Article 19.3(1) and unless the directors otherwise provide in the resolution appointing the committee or in 
any subsequent resolution, with respect to a committee appointed under Articles 19.1 or 19.2:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
20.
20.1
the committee may meet and adjourn as it thinks proper;
the committee may elect a chair of its meetings but, if no chair of a meeting is elected, or if at a meeting the 
chair of the meeting is not present within 15 minutes after the time set for holding the meeting, the directors 
present who are members of the committee may choose one of their number to chair the meeting;
a majority of the members of the committee constitutes a quorum of the committee; and
questions arising at any meeting of the committee are determined by a majority of votes of the members 
present, and in the case of an equality of votes, the chair of the meeting does not have a second or casting 
vote.
OFFICERS
Directors May Appoint Officers
The directors may, from time to time, appoint such officers, if any, as the directors determine and the directors may, 
at any time, terminate any such appointment.
20.2
Functions, Duties and Powers of Officers
The directors may, for each officer:
(1)
(2)
(3)
determine the functions and duties of the officer;
delegate to the officer any of the powers exercisable by the directors on such terms and conditions and with 
such restrictions as the directors think fit; and
revoke, withdraw, alter or vary all or any of the functions, duties and powers of the officer.
20.3
Qualifications
No officer may be appointed unless that officer is qualified in accordance with the Business Corporations Act. One 
person may hold more than one position as an officer of the Company. Any person appointed as the chair of the 
board or as a managing director must be a director. Any other officer need not be a director.
20.4
Remuneration and Terms of Appointment
All appointments of officers are to be made on the terms and conditions and at the remuneration (whether by way of 
salary,  fee,  commission,  participation  in  profits  or  otherwise)  that  the  directors  think  fit  and  are  subject  to 
termination  at  the  pleasure  of  the  directors,  and  an  officer  may  in  addition  to  such  remuneration  be  entitled  to 
receive, after he or she ceases to hold such office or leaves the employment of the Company, a pension or gratuity.
21.
INDEMNIFICATION
21.1
Definitions
In this Article 21:
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
(1)
(2)
- 28 -
“eligible  penalty”  means  a  judgment,  penalty  or  fine  awarded  or  imposed  in,  or  an  amount  paid  in 
settlement of, an eligible proceeding;
“eligible  proceeding”  means  a  legal  proceeding  or  investigative  action,  whether  current,  threatened, 
pending  or  completed,  in  which  a  director,  former  director  or  alternate  director  of  the  Company  (an 
“eligible party”) or any of the heirs and legal personal representatives of the eligible party, by reason of the 
eligible party being or having been a director or alternate director of the Company:
(a)
(b)
is or may be joined as a party; or
is or may be liable for or in respect of a judgment, penalty or fine in, or expenses related to, the 
proceeding;
(3)
“expenses” has the meaning set out in the Business Corporations Act.
21.2  Mandatory Indemnification of Directors
Subject  to  the  Business  Corporations  Act,  the  Company  must  indemnify  a  director,  former  director  or  alternate 
director of the Company and his or her heirs and legal personal representatives against all eligible penalties to which 
such person is or may be liable, and the Company must, after the final disposition of an eligible proceeding, pay the 
expenses actually and reasonably incurred by such person in respect of that proceeding. Each director and alternate 
director is deemed to have contracted with the Company on the terms of the indemnity contained in this Article 21.2.
21.3
Permitted Indemnification
Subject to any restrictions in the Business Corporations Act, the Company may indemnify any person.
21.4
Non-Compliance with Business Corporations Act
The failure of a director, alternate director or officer of the Company to comply with the Business Corporations Act 
or these Articles or, if applicable, any former Companies Act or former Articles, does not invalidate any indemnity 
to which he or she is entitled under this Part 21.
21.5
Company May Purchase Insurance
The  Company  may  purchase  and  maintain  insurance  for  the  benefit  of  any  person  (or  his  or  her  heirs  or  legal 
personal representatives) who:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
is or was a director, alternate director, officer, employee or agent of the Company;
is  or  was  a  director,  alternate  director,  officer,  employee  or  agent  of  a  corporation  at  a  time  when  the 
corporation is or was an affiliate of the Company;
at  the  request  of  the  Company,  is  or  was  a  director,  alternate  director,  officer,  employee  or  agent  of  a 
corporation or of a partnership, trust, joint venture or other unincorporated entity;
at the request of the Company, holds or held a position equivalent to that of a director, alternate director or 
officer of a partnership, trust, joint venture or other unincorporated entity;
against any liability incurred by him or her as such director, alternate director, officer, employee or agent or person 
who holds or held such equivalent position.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
22.
22.1
- 29 -
DIVIDENDS
Payment of Dividends Subject to Special Rights
The provisions of this Part 22 are subject to the rights, if any, of shareholders holding shares with special rights as to 
dividends.
22.2
Declaration of Dividends
Subject to the Business Corporations Act, the directors may from time to time declare and authorize payment of 
such dividends as they may consider appropriate.
22.3
No Notice Required
The directors need not give notice to any shareholder of any declaration under Article 22.2.
22.4
Record Date
The  directors  may  set  a  date  as  the  record  date  for  the  purpose  of  determining  shareholders  entitled  to  receive 
payment of a dividend. The record date must not precede the date on which the dividend is to be paid by more than 
two months. If no record date is set, the record date is 5 p.m. on the date on which the directors pass the resolution 
declaring the dividend.
22.5  Manner of Paying Dividend
A  resolution  declaring  a  dividend  may  direct  payment  of  the  dividend  wholly  or  partly  in  money  or  by  the 
distribution of specific assets or of fully paid shares or of bonds, debentures or other securities of the Company or 
any other corporation, or in any one or more of those ways.
22.6
Settlement of Difficulties
If any difficulty arises in regard to a distribution under Article 22.5, the directors may settle the difficulty as they 
deem advisable, and, in particular, may:
(1)
(2)
set the value for distribution of specific assets;
determine that money in substitution for all or any part of the specific assets to which any shareholders are 
entitled may be paid to any shareholders on the basis of the value so fixed in order to adjust the rights of all 
parties; and
(3)
vest any such specific assets in trustees for the persons entitled to the dividend.
22.7  When Dividend Payable
Any dividend may be made payable on such date as is fixed by the directors.
22.8
Dividends to be Paid in Accordance with Number of Shares
All dividends on shares of any class or series of shares must be declared and paid according to the number of such 
shares held.
22.9
Receipt by Joint Shareholders
If  several  persons  are  joint  shareholders  of  any  share,  any  one  of  them  may  give  an  effective  receipt  for  any 
dividend, bonus or other money payable in respect of the share.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 30 -
22.10  Dividend Bears No Interest
No dividend bears interest against the Company.
22.11  Fractional Dividends
If a dividend to which a shareholder is entitled includes a fraction of the smallest monetary unit of the currency of 
the dividend, that fraction may be disregarded in making payment of the dividend and that payment represents full 
payment of the dividend.
22.12  Payment of Dividends
Any dividend or other distribution payable in money in respect of shares may be paid by cheque, made payable to 
the order of the person to whom it is sent, and mailed to the registered address of the shareholder, or in the case of 
joint  shareholders,  to  the  registered  address  of  the  joint  shareholder  who  is  first  named  on  the  central  securities 
register, or to the person and to the address the shareholder or joint shareholders may direct in writing. The mailing 
of such cheque will, to the extent of the sum represented by the cheque (plus the amount of the tax required by law 
to be deducted), discharge all liability for the dividend unless such cheque is not paid on presentation or the amount 
of tax so deducted is not paid to the appropriate taxing authority.
22.13  Capitalization of Retained Earnings or Surplus
Notwithstanding anything contained in these Articles, the directors may from time to time capitalize any retained 
earnings or surplus of the Company and may from time to time issue, as fully paid, shares or any bonds, debentures 
or other securities of the Company as a dividend representing the retained earnings or surplus so capitalized or any 
part thereof.
23.
23.1
ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND AUDITOR
Recording of Financial Affairs
The  directors  must  cause  adequate  accounting  records  to  be  kept  to  record  properly  the  financial  affairs  and 
condition of the Company and to comply with the Business Corporations Act.
23.2
Inspection of Accounting Records
Unless the directors determine otherwise, or unless otherwise determined by ordinary resolution, no shareholder of 
the Company is entitled to inspect or obtain a copy of any accounting records of the Company.
23.3
Remuneration of Auditor
The directors may set the remuneration of the auditor of the Company.
24.  NOTICES
24.1  Method of Giving Notice
Unless the Business Corporations Act or these Articles provide otherwise, a notice, statement, report or other record 
required or permitted by the Business Corporations Act or these Articles to be sent by or to a person may be sent by 
any one of the following methods:
(1)
mail addressed to the person at the applicable address for that person as follows:
(a)
for a record mailed to a shareholder, the shareholder’s registered address;
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 31 -
(b)
for  a  record  mailed  to  a  director  or  officer,  the  prescribed  address  for  mailing  shown  for  the 
director  or  officer  in  the  records  kept  by  the  Company  or  the  mailing  address  provided  by  the 
recipient for the sending of that record or records of that class;
(c)
in any other case, the mailing address of the intended recipient;
(2)
delivery at the applicable address for that person as follows, addressed to the person:
(a)
(b)
for a record delivered to a shareholder, the shareholder’s registered address;
for a record delivered to a director or officer, the prescribed address for delivery shown for the 
director or  officer  in  the records kept  by  the Company  or  the  delivery address  provided by  the 
recipient for the sending of that record or records of that class;
(c)
in any other case, the delivery address of the intended recipient;
unless the intended recipient is the auditor of the Company, sending the record by fax to the fax number 
provided by the intended recipient for the sending of that record or records of that class;
unless  the  intended  recipient  is  the  auditor  of  the  Company,  sending  the  record  by  e-mail  to  the  e-mail 
address provided by the intended recipient for the sending of that record or records of that class;
physical delivery to the intended recipient.
(3)
(4)
(5)
24.2
Deemed Receipt
A notice, statement, report or other record that is:
(1)
(2)
(3)
mailed to a person by ordinary mail to the applicable address for that person referred to in Article 24.1 is 
deemed to be received by the person to whom it was mailed on the day (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
excepted) following the date of mailing;
faxed to a person to the fax number provided by that person referred to in Article 24.1 is deemed to be 
received by the person to whom it was faxed on the day it was faxed; and
e-mailed to a person to the e-mail address provided by that person referred to in Article 24.1 is deemed to 
be received by the person to whom it was e-mailed on the day it was e-mailed.
24.3
Certificate of Sending
A certificate signed by the secretary, if any, or other officer of the Company or of any other corporation acting in 
that capacity on behalf of the Company stating that a notice, statement, report or other record was sent in accordance 
with Article 24.1 is conclusive evidence of that fact.
24.4
Notice to Joint Shareholders
A notice, statement, report or other record may be provided by the Company to the joint shareholders of a share by 
providing such record to the joint shareholder first named in the central securities register in respect of the share.
24.5
Notice to Legal Personal Representatives and Trustees
A notice, statement, report or other record may be provided by the Company to the persons entitled to a share in 
consequence of the death, bankruptcy or incapacity of a shareholder by:
(1)
mailing the record, addressed to them:
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 32 -
(a)
(b)
by  name,  by  the  title  of  the  legal  personal  representative  of  the  deceased  or  incapacitated 
shareholder, by the title of trustee of the bankrupt shareholder or by any similar description; and
at the address, if any, supplied to the Company for that purpose by the persons claiming to be so 
entitled; or
(2)
if an address referred to in paragraph (1)(b) has not been supplied to the Company, by giving the notice in a 
manner in which it might have been given if the death, bankruptcy or incapacity had not occurred.
24.6
Undelivered Notices
If  on  two  consecutive  occasions,  a  notice,  statement,  report  or  other  record  is  sent  to  a  shareholder  pursuant  to 
Article 24.1 and on each of those occasions any such record is returned because the shareholder cannot be located, 
the Company shall not be required to send any further records to the shareholder until the shareholder informs the 
Company in writing of his or her new address.
25.
SEAL
25.1  Who May Attest Seal
Except  as  provided  in  Articles  25.2  and  25.3,  the  Company’s  seal,  if  any,  must  not  be  impressed  on  any  record 
except when that impression is attested by the signatures of:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
any two directors;
any officer, together with any director;
if the Company only has one director, that director; or
any one or more directors or officers or persons as may be determined by the directors.
25.2
Sealing Copies
For the purpose of certifying under seal a certificate of incumbency of the directors or officers of the Company or a 
true copy of any resolution or other document, despite Article 25.1, the impression of the seal may be attested by the 
signature of any director or officer or the signature of any other person as may be determined by the directors.
25.3  Mechanical Reproduction of Seal
The directors may authorize the seal to be impressed by third parties on share certificates or bonds, debentures or 
other  securities  of  the  Company  as  they  may  determine  appropriate  from  time  to  time.  To  enable  the  seal  to  be 
impressed on any share certificates or bonds, debentures or other securities of the Company, whether in definitive or 
interim  form,  on  which  facsimiles  of  any  of  the  signatures  of  the  directors  or  officers  of  the  Company  are,  in 
accordance  with  the  Business  Corporations  Act  or  these  Articles,  printed  or  otherwise  mechanically  reproduced, 
there  may  be  delivered  to  the  person  employed  to  engrave,  lithograph  or  print  such  definitive  or  interim  share 
certificates  or  bonds,  debentures  or  other  securities  one  or  more  unmounted  dies  reproducing  the  seal  and  such 
persons as are authorized under Article 25.1 to attest the Company’s seal may in writing authorize such person to 
cause the seal to be impressed on such definitive or interim share certificates or bonds, debentures or other securities 
by the use of such dies. Share certificates or bonds, debentures or other securities to which the seal has been so 
impressed are for all purposes deemed to be under and to bear the seal impressed on them.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 33 -
26.
PROHIBITIONS
26.1
Definitions
In this Part 26:
(1)
(2)
“security” has the meaning assigned in the Securities Act (British Columbia);
“transfer restricted security” means:
(a)
(b)
(c)
a share of the Company;
a security of the Company convertible into shares of the Company;
any other security of the Company which must be subject to restrictions on transfer in order for the 
Company  to  satisfy  the  requirement  for  restrictions  on  transfer  under  the  “private  issuer” 
exemption  of  Canadian  securities  legislation  or  under  any  other  exemption  from  prospectus  or 
registration  requirements  of  Canadian  securities  legislation  similar  in  scope  and  purpose  to  the 
“private issuer” exemption.
26.2
Application
Article 26.3 does not apply to the Company if and for so long as it is a public company or a pre-existing reporting 
company which has the Statutory Reporting Company Provisions as part of these Articles or to which the Statutory 
Reporting Company Provisions apply.
26.3
(1)
(2)
(3)
27.
Shareholder Limit; Consent Required for Transfer of Shares; No Distribution to Public
The number of shareholders shall be limited to 50, not including persons who are in the employment of the 
Company and persons, who, having been formerly in the employment of the Company, were, while in that 
employment,  and  have  continued  after  the  termination  of  that  employment  to  be,  shareholders  of  the 
Company, two or more persons holding one or more shares jointly being counted as a single shareholder.
No  share  or  other  transfer  restricted  security  may  be  sold,  transferred  or  otherwise  disposed  of  except 
(i) with the consent of the board of directors, to be expressed either by a resolution passed at a meeting of 
the board of directors or by an instrument or instruments in writing signed by all the directors, or (ii) with 
the consent of the shareholders, to be expressed either by a resolution passed at the meeting of shareholders 
or by an instrument or instruments in writing signed by all the shareholders.
Any distribution of securities of the Company to the public or any invitation to the public to subscribe for 
securities of the Company shall be prohibited. 
SPECIAL RIGHTS OR RESTRICTIONS ATTACHING TO THE COMMON SHARES AND THE 
CLASS A REDEEMABLE PREFERRED SHARES
The special rights or restrictions attaching to each class of shares of the Company shall be as follows:
Common Shares
27.1
Dividends
Subject to the rights of the holders of any class of shares of the Company entitled to receive dividends in priority to 
or ratably with the holders of the Common Shares, the holders of the Common Shares shall be entitled to receive 
dividends if, as and when declared by the board of directors out of the assets of the Company properly available for 
the payment of dividends of such amounts and payable in such manner as the board of directors may from time to 
time determine.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 34 -
27.2
Voting Rights
The  holders  of  the  Common  Shares  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  notice  of  and  to  attend  any  meeting  of  the 
shareholders  of  the  Company  and  shall  be  entitled  to  one  vote  in  respect  of  each  Common  Share  held  at  such 
meetings, except a meeting of holders of a particular class or series of shares other than the Common Shares who are 
entitled to vote separately as a class or series at such meeting.
27.3
Liquidation, Dissolution or Winding-Up
In the event of the liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Company or any other distribution of the property or 
assets of the Company among its shareholders for the purpose of winding-up its affairs, the holders of the Common 
Shares shall, subject to the rights of the holders of any other class of shares of the Company entitled to receive the 
property or assets of the Company upon such distribution in priority to or ratably with the holders of the Common 
Shares, be entitled to receive the remaining property and assets of the Company.
Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares
27.4
Redemption
Subject  to  the  requirements  of  the  Business  Corporations  Act,  the  Company  shall,  as  of  the  time  immediately 
following the amalgamation forming the Company and at the instance, and in the discretion, of the Company from 
time  to  time  thereafter  (the  "Time  of  Redemption"),  redeem  the  Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Shares  in 
accordance  with  the  following  provisions  of  this  section  27.4.  Except  as  hereinafter  provided  or  as  otherwise 
determined by the Company, no notice of redemption or other act or formality on the part of the Company shall be 
required to call the Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares for redemption.
Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Shares,  other  than  those  redeemed  as  of  the  time  immediately  following  the 
amalgamation forming the Company may be redeemed at any time and from time to time by one or more resolutions 
(a "Redemption Resolution") of the board of directors, whether made before or after the issuance or creation of the 
Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares to be redeemed, stating that the Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares set out 
in  the  Redemption Resolution  shall  be  redeemed,  and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  redeemed  for  the 
Redemption Amount  (as  defined  below)  in  the  manner  and  at  the  time  specified  herein  and  in  the 
Redemption Resolution.
At or before each Time of Redemption, the Company shall deliver or cause to be delivered to  (the "Depositary"), 
at its principal office in the [City of Toronto, Province of Ontario], $ (the "Redemption Amount") in respect of 
each Class A Redeemable Preferred Share to be redeemed. Delivery of the aggregate Redemption Amount in such a 
manner  shall  be  a  full  and  complete  discharge  of  the  Company's  obligation  to  deliver  the  aggregate 
Redemption Amount to the holders of Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares.
From and after the Time of Redemption, (i) the Depositary shall pay and deliver or cause to be paid and delivered to 
the order of the respective holders of the Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares, by way of cheque, on presentation 
and  surrender  at  the  principal  office  of  the  Depositary  in  the  [City  of  Toronto,  Province  of  Ontario],  of  the 
certificate  representing  the  common  shares  in  the  share  capital  of  the  Company's  predecessor,  Alloycorp  Mining 
Inc.,  which  were  exchanged  for  Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Shares  upon  the  amalgamation  or  such  other 
documents as the Depositary may, in its discretion, consider acceptable, the total Redemption Amount payable and 
deliverable to such holders, respectively, and (ii) the holders of Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares shall not be 
entitled to exercise any of the rights of shareholders in respect thereof except to receive the Redemption Amount 
therefor, provided that if satisfaction of the Redemption Amount for any Class A Redeemable Preferred Share is not 
duly made by or on behalf of the Company in accordance with the provisions hereof, then the rights of such holders 
shall remain unaffected. Under no circumstances will interest on the Redemption Amount be paid by the Company 
whether as a result of any delay in paying the Redemption Amount or otherwise.
From  the  Time  of  Redemption,  each  Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Share  in  respect  of  which  deposit  of  the 
Redemption Amount  is  made  shall  be  deemed  to  be  redeemed  and  cancelled,  the  Company  shall  be  fully  and 
completely discharged from its obligations with respect to the payment of the Redemption Amount to such holders 
of  Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Shares,  and  the  rights  of  such  holders  shall  be  limited  to  receiving  the
38784|2762925_1|MBASA
- 35 -
Redemption Amount payable to them on presentation and surrender of the said certificates held by them or other 
documents respectively as specified above. Subject to the requirements of applicable law with respect to unclaimed 
property, if the Redemption Amount has not been fully claimed and paid in accordance with the provisions hereof 
within  six  years  of 
the 
Redemption Amount, including without limitation all interest thereon, shall be forfeited to the Company and any 
person who surrenders certificates after the sixth anniversary of the effective time of such amalgamation application 
will not be entitled to the Redemption Amount or other compensation.
the  amalgamation  application  forming
the  effective  date  of
the  Company,
27.5
Priority
The  Common  Shares  shall  rank  junior  to  the  Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Shares  and  shall  be  subject  in  all 
respects to the rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions attaching to the Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares.
27.6
Dividends
The holders of the Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares shall not be entitled to receive any dividends thereon.
27.7
Voting Rights
Except as otherwise provided in the Business Corporations Act, the holders of the Class A Redeemable Preferred 
Shares  shall  not  be  entitled  to  receive  notice  of,  to  attend  or  to  vote  at  any  meeting  of  the  shareholders  of  the 
Company.
27.8
Liquidation, Dissolution or Winding-Up
In the event of the liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Company or any other distribution of the property or 
assets  of  the  Company  among  its  shareholders  for  the  purpose  of  winding-up  its  affairs,  and  subject  to  the 
extinguishment  of  the  rights  of  holders  of  Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Shares  upon  satisfaction  of  the 
Redemption Amount in respect of each Class A Redeemable Preferred Share, the holders of Class A Redeemable 
Preferred Shares shall be entitled to receive and the Company shall pay to such holders, before any amount shall be 
paid or any property or assets of the Company shall be distributed to the holders of Common Shares or any other 
class of shares ranking junior to the Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares as to such entitlement, an amount equal to 
the  Redemption Amount  for  each  Class A  Redeemable  Preferred  Share  held  by  them  respectively  and  no  more. 
After payment to the holders of the Class A Redeemable Preferred Shares of the amounts so payable to them as 
hereinbefore provided, they shall not be entitled to share in any further distribution of the property or assets of the 
Company.
38784|2762925_1|MBASA