
10SB12G 1 c10sb12g.htm FORM 10-SB12G
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-SB
GENERAL FORM FOR REGISTRATION OF SECURITIES
OF SMALL BUSINESS ISSUERS
Under Section 12(b) or 12 (g) of The Securities Exchange Act of 1934
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(Name of Small Business Issuer in its charter
Nevada
47-0951158
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employee Identification No.)
10655 NE 4th Street Suite 400, Bellevue, WA
(Address of principal executive offices)
Issuer's telephone number  (  604  )            261-6100          
 
Securities to be registered under Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
to be so registered
98004
(Zip Code)
Name of each exchange on which
each class is to be registered
Securities to be registered under Section 12(g) of the Act:
60,000,000 shares of common stock, $.001 par value
(Title of Class)
(Title of Class)
Table of Contents
PART I
Item 1.
Item 2.
Item 3.
Item 4.
Description of Business
Management's Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation
Description of Property
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
Page
3
12
18
18
19
Item 5.
Item 6.
Item 7.
Item 8.
Item 1.
Item 2.
Item 3.
Item 4.
Item 5.
Item 1.
Item 2.
Item 1.
Item 2.
Directors and Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons
Executive Compensation
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
Description of Securities
PART II
Market Price of and Dividends on the Registrant's Common Equity and Related
Stockholder Matters
Legal Proceedings
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
Indemnification of Directors and Officers
PART F/S
Audited Financial Statements - Year Ended March 31, 2005
Unaudited Financial Statements - Six Months Ended September 30, 2005
Index to Exhibits
Description of Exhibits
PART III
SIGNATURES
All $ amounts in $USD, unless stated otherwise.
Signatures
19
22
23
24
26
27
27
27
28
29
45
52
52
52
Page 2
PART I
Item 1.  Description of Business
Business Development
Corvair Resources Inc. is an exploration stage company engaged in the exploration of our mineral claims.  The
Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on March 9, 2004.  We maintain our statutory registered agent's
office at 1000 East William Street, Suite 204, Carson City, Nevada, and our business office is located at 10655 NE
4th Street, Suite 400, Bellevue, WA, 98004.  Our telephone number is (604) 261-6100 and our fax number is (604)
608-9185.
Our Business
We explore our mineral claims in Canada for the presence of gold.  Activities to date have consisted solely of the
staking of mining claims.  As yet, we have not yet developed any mining properties into a producing mine, nor have
we earned revenue from any of the mineral claims.  Exploration will be required before a final evaluation as to the
economic feasibility is determined.  There is no assurance that a commercially viable gold deposit exists on our
property.  We have mineral claims which we may explore.  The mineral claims, Amber1 and Amber2, are located near
the city of Vernon, British Columbia, Canada.  None of our mineral claims contain a known commercially viable
deposit suitable for mining.
Our management does not have any technical training in the field of mineral exploration and is inexperienced
in exploration, as well as starting and operating a mine.  Due to the lack of direct training and experience in
these areas, our management may not be fully aware of many of the specific requirements related to working
within the mining industry.  In addition, we will also have to rely on the expertise and services of qualified
personnel for the surveying, exploration, and excavation of our mineral claims.  If we are unable to contract
such services at reasonable costs, we may have to suspend or cease operations.  Decisions and choices
made by our management due to their inexperience in this industry may not take into account standard
engineering or managerial approaches that mineral exploration companies commonly use.  Consequently,
our operations, earnings and ultimate financial success could suffer irreparable harm.
Our plan of operation is to conduct mineral exploration on our two Amber mineral claims in order to determine if our
mineral claims contain any commercially viable gold reserves.  Corvair has developed a four phase exploration
program to explore our mineral claims for gold deposits (please see "Our Proposed Exploration Program" on page 8
for more information on our four phase exploration program).  We have not started Phase 1 and do not plan to start
until we obtain additional capital.  We will not make a decision whether to proceed to Phase 2 until completion of
Phase 1 and upon analysis of the results of Phase 1.  Even if we complete our current four phase exploration program
and even if we are successful in identifying a mineral deposit, we will have to spend substantial funds on further
drilling and engineering studies before we can determine if we have a commercially viable deposit or a deposit that
can be defined as a reserve.  A reserve is that part of a mineral deposit which could be economically and legally
extracted or produced at the time of the reserve determination.
The success of Corvair Resources is critically dependent upon finding a gold deposit.  If we don't find a gold deposit
or we cannot remove this deposit, either because we do not have the money to do it or because it is not economically
feasible to do it, we will cease operations and you will lose your investment.  Mineralized material or deposit is a
mineralized body which has been delineated by appropriate drilling and/or underground sampling to support a sufficient
tonnage and average grade of metal(s).  Under SEC standards, such a deposit does not qualify as a reserve until a
comprehensive evaluation, based upon unit cost, tonnage, grade, price, recoveries costs and other factors, concludes
economic feasibility.
Page 3
The likelihood of finding any reserves or mineral deposits which could be economically and legally extracted
or produced, on any of our mineral claims is extremely remote.  In all probability our mineral claims do not
contain any reserves.  Any funds spent on exploration will probably be lost.
Province of British Columbia, Canada
Corvair has not begun Phase 1 of our exploration program as the Company does not have enough capital to complete
Phase 1 and thus must first raise additional capital in order to proceed (please see "Our Proposed Exploration
Program" on page 8 for details regarding Phase 1 of our exploration program).  We will need to secure additional
funding from a private placement or loans.  At the present time, we have not made any plans to raise additional
money and there is no assurance that we would be able to raise additional money in the future.  If we cannot raise
additional money to complete Phase 1, we will have to suspend our exploration program.  Corvair's investment capital
has consisted entirely of advances and equity investments by our president.  The timing of such capital infusions was
dependent on our requirements and the economic climate.  We anticipate having to raise additional funds by equity
issuance in the next several years, as we do not expect to generate material revenue from mining operations, or to
achieve self-sustaining commercial mining operations for some time.  The Company plans to fund its future
operations through additional sales of its unregistered common stock.  There can be no assurance the Company will
be successful in its efforts to raise equity.
Page 4
Our cash balance as of December 15, 2005 was $12,030.  The Company maintains its cash balances in an account
at one financial institution, Sterling Savings Bank.  The balances are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation up to $100,000.  As of December 15, 2005, there were no uninsured cash balances.
Corvair's entire property base consists of undeveloped raw land.  Exploration and surveying has not yet been initiated,
and to our knowledge, the property has never been mined.  Further exploration is essential to determine what amount
of minerals, if any, exist on our mineral claims and, if any minerals which are found can be economically extracted
and profitably processed.
We must explore for and find a gold deposit and determine if it is economically feasible to remove the mineral
reserves.  Economically feasible means that the costs associated with the removal of the gold deposit will not exceed
the price at which we can sell the mineralized material.  We do not claim to have any minerals or reserves whatsoever
at this time on any of our mineral claims.
All Canadian lands and minerals which have not been granted to private persons are owned by either the federal or
provincial governments in the name of Her Majesty.  Ungranted minerals are commonly known as Crown minerals. 
Ownership rights to Crown minerals are vested by the Canadian Constitution in the province where the minerals are
located.  In the case of the Company's property, that is the province of British Columbia.  In the 19th century the
practice of reserving the minerals from fee simple Crown grants was established.  Legislation now ensures that
minerals are reserved from Crown land dispositions.  The result is that the Crown is the largest mineral owner in
Canada, both as the fee simple owner of Crown lands and through mineral reservations in Crown grants.  Most
privately held mineral titles are acquired directly from the Crown.  The Company's two mineral claims, the Amber1 and
Amber2 mineral claims, are examples of such acquisitions.  Accordingly, fee simple title to the Company's properties
resides with the Crown.  The Company's claims are mining leases issued pursuant to the British Columbia Mineral
Act.  The lessee has exclusive rights to mine and recover all of the minerals contained within the surface boundaries
of the lease continued vertically downward.
According to the Mineral Tenure Act of British Columbia, a mineral claim may be held for one year and thereafter from
year to year.  In order to maintain a mineral lease the holder of the lease must, on or before the anniversary date,
spend $100 CAD, or approximately $85 USD, each year per unit during the first three 1 year terms; and $200 CAD, or
approximately $170 USD, each year per unit for subsequent 1 year terms.  The required expenditure can be in the
form of expenditures on exploration or can be in the form of a direct payment to the Province of British Columbia.  If in
any year, the required exploration work expenditure is not completed and filed with the Province prior to the lease
expiry date, or if a payment is not made to the Province of British Columbia in lieu of the required work prior to the
lease expiry date, the mineral claims will lapse.  A maximum of ten years of work credit may be filed on a claim.
Corvair's two mineral leases each consist of approximately 13 units for a total of 26 units.  The Amber1 and Amber2
mineral claims expire on March 12, 2006.  The extension of these two mineral claims for another 1 year period
therefore requires an expenditure of approximately $2,600 CAD or approximately $2,210 USD for exploration work,
plus a payment of a recording fee for each claim, or a direct payment of the same amount to the Province of British
Columbia.
There is no insurance covering the property and we believe that no insurance is necessary since the property is
unimproved and contains no buildings or improvements.  The property is unencumbered and there are no competitive
conditions which affect the property.  To date we have not performed any work on the property and we cannot
guarantee that a commercially viable mineral deposit or reserve exists in the property until exploration is done and a
comprehensive evaluation concludes economic feasibility, based on prevailing and projected mineral prices.
The Amber1 and Amber2 Mineral Claims
Page 5
The Amber1 and Amber2 mineral claims are not producing properties.  They are all currently dormant.  No revenue
from mining operations has ever been generated from any of these claims.
The Amber1 and Amber2 mineral claims are adjoining claims, both rectangular in shape and each measure
approximately 3.6 kilometers by 0.9 kilometers.  The combined total claim area of the Amber claims is approximately
6.6 square kilometers.
The Amber1 mineral claim was originally staked in March 2004 and subsequently re-registered for another year in
March 2005.  The Amber2 mineral claim was registered in March 2005.  The Amber mineral claims are located within
the Vernon Mining District in British Columbia, Canada.  The following table shows the current registration details:
Claim Name
Tenure Number
Area
(hectares)
Record Date
Expiry Date
Amber1
Amber2
508844
508845
329.693
329.635
03/12/2005
03/12/2005
03/12/2006
03/12/2006
The British Columbia Mineral Tenure Act generally requires all claimholders to be Canadian residents or Canadian
corporations amongst other conditions.  We believe the additional costs of incorporating a Canadian subsidiary and
the additional associated fees and administrative costs are unwarranted at this time.  In order to minimize fees, the
Amber claims are registered with the Province of British Columbia in the name of Terry G. Cook, Corvair's President,
and are held in trust for Corvair Resources Inc. by Mr. Cook.  A Declaration of Trust, executed by Mr. Cook on March
12, 2005, declares that he holds the mineral claims in trust for the Company and will deliver full title on demand to
Corvair Resources Inc. for as long as the claims are in good standing with the Province of British Columbia.  The
Declaration of Trust also specifies that Mr. Cook has no interest in the mineral claims other than that of a bare
trustee.  All rights in respect of the mineral claims and any distributions whether income or capital and whether in
cash or otherwise, do not in any manner belong to Mr. Cook but are the property of Corvair Resources Inc.  In the
event that we find a gold deposit and this deposit can be economically extracted, we intend to form a wholly owned
British Columbia subsidiary corporation.  Mr. Cook will then convey title to the Amber claims to the wholly owned
subsidiary corporation.
Amber1 (Tenure # 508844) and Amber2 (Tenure # 508845) Mineral Claim Location Map
Location and Access
Page 6
The Amber1 and Amber2 mineral claims are located approximately 20 kilometers northwest of the city of Vernon,
B.C., Canada.  The claims are centered at UTM coordinates zone 11, Easting 324408.085, and Northing 5584157.603
(50 degrees, 22 minutes, 59 seconds North and 119 degrees, 28 minutes, 12 seconds West).
The claims can be accessed by vehicle by traveling north from Vernon on Highway 97 to Westside Road; south to Six
Mile Creek Road, north to McGregor Forest Road and north on Pinus Lake Forest Road.  The claims are located at
the junction of the Pinus Lake Forest Road and the bridge over Equesis Creek.
Topography and Vegetation
Location Map
The properties cover the steep (average 30-degree slope) west facing slope of Equesis Creek Valley, rising from an
elevation of 670 meters on the southeast to 1280 meters in the northeast following a gentle ridge marking Banks
Creek.
Most of the two mineral claims is forested with poplar and alder trees along the steep talus slopes and lower part of
the property merging into widely spaced mature pine and fir trees in the center and cedar and birch trees over the
eastern boundary.
Summary of History of the Property
Between 1895 and 1899, prospecting took place over the property identifying a quartz vein hosting free-milling native
gold.  By 1899 a 55 meter tunnel had been constructed on the property.  The area was prospected intermittently in the
late 1890's.
Regional Geology
Page 7
In this region,  Devonian to Triassic sedimentary and volcanic rocks of the Harper Ranch Group are unconformably
overlain by Upper Triassic to Lower Jurassic Nicola Group sedimentary and volcanic rocks.  These units are intruded
by Middle Jurassic granitic rocks of the informally named Terrace Creek batholith.  Eocene Penticton Group or
Kamloops Group volcanic rocks overlie the sedimentary rocks.
The area of the claims is underlain by wedges of Harper Ranch limestone of the Upper Triassic to Lower Triassic
Slocan and Nicola Groups.
West and north of the property late Jurassic Valhalla Plutons of granodiorite, granite and minor diorite and quartz
diorite cut the stratigraphy.  The stratigraphy to the north and east is cut by small plugs of granite, granodiorite and
quartz monzonite associated with the Cretaceous Salmon Arm Stock.
Property Geology
Much of the property has a soil cover with outcrops occupying only 10% of the claim.
The predominate assemblage appears to the clastics and phyillite of the Harper Ranch Group in a mixed assemblage
of siltstone and argillite.
Part of the claim features a fractured northwest / southeast striking quartz vein/shear up to 4.3 meters wide.
Bedding foliation and faulting are predominately strike northwest / southeast.  A weak later foliation and fracturing can
be seen orientated at right angles to the above at northeast / southwest.
Mineralization
Quartz veining can be seen on most of the claim with the predominate target being a major shear zone characterized
by a large quartz vein that pinches and swells to over 4.5 meters mineralized with minor (< 1%) pyrite, limonite,
chalcopyrite, sphalerite, and galena.
Another set of quartz veining is seen striking northeast / southwest and are better mineralized with up to 10% pyrite
but are overall thinner, being less than 50 centimeters in width.
Our Proposed Exploration Program
The Company has planned it's exploration program to be carried out in four successive phases.  Each successive
exploration phase is more extensive and more costly to implement.  In addition, the decision to proceed with each
successive phase will be increasingly dependent upon positive results from previous phases.  Management will
review the results of each phase before proceeding to the next phase.  The Company has not started Phase 1 and
does not, at this time, have enough cash to complete Phase 1.  The Company will require financing in order to start
and complete its exploration program,  This four-phase program will enable the Company to begin its exploration
program with smaller cash requirements.  Positive results from each successive phase will be conducive to obtaining
any additional financing necessary to proceed to the next phase.
Page 8
The phased program of exploration activities would have a goal of generating and prioritizing targets to test by
trenching or drilling. The first three phases of exploration involve activities such as geological mapping, soil sampling,
grid establishment and  geophysical surveys and these activities do not involve ground disturbance, and therefore do
not require work permits.  Any follow-up trenching and/or drilling (Phase 4) will require permits, applications and
posting of bond(s).
Phase 1
Phase 1 will begin with a review of all available data from exploration that has taken place on the Amber claims and
on areas around it.  This review would also include the numerous provincial and federal government publications that
attempted to define the geological framework of the area.  A short field program, or physical assessment, of the
Amber mineral claims by a geologist will also be conducted to become familiar with the overall geological picture. 
Areas of interest on the mineral claims that were identified by the review of available data will be examined along with
basic geological mapping and rock sampling.  This work is also intended to identify any visible rock exposures and
rock outcrops that may warrant further investigation and to substantiate previous geological mapping. The field work
will also examine logistic issues for the mineral claims including physical access to the different areas of the mineral
claims and to facilitate the planning of the Phase 2 work program.  Phase 1 is estimated to cost $10,000 and will take
a approximately 2 months to complete.
Phase 2
The second phase will be a longer field program similar to Phase 1 consisting of detailed geological mapping,
prospecting and rock and soil sampling in areas of interest.  Phase 2 is estimated to cost $20,000 and will take a
approximately 2 months to complete.
Phase 3
Phase 3 will consist of grid controlled geochemical and geophysical surveys as required to cover specific areas of
interest as identified in Phase 2. Phase 3 is intended to identify the geological environment underlying the mineral
claims enabling a detailed mineralization map to be produced.  Phase 3 will also include a geological report with an
independent analysis and recommendations on the mineral claims. A budget of $55,000 is estimated for Phase 3 and
is estimated to take approximately 3 months.
Phase 4
Subject to positive results from earlier exploratory work, Phase 4 would entail mechanical trenching and/or diamond
drilling.  This phase would require the contracting of mining excavation or drilling companies to perform this work.
Costs for this phase of the exploration program have not been estimated by the Company.  Costs will depend on
recommendations from Phase 3, which cannot be estimated at this time.
Exploration Program Cost Estimates
The breakdown of estimated times and dollars for each phase was made by Corvair's management.
We do not intend to interest other companies in the property if we find mineral reserves.  We intend to try to develop
the reserves ourselves.  If we are unable to complete any phase of exploration because we do not have enough
money, we will cease operations until we raise more money.  If we cannot or do not raise more money, we will cease
operations.
Page 9
We cannot provide you with a more detailed discussion of how our exploration program will work and what we expect
will be our likelihood of success.  That is because we have a piece of raw land and we intend to look for gold.  We
may or may not find any gold.  It is impossible to predict the likelihood of such an event at this stage of Corvair's
development.
We will not move on to a subsequent phase until the phase we are working on is completed.  We do not have any plan
to take the Company from phase 2 exploration to revenue generation as it is impossible to project revenue generation
at this stage.
Competitive Environment
The gold mining industry is fragmented.  We compete with other exploration companies looking for gold deposits.  We
are an infinitely small participant in the gold mining market.  However, while we compete with other exploration
companies, there is no competition for the exploration or removal of mineral from the Amber claims.
We hold no material patents, licenses, franchises or concessions.
Codes & Regulations
Our mineral exploration program is subject to the Canadian Mineral Tenure Act Regulation.  This act sets forth rules
for locating claims, posting claims, working claims and reporting work performed.
We are also subject to the British Columbia Mineral Exploration Code which tells us how and where we can explore for
minerals.  We must comply with these laws to operate our business.  Compliance with these rules and regulations will
not adversely affect Corvair's operations but may have a significant impact on the costs of carrying out our
exploration program.
Environmental Legislation
As a mineral exploration company, Corvair is subject to the Health, Safety and Reclamation Code for Mines in British
Columbia.  This code deals with environmental matters relating to the exploration and development of mining
properties and aims to protect the environment through a series of regulations affecting health and safety,
archaeological sites and exploration access.
Corvair is responsible for providing a safe working environment, to not disrupt archaeological sites, and to conduct its
activities in a manner that minimizes unnecessary damage to the property.
To comply with environmental laws, Corvair will secure all necessary permits prior to commencing exploration.  If
development is warranted on the property, we will file final plans of operation before we start any mining operations. 
We anticipate no discharge of water into active stream, creek, river, lake or any other body of water regulated by
environmental law or regulation.  No endangered species will be disturbed.  Restoration of the disturbed land will be
completed according to law.  All holes, pits and shafts will be sealed upon abandonment of the property.  It is difficult
to estimate the cost of compliance with environmental laws since the full nature and extent of our proposed activities
cannot be determined until we start our operations and know what that will involve from an environmental standpoint.
Page 10
Inspectors for the B.C. Mining Division determine on a case-by-case basis the amount of any bond or other form of
security that an exploration company must put up to ensure compliance with government remediation requirements. 
Remediation refers to the process of returning the lands to their original state.  It is an important and potentially costly
responsibility.  If any of Corvair's mineral claims are abandoned subsequent to any physical activity (such as
trenching) taking place, then by the terms of the Mineral Tenure Act of British Columbia, Corvair is responsible for
remediation of the lands involved.
While the cost of any bond required cannot be precisely estimated, until a detailed work program is finalized and
reviewed by the Mining Division, the history of bonding requirements in the Vernon Mining Division would suggest that
if government inspectors required the posting of a bond, the cost of such a bond would likely be a minimum of $900
up to a maximum of $3,500.  The time and costs involved in having the Company's mineral claims inspected by
inspectors for the B.C. Mining Division and a rough estimate of the cost of a bond that might have to be posted forms
part of our estimate of time and costs for our exploration program.
Corvair is in compliance with the Act and will continue to comply with the Act in the future.  We believe that
compliance with the Act will not adversely affect our business operations but may represent a significant part of our
cost structure.
Employees
Corvair is presently managed by Terry G. Cook, our President and sole director.  Mr. Cook does not have an
employment agreement with us.  He devotes approximately 5% of his time to our operations.  At present, we have no
full or part-time employees.  Corvair does not have pension, health, annuity, insurance, stock options, profit sharing or
similar benefit plans; however, we may adopt such plans in the future.  We intend to use the services of
subcontractors for manual labor exploration work on our mineral claims.  There are presently no personal benefits
available to any employees.
Shareholder Communication
We will be required to file reports with the SEC under section 15(d) of the Securities Act following completion of this
registration.  The reports we will be required to file are Forms 10-KSB, 10-QSB, and 8-K.  The reports will be filed
electronically.  Corvair will not be required to furnish you with an annual report and will not be voluntarily sending an
annual report.  Our annual reports will include audited financial statements.  Shareholders wishing to receive an annual
report may request one by contacting our principal executive offices.
The SEC also maintains an Internet site that will contain copies of the reports we file electronically.  The address for
the SEC website is www.sec.gov.  Shareholders may also read copies of any materials we file with the SEC at the
SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549, and may obtain information on the
operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330.
Page 11
Item 2.  Management's Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation
The information in this Management's Discussion is current as of December 16, 2005.
Forward-looking Statements
Some discussions in this filing may contain forward-looking statements and be prospective in nature.  Such forward-
looking statements reflect management's beliefs and assumptions and are based on information currently available to
management.  Forward-looking statements are statements that express our goals, beliefs, plans, current expectations
or other statements regarding matters that are not historical facts.  Forward-looking statements are often identified by
words such as "believes", "anticipates", "expects", "estimates" and similar expressions, or words which, by their
nature, refer to future events.  The forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and
other factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in such statements.
Such factors include, among others, the following:  local, national and international general economic and market
conditions; the ability of the Company to attract equity capital; the ability of the Company to implement our proposed
exploration program and the success thereof; existing government regulations and changes in, or the failure to comply
with, government regulations; changes in business strategy or development plans; the ability to attract and retain
qualified personnel; and other factors referenced in this and previous filings.
Given these uncertainties, readers of this Form 10-SB are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-
looking statements.  The Company disclaims any obligation to update any such factors or to publicly release the
results of any revisions to any of the forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect future events or
developments.
Overview
Corvair Resources Inc. is an exploration stage company engaged in the exploration of our mineral claims for gold.  We
were incorporated on March 9, 2004 in the State of Nevada.  In March 2004, we staked the Amber1 mineral claim in
the Vernon Mining District of British Columbia, Canada.  In March 2005, we re-registered the Amber1 mineral claim to
retain our mineral rights for this property and registered the Amber2 mineral claim on adjacent land immediately north
of Amber1.  Our plan of operation is to explore these mineral claims for gold reserves by implementing a four phase
exploration program.
We have not earned any revenue to date and have limited capital.  We will need to raise additional capital within the
next 12 months to continue operations and to implement phase one of our exploration program.
The acquisition of mining claims within the mining industry is intensely competitive.  We are a very small company
with limited resources.  Many mining companies have significantly more resources to evaluate and acquire mineral
claims.  However, with respect to our claims, there is no competition for minerals on our mineral claims.
Plan of Operation
Page 12
Our plan of operation is to conduct mineral exploration on our two Amber mineral claims in order to determine if our
mineral claims contain any commercially viable gold reserves.  In consultation with Mr. William E. Lumley, B. Sc.,
Corvair has developed a four phase exploration program to explore our mineral claims for gold deposits.  We have not
started phase 1 and do not plan to start until we obtain additional capital.  Neither of our two mineral claims contain
any known commercially viable gold reserves.
William Lumley assisted Corvair in the research and staking of our mineral claims, and with developing our four phase
exploration program.  Mr. Lumley is a consulting geologist residing in Vancouver, B.C., Canada and has been
practicing his profession for the past 25 years in Canada, United States and internationally.  Mr. Lumley graduated
from the University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Geology.  The Company has
no contractual arrangement with Mr. Lumley, professional geologist.  Rather, Mr. Lumley performs consulting services
for the Company, if, as and when required, and is compensated in hourly fees, paid in cash.
Phase 1 will begin with a review of all available data from exploration that has taken place on the Amber claims and
on areas around it.  A short field program, or physical assessment, of the Amber mineral claims by our geologist will
also be conducted to become familiar with the overall geological picture.  Areas of interest on the mineral claims that
were identified by the review of available data will be examined along with basic geological mapping and rock
sampling.  The field work is also intended to identify any visible rock exposures and rock outcrops that may warrant
further investigation and to substantiate previous geological mapping. The field work will also examine logistic issues
for the mineral claims including physical access to the different areas of the mineral claims and to facilitate the
planning of the phase two work program.  Phase 1 is estimated to cost $10,000 and will take a approximately 2
months to complete.
The second phase will be longer field program similar to Phase 1 consisting of detailed geological mapping,
prospecting and rock and soil sampling in areas of interest.  Following a thorough analysis of the data collected in
Phase 1 and 2, we will decide if the property warrants proceeding to Phase 3.  Phase 2 is estimated to cost $20,000
and will take a approximately 2 months to complete.
Phase 3 will consist of grid controlled geochemical and geophysical surveys as required to cover specific areas of
interest as identified in Phase 2.  Phase 3 is intended to identify the geological environment underlying the mineral
claims enabling a detailed mineralization map to be produced.  Phase 3 will also include a geological report with an
independent analysis and recommendations on the mineral claims. A budget of $55,000 is estimated for Phase 3 with
exploration work estimated to take approximately 3 months.
Subject to positive results from earlier exploratory work, Phase 4 would entail mechanical trenching and/or diamond
drilling.  This phase would require the contracting of mining excavation or drilling companies to perform this work.
Costs for this phase of the exploration program have not been estimated by the Company.  Costs will depend on
recommendations from Phase 3, which cannot be estimated at this time.
Management will review our exploration program and results with the assistance of mining professionals.  Decisions to
abandon, reduce or expand exploration efforts are based upon many factors including general and specific
assessments of mineral deposits, the likelihood of increasing or decreasing those deposits, land costs, estimates of
future mineral prices, potential extraction methods and costs, the likelihood of positive or negative changes to the
environment, permitting, taxation, labor and capital costs.
Page 13
The Company estimates that it will require $12,000 over the next twelve months to fund its general and administrative
expenses and to retain title to its mining claims for another year and $10,000 to implement phase 1 of its exploration
program for a total cash requirement over the next twelve months of $22,000.  As of December 15, 2005, Corvair had
cash on hand of $12,030.  We do not plan to proceed with phase 1 until we obtain the capital required to complete
phase 1.  We intend to raise cash to fund our general and administrative expenses and to fund our exploration
program by the issuance of our common stock to third party investors.  The Company has not explored any third party
debt financing options or other sources of external financing and does not plan to in the foreseeable future.  Proceeds
from the sale of our stock will be applied first to our general and administrative expense requirements and secondly to
our exploration program.
There is no assurance that we will be able to raise enough money from the sale of stock to third party investors to
implement either our exploration plan or fund our general or administrative expenses for the twelve months.  In the
event that we are not able to raise the required capital to fund our general and administrative expenses for the next
twelve months from the sale of stock to third party investors, we expect that Terry G. Cook, our President will
continue to advance the required funds either in the form of cash advances or by purchase of stock, as he has since
Corvair's inception.  If we cannot obtain the funds required to complete Phase 1, we will have to suspend our
exploration program.  If we are unable to obtain the funds required to pay our general and administrative expenses, we
will have to suspend or cease operations.
We are currently seeking full-reporting status with the U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, so that Corvair may
be in a significantly better position to attract equity capital.  Future equity financing may result in substantial dilution
to purchasers.
We have not generated any revenue and are dependent upon obtaining financing to fund our operating expenses and
to pursue any exploration activities.  For these reasons our auditors stated in their report dated December 15, 2005,
that they have substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
We plan to retain future earnings, if any.  We have very limited resources and do not anticipate paying dividends on
our common stock for the foreseeable future.
As we are an exploration stage company and have no end products, we have not conducted any product research or
product development and have no plans to conduct any product research or product development over the next fiscal
year.
Corvair is presently managed by Terry G. Cook our sole officer and director.  At present, we have no full or part-time
employees and do not foresee any significant changes in the number of employees.  Our plan is to hire outside
consultants or firms to implement our exploration program.  We do not have any plans to purchase any plant or any
significant equipment.
In November 2004, the Board of Directors adopted a Code of Ethics for the Company's Officers and Directors.  A
copy of the Code of Ethics is included as Exhibit 14.1.
On November 14, 2005, the Company appointed Dale Matheson Carr-Hilton Labonte, Chartered Accountants, as their
independent auditors for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2005.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Page 14
Since our inception, the Company has been financed from advances from Terry G. Cook, our President.  At
December 15, 2005, this related party payable was $16,993 compared to $1,923 at our fiscal year end at March 31,
2005 and $0 at March 31, 2004.  This debt is unsecured, accrues no interest and has no fixed terms of repayment. 
On March 24, 2004, Mr. Cook agreed not to demand payment of any of the Company's related party payables until
July 1, 2007.
There are no preliminary agreements or understandings between Corvair Resources and its officers and directors,
affiliates or lending institutions with respect to any loan agreements, other than the related party payable owing to Mr.
Terry G. Cook.
During our first fiscal year ended March 31, 2005, the Company extinguished $1,971 of debt owing to Mr. Terry G.
Cook by issuing 1,971,150 common shares of the Company to Mr. Cook.  For this share issue, we relied on Section
4(2) of the Securities Act because the transaction did not involve a public offering and was therefore exempt from the
registration requirements of the Securities Act.  No underwriters were used, nor were any brokerage commissions paid
in connection with the above share issue.
The following table highlights our recent cash and working capital positions:
Cash
 
Working Capital
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As at
Dec. 15, 2005
12,030 
 
11,530
$
 
$
As at
Mar. 31, 2005
$
 
$
0 
 
(3,500)
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future
effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity,
capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to our stockholders.
Results of Operations
We have not earned any revenues to date.  We do not anticipate earning revenues until such time as we enter into
commercial production of our mineral claims.  We are presently in the exploration stage of our business and we can
provide no assurance that we will discover commercially viable levels of mineral resources on our mineral claims or
that we will enter into further substantial exploration programs or production if such deposits are discovered.
The following table highlights our recent operating results:
Page 15
REVENUE
 
EXPENSES
   General and 
      administrative
      expenses
   Property expenses
 
NET (LOSS)
Variation in Operating Results
For the
Ended
Six Months
Sep. 30, 2005
$
$
$
$
0
25 
-
(25)
For the
Year
Ended
Mar. 31, 2005
$
$
$
$
0
5,204 
2,191
(7,395)
Neither of our two mineral claims are yet in production, and consequently, the mineral claims do not produce any
revenue.  As a result, we expect our losses to continue.
Inflation
Our results of operations have not been significantly affected by inflation.  Management does not expect inflation to
have a material impact on our operations in the future.
Significant Uncertainties
There is no assurance that the mineral claims contain any gold reserves.  It is also uncertain whether we can finance
the exploration of our mineral claims.  Mineral exploration projects are subject to numerous regulatory requirements,
as well as economic uncertainties.  There is no assurance that any of our mineral claims will prove to be profitable.
Possible Dilution to Shareholders
Our plan of operation calls for us to finance business expansion and acquisitions by issuing securities.  Any issue of
stock or securities convertible into common stock could result in significant dilution to present and prospective
holders of our common shares.
Securities Market Risk and Penny Stock Risk
Page 16
Corvair's stock is subject to "penny stock" rules as defined in the 1934 Securities and Exchange Act rule 3151-1. 
The Securities & Exchange Commission regulates broker-dealers transactions in penny stocks.  Penny stocks, with
some exceptions, are equity securities with a price of less than $5.00.  Penny stock rules require a broker-dealer to
deliver to a prospective purchaser a standardized disclosure document that provides information about penny stocks
and the risks of the penny stock market.
The broker or dealer must also deliver, prior to any transaction in a penny stock, a disclosure schedule prepared by
the Commission relating to the penny stock market, which, in highlight form, (i) sets forth the basis on which the
broker or dealer made the suitability determination; and (ii) that the broker or dealer received a signed, written
agreement from the investor prior to the transaction.  Disclosure also has to be made about the risks of investing in
penny stock in both public offering and in secondary trading, and about commissions payable to both the broker-
dealer and the registered representative, current quotations for the securities and the rights and remedies available to
an investor in cases of fraud in penny stock transactions.  Finally, monthly statements must be sent disclosing recent
price information for the penny stock held in the account and information on the limited market in penny stocks.
Bid and offer quotations, and broker-dealer and salesperson compensation information, must be given to the customer
orally or in writing prior to effecting a transaction.  The broker-dealer must make a written determination that the penny
stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser's written agreement.  In addition, the
disclosure requirements above may reduce trading activity in the secondary market for penny stocks.
Transaction costs with purchases and sales of penny stocks are likely to be higher than those for other securities.
Fluctuations in our quarterly operating results may cause our stock price to decline.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 153 "Exchanges of Non-
monetary Assets - an amendment of APB Opinion No. 29".  This Statement amended APB Opinion 29 to eliminate
the exception of non-monetary exchanges of similar productive assets and replaces it with a general exception for
exchanges of non-monetary assets that do not have commercial substance.  A non-monetary exchange has
commercial substance if the future cash flows of the entity are expected to change significantly as a result of the
exchange.  The Company has determined that the adoption of SFAS 153 does not have an impact on its results of
operations or financial position.
In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004) "Share-
Based Payment".  This Statement requires that the cost resulting from all share-based transactions be recorded in the
financial statements.  The Statement establishes fair value as the measurement objective in accounting for share-
based payment arrangements and requires all entities to apply a fair-value-based measurement in accounting for
share-based payment transactions with employees.  The Statement also establishes fair value as the measurement
objective for transactions in which an entity acquires goods or services from non-employees in share-based payment
transactions.  The Statement replaces FASB Statement No. 123 "Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation" and
supercedes APB Opinion No. 25 "Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees".  The provisions of this Statement will
be effective for the Company beginning with its fiscal year ending 2007.  The Company has determined that the
adoption of SFAS 123 (revised 2004) does not have an impact on its results of operations or financial position.
Page 17
In May 2005, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued SFAS No. 154, "Accounting Changes and
Error corrections - A Replacement of APB Opinion No. 20 and SFAS No. 3".  SFAS 154 changes the requirements for
the accounting for and reporting of a change in accounting principle and applies to all voluntary changes in accounting
principle.  It also applies to changes required by an accounting pronouncement in the unusual instance that the
pronouncement does not include specific transition provisions.  SFAS 154 requires retrospective application to prior
periods' financial statements of changes in accounting principle, unless it is impracticable to determine either the
period-specific effects or the cumulative effect of the change.  The provisions of SFAS No. 154 are effective for
accounting changes and correction of errors made in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005.  The adoption of
this standard is not expected to have a material effect on the Company's results of operations or financial position.
Mineral Claims
Item 3.  Description of Property
We hold two mineral claims which we may explore.  The two mineral claims, the Amber1 and Amber2, are located
near the city of Vernon, British Columbia, Canada.  Neither of the two mineral claims contain a known commercially
viable deposit suitable for mining.  Details regarding our mineral claims are discussed in a previous item entitled
Description of Business.
Office Facilities
Other than our mining claims, the Company does not own any other property.  Our offices are located at 10655 NE 4th
Street, Suite 400, Bellevue, WA, 98004 in an area comprised of approximately 200 square feet.  This office space is
rented on a month to month basis and provided at no cost to the Company by its President.  Any resulting rent
expense if the space were rented to the Company would be immaterial.  The Company considers the facilities
adequate for its current purposes.
Item 4.  Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
As of the close of business on December 15, 2005, the following persons owned beneficially more than 5% of our
outstanding common shares:
5% or Greater Shareholders
Amount and Nature of
Beneficial Ownership
Percent of
Class  (1)
1,971,151
100%
Title of
Class
Common
Name and Address
of Beneficial Owner
Terry G. Cook
  10655 NE 4th Street  Suite 400
  Bellevue, WA, 98004
(1) Based on 1,971,151 shares of common stock outstanding as of December 15, 2005.
Page 18
The table below lists as of December 15, 2005, all of our directors and executive officers who beneficially owned our
voting securities and the amount of our voting securities owned by the directors and executive officers as a group.
Security Ownership of Management
Title of
Class
Common
Name and Address
of Beneficial Owner
Terry G. Cook
  10655 NE 4th Street  Suite 400
  Bellevue, WA, 98004
Total Directors and Officers
Amount and Nature of
Beneficial Ownership
Percent of
Class  (1)
1,971,151 
  
  
  
  
1,971,151
100%
  
  
  
  
100%
(1) Based on 1,971,151 common shares outstanding as of December 15, 2005.
Item 5.  Directors and Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons
Directors and Executive Officers
Our directors and executive officers, their respective positions and ages, and the year in which each director was first
elected, are set forth in the following table.  Each director has been elected to hold office until the next annual meeting
of shareholders and thereafter until his successor is elected and has qualified.  Vacancies in the existing Board of
Directors are filled by majority vote of the remaining Directors.  Officers of the Company serve at the will of the Board
of Directors.  There are no agreements or understandings for any officer or director to resign at the request of another
person and no officer or director is acting on behalf of or will act at the direction of any other person.  Additional
information concerning each of these individuals follows the table.
Directors and Executive Officers
Name
Terry G. Cook
Age
56
Positions(s)
President, Director
Director Since
March 2004
Terry G. Cook
Mr. Cook is the President and a Director of Corvair Resources Inc.  Mr. Cook also holds the positions of Chief
Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer.  His responsibilities include general management and financial
management.  Mr. Cook has been the President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and a
Director of Corvair since its inception in March 2004.
Mr. Cook is a graduate of Harvard Business School where he received an MBA in 1974.  Since 1978 to the present he
has continuously been the President and a Director of Stanford Capital, Inc. (formerly Westridge Capital Inc.), a
management and investment company.  Mr. Cook has over 25 years of experience in creating and building small and
medium sized businesses and real estate ventures as a result of his work with Stanford Capital, Inc.
Page 19
Mr. Cook has been an Officer and a Director of Mustang Resources Inc. continuously from November 1998 to the
present.  Mr. Cook is currently the President and a Director of Mustang Resources Inc. and he also holds the
positions of Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer.  Mustang Resources Inc. is a gold mining exploration
and development company incorporated in Nevada and holds mineral claims in British Columbia, Canada.  Mustang
Resources Inc. is an SEC reporting company.
Mr. Cook was the President and a Director of Cougar Holdings Inc. from June 1999 to July 2005.  Mr. Cook also held
the positions of Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer.  Cougar Holdings Inc. is a public reporting company that
previously held mineral claims in British Columbia, Canada.  In July 2005, Cougar Holdings Inc. went through a
change of control and Mr. Cook resigned his positions as an Officer and a Director.
Mr. Cook was the President and a Director of Leopard Capital Inc. from May 1998 to February 2004.  Mr. Cook also
held the positions of Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer.  Leopard Capital is a public reporting company that
previously held mineral claims in British Columbia, Canada.  In February 2004, Leopard Capital went through a change
of control, and a name change to China Expert Technology Inc., and Mr. Cook resigned his positions as an Officer
and a Director.
Conflicts of Interest
Members of the Company's management is associated with Mustang Resources Inc. ("Mustang").  Consequently,
there are potential inherent conflicts of interest in their acting as officers and directors of the Company.  Insofar as the
officers and directors are engaged in other business activities, management anticipates it will devote only a portion of
each person's time to the Company's affairs.
The officers and directors of the Company are now and may in the future become shareholders, officers or directors of
other companies that may be engaged in additional business activities similar to those conducted by the Company. 
Accordingly, additional direct conflicts of interest may arise in the future with respect to such individuals acting on
behalf of the Company or other entities.  Moreover, additional conflicts of interest may arise with respect to
opportunities which come to the attention of such individuals in the performance of their duties or otherwise.  The
Company does not currently have a right of first refusal pertaining to opportunities that come to management's
attention, other than an agreement dated October 8, 2005 with Mustang Resources Inc., that is described below.
The officers and directors, so long as they are officers or directors of the Company, are subject to the restriction that
all opportunities which come to their attention, either in the performance of their duties or in any other manner, will be
considered opportunities of, and be made available to the Company and the companies that they are affiliated with on
an equal basis.  A breach of this requirement will be a breach of the fiduciary duties of the officer or director.
If the Company or the companies in which the officers and directors are affiliated with both desire to take advantage
of an opportunity, then said officers and directors would abstain from negotiating and voting upon the opportunity.
 However, all directors may still individually take advantage of opportunities if the Company should decline to do
so.  The only exception to this policy is the specific agreement dated October 8, 2005 between Corvair Resources
Inc. and Mustang Resources Inc., attached as Exhibit 10.5 to this filing.  Except as set forth above, the Company
has not adopted any other conflict of interest policy with respect to such transactions.
By the terms of the October 8, 2005 agreement referred to above, Corvair and Mustang have clarified the terms of
their competitive relationship in seeking out mineral claims, as follows:
Corvair's Board of Directors passed a Resolution adopted October 8, 2005, adopting an Agreement between Corvair
Resources Inc. and Mustang Resources Inc. whereby:
Page 20
(a)  Corvair agrees not to register mineral claims for a period of 20 years beginning October 8, 2005,
within a 100 mile radius of Mustang's core properties, the JC1, JC2, JC3 and JC4 mineral claims
located in the Nelson Mining Division, in Central B.C.
(b)  Corvair agrees to grant Mustang a right of first refusal to acquire a 50% undivided interest in any
mineral claims registered by Corvair, where such claims are located outside the 100 mile radius of
Mustang's JC1, JC2, JC3 and JC4 mineral claims; and also outside the 100 mile radius of Corvair's
Amber1 and Amber2 mineral claims.
To exercise such first refusal Mustang Resources Inc. must:
(a)  provide notice, in writing, to Corvair, within 30 days of the registration of any such "open area
claims" that Mustang wishes to exercise its right to a 50% undivided interest in the subject claims, and
(b)  Submit to Corvair's office a check for 50% of the cost Corvair incurred to register such claims, plus
reasonable out-of-pocket expenses, properly documented.  Such payment by Mustang must be made
within 10 days of being invoiced by Corvair for such expenses, or the right of first refusal shall lapse.
Mustang's Board of Directors passed a Resolution adopted October 8, 2005, adopting an Agreement between
Mustang Resources Inc. and Corvair Resources Inc. whereby:
(a)  Mustang agrees not to register mineral claims for a period of 20 years beginning October 8, 2005,
within a 100 mile radius of Corvair's core properties, the Amber1 and Amber2 claims located in the
Vernon Mining Division, in Southern B.C.
(b)  Mustang agrees to grant Corvair a right of first refusal to acquire a 50% undivided interest in any
mineral claims registered by Mustang, where such claims are located outside the 100 mile radius of
Corvair's Amber1 and Amber2 mineral claims; and also outside the 100 mile radius of Mustang's JC1,
JC2, JC3 and JC4 mineral claims.
To exercise such first refusal Corvair Resources must:
(c)  provide notice, in writing, to Mustang, within 30 days of the registration of any such "open area
claims" that Corvair wishes to exercise its right to a 50% undivided interest in the subject claims, and
(d)  Submit to Mustang's office a check for 50% of the cost Mustang incurred to register such claims,
plus reasonable out-of-pocket expenses, properly documented.  Such payment by Corvair must be
made within 10 days of being invoiced by Mustang for such expenses, or the right of first refusal shall
lapse.
Significant Employees
We have no employees at this time.  Corvair Resources is managed by Terry G. Cook, our President and director.
Family Relationships
Page 21
Mr. Terry G. Cook is our sole executive officer and director.  As such, there are no family relationships to report.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
There have been no legal proceedings involving either our directors or executive officers during the past five years
that are material to an evaluation of the ability or integrity of any director or executive officer of Corvair Resources Inc.
Item 6.  Executive Compensation
No compensation has been paid to or accrued for any of our Officers or Directors since our inception.  We have not
set aside or accrued any funds since our inception to provide long-term compensation, pension, retirement or similar
benefits for Executive Officers or Directors.
Summary Compensation Table
The following table sets forth the compensation paid by us to our principal executive officer for fiscal years ending
March 31, 2005, and 2004.
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
Annual compensation
Other
Long-term compensation
Payouts
Awards
Securities
Name and
principal
position
Year Salary
($)
Bonus
($)
annual
compen-
sation
($)
Restricted
stock
award(s)
($)
under-
lying
options/
SARs
(#)
LTIP
payouts
($)
All other
compen-
sation
($)
Terry G. Cook,
President, CEO,
Secretary,
Treasurer and
Director
 
Terry G. Cook,
President, CEO,
Secretary,
Treasurer and
Director
2005
2004
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Page 22
No compensation is payable to directors of the Company in connection with attendance at board meetings, except as
to such directors who also serve as officers of the Company in capacities other than directors and/or officers.  At this
time, no other compensation has been scheduled for any other member of the Board of Directors of officers of the
Company.
Future compensation of officers will be determined by the Board of Directors based upon financial condition and
performance of the Company, the financial requirements of the Company, and upon individual performance of each
officer.  The Board of Directors intends to insure that the salaries paid to the Company's officers and employees are
reasonable and prudent and are based upon both the financial condition and performance of the Company and upon
the performance of the individual officers.
No retirement, pension, profit sharing, stock option or insurance programs or other similar programs have been
adopted by the Company for the benefit of its employees.
Item 7.  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
The Company was initially capitalized at its inception on March 9, 2004 by the sale of one share of its common stock
for $1 to its President, Terry G. Cook.  During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2005, the Company extinguished
$1,971 of debt owing to Mr. Cook by issuing 1,971,150 common shares of the Company to Mr. Cook.  For these two
share issues, we relied on Section 4(2) of the Securities Act because the transactions did not involve a public offering
and were therefore exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act.  No underwriters were used, nor
were any brokerage commissions paid in connection with the above share issue.
The Company's President, Terry G. Cook, has since our inception advanced funds to Corvair Resources Inc. for its
administrative and operating expenses.  There are no specific terms of repayment and no interest charged on these
related party payables.  Corvair's long-term liabilities totaled $16,993 at December 15, 2005, all payable to Mr. Cook. 
Mr. Cook has agreed not to demand payment of any of the Company's related party payables until July 1, 2007. 
Correspondence from Mr. Cook to Corvair confirming this deferral of payments until July 15, 2007 is attached as
Exhibit 10.4.
Terry G. Cook, the Company's President, has provided office and management services from time to time to the
Company at no charge since Corvair's inception.  There is no services contract between Mr. Cook and Corvair
Resources.  Valuation and any charges for future services will be determined entirely by prevailing professional fees
charged by third parties for such services, with the clear understanding that the fees charged by Mr. Cook to Corvair
shall be no less favorable to Corvair than if these services were provided by an independent third party.
Other than as discussed above, none of the following parties has, since our date of incorporation, had any material
interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction with us or in any presently proposed transaction that has or will materially
affect us:
Any of our directors or officers;
Any person proposed as a nominee for election as a director;
Any person who beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, shares carrying more than 10%
     of the voting rights attached to our outstanding shares of common stock;
Any of our promoters, and;
Any member of the immediate family of any of the foregoing persons.
General
Page 23
Item 8.  Description of Securities
Our authorized capital stock consists of 60,000,000 shares of common stock, with a par value of $0.001 per share,
and 15,000,000 shares of preferred stock, with a par value of $0.001 per share.  As of December 15, 2005, there were
1,971,151 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding that were held by 1 stockholder of record.  We have
not issued any shares of preferred stock.
Common Stock
Our common stock is entitled to one vote per share on all matters submitted to a vote of the stockholders, including
the election of directors.  Except as otherwise required by law or provided in any resolution adopted by our board of
directors with respect to any series of preferred stock, the holders of our common stock will possess all voting
power.  Generally, all matters to be voted on by stockholders must be approved by a majority, or, in the case of
election of directors, by a plurality, of the votes entitled to be cast by all shares of our common stock that are present
in person or represented by proxy, subject to any voting rights granted to holders of any preferred stock.  Our Articles
of Incorporation do not provide for cumulative voting in the election of directors.
Subject to any preferential rights of any outstanding series of preferred stock created by our board of directors from
time to time, the holders of shares of our common stock will be entitled to such cash dividends as may be declared
from time to time by our board of directors from funds available therefore.
Subject to any preferential rights of any outstanding series of preferred stock created from time to time by our board
of directors, upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up, the holders of shares of our common stock will be entitled to
receive pro rata all assets available for distribution to such holders.
In the event of any merger or consolidation with or into another company in connection with which shares of our
common stock are converted into or exchangeable for shares of stock, other securities or property (including cash),
all holders of our common stock will be entitled to receive the same kind and amount of shares of stock and other
securities and property (including cash).
Holders of our common stock have no pre-emptive rights and no conversion rights.  There are no redemption
provisions applicable to our common stock.
Preferred Stock
Our board of directors is authorized by our articles of incorporation to divide the authorized shares of our preferred
stock into one or more series, each of which must be so designated as to distinguish the shares of each series of
preferred stock from the shares of all other series and classes.  Our board of directors is authorized, within any
limitations prescribed by law and our articles of incorporation, to fix and determine the designations, rights,
qualifications, preferences, limitations and terms of the shares of any series of preferred stock including but not
limited to the following:
(a) the rate of dividend, the time of payment of dividends, whether dividends are cumulative, and the
date from which any dividends shall accrue;
(b) whether shares may be redeemed, and, if so, the redemption price and the terms and conditions of
redemption;
Page 24
(c) the amount payable upon shares of preferred stock in the event of voluntary or involuntary
liquidation;
(d) sinking fund or other provisions, if any, for the redemption or purchase of shares of preferred stock;
(e) the terms and conditions on which shares of preferred stock may be converted, if the shares of any
series are issued with the privilege of conversion;
(f) voting powers, if any, provided that if any of the preferred stock or series thereof shall have voting
rights, such preferred stock or series shall vote only on a share for share basis with our common stock
on any matter, including but not limited to the election of directors, for which such preferred stock or
series has such rights; and
(g) subject to the above, such other terms, qualifications, privileges, limitations, options, restrictions,
and special or relative rights and preferences, if any, of shares or such series as our board of directors
may, at the time so acting, lawfully fix and determine under the laws of the State of Nevada.
Dividend Policy
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock.  We currently intend to retain future
earnings, if any, to finance the expansion of our business.  As a result, we do not anticipate paying any cash
dividends in the foreseeable future.
Share Purchase Warrants
We have not issued and do not have outstanding any warrants to purchase shares of our common stock.
Options
We have not issued and do not have outstanding any options to purchase shares of our common stock.
Convertible Securities
We have not issued and do not have outstanding any securities convertible into shares of our common stock or any
rights convertible or exchangeable into shares of our common stock.
Nevada Anti-Takeover Laws
Page 25
The articles of incorporation of Corvair Resources Inc state that the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes, 78.378
through 78.3793 inclusive, regarding the voting of a controlling interest in stock of a Nevada corporation and sections
78.411 through 78.444 inclusive, regarding combinations with interested stockholders, shall not apply.  The Nevada
revised statutes sections 78.378 to 78.3793 inclusive, and sections 78.411 through 78.444 inclusive, provide state
regulation over the acquisition of a controlling interest in certain Nevada corporations unless the articles of
incorporation or bylaws of the corporation provide that the provisions of these sections do not apply.  The statute
creates a number of restrictions on the ability of a person or entity to acquire control of a Nevada company by setting
down certain rules of conduct and voting restrictions in any acquisition attempt, among other things.  The statute is
limited to corporations that are organized in the state of Nevada and that have 200 or more stockholders, at least 100
of whom are stockholders of record and residents of the State of Nevada; and does business in the State of Nevada
directly or through an affiliated corporation.
PART II
Item 1.  Market Price of and Dividends on the Registrant's Common Equity and Related
Stockholder Matters
Market Information
There is no public trading market as the Company's common stock does not trade on any exchange or any OTC
Bulletin Board.
As of December 15, 2005, there were 1,971,151 shares of common stock outstanding.  There are no stock options,
warrants, rights, conversion privileges or other similar rights which the listed beneficial owners or anyone else may
acquire.  No shares have been offered nor proposed to be offered to the public.
A total of 1,971,151 shares are held by our Officers, Directors and Affiliates, all of which are restricted securities, as
that term is defined in Rule 144 of the Rules and Regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission,
promulgated under the Act.  Under Rule 144, such shares can be publicly sold, subject to volume restrictions and
certain restrictions on the manner of sale, commencing one year after their acquisition.
Holders
As of December 15, 2005, the shareholders' list for the Company's common shares showed 1 registered shareholder.
Dividends
The Company has not declared any dividends since incorporation, and does not anticipate that it will do so in the
foreseeable future.  The present policy of the Company is to retain future earnings for use in its operation and
expansion of its business.
Page 26
There are no restrictions in our articles of incorporation or bylaws that prevent the Board of Directors from declaring
dividends.  The Nevada Revised Statutes, however, do prohibit the Company from declaring dividends where, after
giving effect to the distribution of the dividend:
1.  We would not be able to pay our debts as they become due in the usual course of business; or
2.  Our total assets would be less than the sum of our total liabilities plus the amount that would be needed to satisfy
the rights of shareholders who have preferential rights superior to those receiving the distribution.
We have not declared any dividends and we do not plan to declare any dividends in the foreseeable future.
Equity Compensation Plans
The Company does not have any Equity Compensation Plans at this time.
Item 2.  Legal Proceedings
Corvair Resources Inc. is currently not a party to any legal proceedings and does not know of any pending legal
proceedings.
Item 3.  Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants
We have had no disagreements with our independent auditors on accounting or financial disclosures.
Item 4.  Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
During the past three years, the Registrant has sold the following securities which were not registered under the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Name and Address
Terry G. Cook
10655 NE 4th Street, Suite 400
Bellevue, WA  98004
 
Terry G. Cook
10655 NE 4th Street, Suite 400
Bellevue, WA  98004
Date
03/09/2004
03/24/2004
Shares
1 
  
  
  
1,971,150
Consideration
$1 
  
  
  
$1,971
For the shares issued in the above table, we relied on Section 4(2) of the Securities Act because the transaction did
not involve a public offering and was therefore exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act.  No
underwriters were used, nor were any brokerage commissions paid in connection with the above share issues.
Page 27
Item 5.  Indemnification of Directors and Officers
The only statute, charter provision, bylaw, contract, or other arrangement under which any controlling person, director
or officer of the Registrant is insured or indemnified in any manner against any liability which he may incur in his
capacity as such, is as follows:
1.  Articles X and XIV of the Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of the company, filed as Exhibit 3.1 to
the Registration Statement.
2.  Article XI of the Restated Bylaws of the company, filed as Exhibit 3.2 to the Registration Statement.
3.  Nevada Revised Statutes, Chapter 78.
The general effect of the foregoing is to indemnify a control person, officer or director from liability, thereby making the
company responsible for any expenses or damages incurred by such control person, officer or director in any action
brought against them based on their conduct in such capacity, provided they did not engage in fraud or criminal
activity.
Page 28
Part F/S
Item 1.  Audited Financial Statements (Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2005)
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
MARCH 31, 2005
Corvair Resources Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Balance Sheet, March 31, 2005
 
Statements of Operations for the year ended March 31, 2005, and
   from inception on March 9, 2004 through March 31, 2005
 
Statement of Changes in Stockholders' Deficiency, for the period
   from inception on March 9, 2004 through March 31, 2005
 
Statements of Cash Flows for the year ended March 31, 2005, and
   from inception on March 9, 2004 through March 31, 2005
 
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page
1
2
3
4
5
6 - 14
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of Corvair Resources, Inc.
We have audited the balance sheet of Corvair Resources, Inc. as at March 31, 2005 and the statements of
operations, stockholders' deficiency and cash flows for the year then ended.  These financial statements are
the responsibility of the Company's management.  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(United States).  Those standards require that we plan and perform an audit to obtain reasonable assurance
whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.  An audit also includes
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.  We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
In our opinion, these financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Company as at March 31, 2005 and the results of its operations and its cash flows and the changes in
stockholders' equity for the year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a
going concern.  As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, to date the Company has reported net
losses since inception from operations and requires additional funds to meet its obligations and fund the costs
of its operations.  These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going
concern.  Management plans in this regard are described in Note 1.  The financial statements do not include
any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ Dale Matheson Carr-Hilton LaBonte
DALE MATHESON CARR-HILTON LABONTE
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
Vancouver, B.C.
December 15,  2005
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
BALANCE SHEET
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
CURRENT
   Cash
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
RELATED PARTY PAYABLE (Note 5)
TOTAL LIABILITIES
ASSETS
LIABILITIES
STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
Capital Stock (Note 6)
   Preferred stock, $0.001 par value;
      15,000,000 shares authorized, no shares outstanding
   Common stock, $0.001 par value;
      60,000,000 shares authorized, 1,971,151 shares outstanding
Additional paid-in capital
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage
TOTAL STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
March 31,
2005
$
$
$
-
-
3,500
3,500
1,923
5,423
-
1,971 
1 
(7,395)
(5,423)
$
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
- 2 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
For the period  
 
 
 
(inception) to
March 31,
2004
from
March 9,
2005
OPERATING EXPENSES
Mining property expenses (Note 3)
General and administrative  expenses
NET LOSS
NET LOSS PER SHARE - BASIC
WEIGHTED AVERAGE COMMON SHARES
   OUTSTANDING - BASIC
$
$
$
2,191 
5,204
(7,395)
(0.00)
1,894,750
For the year
ended
March 31,
2005
$
$
$
2,191 
5,204
(7,395)
(0.00)
1,894,750
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
- 3 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
For the period from March 9, 2004 (inception) through March 31, 2005
Inception March 9, 2004
 
Common stock issued for
   cash ($1.00 per share)
Common stock issued in
   satisfaction of the
   related party payable
   ($0.001 per share)
Net (loss) for the year
Balance, March 31, 2005
Common Stock    
Shares
Amount
Additional
paid-in
capital
Deficit
accumulated  
 
during the
exploration
stage
Total
1
$
-
$
1  $
-      $
1
1,971,150 
-
1,971,151
1,971 
-
1,971
-      
-
1
-
(7,395)
1,971 
(7,395)
(7,395)
(5,423)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
- 4 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
   Net (loss)
   Increase in accounts payable and
      accrued liabilities
Net Cash Used For Operating  Activities
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
   Issuance of capital stock
   Advances from related party
Net Cash Provided By  Financing Activities
NET INCREASE (DECREASE) IN CASH
 
CASH, BEGINNING OF  PERIOD
CASH, END OF PERIOD
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF CASH
   FLOW INFORMATION
 
Non-cash Financing Activity
   Common stock issued in satisfaction of the
      related party payable
Income Taxes Paid
Interest Paid
from
March 9,
2004
For the period  
  
 
 
(inception) to
March 31,
2005
$
(7,395)
$
$
$
$
3,500
(3,895)
1 
3,894
3,895
-
-
-
1,971
-
-
For the year
ended
March 31,
2005
$
(7,395)
3,500
(3,895)
1 
3,894
3,895
-
-
-
1,971
-
-
$
$
$
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements
- 5 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 1 - NATURE OF BUSINESS
Corvair Resources Inc. (the "Company") was incorporated in the State of Nevada on March 9, 2004.  The
Company was organized to explore mineral properties in British Columbia, Canada.
The financial statements are presented on the basis that the Company is a going concern, which
contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business over a
reasonable length of time.  The Company has incurred operating losses since its inception, has a
stockholders' deficiency, and no recurring sources of revenue.  These conditions raise substantial doubt as to
the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Management's plans for the continuation of the Company as a going concern include financing the Company's
operations through advances from related parties and issuance of its unregistered common stock.  There are
no assurances, however, with respect to the future success of these plans.  The financial statements do not
contain any adjustments, which might be necessary, if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Unless otherwise indicated, amounts provided in these notes to the financial statements pertain to continuing
operations.
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in the United States of America and are presented in US dollars.  The Company was
incorporated on March 9, 2004 with the issuance of one common share for $1, and chose March 31 as the
fiscal year end; therefore, the Company's first year end is for the period March 9, 2004 to March 31, 2005.
Exploration Stage Company
The Company complies with Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement ("FASB") No. 7 and Securities
and Exchange Commission Act Guide 7 for its characterization as an exploration stage company.
- 6 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Cont'd)
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Cont'd)
Mineral Properties
Mineral property acquisition, exploration and development costs are expensed as incurred until such time as
economic reserves are quantified.  To date the Company has not established any proven or probable reserves
on its mineral properties.  The Company has adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 143 "Accounting for Asset
Retirement Obligations" which establishes standards for the initial measurement and subsequent accounting
for obligations associated with the sale, abandonment, or other disposal of long-lived tangible assets arising
from the acquisition, construction or development and for normal operations of such assets.  The adoption of
this standard has had no effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations.  As at March 31,
2005, any potential costs relating to the retirement of the Company's mineral property interest are not yet
determinable.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities
and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported
amounts of revenues and expenses during the year.  Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the liability method of accounting for income taxes.  Under this method, deferred income
tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated tax consequences attributable to differences
between the financial statement carrying values and their respective income tax basis (temporary
differences).  The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in
income in the year that includes the enactment date.  At March 31, 2005 a full deferred tax asset valuation
allowance has been provided due to the uncertainty of realization and no deferred tax asset benefit has been
recorded.
- 7 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Cont'd)
Basic and Diluted Loss Per Share
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with SFAS No. 128, "Earnings per Share"
(SFAS 128). SFAS 128 requires presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS) on the face
of the income statement.  Basic EPS is computed by dividing net income (loss) available to common
shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding (denominator)
during the year.  Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the year
including stock options, using the treasury stock method, and convertible preferred stock, using the if-
converted method.  In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the year is used in determining the
number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants.  Diluted EPS
excludes all dilutive potential common shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.  Because the Company does not
have any potentially dilutive securities, the accompanying presentation is only of basic loss per share.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying value of cash and accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximates their fair value because
of the short maturity of these instruments.  Unless otherwise noted, it is management's opinion that the
Company is not exposed to significant interest, currency or credit risks arising from these financial
instruments.  As at March 31, 2005, the Company has not engaged in any transactions that would be
considered derivative instruments or hedging activities.
Start-up Expenses
The Company has adopted Statement of Position No. 98-5, "Reporting the Costs of Start-up Activities", which
requires that costs associated with start-up activities be expensed as incurred.  Accordingly, start-up costs
associated with the Company's formation have been included in the Company's general and administrative
expenses for the period from inception on March 9, 2004 to March 31, 2005.
Environmental Costs
Environmental expenditures that relate to current operations are expensed or capitalized as appropriate. 
Expenditures that relate to an existing condition caused by past operations, and which do not contribute to
current or future revenue generation, are expensed.  Liabilities are recorded when environmental assessments
and/or remedial efforts are probable, and the cost can be reasonably estimated.  Generally, the timing of these
accruals coincides with the earlier of completion of a feasibility study or the Company's commitments to a
plan of action based on the then known facts.
- 8 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Cont'd)
Regulatory Matters
The Company and its mineral property interests are subject to a variety of Canadian national and provincial
regulations governing land use, health and safety, and environmental matters.  The Company's management
believes it has been in substantial compliance with all such regulations, and is unaware of any pending action
or proceeding relating to regulatory matters that would affect the financial position of the Company.
Foreign Currency Translation
In accordance with the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 52, "Foreign Currency Translation,"
("SFAS No. 52"), the United States dollar is considered the functional and reporting currency.
Transaction amounts denominated in foreign currencies are translated into United States currency at prevailing
transaction date exchange rates.  Carrying values of foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are
adjusted at each balance sheet date to reflect the exchange rate at that date. Gains and losses from
restatement of foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are included in income.  For the year ended
March 31, 2005, the Company did not incur any foreign currency gains or losses.
- 9 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Cont'd)
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 153 "Exchanges of
Non-monetary Assets - an amendment of APB Opinion No. 29".   This Statement amended APB Opinion 29 to
eliminate the exception of non-monetary exchanges of similar productive assets and replaces it with a general
exception for exchanges of non-monetary assets that do not have commercial substance.  A non-monetary
exchange has commercial substance if the future cash flows of the entity are expected to change significantly
as a result of the exchange.  The Company has determined that the adoption of SFAS 153 does not have an
impact on its results of operations or financial position.
In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004)
"Share-Based Payment".  This Statement requires that the cost resulting from all share-based transactions be
recorded in the financial statements.  The Statement establishes fair value as the measurement objective in
accounting for share-based payment arrangements and requires all entities to apply a fair-value-based
measurement in accounting for share-based payment transactions with employees.  The Statement also
establishes fair value as the measurement objective for transactions in which an entity acquires goods or
services from non-employees in share-based payment transactions.  The Statement replaces FASB
Statement No. 123 "Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation" and supercedes APB Opinion No. 25
"Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees".  The provisions of this Statement will be effective for the
Company beginning with its fiscal year ending 2007.  The Company has determined that the adoption of SFAS
123 (revised 2004) does not have an impact on its results of operations or financial position.
In May 2005, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued SFAS No. 154, "Accounting Changes
and Error corrections - A Replacement of APB Opinion No. 20 and SFAS No. 3".  SFAS 154 changes the
requirements for the accounting for and reporting of a change in accounting principle and applies to all
voluntary changes in accounting principle.  It also applies to changes required by an accounting
pronouncement in the unusual instance that the pronouncement does not include specific transition
provisions.  SFAS 154 requires retrospective application to prior periods' financial statements of changes in
accounting principle, unless it is impracticable to determine either the period-specific effects or the cumulative
effect of the change.  The provisions of SFAS No. 154 are effective for accounting changes and correction of
errors made in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005.  The adoption of this standard is not expected
to have a material effect on the Company's results of operations or financial position.
- 10 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 3 - MINERAL PROPERTIES
On March 11, 2004, the Company staked the Amber1 Mineral Claim and recorded the claim on March 24,
2004 with the Mineral Titles Branch of the Province of British Columbia, Canada.  This claim expired on March
11, 2005.  On March 12, 2005, the Company re-registered its core property and additional surrounding land, as
two mineral claims totaling approximately 659 hectares.  These claims are known as the Amber1 and Amber2
Mineral Claims and expire on March 12, 2006.  The Company incurred costs of $219 for registering the
Amber1 and Amber2 claims in March 2005 and $1,972 for staking and recording the Amber1 claim in March
2004.
Title to mineral properties involves certain inherent risks due to the difficulties of determining the validity of
certain claims as well as the potential for problems arising from the frequently ambiguous conveyancing
history characteristic of many mineral properties.  The Company has investigated title to all its mineral
properties and, to the best of its knowledge, title to all of its properties is in good standing and unencumbered.
NOTE 4 - INCOME TAXES
 
(a)
Income tax provision
 
The provision for income taxes differs from the result which would be obtained by applying the
statutory income tax rate of 34% to income before income taxes.  The difference results from the
following items:
 
 
Computed expected (recovery of) income taxes
Increase in tax resulting from:
                    Increase in valuation allowance
(2,514)
(2,514)
$
March 31, 2005
Total income tax operating loss carry forward
$
-
Significant components of the Company's deferred income tax assets are as follows:
Net income tax operating loss carry forward
                    Statutory tax rate
Deferred income tax asset
Valuation allowance
Net deferred tax asset
March 31, 2005
7,395
34 %
2,514 
(2,514)
$
-
- 11 -
b)
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 4 - INCOME TAXES Cont'd)
 
c)
The Company has incurred operating losses of $7,395 which, if unutilized, will expire in 2025.  Future
tax benefits, which may arise as a result of these losses, have not been recognized in these financial
statements, and have been offset by a valuation allowance.  The following table lists the fiscal year
in which the loss was incurred and the expiration date of the operating loss carryforwards:
 
 
 
 
 
Net loss
income tax operating
loss carryforwards
Expiration date of
March 31, 2005
7,395
2025
$
Total income tax operating loss carry forward
$
7,395
NOTE 5 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
NOTE 5 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Transactions with related parties have occurred in the normal course of operations and are measured at the
exchange amount, which is the amount of consideration established and agreed by the related parties.
For the period
from March 9,
2004 (inception)
The Company's operations have been financed mainly through advances or capital investments from the
Company's President.  During the year ended March 31, 2005, the Company issued 1,971,150 shares of its
common stock at $0.001 per share to the Company's President in satisfaction of $1,971 payable to the
Company's President.  In addition to the transactions described in Note 6, advances from the Company's
President were as follows:
Beginning balance
Advances
Repayment
-     
3,894 
(1,971)
-     
3,894 
(1,971)
Ending balance
to March 31,
For the year
ended
March 31,
$
$
1,923
1,923
2005
2005
$
$
- 12 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 5 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (Cont'd)
The balance in the related party payable consists of amounts paid by the Company's President on the
Company's behalf or funds advanced directly to the Company.  These amounts are unsecured, do not bear
interest and are repayable on demand after July 1, 2007.
NOTE 6 - CAPITAL STOCK
Authorized
The total number of shares which the Company shall have authority to issue is 75,000,000 of which
15,000,000 shall be Preferred Stock of par value of $0.001 per share and 60,000,000 shall be Common Stock
of par value of $0.001 per share.  The authorized capital for both Preferred and Common Stock may be issued
in one or more series or classes with the voting rights to be determined by the Board of Directors at the time
of issue.  As at March 31, 2005, the Company has only issued voting Common Stock.
Common Stock Issued for Cash
The Company was initially capitalized at its inception by the sale of one share of its common stock for $1 to
its President.  During the year ended March 31, 2005, the Company did not issue any additional shares of its
common stock for cash.
Common Stock Issued in Satisfaction of the Related Party Payable
During the year ended March 31, 2005, the Company issued 1,971,150 shares of its common stock at $0.001
per share to the Company's President in satisfaction of $1,971 payable to the Company's President.
NOTE 7 - SEGMENTED INFORMATION
The Company operates in Canada in one business segment, being the exploration of mineral properties.
- 13 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
MARCH 31, 2005
NOTE 8 - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Exclusive Mineral Claim Agreement
The Company's President is associated with Mustang Resources Inc., a U.S. reporting company engaged in
the exploration of its mineral claims in British Columbia, Canada.  Consequently, there are potential inherent
conflicts of interest in him acting as an officer and director for both companies.  To address this inherent
potential conflict of interest, the Company entered into an agreement with Mustang Resources Inc., dated
October 8, 2005, defining exclusive mineral claim registration areas of a 100 mile radius surrounding each
company's core mineral claims, and, defining joint first refusal rights for a 50% undivided interest in any claim
staked and registered by the other company for mineral claims staked and registered outside of their core
mineral claim areas. The term of this agreement is for a period of 20 years beginning October 8, 2005.
Related Party Transaction
The Company's President advanced $3,000 on November 24, 2005 and $12,000 on December 15, 2005 to the
Company.  As described in Note 5 - Related Party Transactions, the balance in the related party payable
consists of amounts paid by the Company's President on the Company's behalf or funds advanced directly to
the Company.  These amounts are unsecured, do not bear interest and are repayable on demand after July 1,
2007.
- 14 -
Unaudited Financial Statements (Six Months Ended September 30, 2005)
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Unaudited)
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
SEPTEMBER 30, 2005
Corvair Resources Inc.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Balance Sheets, September 30, 2005 and March 31, 2005
 
Interim Statements of Operations for the three and six months ended September 30, 2005
    and 2004, and from inception on March 9, 2004 through September 30, 2005
 
Statement of Changes in Stockholders' Deficiency, for the period
   from inception on March 9, 2004 through September 30, 2005
 
Interim Statements of Cash Flows for the three and six months ended September 30, 2005
   and 2004, and from inception on March 9, 2004 through September 30, 2005
Page
1
2
3
4
Condensed Notes to the Interim Financial Statements
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
BALANCE SHEETS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
CURRENT
   Cash
TOTAL ASSETS
ASSETS
LIABILITIES
CURRENT
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
RELATED PARTY PAYABLE
TOTAL LIABILITIES
STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
Capital Stock
   Preferred stock, $0.001 par value;
      15,000,000 shares authorized, no shares outstanding
   Common stock, $0.001 par value;
      60,000,000 shares authorized, 1,971,151
         (Mar. 31, 2005 - 1,971,151) voting shares outstanding
Additional paid-in capital
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage
TOTAL STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
4
5 - 6
Sep. 30, 2005 Mar. 31, 2005
(unaudited)
$
$
45
45
$
$
-
-
$
3,500
$
3,500
-
1,993
5,493
-
1,971 
1 
(7,420)
(5,448)
-
1,923
5,423
-
1,971 
1 
(7,395)
(5,423)
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
$
45
$
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim financial statements
- 1 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
INTERIM STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS (unaudited)
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
For the
period from
Mar. 9,
2004
For the
For the
For the
For the
three months three months
six months
six months
(inception) to
Sep. 30,
2005
ended
Sep. 30,
2005
ended
Sep. 30,
2004
ended
Sep. 30,
2005
ended
Sep. 30,
2004
OPERATING EXPENSES
   Mining property expenses
   General and administrative 
      expenses
NET LOSS
NET LOSS PER SHARE - BASIC
WEIGHTED AVERAGE
   COMMON SHARES
   OUTSTANDING - BASIC
$
2,191
$
-
$
-
$
-       $
-
$
$
5,229
7,420
15
15
-
-
25
25
409
409
(7,420)
$
(15)
$
-
$
(25) $
(409)
(0.00)
$
(0.00)
$
(0.00)
$
(0.00) $
(0.00)
1,919,279
1,971,151
1,971,151
1,971,151
1,971,151
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim financial statements.
- 2 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIENCY
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
For the period from inception on March 9, 2004 through September 30, 2005
Inception March 9, 2004
 
Common stock issued for
   cash ($1.00 per share)
Common stock issued in
   satisfaction of the
   related party payable
   ($0.001 per share)
Net (loss) for the year
Balance, March 31, 2005
 
(Loss) for the six months
   ended September 30, 2005
Balance, September 30, 2005
(unaudited)
Common Stock    
Amount
Shares
Additional
paid-in
capital
Deficit
accumulated  
during the
 
exploration
Stage
Total
1
$
-
$
1  $
-      $
1
1,971,150 
-
1,971,151
-
1,971 
-
1,971
-
-      
-
1
-
-
(7,395)
1,971 
(7,395)
(7,395)
(5,423)
(25)
(25)
1,971,151
$
1,971
$
1  $
(7,420) $
(5,448)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim financial statements
- 3 -
For the
period from
Mar. 9,
2004
For the
For the
For the
For the
three months three months
six months
six months
(inception) to
Sep. 30,
2005
ended
Sep. 30,
2005
ended
Sep. 30,
2004
ended
Sep. 30,
2005
ended
Sep. 30,
2004
$
(7,420)
$
(15)
$
-
$
(25) $
(409)
3,500
(3,920)
1 
3,964
3,965
45
-
-
(15)
-     
50
35
-
10
-
-
-     
-
-
-
-
-
-
(25)
-
-     
70
45
45
-
-      
409
-
-
-
-
- 3 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
INTERIM STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (unaudited)
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
   Net (loss) for the period
   Increase in accounts payable 
      and accrued liabilities
Net Cash Used For
   Operating Activities
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
   Issuance of capital stock
   Advances from related party
Net Cash Provided By
   Financing Activities
NET INCREASE IN CASH
 
CASH, BEGINNING OF PERIOD
CASH, END OF PERIOD
$
45
$
45
$
-
$
45  $
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF
   CASH FLOW INFORMATION
 
Non-cash Financing Activity 
   Common stock issued in satisfaction
      of the related party payable
Income Taxes Paid
Interest Paid
$
$
$
1,971
-
-
$
$
$
-
-
-
$
$
$
-
-
-
$
$
$
-      $
-      $
-      $
-
-
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim financial statements.
- 4 -
- 4 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
CONDENSED NOTES TO THE INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2005
NOTE 1 - BASIS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT PREPARATION
The second quarter financial statements have been prepared by CORVAIR RESOURCES INC. without audit,
in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles for interim financial information
and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.  The information
furnished in the financial statements includes normal recurring adjustments and reflects all adjustments, which
are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair presentation of such financial statements.  Certain
information and footnote disclosures normally included in financial statements prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles have been condensed or omitted pursuant to such rules and
regulations.  The Company believes that the information presented is not misleading.  These condensed
financial statements should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the
accompanying notes for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2005, included in the Company's Form 10-SB.  The
results of operations for the period ended September 30, 2005 are not necessarily indicative of operating
results for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2006.
NOTE 2 - EXPLORATION STAGE COMPANY
We are an exploration stage company formed to explore our mineral claims in Canada for the presence of
minerals.  Activities to date have consisted solely of the staking of mining claims.  We have not yet
developed any mining properties into a producing mine, nor have we earned revenue from any of the
properties.  We have minimal cash and no history of earnings.  Since we have been an exploration stage
company since inception and have not generated revenues, we operate with minimal overhead.
NOTE 3 - GOING CONCERN
These second quarter financial statements are prepared on the basis that the Company is a going concern,
which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business
over a reasonable length of time.  As of September 30, 2005, the Company had $45 in cash, negative working
capital of ($3,455), a stockholders' deficiency of ($5,448) and accumulated net losses of ($7,420) since
inception.  The Company's continuation as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to generate sufficient
cash flow to meet its obligation on a timely basis, to obtain additional financing and re-financing as may be
required, to develop commercially viable mining resources, an ultimately to establish profitable operations.
- 5 -
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
 
CONDENSED NOTES TO THE INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2005
NOTE 4 - NET LOSS PER SHARE
At September 30, 2005 and 2004, the Company had no outstanding stock options, warrants, and other
convertible securities.  Accordingly, only basic earnings or loss per share is presented.
NOTE 5 - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Exclusive Mineral Claim Agreement
The Company's President is associated with Mustang Resources Inc., a U.S. reporting company engaged in
the exploration of its mineral claims in British Columbia, Canada.  Consequently, there are potential inherent
conflicts of interest in him acting as an officer and director for both companies.  To address this inherent
potential conflict of interest, the Company entered into an agreement with Mustang Resources Inc., dated
October 8, 2005, defining exclusive mineral claim registration areas of a 100 mile radius surrounding each
company's core mineral claims, and, defining joint first refusal rights for a 50% undivided interest in any claim
staked and registered by the other company for mineral claims staked and registered outside of their core
mineral claim areas.  The term of this agreement is for a period of 20 years beginning October 8, 2005.
Related Party Transactions
The Company's President advanced $3,000 on November 24, 2005 and $12,000 on December 15, 2005 to the
Company.  The balance in the related party payable consists of amounts paid by the Company's President on
the Company's behalf or funds advanced directly to the Company.  These amounts are unsecured, do not bear
interest and are repayable on demand after July 1, 2007.
- 6 -
PART III
Item 1.  Index to Exhibits
3.1
3.2
4.1
4.2
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
14.1
23.1
99.1
Item 2.  Description of Exhibits
Exhibit Number
Description of Exhibits
Articles of Incorporation
Bylaws
Front of Sample Common Stock Certificate
Back of Sample Common Stock Certificate
Amber1 Mining Claim
Amber2 Mining Claim
Declaration of Trust - Mining Properties
Related Party Payable - March 24, 2004 letter
Corvair / Mustang Mineral Claim Agreement
Code of Ethics
Consent of Expert
Glossary of Mining Terms
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
 
 
 
 
Date:  December 17, 2005
CORVAIR RESOURCES INC.
/s/Terry G. Cook
(Registrant)
By:
Terry G. Cook, President
Page 52