
RED RIVER RESOURCES LIMITED
ACN 100 796 754
Notice of Annual General Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum
Date of Meeting:
27 October 2016
Time of Meeting:
10 am AEDT
Place of Meeting:
Institute of Chartered Accountants Australia 
Level 3 Bourke Place 
600 Bourke Street 
MELBOURNE VICTORIA 3000
Notice of Annual General Meeting
Notice is given that the Annual General Meeting of the shareholders (AGM) of Red River Resources 
Limited  ACN  100  796  754  (Company)  will  be  held  at  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants 
Australia on Level 3 600 Bourke Street Melbourne Victoria on 27 October 2016 at 10 am (AEDT).
Capitalised  terms  used  in  this  Notice  of  Meeting  and  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  have  the 
meaning ascribed to them in the Explanatory Memorandum.
This Notice of Meeting should be read in its entirety, together with the Explanatory Memorandum 
and the enclosed proxy form.
ORDINARY BUSINESS:
Financial Statements:
To  receive  and  consider  the  financial  statements  and  the  reports  of  the  Directors’  and  the 
Company’s auditors for the financial year ended 30 June 2016.
These  statements  and  reports  can  be  viewed  in  the  Company’s  2016  Annual  Report,  which  is 
available at www.redriverresources.com.au.
Note: There is no requirement for Shareholders  to approve the financial statements and reports 
and accordingly no resolution will be put to Shareholders regarding this item of business.
1.
Resolution 1 – Re-election of Mr Paul Hart as a Director
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution:
"That, Mr Paul Hart, who retires by rotation in accordance with clause 11.3 of the Constitution, 
who  is  eligible  and  has  offered  himself  for  re-election,  be  re-elected  as  a  Director  of  
the Company."
2.
Resolution 2 – Re-election of Mr Donald Garner as a Director
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution:
"That,  Mr  Donald  Garner,  who  retires  by  rotation  in  accordance  with  clause  11.3  of  the 
Constitution, who is eligible and has offered himself for re-election, be re-elected as a Director 
of the Company."
3.
Resolution 3 – Adoption of Remuneration Report
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution:
"That  the  Company’s  Remuneration  Report  for  the  financial  year  ended  30  June  2016  
be adopted."
Voting Exclusion Statement: The Company will disregard any votes cast on Resolution 3 by or on 
behalf of a member of the key management personnel (KMP) whose remuneration details are 
included in the Remuneration Report for the year ended 30 June 2016, or a Closely Related Party 
of such a person unless the vote is cast as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote on resolution 3 
and the vote is:
(a)  cast in accordance with directions on the proxy form specifying how the proxy is to vote; or
(b)  cast by the Chair of the Meeting and the proxy form authorises him to vote as he decides on 
Resolution 3 even if the resolution is connected directly or indirectly with the remuneration of 
a member of the Key Management Personnel.
2
Notice of Annual General Meeting
4.
Resolution 4 – Ratification of Option Issue to Mr. Karl Spaleck
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following resolution as an 
Ordinary Resolution:
"That, for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.4 and for all other purposes, the issue of 750,000 Options 
to  Mr.  Karl  Spaleck,  which  Options  are  exercisable  on  or  before  30  June  2019  at  an  exercise 
price  of  $0.12,  and  otherwise  in  accordance  with  the  terms  set  out  in  the  Explanatory 
Memorandum, be ratified."
Voting  exclusion:  The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  Resolution  4  by  Mr  Karl  Spaleck 
and  any  Associates  of  him.  However,  the  Company  need  not  disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  a 
person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in  accordance  with  the  directions  on  the 
proxy form, or it is cast by the Chair of the Meeting as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in 
accordance with the direction on the proxy form to vote as the proxy decides. 
 
Further, a vote must not be cast on Resolution 4  (and will be taken not to have been cast if cast 
contrary  to  this  restriction)  by  a  member  of  the  KMP  and  any  Closely  Related  Party  of  such  a 
member acting as a proxy, if their appointment does not specify the way the proxy is to vote on 
the  Resolution.  However,  a  member  of  the  KMP  or  any  Closely  Related  Party  of  such  a  member 
may  vote  when  acting  as  proxy  if  the  person  is  the  Chair  of  the  Meeting  and  the  appointment 
expressly authorises  the Chair  to exercise  the proxy  even if  the resolution is connected directly or 
indirectly with the remuneration of a member of the Key Management Personnel. 
 
5.
Resolution 5 – Approval of Option Issue to Mr Melkon (Mel) Palancian
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following resolution as an 
Ordinary Resolution:
“That,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  10.11  and  for  all  other  purposes,  the  issue  of  1,500,000 
Options  to  Mr  Melkon  (Mel)  Palancian,  which  Options  are  exercisable  on  or  before  30  June 
2019  at  an  exercise  price  of$0.12  and  otherwise  in  accordance  with  the  terms  set  out  in  the 
Explanatory Memorandum, be approved.”
Voting exclusion: The Company will disregard any votes cast on Resolution 5 by Mr Mel Palancian 
and  any  of  his  Associates.  However,  the  Company  need  not  disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  a 
person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in  accordance  with  the  directions  on  the 
proxy form, or it is cast by the Chair of the Meeting as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, 
in accordance with the direction on the proxy form to vote as the proxy decides.
Further, a vote must not be cast on Resolution 5  (and will be taken not to have been cast if cast 
contrary  to  this  restriction)  by  a  member  of  the  KMP  and  any  Closely  Related  Party  of  such  a 
member acting as a proxy, if their appointment does not specify the way the proxy is to vote on 
the  Resolution.  However,  a  member  of  the  KMP  or  any  Closely  Related  Party  of  such  a  member 
may  vote  when  acting  as  proxy  if  the  person  is  the  Chair  of  the  Meeting  and  the  appointment 
expressly authorises  the Chair  to exercise  the proxy  even if  the resolution is connected directly or 
indirectly with the remuneration of a member of the Key Management Personnel.
6.
Resolution 6 – Adoption of Performance Rights Plan
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass, with or without amendment, the following resolution as an 
Ordinary Resolution:
“That,  for  the  purposes  of  exception  9  of  Listing  Rule  7.2  and  for  all  other  purposes,  the 
establishment and operation of a long term incentive plan to be called the Performance Rights 
Plan  for  the  provision  of  incentives  to  executive  directors,  employees  and  other  persons  who 
the  Board  declares  are  eligible  to  receive  rights  under  the  Performance  Rights  Plan,  in 
accordance with the terms set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
3
Notice of Annual General Meeting
Voting exclusion: The Company will disregard any votes cast on Resolution 6 by a Director or any 
officer, employee or contractor who may be eligible to participate in the Performance Rights Plan 
and  any  of  their  respective  Associates.  However,  the  Company  need  not  disregard  a  vote  if  it  is 
cast by a person as a proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the directions 
on the proxy form, or it is cast by the Chair of the Meeting as a proxy for a person who is entitled to 
vote, in accordance with the direction on the proxy form to vote as the proxy decides.
Further,  a  vote  must  not  be  cast  on  this  Resolution  6  (and  will  be  taken  not  to  have  been  cast  if 
cast contrary to this restriction) by a member of the KMP and any Closely Related Party of such a 
member acting as a proxy, if their appointment does not specify the way the proxy is to vote on 
this  Resolution.  However,  a  member  of  the  KMP  or  any  Closely  Related  Party  of  such  a  member 
may  vote  when  acting  as  proxy  if  the  person  is  the  Chair  of  the  Meeting  and  the  appointment 
expressly authorises  the Chair  to exercise  the proxy  even if  the resolution is connected directly or 
indirectly with the remuneration of a member of the Key Management Personnel.
7.
Resolution 7 – Issue of Performance Rights to Mr. Melkon (Mel) Palancian
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  10.14  and  for  all  other  purposes,  the  issue  of  1,525,423 
Performance  Rights  to  Mr  Mel  Palancian,  a  Director  of  the  Company,  pursuant  to  the 
Performance Rights Plan on the terms set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Voting exclusion: The Company will disregard any votes cast on Resolution 7 by Mr Palancian, any 
Director  of  the  Company  and  any  of  their  respective  Associates.  However,  the  Company  need 
not  disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  a  person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in 
accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  proxy  form,  or  it  is  cast  by  the  Chair  of  the  Meeting  as  a 
proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the direction on the proxy form to 
vote as the proxy decides.
Further,  a  vote  must  not  be  cast  on  this  Resolution  7  (and  will  be  taken  not  to  have  been  cast  if 
cast contrary to this restriction) by a member of the KMP and any Closely Related Party of such a 
member acting as a proxy, if their appointment does not specify the way the proxy is to vote on 
this  Resolution  7.  However,  a  member  or  any  Closely  Related  Party  of  such  a  member  may  vote 
when  acting  as  proxy  if  the  person  is  the  Chair  of  the  Meeting  and  the  appointment  expressly 
authorises  the chair  to exercise  the proxy even if  the resolution is connected  directly or indirectly 
with the remuneration of a member of the Key Management Personnel.
8.
Resolution 8 – Issue of Performance Rights to Mr. Donald Garner
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  10.14  and  for  all  other  purposes,  the  issue  of  711,864 
Performance  Rights  to  Mr  Donald  Garner,  a  Director  of  the  Company,  pursuant  to  the 
Performance Rights Plan on the terms set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Voting  exclusion:  The  Company  will  disregard  any  votes  cast  on  Resolution  8  by  Mr  Garner,  any 
Director  of  the  Company  and  any  of  their  respective  Associates.  However,  the  Company  need 
not  disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  a  person  as  a  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  in 
accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  proxy  form,  or  it  is  cast  by  the  Chai  of  the  Meeting  as  a 
proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with the direction on the proxy form to 
vote as the proxy decides
Further,  a  vote  must  not  be  cast  on  this  Resolution  8  (and  will  be  taken  not  to  have  been  cast  if 
cast contrary to this restriction) by a member of the KMP and any Closely Related Party of such a 
member acting as a proxy, if their appointment does not specify the way the proxy is to vote on 
Resolution 8. However, a member or any Closely Related Party of such a member may vote when 
acting as proxy if the person is the Chair of the Meeting and the appointment expressly authorises 
the  chair  to  exercise  the  proxy  even  if  the  resolution  is  connected  directly  or  indirectly  with  the 
remuneration of a member of the Key Management Personnel.
4
Notice of Annual General Meeting
SPECIAL BUSINESS:
9.
Resolution 9 – Approval of 10% Placement Capacity
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as a Special Resolution:
“That, for the purpose of Listing Rule 7.1A and for all other purposes, Shareholders approve the 
Company issuing up to 10% of the Equity Securities in the Company in accordance with Listing 
Rule  7.1A  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the  Explanatory  Statement  accompanying  
this notice."
Note:  At the date of this notice the Company has not approached any existing security holders in 
relation to the proposed additional 10% placement capacity. Accordingly, no existing shareholder 
will be excluded from voting under the voting exclusion statement.
By order of the Board
Cameron Bodley 
Company Secretary 
Red River Resources Limited 
26 September 2016
5
Explanatory Memorandum
following  notes  and
The 
Memorandum form part of the Notice of Meeting.
Explanatory
the
If  the  appointment  is  signed  by  an  attorney,  the 
power of attorney or a certified copy of it must be 
sent with the proxy form.
Voting and Attendance Entitlement
Attorney
A  Shareholder  may  appoint  an  attorney  to  act  on 
their behalf. Such appointment must be made by a 
duly executed power of attorney, a copy of which 
must  be  provided  by  the  attorney  at  the  point  of 
entry  to  the  Meeting  (original  or  certified  copy), 
together with satisfactory evidence of their identity 
(name and address etc.).
Corporate Representatives
A  Shareholder  which  is  a  corporation  may  appoint 
an  individual  to  act  as  its  representative  to  attend 
and  vote  at  the  Meeting.  The  appointment  must 
comply  with  section  250D  of  the  Corporations  Act, 
meaning  that  Company  will  require  a  Certificate  of 
Appointment of Corporate Representative executed 
in accordance with section 250D of the Corporations 
Act.  The  completed  certificate  should  be  lodged 
with Company’s share registry before the Meeting or 
at the registration desk on the day of the Meeting.
Polls
In  the  event  that  a  poll  is  demanded,  every 
Shareholder  shall  have  one  vote  for  every  Share 
registered  in  their  name  as  at  10.00am  (AEDT)  on  
25 October 2016.
Required Majorities
Each of Resolutions 1 to 8 are Ordinary Resolutions, 
requiring  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  by 
Shareholders entitled to vote on them.
Resolution  9  is  a  Special  Resolution,  requiring  that 
more  than  75%  of  the  votes  cast  by  Shareholders 
entitled  to  vote  are  voted 
in  favour  of  that 
Resolution.
General
All  Shareholders  are  invited  and  encouraged  to 
attend the Meeting or, if they are unable to attend 
in  person,  to  sign  and  return  the  proxy  form  to  the 
Company  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  set 
out on the proxy form.
their
or
proxy
Corporate 
Shareholders, 
Representatives  who  plan  on  attending 
the 
Meeting  are  asked  to  arrive  at  the  venue  at  least  
30  minutes  prior  to  the  time  the  Meeting 
is 
scheduled to commence, so that Shareholders can 
be checked against the Company’s share register, 
or  appointment  as  proxy,  attorney  or  Corporate 
Representative  can  be 
their 
attendance noted.
verified  and
The  Board  has  determined  that  those  persons  who 
are  registered  as  holding  Shares  as  at  10:00am 
(AEDT)  on  25  October  2016,  will  be  entitled  to 
attend and vote at the Meeting.
Accordingly,  transactions  registered  after  that  time 
will  be  disregarded  in  determining  entitlements  to 
attend and vote at the Meeting.
If more than one joint holder of a Share is present at 
the  Meeting  (whether  personally,  by  proxy,  by 
attorney  or  by  representative)  and  tenders  a  vote, 
only  the  vote  of  the  joint  holder  whose  name 
appears first on the register will be counted.
Action to be Taken by Shareholders
the  Company,  as
A Shareholder who is entitled to attend and vote at 
the Meeting may appoint  a person, who need not 
be  a  Shareholder  of 
the 
Shareholder’s  proxy  to  attend  and  vote  on  behalf 
of the Shareholder. 
 
A  Shareholder  who  is  entitled  to  cast  2  or  more 
votes  may  appoint  2  proxies  and  may  specify  the 
proportion  or  number  of  votes  each  proxy 
is 
appointed to exercise. 
 
If you wish to indicate how your proxy should vote, 
please  mark  the  appropriate  boxes  on  the  proxy 
form. If in respect of any of the items of business you 
do  not  direct  your  proxy  how  to  vote,  you  are 
directing your proxy to vote as he or she decides. 
 
If you mark the abstain box for a particular item, you 
are  directing  your  proxy  to  not  vote  on  your  behalf 
and  your  Shares  will  not  be  counted  in  computing 
the required majority in the event of a poll. 
 
For  proxies  without  voting  instructions  that  are 
exercisable  by  the  Chair  of  the  Meeting,  the  Chair 
of  the  Meeting  intends  to  vote  those  proxies  in 
favour  of  the Resolutions.  The  Chair  of  the  Meeting 
will  be  deemed  to  be  appointed  where  a  signed 
proxy  form  is  returned  that  does  not  contain  the 
name  of the proxy or  where the person appointed 
on the form is absent from the Meeting 
 
A  proxy  form  accompanies  this  Notice  of  Meeting. 
Should  you  wish  to  appoint  a  proxy,  please 
complete  the  proxy  form  and  return  it  at  least  48 
hours  before  the  Meeting,  being  no  later  than 
10.00am AEDT on 25 October 2016 to:
if by fax: on + 61 3 9473 2555 or 1800 783 447; or
(a) 
(b)   if by mail:
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited 
GPO Box 242 
MELBOURNE VIC 3001
6
Explanatory Memorandum
This Explanatory Memorandum contains an explanation of, and information about, the Resolutions 
to  be  considered  at  the  Annual  General  Meeting.  Shareholders  should  read  this  Explanatory 
Memorandum  in  full.  This  Explanatory  Memorandum  forms  part  of  the  accompanying  Notice  of 
Meeting and should be read with the Notice of Meeting. 
 
This  Explanatory  Memorandum  does  not  take  into  account  the  individual  investment  objectives, 
financial situation and needs of individual Shareholders or any other person.  If you are in any doubt 
about  what  to  do  in  relation  to  the  Resolutions,  you  should  consult  your  financial  or  other 
professional adviser.
Capitalised words used in the Notice of Meeting and in this Explanatory Memorandum are defined 
in  the  Glossary  section  at  the  end  of  this  Explanatory  Memorandum.    Unless  otherwise  stated,  all 
references to sums of money, '$' and 'dollars' are references to Australian currency.
Financial Statements
In accordance with section 317 of the Corporations Act, the business of an annual general meeting 
(AGM) must include the receipt and consideration of the financial statements and reports required 
by law for the previous financial year.  They are found in the Company’s 2016 annual report which 
is  available 
the  Company’s  website 
www.redriverresources.com.au. If you would like to receive a hard copy of the annual report, free of 
charge, you can contact the Company's Share Registry on 1800 850 505.
for  Shareholders  and  can  be  downloaded
from
There is no requirement for Shareholders to approve these statements or reports. During this item of 
business, the Chair of the Meeting will allow a reasonable opportunity to ask questions and make 
comments on these financial statements and reports. Rothsay Chartered Accountants conducted 
the audit of the Company for the last financial year and has been invited to attend the Meeting 
and the Company has been advised that a suitably qualified member of the audit team of Rothsay 
Chartered Accountants, who conducted the audit of the Company for the last financial year, will 
attend the meeting.
Shareholders,  as  a  whole,  will  be  allowed  a  reasonable  opportunity  at  the  meeting  to  ask  the 
auditor’s  representative  questions  relevant  to  the  conduct  of  the  audit,  the  preparation  and 
content  of  the  auditor’s  report,  the  accounting  policies  adopted  by  the  Company  in  the 
preparation  of  the  financial  statements  and  the  independence  of  the  auditor  in  relation  to  the 
conduct of the audit.
Shareholders who are entitled to vote at the Meeting may submit a written question to the auditor 
that  is  relevant  to  the  content  of  the  auditor’s  report  to  be  considered  at  the  meeting  or  the 
conduct  of  the  audit  of  the  annual  financial  report  to  be  considered  at  the  meeting.  Written 
questions may be submitted by giving them to the Company. Questions must be submitted no later 
than  the  fifth  business  day  before  the  meeting  is  held.  Shareholders  can  use  the  form 
accompanying this notice of meeting.
Resolution 1 and 2 – Re-election of Mr Paul Hart and Mr Donald Garner
Clause 11.3 of the Constitution provides that at each AGM, one-third of the Directors must retire. 
Directors who retire from office in this manner are eligible for re-election.
Mr Garner and Mr Hart have served as directors since their election on 31 March 2014 and have 
both offered themselves for re-election.
Details of both candidates are set out below.
A description of Mr Hart’s experience, qualifications and competencies is as follows:
Mr. Hart holds a Bachelor of Commerce with majors in accounting and marketing.
7
Explanatory Memorandum
During  the  past  20  years  he  has  developed  a  broad  knowledge  of  the  Australian  stock  market 
gained  through  managing  his  own  private  investment  funds.  Mr.  Hart’s  expertise  is  focused  on 
stocks which have a small market capitalisation covering a range of sectors including exploration 
and  mining.  For  the  past  five  years  he  has  also  provided  a  range  of  investor  relations  services  to 
companies and this has included several successful capital raisings. Prior to 2007 he was involved in 
business development, mergers and acquisitions and strategic planning for a global confectionery 
company.
A description of Mr Garner’s experience, qualifications and competencies follows:
Mr  Garner  is  a  qualified  geologist  (BSc  (Hons))  with  over  fifteen  years’  experience  in  the  resource 
industry, corporate finance and corporate development roles.
Mr  Garner  has  a  strong  track  record  in  the  identification  and  acquisition  of  resource  projects, 
recently being responsible for New Age Exploration’s (ASX: NAE) Lochinvar coking coal project and 
Sirius Minerals Plc (LSE:SXX) York Potash project.
He previously worked in a corporate development role at Zinifex, and prior to that worked in metals 
and mining corporate finance in the United Kingdom.
Mr Garner worked as a geologist in Western Australia in a number of roles, both as an exploration 
geologist  and  a  mine  geologist  and  also  worked  as  an  exploration  geologist  
in Myanmar.
The Directors other than Mr Hart recommend that you vote in favour of Resolution 1. The Directors 
other than Mr Garner recommend you vote in favour of Resolution 2.
Resolution 3 – Adoption of Remuneration Report
At  the  AGM,  there  will  be  a  reasonable  opportunity  for  Shareholders  to  ask  questions  about,  or 
make comments on, the Remuneration Report. The Remuneration Report is included in the annual 
report and appears on pages 20 to 26 of the annual report.
The Remuneration Report sets out the Company’s remuneration arrangements for its non-executive 
directors, executive director and senior executives.
The law requires that a resolution, that the remuneration report be adopted, be put to the vote at 
the  Company's  annual  general  meeting.  The  vote  on the  resolution  is  advisory  only  and  does  not 
bind  the  Directors  or  the  Company.  However,  the  Board  will  take  the  outcome  of  the  vote  into 
consideration when reviewing the remuneration practices and policies of the Company.
Shareholders should also note that in accordance with the “two strikes rule”, the result of the vote 
on this item may affect next year’s annual general meeting – if 25% or more of the votes cast on this 
resolution  are  “against”,  a  "spill  resolution"  will  be  included  in  the  2017  notice  of  annual  general 
meeting as required by the Corporations Act.
A  “spill resolution” is a resolution proposing that an extraordinary general  meeting of shareholders 
be called to consider the election of directors. If 25% or more of the votes cast on the remuneration 
resolution  at  the  2016  annual  general  meeting  are  against  the  remuneration  resolution, 
shareholders  would  then  be  required  to  consider  the  "spill  resolution".  If  50%  or  more  of  the  votes 
cast on the spill resolution are "for", a further separate "spill meeting" would need to be held within 
90 days.
The  Company  received  more  than  97%  of  “yes”  votes  on  its  remuneration  report  for  the  2015 
financial year.
The Directors recommend that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 3.
8
Explanatory Memorandum
Resolution 4 – Ratification of Option Issue to Mr. Karl Spaleck
Resolution  4  seeks  to  ratify  the  issue  of  750,000  Options  to  Mr  Karl  Spaleck,  who  is  the  Company’s 
General Manager of Operations.
Broadly,  Listing  Rule  7.1  provides  that,  unless  an  exception  applies,  the  prior  approval  of 
Shareholders is required for an issue of Equity Securities if the Equity Securities will, subject to certain 
exceptions,  together  with  the  number  of  all  other  Equity  Securities  issued  by  the  company  during 
the  previous  12  months,  exceed  15%  of  the  number  of  Equity  Securities  on  issue  at  the 
commencement of that 12-month period.
Listing Rule 7.4 provides that an issue of Equity Securities made without prior shareholder approval is 
treated  as  having  been  made  with  shareholder  approval  for  the  purpose  of  Listing  Rule  7.1  if  the 
issue  did  not  breach  the  Listing  Rules  at  the  time  of  issue  and  the  company's  shareholders 
subsequently ratify that issue.
The  750,000  Options  were  issued  to  Mr  Spaleck  for  the  purpose  of  remuneration  and  were  
initially  issued  within  the  Company's  15%  placement  capacity  contained  in  Listing  Rule  7.1  (15% 
Placement Capacity).
Accordingly,  Resolution  4  seeks  Shareholder  ratification  of  the  issue  of  Options  for  the  purpose  of 
Listing Rule 7.4.
If  Resolution  4  is  passed,  the  Company  will  be  able  to  raise  further  funds  by  issuing  up  to  the 
maximum of the 15% Placement Capacity set out in Listing Rule 7.1, without the need to obtain the 
prior approval of Shareholders.
If Resolution 4 is not passed, the Options issued to Mr Spaleck will be deducted from the Company’s 
15% Placement Capacity in accordance with the Listing Rules, reducing the Company’s ability to 
raise  further  funds  through  the  issue  of  Equity  Securities  in  the  future,  without  first  obtaining 
Shareholder approval.
For  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  7.5,  the  Company  provides  the  following  additional  information  in 
respect of Resolution 4:
Issue Price
The  Options  were  issued  as  part  of  Mr  Spaleck’s  remuneration  and  as  an 
incentive for future performance. As such, they were issued free of charge.
The exercise price per Option, which is required to be paid to receive Shares 
on the exercise of the Options, is $0.12 cents per Option.
No loans have been or will be provided as part of the issue of Options.
Terms of the 
securities
Each  Option  entitles  the  holder  to  receive  one  Share  on  exercise,  which 
Shares will rank equally with all other Shares then on issue as at the relevant 
date of exercise.
The Options were granted on the following key terms:
•  50%  vest  if  the  share  price  is  above  $0.25  for  5  consecutive  trading
days but in any event not before 1 July 2017;
•  50%  vest  if  the  share  price  is  above  $0.30  for  5  consecutive  trading
• 
•
days but in any event not before 1 July 2018; 
Expiry of 30 June 2019; 
If  you  cease  employment  with  the  Company  prior  to  the  Options 
vesting, any unvested Options will be forfeited;
9
Explanatory Memorandum
•
• 
• 
•
If  you  cease  employment  with  the  Company  any  vested  and 
unexercised  Options  will  have  one  month  after  the  date  of  leaving 
to be exercised or they will be forfeited; 
The Options are not transferrable; 
The Options will be unlisted; and 
The Options automatically vest if a Change of Control Event occurs 
before these dates.
Names of allottees  Mr Karl Spaleck.
Use of funds
If  the  full  750,000  Options  are  exercised,  an  amount  (based  on  $0.12  per 
Option)  of  $90,000  will  be  raised.  This  amount  will  be  put  towards  the 
Company’s  general  working  capital  requirements  and  exploration  and/or 
development activities at the relevant time.
The Directors unanimously recommend that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 4.
However,  as  outlined  in  the  voting  exclusion  statement  for  this  Resolution,  as  Mr  Spaleck  is  a 
member of the KMP, the Directors and any of their Closely Related Parties will be precluded from 
voting the Shares that they own or control in respect of this Resolution 4.
Resolution 5 - Approval of Option Issue to Mr Melkon (Mel) Palancian
Resolution 5 seeks Shareholder approval for the Company to issue Options to Mr Mel Palancian, the 
Company’s Managing Director.
Specifically, Listing Rule 10.11.1 provides that the Company must not issue, or agree to issue, Equity 
Securities to a Director or any of their Associates, without the approval of shareholders.
Accordingly, Resolution 5 seeks Shareholder approval for the Company to issue  1,500,000  Options 
to Mr Mel Palancian.
For the purposes of Listing Rule 10.13 the Company provides the following additional information:
Issue date and Exercise 
Period
The  Options  will  be  issued  as  soon  as  practicable  following  the 
Meeting and, in any event, no later than one (1) month after the 
Meeting.
Issue and exercise price
Terms of the securities
The  Options  may  be  exercised,  subject  to  the  vesting  conditions, 
at any time on or before 30 June 2019.
The  Options  are  being 
issued  as  part  of  Mr  Palancian’s 
remuneration  and  as  an  incentive  for  future  performance.  As 
such, they will be issued free of charge.
The  exercise  price  per  Option,  which  is  required  to  be  paid  to 
receive  Shares  on  the  exercise  of  the  Options,  is  $0.12  cents  
per Option.
Each Option entitles the holder to receive one Share on exercise, 
which Shares will rank equally with all other Shares then on issue as 
at the relevant date of issue.
The Options are to be granted on the following key terms:
•  50% vest if the share price is above $0.25 for 5 consecutive
trading days but in any event not before 1 July 2017;
•  50% vest if the share price is above $0.30 for 5 consecutive
trading days but in any event not before 1 July 2018;
10
Explanatory Memorandum
• 
•
•
• 
• 
•
Expiry of 30 June 2019; 
If  you  cease  employment  with  the  Company  prior  to  the 
Options vesting, any unvested Options will be forfeited; 
If  you  cease  employment  with  the  Company  any  vested 
and  unexercised  Options  will  have  one  month  after  the 
date of leaving to be exercised or they will be forfeited; 
The Options are not transferrable; 
The Options will be unlisted; and 
The  Options  automatically  vest  if  a  Change  of  Control 
Event occurs before these dates.
If  the  full  1,500,000  Options  are  exercised,  an  amount  (based  on 
$0.12  per  Option)  of  $180,000  will  be  raised.  This  amount  will  
be  put 
the  Company’s  general  working  capital 
requirements  and  exploration  and/  or  development  activities  at 
the relevant time.
towards
Use of funds
The Directors other than Mr Palancian recommend that you vote in favour of Resolution 5.
Resolution 6 – Adoption of Performance Rights Plan
The  Company  intends  to  adopt  a  performance  rights  plan,  to  enable  the  Company  to  issue 
performance rights, being contractual rights to acquire Shares subject to the satisfaction of certain 
conditions  (Performance  Rights),  to  eligible  employees,  officers  and  senior  consultants  to  assist  in 
the attraction, retention and motivation of those persons (Performance Rights Plan).
A summary of the material terms of the proposed Performance Rights Plan is contained in Annexure 
A to this Explanatory Memorandum.
Shareholder approval for the issue of Performance Rights pursuant to the Performance Rights Plan is 
now being sought for the reasons set out below.
Listing Rules
As  noted  elsewhere  in  this  Explanatory  Memorandum,  ASX  Listing  Rule  7.1  prohibits,  subject  to 
certain  qualified  exceptions,  the  Company  from  issuing  Equity  Securities  in  excess  of  the  15% 
Placement Capacity, unless prior Shareholder approval is obtained.
ASX  Listing  Rule  7.2,  however,  provides  that  the  general  prohibition  contained  in  Listing  Rule  7.1 
does not apply to any Performance Rights issued in accordance with the Performance Rights Plan, 
if,  in  the  3  years  before  the  date  of  the  relevant  issue,  Shareholders  have  approved  the  issue  of 
Performance Rights under the Performance Rights Plan as an exception to Listing Rule 7.1.
Accordingly, Resolution 6 seeks Shareholder approval for the issue of Performance Rights pursuant 
to the Performance Rights Plan as an exception to Listing Rule 7.1.
If Resolution 6 is passed, any Performance Rights issued in accordance with the Performance Rights 
Plan during the three years following the passing of the Resolution will not be counted towards the 
Company’s 15% Placement Capacity when calculating how many Equity Securities can be issued 
in the absence of Shareholder approval.
Corporations Act
The Corporations Act restricts the Company from giving certain “benefits” to certain persons (those 
who  hold  a  managerial  or  executive  office,  as  defined  in  the  Corporations  Act)  on  ceasing  their 
employment  with  the  Company  (Termination  Benefits),  in  the  absence  of  prior  shareholder 
approval unless an exemption applies.
The term “benefit” is defined broadly in the Corporations Act and includes benefits arising from the 
Board exercising its discretion under the rules of the Performance Rights Plan.
Accordingly,  Resolution  6  also  seeks  Shareholder  approval,  for  the  Company  to  provide  these 
Termination Benefits to participants in the Performance Rights Plan.
11
Explanatory Memorandum
Specifically,  Shareholder  approval  is  being  sought  to  enable  the  Board  to  exercise  certain 
discretions under the Performance Rights Plan, including the discretion to determine to waive some 
or  all  of  the  exercise  conditions  attaching  to  Options  issued  to  a  participant,  where  a  participant 
ceases  to  be  employed  or  engaged  by  the  Company,  including  as  a  result  of  redundancy, 
resignation,  death,  or  the  termination  of  their  employment  or  engagement  (where  they  are  a 
contractor) for cause.
This  approval  is  being  sought  in  respect  of  any  current  or  future  participant  in  the  Performance 
Rights Plan, and the Termination Benefits that may arise if and when any participants cease to be 
engaged by the Company.
Except  as  provided  for,  and  subject  to  the  passing  of,  Resolutions  7  and  8,  no  other  Director  will 
participate in the Performance Rights Plan unless separate Shareholder approval is first obtained.
For the purposes of ASX Listing Rule 7.2 (Exception 9(b)) and section 200E of the Corporations Act), 
the following information is provided in respect of Resolution 6.
Prior issue of 
Performance 
pursuant to the 
Performance 
Rights Plan
Terms of 
Performance 
Rights
Explanation of 
the termination 
benefits
As at the date of this Notice of Meeting, the Company has not made any issues 
of Performance Rights under the Performance Rights Plan.
A summary of the terms of the Performance Rights Plan is set out in Annexure A.
The  Performance  Rights  Plan  contains  provisions  setting  out  the  treatment  of 
unexercised Performance Rights, including the Board’s discretion to waive any 
exercise  conditions  attaching  to  those  Performance  Rights  in  the  event  of 
cessation  of  engagement  by  the  Company  arising  from,  among  other  things, 
redundancy,  resignation,  death,  termination  of  employment  for  cause  or 
becomes permanently disabled.
As noted above, the exercise of these discretions by the Board will constitute a 
“benefit” for the purposes of the restrictions contained in the Corporations Act’s 
regarding Termination Benefits.
Value of the 
termination 
benefits
Various matters will or are likely to affect that value of the Termination Benefits 
that the Board may give under the Performance Rights Plan and, therefore the 
value of the Termination Benefits cannot be determined in advance.
The  value  of  a  particular  benefit  resulting  from  the  exercise  of  the  Board’s 
discretion under the Performance Rights Plan will depend on factors such as the 
Company’s  share  price  at  the  time  of  the  exercise  of  this  discretion  and  the 
number  of  Performance  Rights  that  the  Board  decides  to  waive  the  exercise 
conditions in respect of.  Some of the factors that may affect the value of the 
Termination Benefits are as follows:
(a)  the nature and extent of any exercise conditions waived by the Board;
(b)  the number of exercise conditions that have been satisfied at the time that
the Board exercises this discretion; and
(c)  the  number  of  unexercised  Performance  Rights  that the  participant holds
at the time that this discretion is exercised.
As it is proposed that Mr Palancian and Mr Garner will receive Performance Rights pursuant to the 
Performance Rights Plan, subject to the passing or Resolutions 7 and 8, Mr Palancian and Mr Garner 
does not make any voting recommendation to Shareholders as to how to vote on Resolution 6.
12
Explanatory Memorandum
The Directors other than Mr Palancian and Mr Garner recommend that Shareholders vote in favour 
of Resolution 6 and advise that they intend to vote the Shares they own or control in favour of it.
Resolutions 7 and 8 – Issue of Performance Rights to Mr Palancian and Mr Garner
Resolution  6  seeks  Shareholder  approval  for  the  Company  to  issue  Performance  Rights  in 
accordance with the terms of the Performance Rights Plan.
Among  those  persons  initially  intended  to  be  issued  Performance  Rights  in  accordance  with  the 
Performance  Rights  Plan  is  Mr  Mel  Palancian  and  Mr  Donald  Garner,  the  Company’s  Managing 
Director and Executive Director.
However, Listing Rule 10.14 provides that a director may not acquire securities under an employee 
incentive scheme without the approval of shareholders.
Accordingly, Resolutions 7 and 8 seek Shareholder approval for the Company to issue Performance 
Rights  to  Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner,  respectively,  in  accordance  with  the  Performance  
Rights Plan.
A summary of the terms of the Performance Rights Plan is set out in Annexure A. The specific terms 
that will apply to the issue of Performance Rights to Mr Palancian and Mr Garner are set out below.
For  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  10.15,  the  following  information  is  provided  in  respect  of  
Resolutions 7 and 8:
Resolution 5
Resolution 6
Proposed allottee
Mr Mel Palancian
Mr Donald Garner
Maximum 
number 
securities to be issued
of
Issue date and Exercise 
Period
Issue and exercise price
Details of Directors or their 
associates who previously 
received Performance 
Rights under the 
Performance Rights Plan
1,525,423 Performance Rights
711,864 Performance Rights
The  Performance  Rights  will  be  issued  as  soon  as  practicable 
following  the  Meeting  and,  in  any  event,  will  be  issued  no  later 
than twelve (12) months after the Meeting.
The Performance Rights may be exercised within 30 days after the 
end of the respective Vesting Dates, subject to the satisfaction of 
the  Vesting  conditions.  Vesting  Dates  are  1  July  2017,  1  July  2018 
and 1 July 2019.
The Performance Rights are being issued as part of Mr Palancian’s 
and  Mr  Garner’s  remuneration  and  as  an  incentive  for  future 
performance. As such, they will be issued free of charge.
The exercise price per Performance Rights, which is required to be 
paid to receive Shares on the exercise of the Rights, is $0.00 cents 
per Performance Rights.
There is no loan associated with the issue of Performance Rights.
As  at  the  date  of  this  Notice  of  Meeting,  the  Company  has  not 
made  any  issues  of  Performance  Rights  under  the  Performance 
Rights Plan.
13
Explanatory Memorandum
Names of persons referred 
to in Listing Rule 10.14 that 
are entitled to participate in 
the Option Plan
Each  of  Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner,  together  with  any  other 
Director that may be appointed from time to time, are entitled to 
participate in the Performance Rights Plan.
However,  as  Shareholder  approval  is  not  currently  being  sought, 
and  has  not  previously  been  obtained, 
issue  of 
Performance Rights to any other Director other than Mr Palancian 
and Mr Garner, no Performance Rights will be issued to any other 
Director  that  may  be  appointed  in  the  future  unless  Shareholder 
approval  is  separately  sought  and  obtained  for  the  issue  of  such 
Performance Rights pursuant to Listing Rule 10.14.
the
for
Additional Disclosure
To  assist  Shareholders  in  considering  the  proposed  Resolutions,  the  Company  also  provides  the 
following additional information in respect of Resolutions 7 and 8:
Resolution 7
Resolution 8
Proposed allottee
Mr Mel Palancian
Mr Donald Garner
Maximum  number 
of  securities  to  be 
issued
Use of funds
1,525,423 Performance Rights
711,864 Performance Rights
If  the 
full  1,525,423  Performance 
Rights  are  exercised,  an  amount 
(based  on  $0.00  per  Performance 
Right)  of  $0.00  will  be  raised.  This 
amount  will  be  put  towards  the 
Company’s  general  working  capital 
requirements  and  exploration  and/ 
or activities at the relevant time.
If  the  full  711,864  Performance  Rights 
are  exercised,  an  amount  (based  on 
$0.00 per Performance Right) of $0.00 
will be raised. This amount will be put 
the  Company’s  general 
towards 
working  capital 
requirements  and 
exploration  and/  or  development 
activities at the relevant time.
Why are 
Performance Rights 
proposed to be 
issued
In  the  Company’s  circumstances  as  they  existed  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Explanatory  Memorandum,  the  Directors  consider  that  the  Performance 
Rights  provide  a  cost-effective  and  efficient  incentive  as  opposed  to 
alternative forms of incentives (e.g. cash bonuses, increased remuneration).
However, it must be recognised that there will be an opportunity cost to the 
Company,  being  the  price  at  which  the  Company  could  issue  Equity 
Securities to a third party.
The opportunity costs and benefits foregone by the Company by issuing the 
Performance  Rights  to  Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner  is  the  potentially 
dilutionary impact on the issued share capital of the Company (in the event 
that the Performance Rights vest/ are exercised). Until exercised, the issue of 
the Performance Rights will not impact upon the number of ordinary shares 
on  issue  in  the  Company.  To  the  extent  that  upon  their  exercise  the 
dilutionary impact caused with the issue of Shares will be detrimental to the 
Company,  this  is  more  than  offset  by  the  advantages  accruing  from  the 
Company  securing  the  services  of  an  experienced  and  skilled  Director  on 
appropriate incentive terms.
It is also considered that the potential increase of value in the Performance 
Rights  is  dependent  upon  a  concomitant  increase  in  the  value  of  the 
Company generally.
14
Explanatory Memorandum
Why the number of 
Performance Rights 
was Chosen
The  number  of  Performance  Rights  was  chosen  following  commercial 
negotiations  between  the  Company  and  Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner,  for 
the  purpose  of  providing  a  cost  effective  means  of 
incentivising  
Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner  to  increase  Shareholder  value  through  the 
development of the Thalanga Project and the Company’s other projects.
The  Board  determined  that  by  offering  Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner  the 
Performance  Rights,  together  with  his  remuneration  package,  this  would 
assist the Company in securing the services of Mr Palancian and Mr Garner.
Directors’ interest in 
the outcome
Other  than  the  interests  that  each  of  Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner  have  in 
receiving  Performance  Rights  pursuant  to  Resolutions  7  and  8,  respectively, 
no Director has any interest in the outcome of Resolutions 7 and 8.
Valuation of the 
Performance Rights
The  Performance  Rights  are  not  currently  quoted  on  the  ASX  and  as  such 
have  no  market  value.  The  Performance  Rights  each  grant  the  holder 
thereof a right of grant of one ordinary share in the Company upon exercise 
of the Performance Right. Accordingly, the Performance Rights may have a 
present value at the date of their grant.
The  Performance  Rights  may  acquire  future  value  dependent  upon  the 
extent  to  which  the  shares  exceed  the  exercise  price  of  the  Performance 
Rights during the term of the Performance Rights.
As  a  general  proposition,  performance  rights  to  acquire  ordinary  fully  paid 
shares in a company have value.  Various factors impact upon the value of 
options including things such as:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the  period  outstanding  before  the  expiry  date  of  the  Performance 
Right
the  exercise  price  of  the  options  relative  to  the  underlying  price  or 
value of the securities into which they may be converted;
the  proportion  of  the  issued  capital  as  expanded  consequent  upon 
exercise represented by the shares issued upon exercise (ie whether or 
not  the  shares  that  might  be  acquired  upon  exercise  of  the  options 
represent a controlling or other significant interest);
the value of the shares into which the options may be converted; and
(e)  whether  or  not  the  options  are  listed  (ie  readily  capable  of  being
liquidated).
There  are  various  formulae  which  can  be  applied  to  determining  the 
the  
theoretical  value  of  options  (including 
Black-Scholes Model option valuation formula).
formula  known  as
the
The  Company  has  applied  a  Monte  Carlo  Model,  which is  one  of  the  most 
widely  used  and  recognised  models  for  pricing  options.    The  value  of  an 
option calculated by the Monte Carlo Model is a function of the relationship 
between  a  number  of  variables,  being  the  share  price,  the  exercise  price, 
the  time  to  expiry,  the  risk  free  interest  rate  and  the  volatility  of  the 
company’s underlying share price.
Inherent  in  the  application  of  the  Monte  Carlo  Model  are  a  number  of 
inputs,  some  of  which  must  be  assumed.    The  data  relied  upon  in  applying 
the Monte Carlo Model was:
(f)
the exercise price of the Performance Rights being $0.00 cents;
15
Explanatory Memorandum
(g)  an  assumed  Share  price  at  the  date  the  Performance  Rights  are 
granted  of  $0.18  cents,  being  the  Share  price  as  at  the  date  of 
valuation on 15 September 2016);
(h)  an expiry dates of 1 July 2017, 1 July 2018 and 1 July 2019;
(i)
(j)
a volatility measure of 100%;
a risk-free interest rate of 3.25%; and
(k)  a dividend yield of nil.
Based  on  this  information,  the  Company  has  adopted  an  indicative  value 
for each Performance Right of 19.57 cents for Expiry 1 July 2017, 21.48 cents 
for Expiry 1 July 2018 and 22.39 cents for Expiry 1 July 2019.
On  that  basis,  the  respective  value  of  the  Performance  Rights  to  be  issued 
pursuant to Resolutions 7 and 8 are as follows:
(a)
(b)
$322,576
$150,535
TOTAL  $473,111
The  Performance  Rights  valuation  noted  above  assumes  a  market  price  of 
the  Shares  on the  date of  issue  of  $0.18  cents  per  Share,  being  the  market 
value  of  the  Shares  as  at  the  date  that  the  valuation  was  prepared  on  
15  September  2016.    Since  the  date  of  the  valuation  the  Share  price  has 
dropped to $0.17 cents per Share (as at 21 September 2016) and there is a 
possibility  that  the  market  price  of  the  Shares  on  the  date  of  issue  of  the 
Performance  Rights  will be  different to  the  assumed  price  of  $0.18  used  for 
the valuation.
Disclosure of total 
remuneration 
package
As  noted  above,  the  Performance  Rights  are  proposed  to  be  issued  to  
Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner  as  a  means  of  providing  cost  effective 
remuneration  and  incentives  for  his  agreement  to  remain  in  their  roles  as 
Managing Director and Executive Director, respectively.
Palancian
currently
Excluding  the  Performance  Rights  proposed 
to  be 
issued  as  per  Resolution  7,  
Mr 
receives 
remuneration  of  $219,000  per  annum 
(inclusive  of 
the 
Company  for  his  services  as  Managing 
Director.
superannuation)
from
the
Excluding 
Performance 
Rights proposed to be issued as 
per  Resolution  8,  Mr  Garner 
currently  receives  remuneration 
of $158,775 per annum (inclusive 
of  superannuation) 
from  the 
Company  for  his  services  as  an 
Executive Director.
Existing interest in 
the Company
The current Relevant Interests (i.e. before Resolutions 7 and 8 are approved) 
of  Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner  in  the  securities  of  the  Company  are  set  
out below:
Related Party
Mr Mel 
Palancian
Mr Donald 
Garner
Shares
375,000
Options
50,000 @ $0.15 Ex 14/12/2017
1,000,000 @ $0.30 Ex 10/12/2016
7,594,930
1,500,000 @ $0.15 Ex 31/12/2016
16
Explanatory Memorandum
Dilutionary effect of 
the issue of the 
Performance Rights
If  all  of  the  Performance  Rights  that  are  proposed  to  be  issued  to  
Mr  Palancian  and  Mr  Garner  pursuant  to  Resolutions  7  and  8  are  granted 
and  are  subsequently  exercised  (and  assuming  that  no  other  options  or 
shares  are  issued  prior  to  the  exercise  of  the  Performance  Rights),  the 
following  will  be  the  dilutionary  effect  on  the  current  issued  capital  of  
the Company:
Allottee/Other 
Shareholders
Current 
Share 
Holding
% of Total
Number of
% of Total
Share 
Capital
(304,032,62
9Shares on
Shares 
upon
Share Capital 
(306,269,916
Exercise of
Shares on
all
Issue)
issue)
Performanc
Mr Palancian
Mr Garner
Other 
Shareholders
Total
375,000
0.12%
e Rights 
1,900,423
0.62%
7,594,930
2.50%
8,306,794
2.71%
296,062,699
97.38%
296,062,699
96.67%
304,032,629
100.00%
306,269,916
100.00%
Taxation 
Consequences
No  stamp  duty  will  be  payable  in  respect  of  the  grant  of  the  Performance 
Rights.    No  GST  will  be  payable  by  the  Company  in  respect  of the  grant  of 
the  Performance  Rights  (or  if  it  is  then  it  will  be  recoverable  as  an  
input credit).
AASB 2  “Share  Based  Payments”  requires  that  these  payments  shall  be 
measured  at  the  more  readily  determinable  fair  value  of  the  equity 
instrument.  Under the accounting standards this amount will be expensed in 
the  statement  of  financial  performance.    Where  the  grant  date  and  the 
vesting date are different the total expenditure calculated will be allocated 
between  the  two  dates  taking  into  account  the  terms  and  conditions 
attached 
the  counterparties  as  well  as 
management’s  assumptions  about  probabilities  of  payments  and 
compliance with and attainment of the set out terms and conditions.
instruments  and
to
the
Trading History
A  table  of  the  trading  history  of  the  Shares  for  the  preceding  12  month 
period is as follows:
Closing Price on 21 September 2016 being the 
day prior to the approval of this Notice of 
Meeting
12 month VWAP
(prior to and including 21 September 2016)
12-month high
(prior to and including 15 August 2016)
12-month low
(prior to and including 25 November 2015
$0.17
$0.17
$0.27
$0.08
17
Explanatory Memorandum
Performance Conditions
The  number  of  Rights  which  may  vest  in  any  given  year  is  subject  to  three  Performance 
Conditions, namely the Company's share price performance, growth in resources and growth in 
reserves as set out below.
The  Performance  Conditions  operate 
in  so  far  as  satisfaction  of  each 
Performance  Condition  will  vest  a  pre-determined  proportion  of  the  overall  number  of  Rights 
capable  of  vesting  on  each  Vesting  Date.  Any  Rights  capable  of  vesting  on  a  Vesting  Date 
which do not vest because of a failure to satisfy one or more Performance Conditions shall lapse 
on the Vesting Date.
independently
Total Shareholder Return – 50% of the Rights capable of vesting on each Vesting Date
The Company's share price performance condition is the share price performance as compared 
to the Comparator Group of Companies*. The Company share price performance for each of 
the three years commencing 1 July 2016 to 30 June each year will be compared to Comparator 
Group of Companies movement for the same 12 months over the three-year period.
*Comparator Group of Companies 
Heron Resources (HRR) 
KGL Resources (KGL) 
ROX Resources (ROX) 
Ironbark Zinc (IBG) 
PNX Metals (PNX)
Venturex Resources (VXR) 
Terramin Australia (TZN) 
Energia Minerals (EMX) 
Consolidated Zinc (CZL) 
Variscan Mines (VAR)
The  level  of  performance  required  for  each  level  of  vesting  and  the  percentage  vesting 
associated with each level of performance are set out in the table below.
RVR  ranking  versus  Comparator  Group  of 
Companies
% of Maximum Award
Below the 50th percentile
0% vest
Between the 50th and 75th percentile
50% - 100% vest (on a pro-rata basis)
At or above the 75th percentile
100% vest
In addition to each level of performance set out in the above table, the Board reserves its right 
to deem the share price performance condition as being met, in the event that the Company's 
share price at 30 June in a particular year is below the company's share  price on 1 July of the 
preceding year.
Grow Resources at Thalanga – 25% of the Rights capable of vesting on each Vesting Date
Resource increase
% of Maximum Award
•
•
•
Increase Resources by >20%
100% vest
Increase Resources by >0%<20%
0% - 100% vest (on a pro-rata basis)
Increase Resources by 0%
0% vest
18
Explanatory Memorandum
Grow Reserves at Thalanga – 25% of the Rights capable of vesting on each Vesting Date
Reserves increase
% of Maximum Award
•
•
•
Increase Reserves by >20%
100% vest
Increase Reserves by >0%<20%
0% - 100% vest (on a pro-rata basis)
Increase Reserves by 0%
0% vest
Service Condition
To  satisfy  the  service  condition,  Mr  Palancian  and  Mrs  Garner  must  be  employed  by  RVR  or  a 
subsidiary of RVR on the date of the grant and remain employed on the third anniversary of the 
date of the grant. If their employment is terminated prior to satisfaction of the service condition 
any unvested Rights issued pursuant to this Offer Document shall be forfeited, unless the Board 
determines otherwise in accordance with clause 3.2 of the Schedule to the Rules.
The  number  of  Rights  which  will  vest  on  each  vesting  dates  is  1/3,  subject  to  the  Performance 
and Services Conditions.
Details of any Performance Rights issued under the Performance Rights Plan will be published in 
each annual report of the Company relating to a period in which securities have been issued, 
and  where  appropriate,  confirmation  that  approval  for  the  issue  of  securities  was  obtained 
under ASX Listing Rule 10.14.
Any additional persons for whom Shareholder approval is required under Listing Rule 10.14 who 
become entitled to participate in the Performance Rights Plan after the passing or Resolutions 7 
and  8  and  who  were  not  name  in  this  Notice  of  Meeting  will  not  participate  until  Shareholder 
approval is obtained under Listing Rule 10.14.
As it is proposed that Mr Palancian and Mr Garner will receive Performance Rights pursuant to 
the Performance Rights Plan, subject to the passing or Resolutions 7 and 8, Mr Palancian and Mr 
Garner  do  not  make  any  voting  recommendation  to  Shareholders  as  to  how  to  vote  on 
Resolutions 7 and 8.
The Directors, other Mr Palancian and Mr Garner, recommend that Shareholders vote in favour 
of Resolutions 7 and 8.
Save  as  set  out  in  this  Explanatory  Memorandum,  the  Directors  are  not  aware  of  any  other 
information  that  will  be  reasonably  required  by  Shareholders  to  make  a  decision  in  relation  to 
benefits contemplated by the proposed Resolutions 7 and 8.
Resolutions 9 – Additional Placement Capacity
Listing Rule 7.1 requires Shareholder approval for an issue of Equity Securities in the Company if 
that issue will, when aggregated with all other issues during the previous 12 months, exceeds 15% 
of the number of Equity Securities on issue at the commencement of that 12-month period.
In  accordance  with  Listing  Rule  7.1A,  eligible  entities  may  seek  shareholder  approval  at  their 
AGM to issue a further 10% of their issued share capital in addition to the 15% capacity set out in 
ASX Listing Rule 7.1 (10% Share Placement Capacity).
19
Explanatory Memorandum
An eligible entity for the  purpose  of  ASX  Listing Rule 7.1A is an entity that is not included in the 
S&P/ASX  300  Index  and  has  a  market  capitalisation  of  $300  million  or  less.  At  the  date  of  this 
Notice, the Company is an eligible entity.
Any issue of securities under ASX Listing Rule 7.1A: 
(a)  must be in the same class as an existing quoted class of the Company’s equity securities; 
(b)  may be issued at a maximum of 25% discount to the current market price; and 
(c)  must be calculated in accordance with the formula prescribed by ASX Listing Rule 7.1A.2.
Resolution 9 seeks Shareholder approval for the Company to have the ability to issue securities 
under  the  10%  Share  Placement  Capacity.  The  approval  of  Resolution  9  will  provide  the 
Company  with  even  greater  flexibility  to  issue  Equity  Securities  in  addition  to  the  15%  capacity 
set out in ASX Listing Rule 7.1 without a further requirement to obtain prior Shareholder approval.
Technical information required by Listing Rule 7.3A
l
a
t
i
r
p
a
c
e
a
h
s
 
d
e
u
s
s
I
Dilution  when 
compared 
with 
the 
current  issued 
share capital
Hypothetical issue price of shares issued
under the 10% Share Placement Capacity
$0.09
50% decrease 
in Issue Price
$0.18
per share
$0.36
100% increase 
in Issue Price
Current 
issued 
capital
share
10% dilution
30,403,263
30,403,263
330,403,263
shares
shares
shares
304,032,629
Funds raised
$2,736,294
$5,472,587
$10,945,175
50% increase 
in 
issued 
share 
capital
456,048,944
100% 
increase 
in 
issued share 
capital
10% dilution
45,604,894
45,604,894
45,604,894
shares
shares
shares
Funds raised
$4,104,440
$8,208,881
$16,417,762
10% dilution
60,806,526
60,806,526
60,806,526
shares
shares
shares
608,068,258
Funds raised
$5,472,587
$10,945,175
$21,890,349
Note: the table above has been prepared on the following assumptions:
1. 
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The Issue Price of $0.18 is based on the closing price of Shares on 15 September 2016; 
The current issued share capital has been calculated in accordance with the formula in 
Listing Rule 7.1A.2; 
The  Company  issues  the  maximum  number  of  securities  available  under  the  10%  Share 
Placement Capacity; 
No  options  are  exercised  prior  to  the  date  of  issue  of  any  shares  under  the  10%  Share 
Placement Capacity; 
The  table  shows  the  effect  of  issues  of  the  Company’s  equity  securities  under  the  10% 
Share  Placement  Capacity,  not  under  the  Company’s  15%  placement  capacity  under 
Listing Rule 7.1; and 
The  table  does  not  show  an  example  of  dilution  that  may  occur  to  any  particular 
Shareholder due to any placements under the 10% Share Placement Capacity.
20
Explanatory Memorandum
Potential risk of economic and voting dilution
If  Resolution  9  is  approved  by  Shareholders  and  securities  are  issued  under  the  10%  Share 
Placement Capacity, the interests of existing Shareholders who do not participate in the issue will 
be diluted.
Shareholders should note that in such circumstances, as with any time in the market, there is a 
risk that:
(a)
(b)
the  market  price  for  equity  securities  issued  under  the  10%  Share  Placement  Capacity 
may be significantly lower on the issue date than on the date of the approval under ASX 
Listing Rule 7.1A; and
the equity securities may be issued at a price that is at a discount to the market price for 
those  equity  securities  on  the  issue  date,  which  may  have  an  effect  on  the  amount  of 
funds raised by the issue of the equity securities.
Timing of potential issues
If Shareholders approve  Resolution 9,  securities may be issued  under the  10%  Share Placement 
Capacity during the period commencing on the date of the Meeting and ending on the first to 
occur of:
(a)
(b)
12 months after the date of the Meeting; and
the  date  of  Shareholder  approval  for  any  transaction  under  Listing  Rules  11.1.2 
(significant change to the nature or scale of the Company’s activities) or 11.2 (disposal of 
the Company’s main undertaking).
The  approval  under  Listing  Rules  7.1A  will  cease  to  be  valid  in  the  event  that  holders  of  the 
Company’s ordinary securities approve a transaction under Listing Rules 11.1.2 or 11.2.
Purpose of potential issue
Shares may be issued under the 10% Share Placement Capacity for the following purposes:
(a)
(b)
non-cash  consideration  for  the  acquisition  of  new 
resources  assets  and  other 
investments.  If  this  occurs,  the  Company  will  provide  a  valuation  of  the  non-cash 
consideration in accordance with ASX Listing Rule 7.1A.3; or
cash  consideration.  If  this  occurs,  the  Company  intends  to  use  the  funds  raised  to 
continue exploration and development of the Company’s current assets, cover general 
working capital requirements and/or, if appropriate, acquire new assets or investments.
The  Company  will  comply  with  its  disclosure  obligations  under  ASX  Listing  Rules  7.1A.4  and 
3.10.5A upon any issue of shares under the 10% Share Placement Capacity.
Allocation policy under the 10% Share Placement Capacity
The Company’s allocation policy will depend on the prevailing market conditions at the time of 
any proposed issue under the 10% Share Placement Capacity.
Potential allottees of securities under the 10% Share Placement Capacity will be determined on 
a case-by-case basis, having regard to factors which may include:
(a)
(b)
the  methods  of  raising  funds  which  are  available  to  the  Company,  including  the  time 
and market exposure associated with the various methods of raising capital applicable 
at the time of the raising;
the effect of any such issue on the control of the Company;
21
Explanatory Memorandum
(c)
(d)
the financial situation of the Company; and
advice from corporate, financial and broking advisers.
As  at  the  date  of  this  Notice,  no  allottees  for  a  placement  under  the  10%  Share  Placement 
Capacity  have  been  determined.  They  may,  however,  include,  as  well  as  any  existing 
Shareholders, substantial Shareholders and/or new Shareholders who are not Related Parties or 
Associates of a Related Party of the Company.
Prior shareholder approval
The  Company  sought  and  received  Shareholder  approval  under  Listing  Rule  7.1A  at  the  last 
AGM held on 14 December 2015.
A  total  of  115,934,370  Equity  Securities,  including  Shares  and  Options,  were  issued  in  the  
12 months preceding the date of the AGM. This represented 48.88% of the total number of Equity 
Securities on issue at the start of the 12-month period.
Details  of  all  equity  issues  over  the  12  months  preceding  the  date  of  the  Annual  General 
Meeting are outlined below:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
On  22  December  2015,  the  Company  issued  1,347,633  ordinary  shares  to  applicants  of 
the  Company  Share  Purchase  Plan  at  $0.105  per  share.  The  proceeds  have  been  used 
on  exploration,  development  and  general  working  capital  requirements  of  the 
Company;
In  accordance  with  the  Resolutions  14,  15  and  16  passed  by  Shareholders  at  the  AGM 
held on 14 December 2015, on 22 December 2015, the Company issued 238,096 ordinary 
shares to Mrs July Fletcher (an associate of Mr Brett Fletcher), 1,000,000 ordinary shares to 
Buprestid  Pty  Ltd  (an  associate  of  Mr  Mark  Hanlon)  and  100,000  ordinary  shares  to  
Mr Mel Palancian. All shares were issued at $0.105 per share and all proceeds have been 
used  on  exploration,  development  and  general  working  capital  requirements  of  
the Company;
In  accordance  with  the  Resolutions  14,  15  and  16  passed  by  Shareholders  at  the  AGM 
held on 14 December 2015, on 22 December 2015, the Company issued 119,048 options 
to Mrs July Fletcher (an associate of Mr Brett Fletcher), 500,000 options to Buprestid Pty Ltd 
(an  associate  of  Mr  Mark  Hanlon)  and  50,000  options  to  Mr  Mel  Palancian.  All  options 
were issued with an Exercise Price of $0.15 per share and an Expiry of 16 December 2017. 
The options were issued for nil consideration;
In  accordance  with  the  Resolution  13  passed  by  Shareholders  at  the  AGM  held  on  
14 December 2015, on 22 December 2015, the Company issued 6,000,000 Options to the 
JLM  (and  or  their  associates)  with  an  Exercise  Price  of  $0.15  and  an  Expiry  of  
16 December 2017. The options were issued for nil consideration;
In  accordance  with  the  Resolution  11  passed  by  Shareholders  at  the  AGM  held  on  
14  December  2015,  on  22  December  2015,  the  Company  issued  17,828,515  Options  to 
the  s708A  sophisticated 
in  the  Share  Placement  on  
2 November 2015, with an Exercise Price of $0.15 and an Expiry of 16 December 2017. The 
options were issued for nil consideration;
investors  who  participated
In  accordance  with  the  Resolution  12  passed  by  Shareholders  at  the  AGM  held  on  
14 December 2015, on 9 February 2016, the Company issued 673,815 Options which were 
offered  under  the  Prospectus  dated  13  November  2015,  to  the  participants  of  the 
Company Share Purchase Plan. Options were issued with an Exercise Price of $0.15 and 
an Expiry of 16 December 2017. The options were issued for nil consideration;
22
Explanatory Memorandum
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
On  3  May  2016,  the  Company  issued  750,000  ordinary  shares  on  exercise  of  750,000 
options  at  $0.10  by  OTB  Capital  Pty  Ltd.  The  proceeds  have  been  used  on  exploration, 
development and general working capital requirements of the Company;
On 9 June 2016, the Company issued 9,524 ordinary shares on exercise of 9,524 options at 
$0.15  by  Mr  Keith  Charles  Hamilton  &  Mrs  Christine  Anne  Hamilton.  The  proceeds  have 
been  used  on  exploration,  development  and  general  working  capital  requirements  of 
the Company;
On 17 June 2016, the Company issued 3,050,000 ordinary shares on exercise of 1,500,000 
options  at  $0.10  by  Oska  Nominees  Pty  Ltd,  500,000  options  at  $0.10  by  Mr  Peter  David 
Sheppeard  and  Mrs  Sharon  Fay  Sheppeard,  1,000,000  options  at  $0.10  by  Cappig 
Finance Pty Ltd and 50,000 options at $0.10 by Mr Bradley James Hill. The proceeds are to 
be  used  on  exploration,  development  and  general  working  capital  requirements  of  
the Company;
On 27 July 2016, the Company issued 55,295,895 ordinary shares to institutional investors, 
and strategic, professional, and sophisticated investors at $0.12 per share. The proceeds 
are to be used on exploration, development and general working capital requirements 
of the Company;
On 5 August 2016, the Company issued 1,000,000 ordinary shares on exercise of 500,000 
options at $0.10 by Rucking Investments Pty Ltd and 500,000 options at $0.15 by Banskin 
Pty Ltd. The proceeds are to be used on exploration, development and general working 
capital requirements of the Company;
On 15 August 2016, the Company issued 2,137,500 ordinary shares on exercise of 337,500 
options  at  $0.15  by  Jetosea  Pty  Ltd,  50,000  at  $0.15  by  Dolphin  Capital  Partners  Pty  Ltd, 
250,000 options at $0.15 by Dungowan Assets Pty Ltd and 1,500,000 options at $0.15 by BT 
Portfolio Services Pty Ltd. The proceeds are to be used on exploration, development and 
general working capital requirements of the Company;
(m)  On 17 August 2016, the Company issued 2,500,000 ordinary shares on exercise of 500,000 
options  at  $0.15  by  Mr  Andrew  Loddington  Hall  and  2,000,000  options  at  $0.10  by  Oska 
Nominees  Pty  Ltd.  The  proceeds  are  to  be  used  on  exploration,  development  and 
general working capital requirements of the Company;
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
On  23  August  2016,  the  Company  issued  171,429  ordinary  shares  on  exercise  of  50,000 
options  at  $0.15  by  Morshead  Pty  Ltd,  71,429  options  at  $0.15  by  Mr  Sean  Doheny  and 
50,000  options  at  $0.15  by  Dolphin  Partners  Pty  Ltd.  The  proceeds  are  to  be  used  on 
exploration, development and general working capital requirements of the Company;
On  26  August  2016,  the  Company  issued  150,000  ordinary  shares  on  exercise  of  150,000 
options  at  $0.15  by  Westglade  Pty  Ltd.  The  proceeds  are  to  be  used  on  exploration, 
development and general working capital requirements of the Company;
On  2  September  2016,  the  Company  issued  719,500  ordinary  shares  on  exercise  of 
100,000  options  at  $0.15  by  Tromso  Pty  Ltd,  143,000  options  at  $0.15  by  Mandolin 
Nominees  Pty  Ltd,  190,500  options  at  $0.15  by  Mr  Ian  Michael  Paterson  Parker  and  Mrs 
Catriona Sylvia Parker, 143,000 options at $0.15 by KHE Sanh Pty Ltd and 143,000 options 
at  $0.15  by  Project  Contracting  Pty  Ltd.  The  proceeds  are  to  be  used  on  exploration, 
development and general working capital requirements of the Company;
On  7  September  2016,  the  Company  issued  19,679,015  ordinary  shares  to  institutional 
investors, and strategic, professional, and  sophisticated investors at $0.12  per share. The 
proceeds  are  to  be  used  on  exploration,  development  and  general  working  capital 
requirements of the Company;
23
Explanatory Memorandum
On  22  September  2016,  the  Company  issued  1,195,262  ordinary  shares  on  exercise  of 
1,000,000 options at $0.10 by Oska Nominees Pty Ltd, 4,762 options at $0.15 by Mr Andrew 
Leo Morgan and 190,500 options at $0.15 by Mr Jonathan George Edgar. The proceeds 
have been used on exploration, development and general working capital requirements 
of the Company;
On 23 September 2016, the Company issued 750,000 Options to Mr Karl Spaleck (and or 
his associates) with an Exercise Price of $0.12 and an Expiry of 30 June 2019. The options 
were issued for nil consideration;
(r)
(s)
Any inquiries in relation to the Resolutions or the Explanatory Memorandum should be directed 
to Cameron Bodley (Company Secretary):
Red River Resources Limited
Level 6 350 Collins Street
MELBOURNE VIC 3000
Ph: +61 3 9095 7775
24
Explanatory Memorandum
Glossary
AGM means an annual general meeting of the Company.
Associate has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
ASX means ASX Limited (ABN 98 008 624 691).
Board means the board of Directors of the Company.
Closely Related Party has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
Company means Red River Resources Limited ACN 100 796 754.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Director means a director of the Company as at the date of this Explanatory Memorandum.
Equity Securities has the meaning given to that term in the Listing Rules.
Explanatory  Memorandum  means  this  explanatory  memorandum  that  accompanies,  and  forms 
part of, the Notice of Meeting.
General Meeting or Meeting means the general meeting of the Company to be convened by the 
Notice of Meeting.
JLM means Joint Lead Manager, including JLM 1, JLM 2 and JLM 3.
JLM1 means Hartley’s Limited ACN 104 195 057
JLM2 means Triple C Consulting Pty Ltd ACN 141 412 106
JLM3 means Foster Stockbroking Pty Limited ACN 088 747 148
Key Management Personnel or KMP has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
Listing Rules means the listing rules of the ASX.
Notice  of  Meeting  means  the  notice  convening  the  general  meeting  of  shareholders  that 
accompanies this Explanatory Memorandum.
Option means an option to acquire a Share.
Ordinary Resolution means a resolution passed by more than 50% of the votes at a general meeting 
of Shareholder.
Performance Rights Plan means the Company’s employee and officer performance rights plan as 
summarised in Annexure A to this Notice of Meeting.
Related Party has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
Remuneration Report has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
Resolution means a resolution referred to in this Notice.
Shareholder means a holder of a Share.
Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company
25
Explanatory Memorandum
Annexure A – Performance Rights Plan Summary
The  objective  of  the  Plan  is  to  provide  an  incentive  to  key  employees  of  RVR  to  drive 
continuing  improvement  in  RVR’s  performance  and  to  provide  those  employees  with  the 
opportunity to acquire an ownership interest in RVR.  
 
1.
Eligibility
The Board may issue Performance Rights to any director, senior executive, or other employee 
(full or part time). The Board must have regard to the Employee’s contribution to the business, 
the  length  of  the  period  of  employment  of  the  Employee,  the  Employee’s  potential 
contribution  to  the  business,  and  any  other  matters  the  Board  considers  relevant. 
Performance  Rights  may  be  held  by  the  Employee  directly,  or  by  any  entity  nominated  by  
the Employee.  
 
2.
Performance Conditions
The  Board  may  make  vesting  of  Performance  Rights  conditional  upon  Performance 
Conditions, and the Board may also waive any existing Performance Conditions if they see fit, 
subject to the Listing Rules and the law.  
 
3.
Maximum Number of Performance Rights
The  Board  will  ensure  that  the  number  of  Performance  Rights  offered  to  Employees  over  a  
3-year period does not exceed 5% of the Company’s issued Shares, unless that issue does not 
require  disclosure  in  reliance  on  another  exception  to  the  Corporations  Act  or  is  made 
pursuant to a prospectus.  
 
4.
Entitlement
Each Performance Right entitles the holder to one fully-paid Ordinary Share, which shall rank 
equally with all other fully paid shares on and from the date of issue. 
 
5.
Vesting
A  Performance  Right  vests  when  the  Board  determines  that  the  applicable  Performance 
Conditions have been wholly or partially satisfied, or are waived. 
 
6.
Exercise
Performance  Rights  are  exercised  automatically  upon  vesting  and  the  Company  must  issue 
the corresponding Shares within 30 days. 
 
7.
Lapse
Performance Rights will lapse upon any of the following events:
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
the Expiry Date is reached and the Performance Conditions are not satisfied;
the Performance Rights are transferred or an attempt is made to transfer them 
to another entity, without the approval of the Board;
an Employee voluntarily resigns;
an  Employee’s  employment  is  terminated  because  of  death,  total  and 
permanent disability, bona fide redundancy, or any other matter approved by 
the  Board,  unless  the  Board  deems  some  or  all  of  the  unvested  Performance 
Rights to vest;
26
Explanatory Memorandum
7.5
7.6
the  Employee’s  employment  is  terminated  because  of  fraud,  dishonesty, 
breach of obligations, or otherwise for cause; and
a date is reached which is six months after an event described in paragraph 8 
below.
8.
Change of control and reconstruction
Notwithstanding  the  other  conditions,  the  Board  may  declare  that  some  or  all  unvested 
Performance Rights vest if any of the following circumstances arise:
8.1
a  Change  of  Control  event  has  occurred,  or  is  likely  to  occur,  and  the  Board 
considers  that  the  Employee’s  pro-rata  performance  is  satisfactory,  which 
includes:
(a)
(b)
(c)
an offeror acquiring voting power of greater than 50% in the Company 
where, prior to a takeover bid, they held less than 50%;
shareholders  approve  a  compromise  or  arrangement  pursuant  to 
section 411 of the Corporations Act; or
there  is  a  selective  capital  reduction  approved  by  Shareholders  that 
results  in  a  shareholder  acquiring  voting  power  of  greater  than  50%  in 
the Company where they previously held less than 50%;
any  person  or  corporation  has  a  Relevant  Interest  in  more  than  90%  of  the 
Shares, and the Board considers that the Employee’s pro-rata performance is 
satisfactory;
the Company is wound up, voluntarily or by order, or the Company otherwise 
disposes of its main undertaking; or
if  there  is  any  internal  reconstruction,  reorganisation,  or  acquisition  of  the 
Company which is not any of the above events.
8.2
8.3
8.4
9.
Transfer
Performance  Rights  may  only  be  transferred  with  the  consent  of  the  Board,  except  where 
required  by  the  law  because  of  death  or  bankruptcy.  Shares  granted  from  Performance 
Rights  may  only  be  transferred  with  the  consent  of  the  Board  if  there  is  a  period  of  restraint 
attached to their issue, until that period of restraint has expired.
27
E
§
©
@
w
3
@3
c:
(Q
@2)
E
@D
Q
&
©

&


A Lodge your vote:
.
Rethver D 
www.investorvote.com.au
RESOURCES LIMITED
Aatlas too its 754 E By Mail,
:= Computershare investor Services Pty Limited
55 GPO Box 242 Melbourne
:= Victoria 3001 Australia
% nvn
E: MR SAM SAMPLE Alternatively you can lax your lorrn to
g FLAT 123 (within Australia) 1800 783 447
2 123 SAMPLE STREET (outside Australia) +51 3 9473 2555
2 THE SAMPLE HILL
=: SAMPLE ESTATE For intermediary Oniine subscribers oniy
:—: SAMPLEV'LLE “9 3°30 (custodians) wwwintermediaryohlinecom
% For all enquiries call:
:: (within Australia) 1300 850 505
(outside Australia) +51 3 9415 4000
Proxy Form XX
El Vote and view the annual report online
-Go to www.investorvote.com.au or scan the QR Code with your mobile device. I - I
- Follow the instructions on the secure website to vote. E If '5' _ E
_- 'I -_I
Your access information that you will need to vote:  '
 Control Number: 999999 EFF-E '3" a
«n -'a ' -
E7 SRNIHIN: 19999999999 PIN: 99999 F- _ u ..
ii PLEASE NOTE: For security reasons it is important that you keep your SRN/HIN Conﬁdential. E | I I . .
f’ s I
 71% For your vote to be effective it must be received by 10:00am (AEDT) Tuesday, 25 October 2016
r i
3,: How to Vote on Items of Business Signing Instructions for Postal Forms
‘i Ali your securities iviii be voted in accordance with your directions Individual: Where the hoiding is in one name the securityholder
 must sign.
1+ Appointment of Proxy Joint Holding: Where the holding is in more than one name. all oi
‘_> Voting 100% of your holding: Direct your proxy how to vote by the seeurilyhulders should sign
":2 marking one or the boxes opposite each item or business If you do Power 0' Attorney: 1 If You have not already hedged the Power of
g not mark a box your proxy may vote or abstain as they choose (to Ahomey Wilh the registryi piease allach a certified phumeopy cf the
‘f the extent permitted by law). it you mark more than one box on an Power of Allumey I0 this form when yuu relurn It-
; “em you, vote will be ("valid on ma. (rem Companies: Where the company has a Sole Director who is also
a the Sole Company Secretary, this lorm must be signed by that
E young 5 portion of you, holding: indicate a portion cf your person If the company (pursuant to section 204A of the corporations
9; voting rights by inserting the percentage or number at securities Ad 2901) does nol have a Cempany Searelary. a Sole Directur can
3'1 you wish to vote in the For, Against orAbstain box or boxes. The else Sigh e‘ehe OlherWISe Ihle form must be Signed by a Director
5 sum of the votes cast must not exceed your voting entitlement or JOIhW with either another Director or a Company Secretaw- Please
1;, won/m sign in the appropriate place to indicate the ofﬁce held. Delete titles
1 as applicabie.
EL Appointing a second proxy: You are entitied to appoint up to two Attending the Meeting
J, . ,
; proxies to attend the meeting and vote on a poll. if you appornt two _ l , l
5 pmx‘es you mus‘ specify me permmage of Mes or number 0, Bring‘thls lorm to assist-registration. If a representative or a corporate
g securities for each proxy. otherwise each proxy may exercise half of SeCQE‘Yhﬁ‘de' “' “my 'wa ape“ '"feAmee'mg y°“ Vz'g need m
a the votes When appointing a second proxy write both names and “Rm” 5‘ e éppPpm‘e der‘,‘ '5?“ 2 f 99°C?“ ° ,F “WEE b
0° the percentage of votes or number of securities for each in Step 1 ePTESEma‘We pm“ a ""55'°"- . °”" ° ‘ a?“ '9‘“ may 9
ﬂ uveﬂeaﬂ obtained from Computershare or oniine at www investorcentre com
iE A proxy need not be a securityholder of the Company. under me help ‘ab' Pﬂmable Forms
Comments & Questions: If you have any comments or questions
for the company, piease write them on a separate sheet of paper and
return with this form.
GO ONLINE TO VOTE, 9
or turn over to complete the farm
strinirwiiriixnmuttonin:


MR SAM SAMPLE
FLAT 123
123 SAMPLE STREET
THE SAMPLE HILL
SAMPLE ESTATE
SAMPLEVILLE VIC 3030
Proxy Form
Change of address. If incorrect,
mark this box and make the
correction in the space to the left.
Securityholders sponsored by a
broker (reference number
commences with ’X’) should advise
your broker of any changes.

I   9999999999
I ND
Please mark
to indicate your directions
Appoint a Proxy to Vote on Your Behalf
I/We being a member/s of Red River Resources Limited hereby appoint
the Chairman OR
of the Meeting
XX
PLEASE NOTE: Leave this box blank if
you have selected the Chairman of the
Meeting. Do not insert your own name(s).
or failing the individual or body corporate named, or if no individual or body corporate is named, the Chairman of the Meeting, as my/our proxy
to act generally at the Meeting on my/our behalf and to vote in accordance with the following directions (or if no directions have been given, and
to the extent permitted by law, as the proxy sees fit) at the Annual General Meeting of Red River Resources Limited to be held at the Institute of
Chartered Accountants Australia on Level 3, 600 Bourke Street, Melbourne, Victoria on Thursday, 27 October 2016 at 10:00am (AEDT) and at
any adjournment or postponement of that Meeting.
Chairman authorised to exercise undirected proxies on remuneration related resolutions: Where I/we have appointed the Chairman of
the Meeting as my/our proxy (or the Chairman becomes my/our proxy by default), I/we expressly authorise the Chairman to exercise my/our
proxy on Resolutions 3 to 8 (except where I/we have indicated a different voting intention below) even though Resolutions 3 to 8 are connected
directly or indirectly with the remuneration of a member of key management personnel, which includes the Chairman.
Important Note: If the Chairman of the Meeting is (or becomes) your proxy you can direct the Chairman to vote for or against or abstain from
voting on Resolutions 3 to 8 by marking the appropriate box in step 2 below.
Items of Business
PLEASE NOTE: If you mark the Abstain box for an item, you are directing your proxy not to vote on your
behalf on a show of hands or a poll and your votes will not be counted in computing the required majority.
Resolution 1
Re-election of Mr Paul Hart as a Director
Resolution 2
Re-election of Mr Donald Garner as a Director
Resolution 3
Adoption of Remuneration Report
Resolution 4
Ratification of Option Issue to Mr. Karl Spaleck
Resolution 5
Approval of Option Issue to Mr Melkon (Mel) Palancian
Resolution 6
Adoption of Performance Rights Plan
Resolution 7
Issue of Performance Rights to Mr. Melkon (Mel) Palancian
Resolution 8
Issue of Performance Rights to Mr. Donald Garner
Resolution 9
Approval of 10% Placement Capacity
The Chairman of the Meeting intends to vote undirected proxies in favour of each item of business. In exceptional circumstances, the Chairman of the Meeting may
change his/her voting intention on any resolution, in which case an ASX announcement will be made.
Signature of Securityholder(s) This section must be completed.
Individual or Securityholder 1
Securityholder 2
Securityholder 3
Sole Director and Sole Company Secretary
Director
Director/Company Secretary
Contact
Name
R V R
2 1 9 1 7 4 A
Contact
Daytime
Telephone
/           /
Date